Application by Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Limited (No 2) [2022] ACompT 1 (18 February 2022)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by Port of Newcastle
Operations Pty Limited (No 2)
[2022] ACompT 1
Application for authorisation AA1000473 lodged by New South Wales Minerals
Council on behalf of itself, certain coal producers that
export coal through the
Port of Newcastle, and mining companies requiring future access through the
Port, and the determination made
by the ACCC on 27 August 2020
File number:
ACT 2 of 2020
JUSTICE O’BRYAN (Deputy President)
DR D ABRAHAM
MS D EILERT (Member)
Date of Determination:
Date of publication of reasons:
Catchwords:
COMPETITION
review under
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth) of authorisation
granted by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission –
authorisation sought for collective bargaining in respect of
conditions of access to the Port of Newcastle – whether collective
bargaining would result in public benefits comprising
more efficient contract
terms and lower transaction costs – whether collective bargaining would
result in public detriments
comprising increased risk of collusive conduct and
marginalisation of individual interests and preferences of coal producers
authorisation refused and determination of the Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission set aside
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Competition and Consumer Amendment (Competition Policy Review) Act
Trade Practices Act 1974
Trade Practices Amendment Act 1977
Explanatory Memorandum,
Competition and Consumer Amendment (Competition
Policy Review) Bill 2017
Ports and Maritime Administration Act 1995
State Owned Corporations Act 1989
Cases cited:
Application by Concrete Carters Association
(1977) 31 FLR 193
Application by Flexigroup Ltd (No 2)
[2020] ACompT 2
Application by Medicines Australia Inc
[2007] ACompT 4
Application by New South Wales Minerals Council (No 3)
[2021] ACompT
Application by Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd
[2019] ACompT
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Australian Competition
[2017] FCAFC 150
(2017) 254 FCR 341
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v NSW Ports Operations
Hold Co Pty Ltd
[2021] FCA 720
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Pacific National Pty
[2020] FCAFC 77
(2020) 277 FCR 49
Australian Gas Light Company v Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (No 3)
[2003] FCA 1525
(2003) 137 FCR 317
Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Competition
[2020] FCAFC 145
(2020) 280 FCR 194
Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Limited v Glencore Coal Assets
Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] HCA 39
395 ALR 209
Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2017] FCAFC 124
(2017) 253 FCR 115
Re 7-Eleven Stores Pty Ltd
[1998] ACompT 3
; ATPR 41‑666
Re 7-Eleven Stores Pty Ltd
[1994] ATPR 41-357
Re EFTPOS Interchange Fees Agreement
[2004] ACompT 7
Re Glencore Coal Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2016] ACompT 7
309 FLR 358
Re Glencore Coal Pty Ltd
[2016] ACompT 6
Re Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
(1978) 17 ALR 281
Re Howard Smith Industries Pty Ltd
(1977) 28 FLR 385
(1990) 96 ALR 475
Re Qantas Airways Ltd
[2004] ACompT 9
(2005) ATPR 42-065
Queensland Co-operative Milling Association Ltd
Re Rural Traders Cooperative (WA) Ltd
(1979) 37 FLR 244
Re VFF Chicken Meat Growers’ Boycott Authorisation
; ATPR 42-120
United States v Socony-Vacuum Oil Co
[1940] USSC 110
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
11-14 October 2021
Counsel for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
Mr C Moore SC with Dr D Roche and Mr A d’Arville
Solicitor for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for New South Wales Minerals Council:
Mr N De Young QC with Mr K Raghavan
Solicitor for New South Wales Minerals Council:
Clifford Chance LLP
Counsel for the ACCC:
Dr R C A Higgins SC with Mr C Tran
Solicitor for the ACCC:
Australian Government Solicitor
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 2 of 2020
APPLICATION FOR AUTHORISATION AA1000473 LODGED BY NEW SOUTH WALES
MINERALS COUNCIL ON BEHALF OF ITSELF, CERTAIN COAL PRODUCERS THAT
EXPORT COAL
THROUGH THE PORT OF NEWCASTLE, AND MINING COMPANIES REQUIRING FUTURE ACCESS
THROUGH THE PORT, AND THE DETERMINATION MADE
BY THE ACCC ON 27 AUGUST
PORT OF NEWCASTLE OPERATIONS PTY
DETERMINATION
JUSTICE O’BRYAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
DR D ABRAHAM
MS D EILERT (MEMBER)
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES THAT:
1. The determination of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
dated 27 August 2020 granting authorisation to application
AA1000473 made by the
NSW Minerals Council on behalf of itself and Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty
Ltd, Yancoal Australia Ltd,
Peabody Energy Australia Pty Ltd, Bloomfield
Collieries Pty Ltd, Centennial Coal Company Pty Ltd, Malabar Coal Ltd,
Whitehaven Coal
Mining Ltd, Idemitsu Australia Resources Pty Ltd and MACH Energy
Australia Pty Ltd (together, the
authorisation applicants
2. The interim authorisation granted to the authorisation applicants by the
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission on 2 April
2020 in respect of
application AA1000473 be revoked.
3. The reasons for determination of the Tribunal in this proceeding are not
to be disclosed to any person other than the external
legal representatives of
the parties in order that any party may make an application to redact or
suppress any part of the reasons
on the grounds of commercial confidentiality,
any such application to be filed and served on or before 4pm on 4 March 2022. If
application is made by that time, the Tribunal will publish its reasons in
full. If any application is made within that time, the
Tribunal will determine
the question of publication in the resolution of that application.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
B. STATUTORY FRAMEWORK FOR THE
TRIBUNAL’S REVIEW
Nature of the Tribunal’s
Statutory preconditions for
authorisation
C. CONTENTIONS OF THE
The authorisation applicants’
contentions
PNO’s contentions
D. EVIDENCE AND MATERIAL BEFORE THE
PNO’s witnesses
The authorisation applicants’
E. FINDINGS OF FACT
Introduction
The Port and the Hunter Valley coal
Coal demand, supply and
Port capacity and
development
Port charges
Glencore Coal’s application for
the declaration of Port services
Glencore Coal arbitration of Port
The revocation of the
declaration
PNO’s pricing arrangements from
The terms and conditions of the
Pricing Deeds
The Vessel Agent Pricing
Application for declaration by
Why the authorisation applicants seek
to bargain collectively
Why PNO opposes collective
Materiality of the navigation service
and wharfage charges to coal producers’ investment decisions
Transaction costs of collective
Future negotiations between PNO and
coal producers
F. EXPERT EVIDENCE ADDUCED ON THE
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
Introduction
Economic framework
Applying the economic
The experts’ opinions on
category (a) effects
The experts’ opinions on
category (b) effects
The experts’ opinions on
category (c) effects
G. PORT AUTHORITY OF
Facts relied upon
Consideration
H. THE TRIBUNAL’S ASSESSMENT OF
BENEFITS AND DETRIMENTS
Introduction
Public detriments
Public benefits
I. DETERMINATION
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
THE TRIBUNAL:
A. INTRODUCTION
of Newcastle Operations Pty Limited (
) has applied to the Tribunal
pursuant to
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
) for review of an authorisation granted by the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission (
) on 27 August 2020 under
of the Act (
ACCC Determination
). PNO became the operator of the Port of
Newcastle (
) in 2014, following its privatisation by the State of
NSW. PNO controls the terms and conditions of access to the Port, pursuant
the terms of a 98-year lease with the State of NSW.
2 The applicants for the authorisation are the New South Wales Minerals
) and certain of its members. NSWMC is the leading mining
industry association in NSW and its members include exporters of coal (and
commodities) from the Hunter Valley region who are major users of the Port. The
coal producers on behalf of whom NSWMC sought
authorisation from the ACCC are
listed in Schedule 1 to the authorisation application and are as follows:
Glencore Coal Assets Australia
Glencore Coal
), Yancoal Australia
), Peabody Energy Australia Pty Ltd (
Peabody Energy
Bloomfield Collieries Pty Ltd (
Bloomfield Collieries
), Centennial Coal
Company Pty Ltd (
), Malabar Coal Ltd (
Whitehaven Coal Mining Ltd (
), Idemitsu Australia Resources Pty
), MACH Energy Australia Pty Ltd (
MACH Energy
Hunter Valley Energy Coal Pty Ltd. It should be noted that Hunter Valley Energy
Coal, owned by BHP Group Ltd (
), was one of the coal producers that
initially sought authorisation but is no longer seeking to negotiate
collectively with PNO.
In this determination, the phrase “authorisation
applicants” refers to NSWMC and the coal producers on whose behalf the
application for authorisation was made (excluding Hunter Valley Energy Coal).
While NSWMC participated in this proceeding to contest
PNO’s application
to review the ACCC Determination, the Tribunal understands that it did so on
behalf of itself and the other
authorisation applicants.
3 The application for authorisation was filed with the ACCC on 5 March 2020.
The authorisation applicants sought authorisation to:
(a) collectively discuss and negotiate the terms and conditions of access,
including price, to the Port for the export of coal (and
any other minerals)
through the Port;
(b) discuss amongst themselves matters relating to the above discussions and
negotiations; and
(c) enter into, and give effect to, contracts, arrangements or understanding
with PNO containing common terms which relate to access
to the Port and the
export of minerals through the Port,
collective bargaining
4 In the supporting submission attached to the authorisation application, the
authorisation applicants stated that the application
is in relation to the broad
range of contractual arrangements involved in the task of exporting coal from
the Port. In that regard,
the authorisation applicants described that task as
involving vessels entering the Port, transiting the channels in the Port, tying
up at the berths to load coal at the coal terminals and then once again
transiting the channels before exiting the Port for delivery
of the coal to its
ultimate destination. While the authorisation applicants sought authorisation
for the proposed collective bargaining
conduct in respect of all such
contractual arrangements at the Port, their submissions focussed solely on Port
charges and specifically
the navigation service and wharfage charges. As stated
by the authorisation applicants in their written submissions in this proceeding,
it is the terms of the Producer Pro Forma Long Term Pricing Deed (
Pricing Deed
) (which has been offered by PNO to all coal producers as common
terms governing the navigation service and wharfage charges) which
authorisation applicants seek to negotiate collectively with PNO.
5 In the authorisation application, the applicants submitted that, since the
revocation of the declaration of the Port under
of the Act, there is no
other form of constraint on PNO’s pricing power. They argued that there
have been significant increases
in the navigation service and wharfage charges
since privatisation and there is uncertainty as to future increases. The
authorisation
applicants submitted that they are seeking to negotiate
collectively as an industry to achieve a long term commercial solution for
channel and berthing charges that provides the industry with certainty for long
term investment in the Hunter Valley region. The
authorisation applicants
submitted that the key public benefit that would arise from the proposed
collective bargaining conduct is
increasing certainty for investment in the
Hunter Valley, which would facilitate employment and growth in the Hunter Valley
The application made clear that the applicants hoped that collective
bargaining would result in reduced charges at the Port over
time. In that
regard, the applicants submitted that:
...the authorisation will,
users to collectively, as an industry, discuss with PNO the basis on which costs
will be allocated by PNO and means for PNO
to more efficiently engage in capital
expenditure on a transparent basis. It is hoped that such increased transparency
on expenditure
and how costs are allocated, will lead to more efficient
investment and therefore the potential for reduced charges being imposed
mining industry over time.
6 The authorisation applicants also submitted that collective bargaining
would result in transaction cost savings for both PNO and
the mining industry,
and that the result of the above benefits would be a material increase in
competition in a number of dependent
markets including the coal export market,
the markets for the acquisition and disposal of exploration and/or mining
authorities and
the markets for services such as geological and drilling
services, construction, operation and maintenance.
7 Conversely, the authorisation applicants submitted that the conduct is
likely to result in minimal if any public detriment because:
(a) participation by the coal mining industry in the proposed collective
bargaining conduct is voluntary;
(b) there is no obligation on PNO to negotiate collectively;
(c) the authorisation will not extend to collective boycott activity; and
(d) PNO already publishes its access terms with the result that there is no risk
of any information sharing between the authorisation
applicants that would be
prohibited under the Act.
8 On 2 April 2020, the ACCC granted interim authorisation pursuant to
of the Act to enable the authorisation applicants to commence
collective discussion amongst themselves and negotiations with PNO
in relation
to the terms and conditions of access, including price, to the Port (but not
enter into collectively negotiated agreements).
The interim authorisation
commenced immediately and was stated to remain in place until revoked or the
ACCC’s final determination
comes into effect. Pursuant to the interim
authorisation, on 29 April 2020 the authorisation applicants wrote to PNO
an initial meeting to commence negotiations around pricing and access
principles. In response, PNO wrote to NSWMC on 11 May 2020
declining the request
for an initial meeting and indicating that PNO does not support the proposed
collective bargaining. The evidence
before the Tribunal is to the effect that
PNO has maintained that position and that no collective negotiations have
occurred between
the authorisation applicants and PNO since the grant of the
interim authorisation.
9 On 27 August 2020, the ACCC granted authorisation in respect of the
proposed collective bargaining conduct for ten years, until
30 September 2030,
pursuant to
of the Act. The authorised conduct is voluntary for all
parties, including PNO. The ACCC Determination expressly noted (at [5.10])
certain conduct was not covered by the authorisation:
The authorisation does not extend to permit the
Applicants to engage in any collective boycott activity, and does not involve
sharing of competitively sensitive information that relates to customers,
marketing strategies, or volume/capacity projections for
10 In its Determination, the ACCC summarised its conclusions in the following
The ACCC considers that the Proposed Collective
Bargaining Conduct is likely to result in public benefits. In particular, the
considers that the bargaining group will have greater input into the terms
and conditions of access under the Producer Deed, and
increased transparency
around capital expenditure plans and cost allocation at the Port. This will
provide greater certainty for
the delivered price of Hunter Valley coal, more
timely resolution of industry-wide issues, and facilitate more efficient
decisions at the Port and across the Hunter Valley coal industry. The
ACCC also considers these outcomes will enhance the international
competitiveness of the Hunter Valley coal industry, with investment and
employment benefits in Australia.
Further, collective bargaining conduct can result in more efficient contracting,
which can benefit both PNO and the bargaining group.
The ACCC considers the
proposed collective bargaining conduct is also likely to result in public
benefits from lower transaction
The ACCC considers there is likely to be minimal public detriment from the
proposed collective bargaining conduct because participation
in the proposed
collective bargaining conduct is voluntary for both coal producers and PNO, and
does not include boycott activity.
The ACCC considers that there is unlikely to
be an impact on competition between the coal producers. Individual coal
producers are
still free to negotiate terms and conditions of Port access
separately through bilateral discussions with PNO if they believe it
is in their
commercial interests to do so. In addition, the proposed collective bargaining
conduct does not involve coal producers
sharing individual coal projection
volumes, customer pricing information or marketing strategies.
Therefore, the ACCC is satisfied that the proposed collective bargaining conduct
is likely to result in a public benefit and that
this public benefit would
outweigh any likely detriment to the public from the proposed collective
bargaining conduct.
11 PNO has applied for review of the ACCC Determination on the basis that the
Tribunal could not be satisfied that the proposed collective
bargaining conduct
would be likely to result in a benefit to the public, or alternatively, not one
that would outweigh any detriment
likely to result from the conduct.
12 As a result of PNO’s application for review, the ACCC’s
authorisation has not come into effect:
s 91(1A)(b).
However, the interim
authorisation has remained in effect until the date of this determination by the
13 Each of PNO and the authorisation applicants adduced evidence before the
Tribunal, largely in the form of affidavits and supporting
documents. A number
of the witnesses were cross-examined. Each of PNO, the authorisation applicants
and the ACCC also tendered expert
economic reports. The expert economic
witnesses conferred prior to the hearing and produced a joint report and, during
the hearing,
were cross-examined concurrently.
14 The Tribunal also received a submission, with supporting documents, from
the Port Authority of NSW, which the Tribunal addresses
below. The Port
Authority is a state-owned corporation established under the
State Owned
Corporations Act 1989
State Owned Corporations Act
Ports and Maritime Administration Act 1995
responsible for and manages the navigation, security and operational safety
needs of commercial shipping in the Port of Newcastle,
as well as the Sydney
Harbour, Port Botany, Port Kembla and the ports of Eden and Yamba.
15 The ACCC participated in the proceeding to assist the Tribunal. As the
authorities make clear, the ACCC’s role in the review
of an authorisation
determination made by the ACCC is to assist the Tribunal in an impartial manner
and the ACCC ought not act as
an advocate for its original decision: see for
Queensland Co-operative Milling Association Ltd
) at 485. Given the presence of the authorisation
applicants as a (collective) contradictor, it was unnecessary for the ACCC to
all the evidence before the Tribunal or to present opposing points of view
on every issue. The ACCC did, however, make submissions
in respect of matters of
principle. The ACCC also adduced an expert economic report from Dr Rhonda Smith,
to which PNO and the authorisation
applicants responded by adducing expert
reports from Mr Greg Houston and Mr Euan Morton respectively. No objection was
taken by PNO
or the authorisation applicants to the ACCC adducing Dr
Smith’s report. The questions on which Dr Smith was asked to express
opinions were framed by the ACCC in a relatively neutral manner and the
assumptions of fact she was asked to make by the ACCC were
uncontroversial. In
those circumstances, the Tribunal received the report.
16 As the Tribunal is conducting a
review of the grant of
authorisation, the Tribunal must decide for itself whether authorisation should
be granted.
17 For the reasons that follow, the Tribunal has determined not to authorise
the proposed collective bargaining conduct and that the
determination of the
ACCC should be set aside and the interim authorisation should be revoked.
B. STATUTORY FRAMEWORK FOR THE TRIBUNAL’S REVIEW
Nature of the Tribunal’s review
88 of the Act, within Div 1 of Pt VII, empowers the ACCC to grant an
authorisation to a person to engage in conduct, specified
in the authorisation,
to which one or more provisions of Pt IV specified in the authorisation would or
might apply. While the authorisation
remains in force, those provisions of Pt IV
do not apply to the conduct to the extent it is engaged in by the applicant for
authorisation,
any other person named or referred to in the application as a
person who is engaged in or who is proposed to be engaged in the conduct
other particular persons or classes of persons, as specified in the
authorisation, who become engaged in the conduct.
19 Section 101 of the Act, within Div 1 of Pt IX, provides that a person
dissatisfied with a determination by the ACCC under Div 1
of Pt VII may apply to
the Tribunal for a review of the determination. Subject to exceptions that are
not presently relevant, a review
by the Tribunal is a re-hearing of the matter.
Section 102 provides that, on a review, the Tribunal may make a determination
setting aside or varying the determination of the ACCC and, for the
purposes of the review, may perform all the functions and exercise
powers of the ACCC. The Tribunal is expressly permitted to have regard to any
information furnished, documents produced or
evidence given to the ACCC in
connection with the making of the determination (s 102(7)).
20 As the Tribunal observed in
Application by Flexigroup Ltd (No 2)
[2020] ACompT 2
) at [107], a review under s 101 is
review, meaning that the Tribunal conducts a fresh hearing and
determination of the authorisation. The Tribunal must “make
findings of fact and reach its own decision as to whether authorisation should
be granted or not and, if so, any conditions
to which it is to be
Application by Medicines Australia Inc
[2007] ACompT 4
ATPR 42-164 (
Medicines Australia
) at [135] (French J, Mr G Latta
and Prof C Walsh);
at [135]. That function is not performed by
considering “whether the ACCC was right or wrong in the conclusion it
whether it could have better formulated its determination”.
Rather, the Tribunal must “assess the applications for authorisation
their merits and by reference to the information and evidence given to the ACCC
and any material that the parties wish to put
before the Tribunal”:
Medicines Australia
21 The role of the Tribunal in conducting the review is not confined by the
issues raised by the parties to the review and the Tribunal
must determine
itself whether the statutory test for authorisation is satisfied. However, as
observed by the Tribunal (Deane J, Mr
J Shipton and Mr J Walker) in
& Weekly Times Ltd
(1978) 17 ALR 281
at 296, “[t]he published
reasons for determination of the Commission may, in an appropriate case, prove a
convenient reference
point for defining the matters which are truly in dispute
between all or any of the Commission, the applicants, and other parties
represented, or interested, in the proceedings”. Further, where the
parties agree with factual findings made by the ACCC in
its determination,
ordinarily the Tribunal need not itself examine the facts in detail. As
explained by the Tribunal (von Doussa
J, Dr B Aldrich, Prof D Round) in
7-Eleven Stores Pty Ltd
[1998] ACompT 3
; ATPR 41‑666 at 41,453:
In curial proceedings based on the adversarial system,
the role of a court is to determine issues identified by the parties, usually
pleadings. Proceedings before the Tribunal are not adversarial in nature, and
the role of the Tribunal is not merely to resolve
issues in dispute between the
parties. It is an administrative tribunal with a much wider role. It is required
to determine whether
anti-competitive conduct or anti-competitive provisions in
a contract, arrangement or understanding that would otherwise be unlawful,
should, in the public interest, be authorised because the public benefit
outweighs the detriment constituted by any lessening of
competition.
Determinations of the Tribunal are likely to impact on the commercial interests
of many people who are not participants
in the proceedings before the
Notwithstanding the positions taken by the parties in this case, the Tribunal in
the exercise of its statutory functions, must consider
each of the issues
arising under [the applicable statutory provisions] which precede a
consideration of the terms and duration of
the further authorisation granted by
the determinations under review. On these essential steps, the Tribunal must
reach its own conclusions.
It must make its own assessment of both benefit and
However, where the applicants and other parties participating in proceedings
before the Tribunal agree with findings on factual matters
set out in the
Commission's published reasons for determination, the Tribunal would ordinarily
be justified in treating those findings
as common ground which significantly
limits the areas of primary fact which the Tribunal is itself required to
examine in detail;
Re Herald & Weekly Times Ltd (Media Council of
Australia (No 1))
(1978) ATPR 40-058
(1978) 17 ALR 281
296 where the Tribunal (Deane J, President, Shipton and Walker, Members)
observed that fairness and common sense combine to require
that the Tribunal
determine an application for review within the context of matters which can
properly be seen to be in issue between
the parties or which the Tribunal itself
raises or indicates that it regards as being at large.
Statutory preconditions for authorisation
statutory preconditions for authorisation were amended by the
Competition and
Consumer Amendment (Competition Policy Review) Act 2017
Amendment Act
), broadly adopting the recommendations of the Competition
Policy Review chaired by Prof Ian Harper (see Explanatory Memorandum to
Competition and Consumer Amendment (Competition Policy Review) Bill 2017
(Cth) at [9.17]). The amended preconditions are stated in ss 90(7) and (8) of
the Act in the following terms:
(7) The Commission must not make a determination granting an authorisation
under section 88 in relation to conduct unless:
(a) the Commission is satisfied in all the circumstances that the conduct would
not have the effect, or would not be likely to have
the effect, of substantially
lessening competition; or
(b) the Commission is satisfied in all the circumstances that:
(i) the conduct would result, or be likely to result, in a benefit to the
public; and
(ii) the benefit would outweigh the detriment to the public that would result,
or be likely to result, from the conduct;
(c) [not applicable].
(8) Paragraph (7)(a) does not apply if any of the following provisions would
(apart from an authorisation under section 88) apply
to the conduct:
(a) one or more provisions of Division 1 of
(cartel conduct);
(b) one or more of sections 45D to 45DB (secondary boycotts);
(ba) one or more provisions of section 45E or 45EA (contracts etc. affecting
the supply or acquisition of goods or services);
(c) section 48 (resale price maintenance).
23 The provisions listed in s 90(8) are commonly described as
prohibitions. In contrast to the other provisions of
of the Act, the
provisions listed in s 90(8) do not require proof that the prohibited conduct
has the purpose or would have or would
be likely to have the effect of
substantially lessening competition. The nomenclature “
” derives from the use of that phrase in the United States in which
the courts have determined that certain categories of anti-competitive
are illegal without proof of anti-competitive effects. The use of the Latin
” can be traced to
United States v
Socony-Vacuum Oil Co
[1940] USSC 110
(1940) in which Douglas J stated (at
... for over forty years this Court has consistently and
without deviation adhered to the principle that price-fixing agreements are
under the Sherman Act and that no showing of so-called
competitive abuses or evils which those agreements were designed to eliminate
alleviate may be interposed as a defense.
24 Thus, the scheme of the Act is that:
(a) in so far as the proposed conduct might otherwise contravene a
prohibition in Pt IV of the Act, the ACCC is only permitted to grant
authorisation if it is satisfied that the proposed conduct would
result, or be
likely to result, in a benefit to the public and the benefit would outweigh the
detriment to the public that would
result, or be likely to result, from the
conduct; and
(b) in so far as the proposed conduct might otherwise contravene a prohibition
in Pt IV that depended on proof that the conduct has
the purpose or would have
or would be likely to have the effect of substantially lessening competition,
the ACCC is also permitted
to grant authorisation if it is satisfied that the
proposed conduct would not have the effect, or would not be likely to have the
effect, of substantially lessening competition.
25 In their application to the ACCC, the authorisation applicants
acknowledged that the cartel conduct provisions in Div 1 of Pt IV,
the secondary
boycott provisions in ss 45D to 45DB and the resale price maintenance provisions
in s 48 might apply to the proposed
collective bargaining conduct. Accordingly,
the applicable precondition for the grant of authorisation is that stated in s
namely that the conduct would result, or be likely to result, in a
benefit to the public and the benefit would outweigh the detriment
to the public
that would result, or be likely to result, from the conduct.
26 While the statutory preconditions for authorisation were amended by the
2017 Amendment Act, the terminology used and underlying
concepts in the amended
provisions are based on the previous law. In particular, and as observed by the
Explanatory Memorandum at
[9.41], the precondition for the grant of
authorisation stated in s 90(7)(b) is consistent with the tests previously
contained in
s 90. In respect of conduct that might have contravened a
prohibition, the previous statutory test was to the effect that the
conduct would result, or be likely to result, in such a benefit
to the public
that the proposed conduct should be allowed. That test required consideration of
the benefits and detriments likely
to result from the conduct, and involved a
comparison of the future with, and without, the conduct for which authorisation
Medicines Australia
at [117]. As
the statutory precondition in s 90(7)(b) requires the ACCC (or the Tribunal on
review) to be satisfied that the public
benefits likely to result from the
conduct outweigh the public detriments likely to result from the conduct, it is
convenient to
refer to the test by the shorthand “net public
Meaning of public benefit and detriment
27 A benefit to the
public includes “anything of value to the community generally, any
contribution to the aims pursued by society
including as one of its principal
elements (in the context of trade practices legislation) the achievement of the
economic goals
of efficiency and progress”:
Medicines Australia
at [107]. The relevant “public” is the
Australian public:
Re Qantas Airways Ltd
[2004] ACompT 9
(2005) ATPR
Qantas Airways
) at [196] citing
Re Howard Smith
Industries Pty Ltd
(1977) 28 FLR 385
Howard Smith
Similarly, a detriment to the public includes “any impairment to the
community generally, any harm or damage to the
aims pursued by the society
including as one of its principal elements the achievement of the goal of
economic efficiency”:
Re 7-Eleven Stores Pty Ltd
[1994] ATPR 41-357
at 42,683 (Lockhart J, Prof M Brunt and Dr B Aldrich).
Qantas Airways
, the Tribunal concluded that in assessing whether
an increase in economic efficiency constitutes a public benefit for the purposes
of the Act, it was appropriate to apply a total welfare or surplus standard of
economic efficiency. Accordingly, cost savings (productive
efficiency gains)
will constitute a public benefit even if the efficiency gain is captured in the
first instance by the (private)
parties to the proposed conduct. The Tribunal
explained at [187]-[189]:
187 We consider that the phrase “benefit to the
public” is to be given a broad definition which, in addition to group
interests, takes into account (with appropriate weighting) individual interests
to the extent that such interests are considered
by society to be worthy of
inclusion and measurement. This broad approach to public benefit promotes the
achievement of both static
and dynamic efficiencies.
188 Given the above reasoning, we have formed the view that the “public
versus private” dichotomy used by the parties
in relation to cost savings
is of fairly limited assistance when examining the benefits relied upon for the
purposes of s 90. Rather,
the enquiry should be directed towards the extent to
which the benefit has an impact on members of the community, that is society.
Does it fall into the category of “anything of value to the community
generally”? If it does, what weight should be given
to that benefit,
having regard to its nature, characterisation and the identity of the
beneficiaries of it?
189 It follows that cost savings achieved by a firm in the course of providing
goods or services to members of the public are a public
benefit which can and
should be taken into account for the purposes of s 90 of the Act, where they
result in pass through which reduces
prices to final consumers, or in other
benefits, for example, by way of dividends to a range of shareholders or being
returned to
the firm for future investment. However, the weight that should be
accorded to such cost savings may vary depending upon who takes
advantage of
them and the time period over which the benefits are received.
29 In relation to public detriments, the Tribunal stated in
that (at [108], citations omitted):
108 Although “detriment” covers a wider
field than anti-competitive effects in many cases the important detriments will
have that character. The relevant detriment will flow from the anti-competitive
effect of the conduct to which authorisation is sought.
This does not exclude
consideration of other detriments which may be incidental to and therefore
detract from a claimed public benefit.
To that extent such detriment will be
relevant in weighing the public benefit.
30 The citation of conclusory statements in previous Tribunal decisions about
public benefits is of little assistance in applying
the net public benefit test
in s 90(7)(b) in a particular case. For example, the authorisation applicants
placed reliance on the
statement of the Tribunal in
Application by Concrete
Carters Association (Victoria)
(1977) 31 FLR 193
) at 244-245 that:
Authorization in the terms sought by the Applicants
would... authorize the participation of the producers, as a group, in
negotiations
as to such industry-wide rates and conditions. In this sense, the
result of the conduct for which authorization is sought is likely
to make more
even the bargaining power of owner/drivers and producers. This, we see, as a
benefit to the public.
31 The Tribunal’s decision in
Concrete Carters
does not stand
for the proposition that conduct which makes the bargaining power of traders
more even will always constitute a public
benefit. As the Tribunal went on to
explain, there were particular features of the industrial landscape with which
that case was
concerned, whereby the owner/driver concrete carters were already
represented by the Transport Workers Union in negotiations with
producers, and particular features of the proposed collective bargaining conduct
that preserved the freedom of individual
producers to negotiate individually
with concrete carters, that led the Tribunal to conclude that the authorised
conduct would be
conducive to competition both within the cartage industry and,
in consequence, within the pre-mixed concrete industry (at 245).
32 The authorisation applicants also placed reliance on the statement of the
Tribunal in
(1990) 96 ALR 475 (
the achievement of industrial harmony is a public benefit which may
appropriately be taken into account in determining whether
authorisation should
be granted (at 488). That determination concerned an application for
authorisation of a private arbitration
of cartage rates for premixed concrete as
between lorry owner-drivers (acting collectively) on the one hand and the
National Readymixed
Concrete Association of the ACT (which represented producers
of concrete in the ACT) on the other hand. The Tribunal’s conclusion
industrial harmony may constitute a public benefit was qualified by the
observation that lorry owner-drivers are more akin to
employees than small
business operators and that industrial disruption, which creates delays and
uncertainty in the delivery of concrete,
is one of the limited options available
to lorry owner-drivers when seeking changes to their cartage rates (at 488). The
also observed that industrial harmony is a somewhat nebulous concept
and rather fragile and therefore the Tribunal would require
clear evidence that
the grant of authorisation would be likely to lead to significantly greater
industrial harmony (at 489). Ultimately,
the Tribunal was not so satisfied and
refused authorisation. The authorisation applicants did not address those
conclusions of the
Tribunal in
, or explain how the proposed
collective bargaining conduct related to industrial harmony in the sense
considered in
33 As the Tribunal explained in
, in assessing public benefits
(and detriments) it is necessary to go beyond labels or catchphrases. The
Tribunal observed that its
appraisal of claimed benefits must depend upon its
appreciation of the competitive functioning of the industry and predictions
market behaviour and performance (at 510(2)). The validity of claimed
benefits will rarely be self-evident and “[a] claimed
benefit may in fact
be judged to be a detriment when viewed in terms of its contribution to a
socially useful competitive process”
(at 510(2) and (3)).
Quantification of public benefits and detriments
34 The necessity for
authorisation applicants to quantify public benefits claimed to arise from
proposed conduct was discussed by
the Tribunal in
Qantas Airways
Howard Smith
, the Tribunal said (at [201]) that the Act does not require
an applicant to quantify, in precise terms, the benefits claimed to arise
authorisation is granted but there must be a factual basis for concluding that
the public benefits are likely to result. The Tribunal
further explained (at
[203]-[209]):
203 An accurate, objective quantification of public
benefits is difficult, in part because benefits have to be estimated for some
period in the future and so their magnitude becomes a matter not only of
empirical estimation based on assumptions but also one of
statistical
likelihood. Data, assumptions and models can be, and indeed in this proceeding
have been, hotly contested.
204 We consider that the nature of public benefits needs to be defined with some
precision, a degree of precision which lies somewhere
between quantification in
numerical terms at one end of the spectrum and general statements about possible
or likely benefits at
the other end of the spectrum. Whilst the diverse and
speculative nature of potential benefits makes it impossible to lay down any
definitive test of the degree to which, or manner in which, benefits should be
quantified, the following observations should be borne
in mind by any party
seeking to assert a likely benefit.
205 Benefits must be of substance and have durability...
206 Any estimates involved in benefit analysis should be robust and commercially
realistic, in the sense of being both significant
and tangible. The assumptions
underlying their calculation must be spelled out in such a way that they can be
tested and verified.
Care must be taken to distinguish between one‑off
benefits and those of a more lasting nature. Appropriate weighting will
to future benefits not achievable in any other less anti‑competitive way,
and so the options for achieving the claimed
benefits must be explored and
207 Whilst we recognise that public benefits are easy to assert, but are much
harder to prove in advance of their creation, that
does not deter us from
demanding a high standard of commercial and social accountability in the
estimates presented to us. Accordingly,
we do not believe that there is anything
to be gained by fanciful and speculative modelling of benefits where the
underlying assumptions
are not clearly spelled out, where the estimates have not
been subject to rigorous sensitivity analysis, and where the estimating
is not wholly transparent. Further, we observe that point estimates of the
estimated dollar value of benefits purport to
give the estimates a level of
specificity that cannot be justified in most circumstances.
208 All other things being equal, detailed quantification is the best option.
However, quantification at all costs is not required
by the Act, and has never
been sought by the Tribunal. There are diminishing returns to the quantification
exercise. Benefits should
be quantified only to the extent that the exercise
enlightens the Tribunal more than the alternative of qualitative
explanation.
209 Where benefits cannot be quantified in monetary terms, they can still be
claimed in qualitative terms. The authorisation test
is, after all, a balancing
exercise that requires judgment over a wide range of tangible and intangible
factors. The final result
will depend on the relative weight assigned to each of
these factors.
35 Subject to one qualification, the Tribunal agrees with the foregoing
statements. The qualification concerns the statement that
benefits must be
“of substance”. When first enacted, the power to grant authorisation
was subject to a condition that
the proposed conduct would result or be likely
to result in a substantial benefit to the public (see
Practices Act 1974
(Cth) as originally enacted). In its report to the
Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs published in August 1976, the
Practices Act
Review Committee (otherwise known as the “Swanson
Committee”) recommended that the condition for authorisation be amended
remove the requirement of substantiality (see para 11.14). That amendment was
made by the
Trade Practices Amendment Act 1977
(Cth). The legislative
history indicates that the statutory precondition for authorisation is not
subject to an implied requirement
of substantiality.
36 A public benefit must, though, rise above the ephemeral and the trivial
Re Rural Traders Cooperative (WA) Ltd
(1979) 37 FLR 244
at 262-263,
referred to in
Qantas Airways
at [205], and
Medicines Australia
[128]). As observed by the Full Federal Court in
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2017] FCAFC 150
(2017) 254 FCR 341
the need for a benefit to be non-ephemeral can be deduced from the word
“benefit” itself and Parliament is unlikely
to have intended the
Tribunal to concern itself with trifles (at [8]-[10]).
37 In the present case, no attempt was made to quantify either the claimed
public benefits or the claimed public detriments. All claims
were put on a
qualitative basis. As the above passage from
Qantas Airways
makes clear,
numeric quantification of benefits is not essential, but there must be a factual
basis for concluding that the public
benefits are likely to result from the
proposed conduct. In the present case, the evidence adduced by all parties in
respect of claimed
benefits and detriments was largely at the “general
statements” end of the spectrum (see
Qantas Airways
Exercise of discretion
38 The satisfaction of
the statutory precondition to the grant of authorisation does not oblige the
ACCC, or the Tribunal on review,
to grant authorisation:
Medicines Australia
at [106]. Nevertheless, as the Tribunal observed in
the ACCC or the Tribunal on review were to be satisfied that the conduct is
likely to result in a net public benefit, ordinarily
authorisation would be
granted (at [138]).
Medicines Australia
, the Tribunal considered whether
authorisation should be granted in circumstances where the public benefits were
assessed as insubstantial.
The Tribunal said (at [128]):
Similarly, where the anti-competitive detriment is low
to non-existent the ACCC may be entitled to say, as a matter of discretion,
it would only authorise the conduct if the public benefit to be derived from it,
beyond that necessary to outweigh the anti-competitive
detriment, or satisfy the
conduct test is substantial. That is to say that the ACCC can
require, in the proper exercise of its discretion, that the conduct
yields some
substantial measure of public benefit if it is to attract the ACCC’s
official sanction. The Tribunal is in a similar
40 It is important to observe that the above statements in
concern the exercise of the discretion to grant authorisation once
the statutory precondition is satisfied; the statements do not
concern the
content of the statutory precondition (which, as noted above, does not require
the benefits to be substantial).
41 There was no material disagreement between the parties with respect to the
foregoing principles. However, the parties disagreed
statutory test: the first concerned the proper approach to the assessment of the
public benefits or detriments
likely to result from the conduct the subject of
the application for authorisation required by s 90(7)(b); and the second
the meaning of the word “likely” in s 90(7)(b).
The conduct the subject of the authorisation
42 The statutory test in
s 90(7)(b) requires the ACCC (and the Tribunal on review) to assess whether the
conduct the subject of the
application for authorisation would be likely to
result in public benefits or detriments. In the present case, the conduct the
of the application for authorisation is the proposed collective
bargaining conduct which encompasses the authorisation applicants:
(a) collectively discussing and negotiating the terms and conditions of access,
including price, to the Port for the export of coal
(and any other minerals)
through the Port;
(b) discussing amongst themselves matters relating to the above discussion and
negotiations; and
(c) entering into, and giving effect to, contracts, arrangements or
understandings with PNO containing common terms which relate
to access to the
Port and the export of minerals through the Port.
43 As can be seen, the proposed collective bargaining conduct contemplates
certain actions being undertaken by the authorisation applicants
(engaging in
collective discussions between themselves, engaging in collective negotiations
with PNO and entering into contracts
with PNO which contain common terms).
However, the conduct also contemplates certain actions being undertaken by PNO
(participating
in collective negotiations with the authorisation applicants and
entering into contracts with common terms). The parties agreed that,
assessing the public benefits and detriments likely to arise from the proposed
collective bargaining conduct, the Tribunal must
assume, for the purposes of the
assessment, that the authorisation applicants will themselves engage in that
conduct. However, there
was some disagreement whether the Tribunal should
assume, for the purposes of the assessment, that PNO would participate in
negotiations with the authorisation applicants. As discussed below,
since the grant of the interim authorisation by the ACCC, PNO
has in fact
refused to participate in collective negotiations with the authorisation
applicants and, in this proceeding, has adduced
evidence that that will remain
its position into the future.
44 In opening written submissions, the authorisation applicants argued that
the statutory test required the Tribunal to assume that
the collective
bargaining conduct the subject of the authorisation application would occur
(including PNO’s participation in
collective negotiations). They submitted
that such an approach is mandated by s 90(7)(b) which requires an assessment of
that is the subject of the authorisation. In the present
case, the conduct includes PNO engaging in collective negotiations. In support
of that submission, the authorisation applicants relied on the reasoning of the
Tribunal in
Medicines Australia
The so called ‘‘future with or without
test’’ is not a comparison of a hypothetical future in which the
the subject of the application is authorised against a hypothetical
future in which it is not authorised. What the test requires
is comparison of a
future in which the conduct, the subject of the authorisation application,
occurs with a future in which that
conduct does not occur.
45 The authorisation applicants submitted that that approach is consistent
with the purpose of the authorisation regime in
of the Act. In that
regard, the authorisation applicants referred to the observation of the Tribunal
Medicines Australia
that the regime provides “an administrative
process to remove the risk that proposed beneficial conduct may contravene
competition
laws” (at [105]). The authorisation applicants further
submitted that it would frustrate the purpose of
of the Act if the target
of the proposed conduct (such as PNO) were able to defeat an application for
authorisation of collective
bargaining simply by asserting that it will refuse
to participate in the conduct.
46 PNO did not contest the applicable principle as stated by the Tribunal in
Medicines Australia
. It submitted, however, that the authorisation
applicants confuse the authorisation applicants’ conduct, in relation to
authorisation is sought, with PNO’s likely response to that conduct.
PNO argued that the Tribunal should assume that the authorisation
will seek to engage in collective bargaining, but not that PNO will necessarily
take up this opportunity. Instead, in
assessing the likely benefits of the
conduct, it is relevant to consider, among other factors, PNO’s likely
response to that
47 As to the issue of legal principle, the ACCC adopted a similar approach to
PNO (although it differed on the factual assessment
of PNO’s likely future
response to collective negotiations).
48 In oral submissions during the hearing, the authorisation applicants
altered their position from that stated in their written submissions,
conform with the approach of PNO and the ACCC. The authorisation applicants
submitted that, for the purposes of the statutory
assessment, the Tribunal
should assume that they would engage in the proposed collective bargaining
conduct (ie, they would collectively
discuss terms and conditions of Port access
and put a collective negotiating position to PNO). However, PNO’s response
conduct is a factual matter for the Tribunal to assess, not assume, in
applying the statutory test.
49 The Tribunal considers that the authorisation applicants may have conceded
too much in their oral submissions, although the resolution
of the issue does
not make a material difference to the outcome of this application.
50 The Tribunal agrees with the applicable principle as stated in
Medicines Australia
that the statutory test requires a comparison of a
future in which the conduct, the subject of the authorisation application,
with a future in which that conduct does not occur. That comparison is
required in order to assess whether the conduct the subject
of the authorisation
would or would be likely to result in a net public benefit. The statutory test
uses a conditional tense (would
or would be likely) in which the condition is
that the defined conduct is engaged in. As such, the assessment does not require
ACCC (or the Tribunal on review) to form any view about the likelihood of
the conduct being engaged in. The statutory requirement
can be illustrated by
the following example. A company may apply for authorisation in respect of the
acquisition of shares in a second
company. In applying the statutory test, the
ACCC/Tribunal forms an assessment of whether the acquisition, assuming it
occurs, would
result in a net public benefit. It is irrelevant to the assessment
whether a contract has been entered into in respect of the proposed
acquisition,
or whether the proposed acquisition is hostile and the current owners of the
second company have stated that they oppose
the acquisition and may be able to
prevent the proposed acquisition from occurring. The purpose of the
authorisation regime is to
exempt the defined conduct from the prohibitions in
of the Act. The ACCC/Tribunal is empowered to grant that exemption if
satisfied that the defined conduct, if it were to be engaged
in (the condition),
would or would be likely to result in a net public benefit. If the answer is in
the affirmative, authorisation
can be granted and the applicant is able to
engage in the defined conduct without the risk of contravening any provision of
51 In principle, there seems to be no reason why a different approach should
be taken in respect of collective bargaining conduct.
As defined by the
authorisation applicants, the collective bargaining conduct extends to
collective negotiation with PNO, and the
entering into, and giving effect to,
contracts, arrangements or understandings with PNO containing common terms. That
is the conduct
for which authorisation is sought and in respect of which there
is otherwise a risk of contravention of one or more provisions of
the conduct which forms the condition for the application of the statutory test:
whether the conduct would result or be likely
to result in a net public
52 For those reasons, the Tribunal considers that the correct approach is to
assess whether the proposed collective bargaining conduct,
which includes
collective negotiations with PNO and entering into contracts with PNO containing
common terms, would result or be
likely to result in a net public benefit. In
doing so, however, the Tribunal makes no assumptions about the outcome of any
such negotiations
or contracts. A possible outcome of collective negotiations is
a stalemate in which no agreement is reached and no benefits are gained.
statutory test requires the Tribunal to assess whether such collective
negotiations, if they were to be engaged in, would or
would be likely to result
in a net public benefit. That requires the Tribunal to take into account all the
surrounding circumstances,
including the history of negotiations and commercial
dealings between the parties, in order to form an assessment of the likely
or detriments of such negotiations, if any.
The meaning of “likely”
53 PNO submitted that
“likely” in the context of s 90(7)(b) should be read to mean
“more probable than not”,
although it accepted that the Tribunal has
consistently taken the view that “likely” refers to a “real
Howard Smith
Re EFTPOS Interchange Fees
[2004] ACompT 7
; ATPR 41-999 at [26];
Qantas Airways
Re VFF Chicken Meat Growers’ Boycott
Authorisation
[2006] ACompT 2
; ATPR 42-120 at [83]; and
at [109]. PNO submitted, however, that the previously accepted
interpretation should not be followed for at least the following
(a) it does not accord with the ordinary meaning of the expression (as confirmed
by the Full Court in
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Pacific
National Pty Ltd
[2020] FCAFC 77
(2020) 277 FCR 49
Pacific National
(b) the “real chance” meaning of “likely” comes from
decisions interpreting the meaning of the word in the
context of other
provisions in the Act, which use similar language, but are concerned with a
different legal question (namely, the
likelihood of harm resulting from a
substantial lessening of competition);
(c) as observed by the Full Court in
Pacific National
at [223], the
reasoning in those cases for rejecting the ordinary meaning of likely, in favour
of the “real chance” meaning,
involves a conflation between the
matter to be proved (“would result”) and the standard of proof (in a
civil matter,
the balance of probabilities);
(d) the balancing test enshrined in s 90(7)(b) suggests an intention that the
Tribunal would be weighing something more concrete
than a “real
chance” of a benefit against a “real chance” of a
(e) as distinct from the Full Court’s decision in
Pacific National
(which concerned the meaning of the word “likely” in
meaning of “likely” as it appears in the statutory context of s 90
does not appear to have been the subject of previous
consideration by the
Federal Court; and
(f) the decision of the Tribunal in
Howard Smith
, which first adopted the
“real chance” construction of the word “likely”,
concerned an earlier statutory
test for authorisation which did not involve the
weighing of benefits and detriments.
54 The authorisation applicants submitted that none of PNO’s arguments
withstand scrutiny and PNO’s proposed construction
of “likely”
should be rejected because it involves a departure from the established
interpretation of s 90(7) and its
predecessor provisions which has stood for
more than 40 years.
55 The Tribunal accepts the authorisation applicants’ submissions and
sees no reason to depart from the established interpretation
“likely” in the context of s 90(7). That is for four principal
56 First, the meaning of the word “likely” as used in many of the
prohibitions in
of the Act has been authoritatively re-affirmed by the
Full Federal Court in
Pacific National
. The Full Court (at [245]-[246])
approved the meaning of “real commercial likelihood” as explained by
French J in the
following passage from
Australian Gas Light Company v
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (No 3)
[2003] FCA 1525
(2003) 137 FCR 317
The meaning of “likely” reflecting a
“real chance or possibility” does not encompass a mere possibility.
The assessment of the risk or real chance of a substantial lessening of
competition cannot rest upon speculation or theory. To borrow
the words of the
Tribunal in the
Howard Smith
case, the Court is concerned with
“commercial likelihoods relevant to the proposed merger”. The word
has to be applied at a level which is commercially relevant
or meaningful as must be the assessment of the substantial lessening
competition under consideration.
57 Second, the Tribunal does not accept PNO’s contention that the
context in which the word “likely” is used in
s 90(7)(b) (and its
predecessor provisions) differs materially from the context in which the word is
used in the prohibitions in
In the context of the prohibitions in
the law is concerned with the likely effect of the impugned conduct on
competition. As recently reiterated in
Pacific National
, the legal test
requires a comparison between the nature and extent of competition in any
relevant market with and without the conduct
being engaged in or undertaken (at
[103]). In the context of an application for authorisation of particular conduct
, the law is concerned with the benefits to the public and the
detriments to the public that are likely to result from the proposed
That is expressly the case in respect of the current test as amended by the 2017
Amendment Act, but was also implicitly
the case under its predecessor
provisions: see
Howard Smith
at 391. The authorisation test requires a
comparison between the relevant trading and commercial environment with and
without the
conduct being engaged in or undertaken, in order to assess whether
the conduct is likely to give rise to any public benefits or detriments.
context in which the word “likely” is used in s 90(7)(b) does not
require the word to be given the meaning “more
probable than
58 Third, there are two contextual reasons why the word “likely”
should be given the same meaning in the prohibitions
in Pt IV and in the tests
for authorisation in Pt VII. The first reason is that the alternative test for
authorisation in s 90(7)(a)
is the mirror of the prohibitions in Pt IV that
depend upon proof that the conduct would have or would be likely to have the
of substantially lessening competition. The ACCC is empowered to grant
authorisation, in effect, if it is satisfied that the proposed
conduct would not
contravene the relevant prohibition in Pt IV. It follows that the word
“likely” in s 90(7)(a) must
be construed in the same manner as the
underlying prohibition. The second reasons is that there is a close
correspondence between
the tests for authorisation in s 90(7)(a) and (b) which
strongly suggest that the word “likely” should be construed in
same manner in each paragraph. In applying the test under s 90(7)(b), the ACCC
(and the Tribunal on review) will usually be concerned
to identify and weigh the
potential anti-competitive effects of the proposed conduct, as such
anti-competitive effects will constitute
public detriments. The policy that
informs the interpretation of the word “likely” in the prohibitions
in Pt IV, to prohibit
conduct if there is a real commercial likelihood of the
conduct substantially lessening competition, is equally relevant to the
application
of the authorisation test. It is logically consistent, in the
context of determining whether to grant authorisation, to assess whether
is a real commercial likelihood of the conduct harming competition, including
the degree of likelihood and the nature and extent
of the harm, while weighing
those factors against the real commercial likelihood of public benefits.
59 Fourth, and consistently with the view expressed by the Full Court in
Pacific National
(at [243]), the word “likely” in the context
of the tests for authorisation has been construed to mean a likelihood that
less than probable for 40 years (from
Howard Smith
) and there is no
evidence of widespread inconvenience in the application of the law. Indeed, the
law has been amended on numerous
occasions, including most recently by the 2017
Amendment Act, without any suggestion that the legal standard should be
60 As a final observation, it necessarily follows that the word
“likely” should be given the same meaning in paragraphs
(i) and (ii)
of s 90(7)(b). In other words, the statutory test requires the ACCC (and the
Tribunal on review) to assess whether there
is a real commercial likelihood of
the conduct resulting in public benefits and in public detriments and to
determine whether the
anticipated public benefits outweigh the anticipated
public detriments. In weighing the benefits and detriments, the decision maker
must, as a matter of rationality, take into account not only the nature and
extent of the anticipated benefits and detriments to
the public but also the
degree of likelihood of the anticipated benefits and detriments resulting from
the conduct. In some cases,
it may be necessary to weigh a large benefit that
has a low likelihood of resulting from the conduct with a small detriment that
has a high likelihood of resulting from the conduct and
C. CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES
61 Although
PNO is the applicant for review of the ACCC Determination, as the Tribunal is
conducting a
review it is convenient to refer to the contentions
of the authorisation applicants in favour of authorisation before considering
the contentions of PNO opposing authorisation.
The authorisation applicants’ contentions
authorisation applicants contend that the proposed collective bargaining conduct
would be likely to result in two categories
of public benefits.
63 The first category of public benefit was described as facilitating
“more economically efficient contracts”. By way
of explanation of
that phrase, the authorisation applicants referred to an article authored by
Prof Stephen King: “Collective
Bargaining in Business: Economic and Legal
Implications”
(2013) UNSW Law Journal 36(1)
107. Prof King’s article
is referred to in the expert reports of both Dr Smith and Mr Houston. The
parties’ contentions
generally adopted Prof King’s categories of
potential benefits and detriments of collective bargaining. In that article,
King outlined the Australian law on collective bargaining authorisation and
notification, developed an economic framework to analyse
collective bargaining,
against which the ACCC’s approach at the time was compared and contrasted,
and described the economic
literature concerning transaction costs and
contracting.
64 Prof King concluded with the following summary of the ways in which
collective bargaining can enhance economic efficiency (at p
1. Authorisation permits bargaining group members to
share the costs of negotiation... By sharing negotiation and contracting costs
between group members, the collective bargaining group helps parties to
negotiate past inefficient take-it-or-leave-it contracts
in order to design more
complex, mutually beneficial contracts that have fewer economic imperfections.
The gains created by more
efficient bargaining arise from the economies of scale
in negotiations and can be shared by both the collective bargaining group
the counterparty. In other words, both sides to the negotiations can become
better off if collective bargaining occurs.
2. Collective bargaining can change the incentives in the contracting process
in ways that enhance the ability of parties to undertake
non-contractible
investments that increase economic surplus. We discussed two channels for this
improvement. First, collective bargaining
can make delegation desirable where
delegation to the group overcomes issues of individual incentives. Second,
collective bargaining
may alter bargaining power and this can alter incentives
to engage in non-contractible investments.
65 In the article, Prof King observed that while increases in bargaining
power from collective bargaining may change the incentives
for parties to invest
in ways that raise the gains from bargaining (and improve economic efficiency),
changes in bargaining power
may simply change the distribution of the surplus
generated from bargaining (which does not affect economic efficiency). Prof King
also commented that while collective bargaining can improve the efficiency of
contracts in one market, it can also assist the participants
anti-competitively coordinate their behaviour in a functionally separate market,
including by means of the information exchanged
as part of the collective
bargaining.
66 The authorisation applicants’ contentions were exclusively directed
to the Producer Pricing Deed which, as noted earlier
(and is discussed further
below), has been offered by PNO to all coal producers as common terms governing
the navigation service
and wharfage charges. The authorisation applicants
contend that the Producer Pricing Deed in its present form contains inefficient
terms. The Producer Pricing Deed contemplates that PNO will separately meet at
least twice annually, throughout the 10-year term,
with each and every coal
producer who has entered into a Deed in relation to issues which are common to
all coal producers, including
capital expenditures at the Port and price
increases. In addition, the Deed contemplates that price increase disputes can
resolved through a multiplicity of confidential bilateral negotiations,
mediations and arbitrations with each and every coal producer,
notwithstanding
that the dispute will be common to all coal producers and the resolution of any
pricing dispute under one of the
Deeds (including as a result of arbitration)
can only be implemented under the “non-discriminatory pricing”
it is applied across all Deeds. The terms of the Producer Pricing
Deed, if agreed, would impose inefficient transaction costs on
all parties.
67 The authorisation applicants further contend that the proposed collective
bargaining conduct will also help to address the imbalance
of bargaining power
that exists between PNO and individual coal producers. They argued that the
imbalance of bargaining power arises
from the fact that the Port is a bottleneck
facility and PNO, as operator of the Port, is a monopoly service provider where
producers have no practical alternative to the Port for the export of
their coal. They argued that the imbalance in bargaining power
has resulted in
the Producer Pricing Deed containing inefficient terms, including the likelihood
that the Port charges under the
Deed during the 10-year term will exceed
efficient prices. They also argued that the price rise methodology in the Deed
creates substantial
future pricing uncertainty for all parties. Further, the
very high transaction cost of price increase disputes under the Deed (including
bilateral arbitration) is likely to operate as a substantial disincentive for
individual coal producers to dispute PNO’s price
68 The second category of public benefit is a likely reduction in transaction
costs of negotiating the terms of the Producer Pricing
Deed. In that regard, the
authorisation applicants argued that there are normal transaction costs for each
coal producer of preparing
for and engaging in negotiations and that those costs
would likely be less if costs were pooled and shared in collective bargaining.
Likewise, there would be significant transaction costs savings for PNO as
collective bargaining will allow PNO to deal with the group
rather than
negotiating with each coal producer individually. Such cost savings generate
productive efficiencies. The authorisation
applicants argued that the
transaction costs of coordination within the bargaining group are likely to be
small because the Producer
Pricing Deed raises largely common issues for all
coal producers.
69 The authorisation applicants contend that the proposed collective
bargaining conduct would not be likely to result in any public
detriments. They
argued that the conduct gives rise to no material risk of collusive conduct
between coal producers because the collective
bargaining is limited in scope: it
relates to PNO’s publicly available Producer Pricing Deed and
authorisation is not sought
to share competitively sensitive information that
relates to customers, marketing strategies or volume or capacity projections.
Nor will the conduct marginalise the individual interests and preferences of
coal producers: participation in collective bargaining
is voluntary and the
Producer Pricing Deed has been proffered by PNO to all coal producers in a
standard form.
PNO’s contentions
relation to the first claimed public benefit, more efficient contracting, PNO
contends that the evidence does not support the
claims made by the authorisation
applicants.
71 PNO contends that the fact that PNO operates a bottleneck facility does
not mean that it has unfettered market power and the true
relationship between
PNO and coal producers is one of mutual dependence. A variety of commercial,
regulatory and economic factors
are likely to constrain PNO’s market power
across the medium term including that:
(a) coal vessels currently provide the majority of the Port’s revenue;
(b) the Port is not capacity constrained and PNO does not have an incentive to
set prices in a way that reduces coal production and
(c) coal exported through the Port competes against coal from several other
countries in a competitive, international market in which
coal producers are
price takers;
(d) for the next ten years, PNO is also constrained in its ability to increase
prices by the deeds it has entered with vessel agents;
(e) PNO is also constrained by the threat of declaration under Pt IIIA of the
72 PNO also contends that there is no evidence as to how the proposed
collective bargaining conduct would be likely to result in better
outcomes for
coal producers. PNO is not compelled to participate in collective bargaining,
but even if PNO were to participate, there
is no basis to consider that the
navigation service and wharfage charges would be set at a different level given
that PNO is already
constrained in the prices it has set.
73 PNO further contends that, even if the proposed collective bargaining
conduct resulted in better outcomes for coal producers, there
is no evidence to
support a conclusion that that would generate a public benefit (in the form of
an improvement in economic efficiency)
as opposed to a private benefit (in the
form of a transfer of surplus from PNO to the coal producers). In particular,
PNO contends
that there is no evidence to support a conclusion that the conduct
would be likely to promote more certain investment conditions
in the Hunter
Valley and lead to improvements in efficiency and competition in the coal export
market and other dependent markets.
74 In relation to the second claimed public benefit, transaction costs
savings, PNO contends that the claimed benefit is both incomplete
theoretical. It is incomplete in the sense that it ignores new transaction costs
which would not need to be incurred in the absence
of collective bargaining,
specifically the costs of coordination within the bargaining group. It is
theoretical in the sense that
the authorisation applicants have made no attempt
to quantify or estimate the savings or their significance.
75 PNO contends that there are two categories of public detriments likely to
arise from the proposed collective bargaining conduct.
76 First, collective bargaining by coal producers in respect of Port services
increases the risk of collusive conduct between coal
producers in respect of the
acquisition or supply of other goods or services.
77 Second, collective bargaining, which requires the group to reach a
collective position on contractual issues, increases the risk
collective position will reflect the interests and preferences of those members
of the group with the loudest voice or deepest
pockets, at the expense of the
interests and preferences of other, less influential members. PNO contends that
the coal producers
have different concerns or, at least, prioritise concerns
differently. The differences may arise from matters such as differences
coal producers’ size, mine life or operational complexity. PNO contends
that the risk in a collective negotiation framework
is that no agreement will be
reached unless everyone’s concerns can be addressed, or at least not until
the concerns of the
largest, most influential, members of the negotiating group
have been satisfactorily addressed. This may mean that some individual
producers will not sign a contract even though their own concerns have been
satisfactorily addressed, which has the potential
for inefficiency.
D. EVIDENCE AND MATERIAL BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL
evidence and material before the Tribunal comprised the following:
(a) all of the material that was before the ACCC in making its decision
including the original application filed by the authorisation
applicants and
subsequent submissions, as well as submissions made by other persons;
(b) the ACCC’s draft and final determinations;
(c) affidavits filed on behalf of PNO comprising industry evidence given by Mr
Simon Byrnes, Ms Gabriella Sainsbury and Mr Bruce
Lloyd and expert economic
evidence given by Mr Greg Houston;
(d) affidavits filed on behalf of the authorisation applicants comprising
industry evidence given by Mr Michael Dodd, Mr Keiron Rochester,
Mr Brett Lewis
and Mr Dave Poddar and expert economic evidence given by Mr Euan Morton;
(e) expert evidence given by Dr Rhonda Smith which was adduced by the ACCC for
the assistance of the Tribunal;
(f) the Joint Expert Report dated 29 September 2021 prepared by the economic
experts following their conferral (the
Joint Report
(g) a number of additional documents including particularly PNO’s Producer
Pricing Deed and Vessel Agent Pro Forma Long Term
Pricing Deed (
Vessel Agent
Pricing Deed
) and the Whitehaven Annual Reports for 2020 and 2021; and
(h) a submission, with supporting documents, from the Port Authority of
79 With respect to the material that was before the ACCC in making its
decision, the Tribunal was taken to parts of the original application
subsequent submissions filed by the authorisation applicants, but not to any
part of the submissions filed by other persons.
In those circumstances, and in
light of the new evidence filed in this proceeding, it has not been necessary
for the Tribunal to
refer to the submissions filed with the ACCC by other
PNO’s witnesses
Byrnes affirmed four affidavits, dated 15 March 2021, 25 June 2021, 30 July 2021
and 10 October 2021 respectively. Mr Byrnes
is the Chief Commercial Officer and
General Counsel for PNO, a role that he has held since April 2019. As General
Counsel, Mr Byrnes
leads PNO’s legal services division. He is also
responsible for overseeing the commercial, property, environment, business
intelligence, planning, corporate governance, company secretarial and compliance
management functions of PNO. Together with the Chief
Financial Officer, Mr Nick
Livesey, and the Deputy General Counsel, Ms Sainsbury, he is responsible for
leading PNO’s pricing
strategy and commercial negotiations from a legal
perspective, and was authorised to represent PNO in the course of its dealings
with coal producers generally (including in the specific dealings in the period
November 2019 to April 2020). Mr Byrnes principally
gave evidence
(a) the relevant charges levied by PNO at the Port, and the relative
significance of those charges to coal producers, by reference
to recent trends
in the coal export market and the volume of coal exported through the Port;
(b) vessel movements and the total capacity of the shipping channel at the
(c) forecasted coal export volumes through the Port for the period of collective
bargaining authorisation to 2030-31;
(d) the possible development of a container terminal by PNO at the Port; and
(e) negotiations between PNO and coal producers from around November 2019 to 2
April 2020 in respect of proposed long term pricing
arrangements for the
navigation service and wharfage charges at the Port.
81 Mr Byrnes was cross-examined. There was no challenge to his credit and the
Tribunal accepts his evidence as to matters of fact,
but matters of opinion are
discussed below.
82 Ms Sainsbury affirmed an affidavit dated 15 March 2021. Ms Sainsbury is
the Deputy General Counsel and Assistant Company Secretary
for PNO. She has
worked at PNO since April 2018 and has held her current role as Deputy General
Counsel and Assistant Company Secretary
at PNO since 1 July 2019. Together with
Mr Byrnes, Ms Sainsbury has been responsible for leading PNO’s pricing
strategy from
a legal perspective. Ms Sainsbury gave evidence about relevant
charges and open access arrangements at the Port, and the Vessel Agent
Deeds that have been entered into with ships’ agents representing the
operators of coal vessels that use the Port.
Ms Sainsbury was not
cross-examined.
83 Mr Lloyd affirmed an affidavit dated 15 March 2021. Mr Lloyd is a partner
at Clayton Utz, the solicitors for PNO. Mr Lloyd gave
evidence of the legal
background and history to the present application, including the first
declaration of the Port in May 2016,
the revocation of that declaration in
September 2019, and NSWMC’s application for declaration in July 2020. Mr
Lloyd was not
cross-examined.
84 Mr Houston prepared an expert report for PNO dated 30 July 2021. Mr
Houston holds a BSc(Hons) in Economics, a University of Canterbury
post-graduate
degree, which he was awarded with first class honours in 1983. He is a founding
partner of the economic consulting
firm HoustonKemp. He has over thirty
years’ experience in the economic analysis of markets and the provision of
expert advice
and testimony in litigation, business strategy and policy
contexts. Mr Houston has filed expert reports and/or given expert evidence
numerous occasions before arbitrators, appeal panels, regulators, the Federal
Court of Australia, the Competition Tribunal, the
Fair Work Commission, state
Supreme Courts, the High Court of New Zealand and other judicial or adjudicatory
bodies. Mr Houston was
instructed by PNO’s solicitors to review and
respond to the 25 June 2021 report of Mr Morton prepared for NSWMC, and the 22
April 2021 report of Dr Smith, prepared for the ACCC. He concludes from his
review of these reports that the nature and extent of
public benefits and
detriments that can be expected to arise from the proposed collective bargaining
conduct can be synthesised into
three types of economic effect, which he
addresses in turn:
(a) the potential for more efficient outcomes in primary and/or any dependent
markets, or “efficiency effects”;
(b) the implications for the cost of negotiating and transacting for port access
services, or “transactions costs effects”;
(c) the potential for collusive conduct to cause detriment to outcomes in
primary and/or any dependent markets, or “countervailing
detriments”.
85 In accordance with directions of the Tribunal dated 14 September 2021, Mr
Houston participated in an initial conclave with Dr Smith
and Mr Morton,
following which the three experts prepared the Joint Report.
The authorisation applicants’ witnesses
Dodd affirmed an affidavit dated 6 May 2021. Mr Dodd is the General Manager of
Infrastructure at Yancoal, a member of NSWMC.
Yancoal is an Australian coal
producer producing a mix of premium thermal, semi-soft coking and PCI coals for
export. Yancoal’s
New South Wales mines include Moolarben, Hunter Valley
Operations, Mount Thorley Warkworth, Stratford-Duralie and Ashton, Austar
Donaldson. Coal from these mines is exported solely through the Port. Mr Dodd
gave evidence about Yancoal’s business, charges
at the Port, and
discussions with PNO in relation to the Port charges. Mr Dodd was
cross-examined. There was no challenge to his
credit and the Tribunal accepts
his evidence as to matters of fact, but matters of opinion are discussed below.
87 Mr Rochester affirmed an affidavit dated 30 June 2021. Mr Rochester is the
General Manager of Whitehaven, a member of NSWMC. Whitehaven
currently operates
four coal mines in the Gunnedah Coal Basin in north-west New South Wales,
exporting metallurgical and thermal
coal through the Port. Mr Rochester gave
evidence about Whitehaven’s business, charges at the Port, and discussions
in relation to the Port charges. Mr Rochester was not required for
cross-examination but, as discussed below, senior counsel led
some additional
evidence from Mr Rochester in chief that resulted in some further questions in
cross-examination and from the Tribunal.
There was no challenge to Mr
Rochester’s credit and the Tribunal accepts his evidence as to matters of
fact, but matters of
opinion are discussed below.
88 Mr Lewis swore an affidavit dated 30 April 2021. Mr Lewis is the Managing
Director and Chief Executive Officer of the Bloomfield
Group. Its subsidiary,
Bloomfield Collieries, is a member of NSWMC. Bloomfield Collieries operates two
coal mines within the Hunter
Valley. The Bloomfield Mine is located
approximately 20 kms north-west of Newcastle and the Rix's Creek Mine is located
5 kms north-west
of Singleton. Bloomfield Collieries exports 100% of its coal
through the Port. Mr Lewis gave evidence about Bloomfield Collieries’
business, charges at the Port, and Bloomfield Collieries’ discussions with
PNO in relation to Port charges. Mr Lewis was cross-examined.
There was no
challenge to his credit and the Tribunal accepts his evidence as to matters of
fact, but matters of opinion are discussed
89 Mr Poddar affirmed three affidavits dated 25 June 2021, 29 July 2021 and
13 October 2021. Mr Poddar is a partner at Clifford Chance,
the solicitors for
NSWMC. Mr Poddar adduced in evidence public statements made by PNO in relation
to its plans for the development
of the Port, in particular the development of a
container terminal. He also gave evidence about the economic contribution that
mining makes to the Hunter Valley region (and Australia more generally). Mr
Poddar was not cross-examined.
90 Mr Morton prepared an expert report for NSWMC dated 25 June 2021. Mr
Morton holds bachelor degrees in Commerce, Law (Honours) and
Economics (First
Class Honours). He was admitted as a Solicitor to the Supreme Court of
Queensland in 1991. Mr Morton has been a
Principal of Synergies Economic
Consulting (
) since 2004. In his role as Principal of Synergies,
he advises on a range of economic issues relating to infrastructure and economic
policy. Mr Morton was instructed to provide a report on:
(a) his view of the report prepared by Dr Smith, particularly in relation to the
may be expected to accrue
from collective bargaining arrangements; and
(b) his view of how PNO may be expected to act in setting prices and negotiating
access, given its economic circumstances and incentives.
91 As stated above, Mr Morton also participated in the initial expert
conclave and contributed to the preparation of the Joint Report.
The ACCC’s witness
Smith prepared an expert report for the ACCC dated 22 April 2021. Dr Smith holds
the degrees of B.Com (Hons), University of
Melbourne (1967), MA, Economics,
University of Melbourne (1969) and D. Com, Economics, University of Melbourne
(2007). She is a Senior
Lecturer in the Economics Department and a Senior Fellow
in the Law School at the University of Melbourne. From November 1995 to
1998, Dr Smith was a Commissioner with the ACCC. Dr Smith has published
extensively in the area of industrial economics
and competition law and
regulation and has appeared as an expert witness in a number of competition law
cases. Dr Smith was asked
to prepare an independent expert report providing her
opinion in answer to the following questions:
(a) the market(s) relevant to a consideration of the authorisation
application;
(b) the economic principles, if any, relevant to the identification of public
benefits (including when a benefit is “private”
rather than
“public” and when a benefit is both private and public);
(c) the economic principles that apply in relation to collective bargaining
conduct generally and, applying those principles, the
public benefits and public
detriments, if any, that would result or be likely to result from collective
bargaining conduct generally;
(d) applying the principles identified in (b) and (c), the public benefits, if
any, that would result or be likely to result from
the proposed collective
bargaining conduct, and their magnitude; and
(e) the likely harm from the proposed collective bargaining conduct.
93 Dr Smith also participated in the initial expert conclave and contributed
to the preparation of the Joint Report.
E. FINDINGS OF FACT
Introduction
is uncontroversial that the Port is a bottleneck facility, meaning, in practical
terms, that the Port facilities, including
particularly the shipping channel and
berthing services, are necessary for the export of coal from the Hunter Valley.
Coal producers
in the Hunter Valley have no practicable alternative to the Port
for the export of their coal. It is equally uncontroversial that,
at present,
coal exports represent a very substantial share of the Port’s throughput
and revenues. The Port’s 2020 Trade
Report discloses that 80% of ship
visits to the Port in calendar year 2020 were visits by coal ships and 96% of
total trade through
the Port in calendar year 2020 related to coal from which
PNO derives more than 70% of its revenues.
95 Since the privatisation of the Port in 2014, the charges levied by PNO for
Port services have increased substantially, particularly
the navigation service
charge which is payable in respect of the shipping channel service. NSWMC and
its Hunter Valley coal producer
members, and in particular Glencore Coal, have
objected to the increases and have sought to have the shipping channel and
services at the Port declared under Pt IIIA of the Act which would
enable compulsory arbitration of the charges in accordance with
the provisions
of Pt IIIA. Those services were initially declared by a differently constituted
Tribunal in June 2016: see
Re Glencore Coal Pty Ltd
[2016] ACompT 6
Re Glencore Coal
Re Glencore Coal Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2016] ACompT 7
309 FLR 358
Re Glencore Coal No 2
). Following
the declaration, Glencore Coal sought and obtained an arbitrated determination
of the charges for those services at the
Port (being the navigation service and
wharfage charges). Following amendments to the statutory declaration criteria
made by the
2017 Amendment Act, the declaration was revoked in 2019. NSWMC made
another application for declaration on 23 July 2020. That application
refused by the Minister, and the Minister’s decision was subsequently
affirmed by a differently constituted Tribunal on
4 August 2021: see
Application by New South Wales Minerals Council (No 3)
[2021] ACompT 4
96 The application for authorisation of the proposed collective bargaining
conduct has been made in circumstances where the charges
levied by PNO for Port
services, particularly the navigation service and wharfage charges, are not
subject to compulsory arbitration
under Pt IIIA or other form of price
regulation. The one exception is in respect of the Glencore Coal arbitration
determination –
the navigation service and wharfage charges determined in
that arbitration govern the commercial dealings between PNO and Glencore
but are not applicable to other Port users. As noted below, Port charges are
subject to price monitoring under Pt 6 of the
PAMA Act, but that does not extend
to price regulation. In their application to the ACCC for authorisation, the
authorisation applicants
submitted that they “are seeking to collectively
negotiate as an industry, to achieve a long term commercial solution for channel
and berthing charges that provides the industry with certainty for long term
investment in the Hunter Valley region”.
97 Thus, in assessing the application for authorisation, it is necessary to
have regard to the history of Port charges since privatisation
and the dealings
between PNO and Port users in that period. The relevant background facts were
the subject of evidence in this proceeding
and are largely uncontroversial. The
background facts were also recently recounted in the Tribunal’s decision
, in which the Tribunal affirmed the Treasurer’s
decision not to declare the shipping channel and berthing services under Pt
IIIA. Those background facts have been supplemented in this proceeding with more
detailed evidence concerning: the volume of coal
exported through the Port over
time and current forecasts of volumes into the future; the export price of coal
over time and current
forecasts of price into the future; PNO’s intentions
with respect to the development of the Port, including particularly the
development of container facilities; and the history of negotiations between the
Port and coal producers with respect to Port charges.
The Port and the Hunter Valley coal industry
May 2014, the Port was operated by the State of NSW. The Port was privatised in
May 2014 by the grant of a 98 year lease
to the joint venture parents of PNO,
The Infrastructure Fund managed by Hastings Funds Management and China Merchants
transaction generated gross proceeds of some $1.75 billion to the
State of NSW. PNO operates the Port under a 98-year sublease. As
the operator of
the Port, PNO controls the terms and conditions of access to the Port including,
relevantly, the shipping channels
and berthing facilities required for the
export of coal from the Port. In calendar year 2020, PNO earned total revenues
of approximately
$115 million of which the navigation service charge accounted
for approximately $86.4 million and the wharfage charge accounted for
approximately $21.8 million (being in aggregate some 96.4% of its revenues).
Total revenues were largely unchanged from calendar
99 There are more than 35 operating coal mines operated by 11 coal producers
that export coal through the Port, with other coal projects
in various stages of
exploration and development. The coal producers exporting through the Port
(a) Glencore Coal, which is New South Wales’ largest coal producer and
operates several mines and mining complexes across the
Newcastle, Hunter Valley
and Western Coalfields;
(b) BHP (through its subsidiary Hunter Valley Energy Coal Pty Ltd), which
operates the Mt Arthur complex, the largest mine in the
Hunter Valley, located
near Muswellbrook;
(c) Peabody Energy, which operates the Wambo mine in the Hunter Valley and the
Wilpinjong mines in the Western Coalfield;
(d) Yancoal, which operates several mines in the Hunter Valley, Newcastle and
Western Coalfields;
(e) Whitehaven, which operates several mines in the Gunnedah Basin;
(f) MACH Energy, which operates the Mt Pleasant mine in the Hunter Valley;
(g) New Hope Group (through its subsidiary Bengalla Mining Company Pty Ltd),
which operates the Bengalla Mine in the Hunter Valley;
(h) Bloomfield Collieries, which operates two open cut coal mines in the Hunter
Valley: Bloomfield at East Maitland and Rix's Creek
at Singleton;
(i) Centennial, which operates the Mandalong, Myuna and Newstan mines in the
Newcastle coalfield;
(j) Idemitsu, which owns the Boggabri mine in the Gunnedah Basin and the
Muswellbrook mine in the Hunter Valley; and
(k) Delta Coal, which owns the Chain Valley mine approximately 60km south of
Newcastle and directly adjacent to the Vales Point Power
100 Other coal projects that may export coal through the Port in the future
include Malabar’s Spur Hill and Maxwell projects.
101 There are different grades of coal that are mined in, and exported from,
Australia. These include:
(a) thermal coal (or steaming coal), which is primarily used as an energy source
for electricity generation and, to a lesser extent,
as an ingredient in cement;
(b) metallurgical coal, which is used to produce high grade coking coal and is
an essential ingredient in the steelmaking industry.
102 Metallurgical coal can be divided into three further sub-categories
according to the quality grade of the coal, being hard coking
coal, semi-soft
coking coal and pulverised coal injection (
103 The majority of coal exported through the Port, and produced in the
Hunter Valley, is thermal coal, followed by some semi-soft
coking coal and some
PCI coal. For the 2020 calendar year, approximately 158 million tonnes
) of coal was exported through the Port comprising 131 Mt of thermal
coal and 27 Mt of semi-soft coking and PCI coal combined.
104 In February 2020, Lawrence Consulting prepared a report for NSWMC titled
“NSW Mining Industry Expenditure Impact Survey
2018/19”. That report
stated that, in the 2019 financial year, the Hunter Valley mining sector
directly supported 3,282 businesses,
directly employed 13,347 people, paid $1.4
billion in wages and salaries and directly spent $4.0 billion on goods and
services. In
total, about 19.1% of the Hunter Region’s workforce was
supported by mining.
105 Many of the coal producers in the Hunter Valley are large multinational
companies and conduct Australian coal mining operations
that, in financial
terms, are far larger than the Port of Newcastle. By way of
illustration:
(a) BHP Group’s revenues from its New South Wales Energy Coal operations
were US$972 million for the year ended 30 June 2020;
(b) Centennial’s sales revenues from its total operations in Australia
were A$1.107 billion for the year ended 31 December
(c) Glencore plc’s revenues from its thermal coal operations in Australia
were US$4.031 billion for the year ended 31 December
2020, with 66.7 Mt of
thermal coal produced in Australia during that period;
(d) Peabody Energy Corporation sold 19 Mt of thermal coal from Australian mines
in the year ended 31 December 2020;
(e) Whitehaven’s revenues for thermal coal production were around $1.402
billion for the year ended 30 June 2020; and
(f) Yancoal’s total ex-mine revenues for thermal coal production were
$2.535 billion for the year ended 31 December 2020.
Coal demand, supply and prices
maintains records of the total volume of coal exported through the Port by coal
in each calendar year from 1997 to
2020, which are confidential to PNO. As noted earlier, approximately 158 Mt of
coal was exported
through the Port in the 2020 calendar year (
evidence and by reference to those records, Mr Byrnes commented that the volume
of coal exported through the Port year-on-year
very substantially increased in
the period from the mid-1990s until 2019 (by almost 300%). During the period
CY2014 to CY2015 (during
which the increase to the navigation service charge was
announced and implemented by PNO), and thereafter, total coal exports through
the Port remained at high levels compared to the historical annual coal export
volumes. The volume of coal exported through the Port
reached a record high of
approximately 165 Mt in CY2019.
107 Mr Byrnes also produced a graph which plotted the world coal price on the
same graph as the volume of coal exports from the Port
in the period CY2006 to
CY2020. Mr Byrnes commented that the graph showed that the world coal price does
not correlate to volumes
exported through the Port. The Tribunal does not accept
that Mr Byrnes’ graph negates a correlation between export coal prices
the volume of coal exports, and it would be economically surprising if there
were no correlation. In the long run, export coal
prices would be expected to
drive coal production volumes. Indeed, Mr Byrnes graph shows that a very
substantial increase in coal
export volumes occurred during periods of high
export prices, and the rate of increase in coal production volumes declined (to
during a subsequent period of declining export prices.
108 PNO retains Kpler, a leading data analytics service provider which
reports data and analytics for various global commodity markets,
periodic reports which track export and production trends with respect to world
coal markets, including tracking sources
of demand from time to time. Based on
Kpler’s reports, Mr Byrnes commented that the increase in demand for
Australian coal
from 2010 onwards was largely as a result of the very
significant increase in electricity generation and steel making requirements
China and, to a lesser extent, India, Korea and Japan. According to the Reserve
Bank of Australia, China is by far the largest
global consumer of thermal coal,
accounting for nearly half of annual global consumption, and driving most of the
growth in production
in recent decades. Thermal coal exports to China have
increased rapidly over the past decade, from less than 2% of Australian thermal
coal exports in 2008, to around 25% as at 2019. Sustained economic growth over
recent decades in India and other Asian economies
has also contributed to
increased global thermal coal consumption. From around September 2020, there has
been a very substantial
decline in coal exported through the Port to China.
However, exports of coal through the Port to other countries, such as India,
have increased substantially.
109 Mr Byrnes also commented that global coal prices (including the benchmark
Newcastle thermal coal spot price) are unpredictable
and fluctuate on a daily
basis and routinely by more than 1%. During the past five years, global thermal
coal prices have ranged
between approximately US$49 and US$119 per metric tonne
and, as at February 2021, were around US$86.7. In his fourth affidavit dated
October 2021, Mr Byrnes noted that the Newcastle thermal coal spot price had
increased to around A$257.69 on that date (using
publicly available data from
the World Bank). Mr Poddar’s fourth affidavit exhibited the underlying
World Bank data which showed
that the coal price had reached a low of US$50.14
in August 2020 and had thereafter increased each month, surging from mid-2021
reaching US$185.69 in September 2021 (all prices expressed in nominal US
dollars). Mr Poddar also reproduced the World Bank forecast
(as at 20 April
2021) for Newcastle thermal coal spot prices out to 2035, which were (in nominal
US dollars) US$70.6 (2025), US$62.3
(2030) and US$55.0 (2035).
110 PNO also retains Wood Mackenzie, a global commodities research and
consultancy business, to provide historical data, and projected
forecasts, for
domestic and global coal export and production trends. In around January 2021,
Wood Mackenzie prepared for PNO a confidential
report titled “Scenario
Development and Planning” which included forecasts for Port coal
throughput and global thermal
and metallurgical coal demand to 2035. Wood
Mackenzie’s forecast was that thermal coal exported from the Port would
to a peak of approximately 190 Mt in 2028 and decline to approximately
170 Mt by 2035. The report also commented that on average,
catchment mines (for thermal coal) have lower production costs than other
suppliers which means that, as additional
production becomes available, it
pushes out other, higher cost production from the seaborne market. Mr Byrnes
also gave confidential
evidence about PNO’s commercial dealings with the
operators of coal terminals at the Port. The evidence supports a conclusion
the operators of coal terminals do not anticipate a decline in coal exports
through the Port in the medium term.
Port capacity and development
the terms of its lease, PNO is required to prepare a development plan to assist
the State, Government agencies, and the
local community to understand its
intentions in relation to the development of the Port. PNO's current development
Port Master Plan 2040
) was published in 2018 and is available on
PNO's website.
112 The Port Master Plan 2040 states (at page 30) that the shipping channel
at the Port can accommodate the safe movement of over
10,000 vessels per annum,
and that, as at 2018, the shipping channel was operating at less than 50% of its
capacity. The Port Master
Plan 2040 lists (at page 29) a number of constraints
which can limit the size of vessels entering and departing the Port,
(a) under-keel clearance (distance between the lowest point of the ship’s
hull and the channel bottom);
(b) channel clearance (distance from ship’s hull to channel boundary);
(c) channel geometry.
113 PNO also publishes annual trade reports on its website which include
statistics on ship visits at the Port, coal export destinations
and volumes, and
the financial performance of the Port. PNO's most recent annual trade report
(the 2020 Trade Report) states (at
page 2) that:
(a) 2,205 ship visits were made at the Port in the calendar year 2020, of which
1,754 (around 80%) were visits by coal ships (with
“visit” comprising approximately two vessel “movements”,
being one movement in and one movement
out of the Port); and
(b) 96% of total trade through the Port in the calendar year 2020 related to
coal (from which PNO derives more than 70% of its revenues).
114 PNO has made a number of public statements about its intention to develop
a dedicated, high volume container terminal, known as
the Multi-purpose
Deepwater Terminal (
), at the Port. In evidence were many public
statements made during 2021 about PNO’s plans to proceed with the
development,
recognising the commercial opportunity to attract cargo container
traffic through the Port and to diversify the Port’s revenue
streams (and
high reliance on export coal trade).
115 However, PNO has also publicly stated that it cannot proceed with the MDT
until the obligations imposed on it under a Port Commitment
Deed entered into
with the State of NSW at the time of privatisation are removed. Mr Byrnes gave
evidence that, in May 2013, in connection
with the privatisation of Port Kembla
and Port Botany, the State of NSW entered into agreements, known as Port
Commitment Deeds,
with the incoming operator of Port Kembla and Port Botany, NSW
Ports Operations Hold Co Pty Limited (and two of its subsidiaries)
) for a term of 50 years. The Port Botany and Port Kembla Port
Commitment Deeds oblige the State of NSW to compensate NSW Ports for
diverted from Port Botany or Port Kembla to a container terminal at the Port of
Newcastle (if one exists) above a specified
threshold amount (which the capacity
of the MDT substantially exceeds). Separately, in connection with the
privatisation of the Port
of Newcastle, the State of NSW and PNO entered into a
corresponding Port Commitment Deed that requires PNO to reimburse the State
NSW for any compensation paid under the Port Botany and Port Kembla Port
Commitment Deeds to NSW Ports in respect of container
traffic at the Port of
116 The ACCC has brought proceedings in the Federal Court against NSW Ports
alleging that the Port Commitment Deeds contravene s 45
of the Act and are
therefore unenforceable. On 29 July 2021, the Federal Court dismissed the
proceedings:
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v NSW Ports
Operations Hold Co Pty Ltd
[2021] FCA 720.
The ACCC has appealed against
that decision, with the appeal yet to be heard and determined.
117 Mr Byrnes said that, if the obligations in the Port Commitment Deeds were
to be removed, it would take PNO four to five years
to construct the MDT. Mr
Byrnes said that, at present (given the existence of the Port Commitment Deeds),
PNO does not have a funding
plan for the development of the MDT and PNO’s
five-year capital expenditure forecast as at March 2021 does not include
for capital expenditure on any future channel improvements or future
berths related to the MDT.
118 The evidence before the Tribunal indicates that the development of the
MDT is an important part of PNO’s future business
plans and that PNO has
been actively seeking to progress that development. At the same time, there is
some uncertainty around the
project by reason of the Port Commitment Deeds. In
this determination, the Tribunal takes into consideration the prospect that the
MDT will proceed despite the Port Commitment Deeds.
Port charges
the port operator in respect of the Port, PNO is empowered under Pt 5 of the
PAMA Act to fix and levy three types of charges
on the users of Port
(a) the navigation service charge, which is payable in respect of general use by
a vessel of the Port and its infrastructure, and
is paid by the owner of the
vessel (as defined in s 48 of the PAMA Act) on each entry by the vessel
into the Port calculated by reference
to the gross tonnage of the vessel (ss 50
and 51 of the PAMA Act);
(b) the wharfage charge, which is payable in respect of the availability of a
site at which stevedoring operations may be carried
out, and is paid by the
owner of the cargo at the time immediately before it is loaded or immediately
after it is unloaded at the
site by reference to the quantity of cargo loaded or
unloaded (s 61 of the PAMA Act); and
(c) the site occupation charge, which is payable by occupiers of land-side
facilities such as stevedoring at terminals (s 60 of the
120 The two charges that are most relevant to this proceeding are the
navigation service charge and the wharfage charge. As noted
above, PNO levies
the navigation service charge on the vessel owner. As the vast majority of coal
exported through the Port is sold
on a “free on board” (
basis with the coal buyer arranging shipping from the Port, the navigation
service charge is a cost borne in the first instance
by the coal buyer (as part
of the shipping costs) rather than the coal producer. However, the Tribunal
accepts that the navigation
service charge will indirectly affect the price for
coal received by the coal producers because that price is derived from
international
coal prices and the costs of shipment from Newcastle. In contrast,
the wharfage charge is levied on coal producers directly.
121 Section 67 of the PAMA Act empowers PNO, as the port operator in respect
of the Port, to enter into an agreement with a person
otherwise liable to pay a
charge under Pt 5 of the PAMA Act in respect of such charges. It provides as
67 Agreements in respect of charges
(1) The relevant port authority may enter into an agreement with a person
liable to pay any kind of charge under this Part.
(2) Such an agreement may make provision for or with respect
(a) fixing the amount of any charge payable by the person to the relevant port
authority, and
(b) any other matter which the relevant port authority is permitted by or under
this Part to determine in respect of the charge,
(c) any right or privilege which by or under this Part accrues to the person
liable to pay the charge, or which the relevant port
authority may confer on the
(3) To the extent that provision is so made, the agreement displaces any
determinations of the relevant port authority in relation
to the charge or to
the matter, right or privilege concerned.
122 Part 6 of the PAMA Act establishes a price monitoring scheme in respect
of charges imposed at various ports in NSW including the
Port. Section 77 states
the objective of the scheme:
The objective of the price monitoring scheme established
by this Part (the
scheme objective)
is to promote the economically
efficient operation of, use of and investment in major port facilities in the
State by monitoring
the prices port operators charge users of those facilities,
so as to promote a competitive commercial environment in port operations.
123 By s 79, PNO is required to publish, on its website, a list of the Port
charges charged by it (other than charges made pursuant
to an agreement under s
67). Under s 80, PNO is required to give prior notice of any change in its
charges to the Minister (responsible
for the administration of the PAMA Act in
NSW) and by publication on its website, and must state the reason for the
change. Under
s 81, PNO must provide an annual report to the Minister in respect
of its charges and the revenue received from the charges.
124 As required by the PAMA Act, PNO publishes a “Schedule of Service
Charges” that apply to the use of the Port, which
includes the navigation
service charge and the wharfage charge.
125 Following the privatisation of the Port and PNO’s assumption of the
operation of the Port on 30 May 2014, PNO implemented
a pricing review of the
navigation service charge. Following this pricing review, PNO removed the
two-tiered navigation service charge
that was previously in place at the Port
for coal vessels, which charged rates (up to a cap) depending on the gross
tonnage of the
vessel, and replaced this with a flat rate per gross tonne with
no cap. The new flat rate was announced on 1 July 2014 and was effective
January 2015.The table below compares the old (pre - 1 January 2015) and new
(post - 1 January 2015) navigation service charge:
Before 1 January 2015
After 1 January 2015
NSC (gross tonnage < 50,000)
NSC (gross tonnage > 50,000
Max NSC (cap)
126 Since 2015, there have been further increases in the published navigation
service charge, as set out in the following table (per
gross tonne):
127 As discussed below, in around March 2020 PNO entered into pricing deeds
with vessel agents in respect of all coal vessels using
the Port which apply a
lower rate for the navigation service charge (than the published rate) from 1
January 2020. The deeds have
a term of 10 years.
128 The navigation service charge is fixed and payable according to the gross
tonnage of a vessel that enters the Port and uses the
shipping channel. Gross
tonnage refers to the capacity of the vessel using the channel, rather than the
volume of coal or other cargo
which might be loaded onto the vessel during its
visit at the Port. The gross tonnage (or capacity) of a vessel is determined by
reference to the total internal volume of the vessel, expressed in cubic metres.
Mr Byrnes explained that one vessel gross tonne
(cubic metre of volume) can
accommodate around 1.56 tonnes (mass) of coal, owing to factors including the
density of coal. Without
descending to the detail, the Tribunal notes that Mr
Byrnes’ evidence shows that a number of factors will determine the
rate of the navigation service charge per tonne of loaded coal in any
shipment and it does not rely on the 1.56 tonnes per vessel
gross tonnage figure
cited by Mr Byrnes. Nevertheless, the Tribunal accepts the general proposition
that some adjustment of the rate
of the navigation service charge is required in
any assessment of its significance in the price per tonne of coal received by
exporters and that, based on historical averages, the navigation service
charge is a smaller dollar amount per loaded tonne than
its published dollar
amount per gross tonne.
129 The following table sets out the wharfage charge (per revenue tonne)
which has been charged by PNO in respect of coal since 2014:
130 Mr Byrnes gave evidence that, since PNO took
over the management of the Port in 2014, PNO has not discriminated on price or
terms between:
(a) coal vessel operators with respect to the navigation service charge payable
for the use of the channels and berths at the Port;
(b) coal producers whose coal is exported through the Port in respect of any
Port charges, including the wharfage charge payable
Glencore Coal’s application for the declaration of Port
May 2015, Glencore Coal applied to the National Competition Council (
for the declaration of the shipping channel and berthing service at the Port. In
January 2015, the NCC recommended against declaration,
and in January 2016 the
Treasurer decided not to declare the Port service. Glencore Coal applied to the
Tribunal for review of that
decision. On 31 May 2016, a differently constituted
Tribunal published its reasons for deciding to set aside the Minister’s
decision and make an order to declare the Port service for a period of 15 years,
commencing July 2016 and expiring July 2031:
Re Glencore Coal
. That order
was made on 10 June 2016:
Re Glencore Coal No 2
. The Tribunal’s
decision in
Re Glencore Coal
was upheld by the Full Court in
Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2017] FCAFC 124
Glencore Coal arbitration of Port charges
2016, Glencore Coal notified the ACCC of an access dispute with respect to the
navigation service and wharfage charges at the
Port under Div 3 of Pt IIIA of
the Act. In its arbitral determination made on 18 September 2018, the ACCC set
out the following information
concerning PNO’s published rates for the two
charges, the rates of the charges proposed by each of PNO and Glencore Coal in
the arbitration and the ACCC’s determination of the charges (all in 2018
Navigation service charge ($ per gross tonne
Wharfage charge ($ per revenue tonne)
PNO 2015 port pricing schedule
PNO 2018 port pricing schedule
PNO proposed pricing
Glencore Coal proposed pricing
ACCC determination
133 In determining the initial rates for the navigation service and wharfage
charges, the ACCC used a building block model to calculate
the maximum allowable
revenue that PNO could recover from the two charges. The parties agreed to use
the depreciated optimised replacement
) methodology to value
the Port assets and establish the regulated asset base upon which the capital
components of the allowed revenue
were to be calculated. As noted in the NCC
Recommendation, the rate for the navigation service charge determined by the
ACCC represented
a significant decrease below the rate published by PNO as at 1
January 2018. The term of the determination made by the ACCC coincided
term of declaration of the shipping channel service, expiring July 2031 (with
the arbitral prices to apply from the commencement
of declaration, July 2016).
Under the determination, the initial prices were to be adjusted over the
declaration period as follows:
(a) The wharfage charge was to be indexed annually by reference to CPI.
(b) The navigation service charge was to be reviewed on an annual and
five-yearly basis. In the annual review, the inputs to the
building block model
to be reviewed were limited to the forecast cargo volumes and gross tonnage coal
vessels and non-coal vessels
for the year. The five-yearly review allowed review
of the primary integers of the building block model including the roll forward
of the regulated asset base, rates of depreciation and the useful life of
assets, the weighted average cost of capital, forecast
capital expenditure and
forecast operating expenditure. In both categories of review, account could be
taken of material change events,
being a change in law that was expected to
cause an increase in costs that would cause a change in the charges of more than
134 A material area of dispute between Glencore Coal and PNO in the
arbitration before the ACCC was the treatment in the regulated
asset base of
user funded capital contributions, being historic payments made by Port users to
the Port owner which funded, amongst
other things, channel dredging to allow
larger ships to berth at the Port. Glencore Coal argued that user funded
contributions should
be deducted from the Port's regulatory asset base, upon
which the capital components of Port charges were calculated. The deduction
user funded contributions from the regulatory asset base would reduce the amount
of capital costs PNO was able to recover through
charges for the navigation
service charge.
135 PNO applied to the Tribunal for review of the prices that had been
determined by the ACCC. In an arbitral determination made on
30 October 2019, a
differently constituted Tribunal determined an initial arbitral price for the
navigation service charge of $1.0058
per gross tonne (as at 1 January 2018) and
the rate of wharfage charge agreed in the ACCC arbitration was maintained:
Application by Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd
[2019] ACompT 1
Re Port of Newcastle Operations
). In its decision, the Tribunal
disagreed with the ACCC’s deduction of historic user funded contributions
from the regulatory
asset base of the Port.
136 Glencore Coal applied to the Full Federal Court for judicial review of
the 2019 arbitral decision of the Tribunal. The application
concerned two
aspects of the Tribunal’s decision, but it is only necessary to refer to
the aspect that concerned the level
of the navigation service charge. In August
2020, the Full Court determined that the Tribunal’s decision in respect of
navigation service charge was affected by errors of law, in failing to take
into account the value of expansions of capacity to the
shipping channels the
cost of which was historically borne by Port users, and remitted the arbitral
determination to the Tribunal
for re-determination:
Glencore Coal Assets
Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2020] FCAFC 145
(2020) 280 FCR 194.
137 PNO appealed the Full Court decision to the High Court. On 8 December
2021 (after the hearing of this application), the High Court
delivered its
judgment on the appeal:
Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Limited v Glencore
Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] HCA 39
395 ALR 209
Newcastle Operations
). In respect of the navigation service charge, the
High Court upheld PNO’s appeal and effectively reinstated the
arbitral determination of the initial navigation service charge
of $1.0058 per gross tonne (as at 1 January 2018).
The revocation of the declaration
s 44J of the Act, the NCC may recommend to the designated Minister that the
declaration of a service be revoked if it is
satisfied that, at the time of the
recommendation, the declaration criteria would prevent the service being
declared. Following amendments
made to the declaration criteria by the 2017
Amendment Act, on 2 July 2018 PNO applied to the NCC for a recommendation that
declaration of Port services be revoked. In July 2019, the NCC made
that recommendation to the Treasurer. The Treasurer did not publish
on that recommendation within 60 days of receiving it. As a result, he was
deemed by s 44J(7) of the Act to have made
a decision that the declaration be
139 The revocation of the 2016 declaration of Port services did not affect
accrued rights. Accordingly, the arbitral determination
of the navigation
service and wharfage charges at the Port made in respect of Glencore Coal
remains in force.
PNO’s pricing arrangements from 2020
around November 2019, PNO (through its Chief Executive Officer, Mr Craig Carmody
and Mr Byrnes and Ms Sainsbury) sought to
conduct negotiations with a number of
coal producers in relation to long-term pricing arrangements for the navigation
service charge
and the wharfage charge. Mr Byrnes gave evidence that, during the
period from around November 2019 to 2 April 2020, he was involved
in individual
bilateral negotiations with representatives of ten coal producers (being all of
the coal producers who form part of
the authorisation applicants other than
Malabar, as well as Bengalla Mining Company Pty Ltd which is not an
authorisation applicant).
The negotiations were focussed on the terms of a draft
pricing deed proposed by PNO which would govern the level of the navigation
service charge and wharfage charge over the proposed 10-year term of the deed.
PNO emphasised in its communications with the coal
producers that PNO believed
that the proposed pricing deed would provide PNO and the coal producers with
long term (10 years) price
141 Mr Byrne gave evidence that, in the course of those negotiations, no coal
producer raised a concern about the quantum of the wharfage
charge. It is also
the case that, in the arbitration between PNO and Glencore Coal conducted under
Pt IIIA, the area of dispute concerned
the navigation service charge and not the
wharfage charge. In that arbitration, the initial level of the wharfage charge
for the purposes of the arbitration.
142 Mr Byrnes also gave evidence about his negotiations with the individual
coal producers and the issues raised by different coal
producers. The details of
the negotiations are subject to confidentiality directions made by the Tribunal,
and it is unnecessary
to descend to the detail. Nevertheless, the evidence shows
that the coal producers raised a number of concerns about the proposed
deed, particularly the terms governing annual increases in the navigation
service charge, the terms governing variations
to that charge (for example,
following capital expenditure incurred by PNO), the inclusion of a
non-discrimination clause in relation
to the level of charges and the term
(duration) of the deed. Some of those issues were raised by a number of the coal
producers while
others were raised by individual coal producers.
143 In oral testimony, Mr Byrnes said that there was a difference between
coal producers with respect to their acceptance of the initial
level of the
navigation service charge. Mr Byrnes said that Glencore Coal was opposed to any
charge that was in excess of the level
determined by the ACCC in the Glencore
Coal arbitration. However, a number of other coal producers were unaware of the
current level
of the navigation service charge (as it was typically paid by coal
buyers who purchased coal on a FOB basis and arranged shipping)
producers were more concerned with the terms governing increases in the
navigation service charge.
144 Although PNO conducted individual negotiations with each coal producer,
the evidence showed that PNO was generally seeking to
reach agreement with the
coal producers on uniform terms and conditions for the pricing deed. The
evidence before the Tribunal also
indicated that, during the period of
negotiations, at least some of the coal producers exchanged views between
themselves about the
proposed pricing deed. Mr Dodd of Yancoal gave evidence
that he discussed the proposed deed with other producers at that time and
on his understanding, the producers came to similar decisions about the deed. Mr
Lewis gave evidence that, in November or December
2019, the proposed pricing
deed was discussed by coal producers at a Hunter Valley coal chain producer
meeting. Mr Lewis said that
the coal producers meet on a bimonthly or quarterly
basis to discuss the Hunter Valley coal chain performance. Mr Lewis also gave
evidence that, subsequently, coal producers had discussions about the pricing
deed through NSWMC.
145 A principal concern of the coal producers was the potential for the
navigation service charge to be increased during the term
of the deed. A
solution to that concern, suggested by a number of producers, was to shorten the
term of the pricing deed to three
or five years. At the risk of
over-generalisation (by ascribing a “collective” view to the coal
producers), the evidence
indicates that the coal producers also preferred
uniform terms and conditions, and a number of coal producers requested the
of a “most favoured nation” clause (which can also be
described as a non-discrimination clause) requiring PNO to offer
producer the most favourable price offered to other coal producers.
146 In the course of the negotiations, Mr Byrnes provided to each coal
producer a pro-forma memoranda of understanding that stated
PNO's and the
respective coal producer’s mutual intention to negotiate in good faith the
terms of a binding pricing deed. Memoranda
were signed on behalf of three of the
coal producers in December 2019 and early January 2020.
147 In December 2019, in parallel with its negotiations with coal producers,
PNO published on its website new “open access”
rates for the
navigation service and wharfage charges for vessels using the shipping channel
service taking effect from 1 January
2020. The “open access” rates
published by PNO, available to any coal vessel entering the Port, were a
navigation service
charge of $1.0424 per gross tonne and a wharfage charge of
$0.0802 per revenue tonne. PNO also published, and offered on a standing
the “Port User Pro Forma Long Term Pricing Deed”. As discussed
below, PNO replaced that deed with the “Producer
Pro Forma Long Term
Pricing Deed” (which, by way of abbreviation, has been referred to earlier
as the Producer Pricing Deed)
and the “Vessel Agent Pro Forma Long Term
Pricing Deed” (referred to earlier as the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed)
(collectively
referred to herein as the
Pricing Deeds
) in March 2020.
148 On around 24 January 2020, PNO sent to the coal producers with which it
had been conducting negotiations a letter offering to
provide an interim
discount to the navigation service charge for the period 1 January 2020 to 31
March 2020 to allow additional time
for coal producers to consider the pricing
deed. PNO further responded to issues raised by coal producers in February 2020.
negotiations with Yancoal reached an advanced stage in mid-March
149 Ultimately, PNO was unable to reach agreement with any of the coal
producers. The Tribunal infers that two matters were likely
to have had some
influence on that outcome.
150 First, on 5 March 2020, the authorisation applicants sought authorisation
from the ACCC to bargain collectively with PNO in respect
of the terms and
conditions of access to the Port (the subject of this proceeding for review). It
would have been somewhat inconsistent
for the coal producers to elect to
participate in the application for authorisation of collective bargaining while
continuing to
negotiate individually with PNO. The Tribunal also infers that
discussions amongst NSWMC and the other authorisation applicants about
authorisation application would have commenced many weeks, and possibly months,
before the application was filed with the ACCC
on 5 March 2020. This would
likely have affected the coal producers’ willingness to negotiate
individually with PNO. In his
first affidavit, Mr Byrnes stated that, since the
grant of interim authorisation by the ACCC on 2 April 2020, PNO has not had any
further bilateral, or collective, negotiations with any coal producers in
relation to the pricing deed. That statement was corrected
in a subsequent
affidavit to note that PNO had some limited further communications with two coal
producers in April 2020 about progressing
the pricing deed, but the evidence
indicates that the communications did not progress far. Mr Byrnes also expressed
the opinion that
Glencore Coal’s opposition to the initial level of the
navigation service charge in the Producer Pricing Deed was likely to
influenced other coal producers, particularly in the context of the application
for authorisation of collective bargaining.
The Tribunal considers that that
would have likely been an influencing factor, but the evidence suggests that the
more significant
issue for coal producers were the terms governing future
increases in the navigation service charge.
151 The second matter that is likely to have affected the failure of the
bilateral negotiations is the entry, by PNO, into the Vessel
Agent Pricing Deeds
in late March 2020. As noted above, in March 2020, PNO replaced the “Port
User Pro Forma Long Term Pricing
Deed” with separate deeds able to be
entered into by vessel agents (the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed) or coal producers
(the Producer
Pricing Deed) respectively, with effect from 1 January 2020. Those
Pricing Deeds were offered as an agreement in respect of the applicable
pursuant to s 67 of the PAMA Act. Both Deeds govern the navigation service
charge, while only the Producer Pricing Deed governs
the wharfage charge. The
Deeds have a 10-year term. Under both of the Deeds, PNO offered an initial
navigation service charge of
$0.8121 per gross tonne and, under the Producer
Pricing Deed, PNO offered a wharfage charge of $0.0802 per revenue tonne,
in both cases to an annual price adjustment (the greater of CPI
increases and 4%) and other adjustment terms (discussed below).
152 The Vessel Agent Pricing Deed enables vessel agents to agree the
navigation service charge with PNO in respect of “Covered
which are defined as a vessel that is loaded with coal at the Port in respect of
which the vessel agent is named as
the vessel’s inward agent in the vessel
berthing application lodged with PNO in respect of that vessel’s visit to
Port. The Producer Pricing Deed enables coal producers to agree the
navigation service charge and wharfage charge with PNO in respect
“Covered Vessels” which are defined as a vessel that is loaded with
and carries out of the Port (a) the producer’s
coal (ie, coal mined from
one of the producer’s mines) and no other coal or (b) the producer’s
coal and other coal in
respect of which PNO has agreed that the navigation
service charge and wharfage charge are the same for that other coal as for the
producer, and no other coal.
153 In late March 2020, PNO entered into Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds with
vessel agents for every coal carrying vessel calling at the
Port (which deeds
have effect from 1 January 2020). There was evidence before the Tribunal that,
after learning that PNO had entered
into Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds with vessel
agents, at least some of the coal producers considered that there was little
in continuing to negotiate a pricing deed with PNO (believing that the
navigation service charge in the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed
would apply in any
event). Mr Dodd of Yancoal gave evidence that he was, and remains, confused as
to the manner in which the Producer
Pricing Deed would operate in light of the
Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds. Mr Lewis of Bloomfield Collieries gave similar
154 The Tribunal notes that, in
, the Tribunal concluded (at
[218]) that the practical effect of the Pricing Deeds was that, if a coal
producer and a vessel agent
had entered into Deeds that, on their terms, were
applicable to the same shipment of coal and the Deeds contained different rates
for the navigation service charge, the rate that would ultimately be charged by
PNO would be the lower rate. None of the parties
submitted that the
Tribunal’s previous analysis of the operation of the Deeds was erroneous.
Accordingly, the Tribunal considers
that there remains the opportunity for coal
producers to seek to negotiate a lower navigation service charge, or different
and conditions, notwithstanding the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds. Of course,
it is a matter of commercial judgment for coal producers
whether, in light of
PNO’s publication of the Pricing Deeds and entry into of Vessel Agent
Pricing Deeds, further negotiations
are likely to result in a change in
PNO’s commercial position.
The terms and conditions of the Pricing Deeds
terms and conditions of the Producer and Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds are
materially the same (save in so far as the Producer
Pricing Deed also governs
the wharfage charge). The following terms and conditions of the Deeds are
significant.
156 The Deeds have an initial term of 10 years. Not later than 36 months
prior to the expiry of the initial term, either party may
issue a written notice
to the other requesting that the parties enter into discussions with respect to
agreeing pricing arrangements
to apply following the expiry of the initial term.
The parties must then commence discussions regarding such pricing arrangements
and must continue such discussions in good faith for a period of up to six
months (or such other period as they agree in writing).
Thus, the Deeds
contemplate a process by which the parties will commence negotiations of the
charges to apply after the expiry of
the initial term at least three years
before that date.
157 Under the Pricing Deeds, PNO represents that the rate of the navigation
service charge levied under the Deeds, including variations,
will not adversely
discriminate against the producer or vessel agent by comparison with the
navigation service charge applicable
to like circumstances to other producers or
vessel agents (as the case may be) who have entered into materially similar
also covenants that it will not enter into an agreement with any
other producer or vessel agent (as the case may be) concerning the
service charge to apply over the initial term, or give effect to any variations
made to that charge, which are materially
dissimilar to the relevant provisions
of the Deed. The parties referred to those clauses as “most favoured
“non-discrimination” clauses.
158 The rate of the navigation service charge during the initial term may be
adjusted in two ways. First, the rate is adjusted annually
by the greater of the
applicable annual CPI increase (if any) and 4%. Second, PNO may increase the
navigation service charge for
other reasons if the resulting increase is
material (greater than 5%) and the increase is consistent with the pricing
defined in cl 4.2 of Sch 3 of the Deeds. PNO must provide written
notice of any proposed variations to the navigation service charge
than 45 days before the proposed date for commencement of the proposed
variation. If the proposed variation is made on
the second basis, PNO must also
issue a copy of a report prepared by an independent, appropriately qualified
professional which sets
out the opinion of that person, and the material facts
(including all relevant cost, capital expenditure and revenue data) on which
that opinion was based, as to whether the proposed variation is consistent with
the pricing principles. The counterparty may issue
a price objection notice to
PNO within 14 days and the dispute must be resolved in accordance with the
dispute resolution process
set out in the Deeds. The dispute resolution process
contemplates discussions between senior representatives of the parties, followed
by mediation if necessary. If the dispute cannot be resolved by agreement
between the parties, either party can refer it to arbitration
to be conducted in
accordance with the Australian Centre for International Commercial Arbitration
) Arbitration Rules. The arbitrator is required to apply the
pricing principles set out in the Deeds.
159 Under the Pricing Deeds, PNO undertakes to prepare and provide to the
coal producer or vessel agent (as applicable) on an annual
basis a forward
looking five year forecast of its projected capital expenditure that may impact
the applicable charges and meet with
the coal producer or vessel agent to
discuss those forecasts and any potential associated variations to the
applicable charges. However,
PNO is not obliged to implement any comments made
by the coal producer or vessel agent.
160 The pricing principles defined in cl 4.2 of Sch 3 of the Pricing Deeds
closely follow the mandatory considerations that the ACCC
must take into account
under s 44X(1) of the Act when conducting an arbitration on terms and conditions
of access under Div 3 of
Pt IIIA, but they are not identical. The differences
were the subject of consideration by the Tribunal in
[221]-[239]. None of the parties submitted that the Tribunal’s previous
analysis of the pricing principles in that decision
was erroneous, and this
Tribunal believes that the analysis and conclusions expressed in that decision
are fair and accurate.
161 The pricing principles in cl 4.2 of Sch 3 of the Deeds are as follows
(noting that PNO is designated as PON in the Deeds):
The matters that must be taken into account by a
mediator and applied by the arbitrator in resolving a Permitted Price Dispute
(a) the provisions in Item 7 of this deed (but only in relation to whether the
requirements of Item 7(a) or 7(b)(i) are met (not
in relation to the requirement
in Item 7(b)(ii) that any proposed increase in the Covered Vessel NSC is
consistent with the Pricing
Principles, which will be measured solely by
reference to the remaining principles below);
(b) PON's legitimate business interests and investment in the Port or Port
facilities, including a reasonable opportunity to recover
over the Leasehold
Period the efficient cost of the service provided at the Port, which recovery
shall include:
(i) the value of its Initial Capital Base and any updates thereof, including
efficient additional capital investments;
(ii) a reasonable rate of return, commensurate with the commercial risks
involved on the value of all assets comprising its Initial
Capital Base and any
updates thereof, including efficient additional capital investments; and
(iii) the return over the Leasehold Period of the total value of the assets
comprising its Initial Capital Base and any updates
thereof, including efficient
additional capital investments;
(c) the revenue expected to be derived from all users of the service;
(d) the costs to PON of providing the service (including the costs of any
necessary modification to, or extension of, a Port facility)
but not costs
associated with losses arising from increased competition in upstream or
downstream markets;
(e) the economic value to PON of any additional investment that the Vessel
Agent (or any other user of the service) or PON has agreed
to undertake;
(f) the interests of all persons holding contracts for use of any relevant Port
facility or otherwise having rights to use the service;
(g) firm and binding contractual obligations of PON or other persons (or both)
already using any relevant Port facility;
(h) the operational and technical requirements necessary for the safe and
reliable provision of the service;
(i) the economically efficient operation of any relevant Port facility;
(j) the benefit to the public from having competitive markets;
(k) that prices should allow multi-part pricing and price discrimination when
it aids efficiency;
(l) that prices should not allow a vertically integrated service provider to
set terms and conditions that would discriminate in
favour of either its
upstream or downstream operations, except to the extent that the cost of
providing services to others would
be higher; and
(m) that prices should provide incentives to reduce costs or otherwise improve
productivity.
162 The “Initial Capital Base” referred to in cl 4.2(b) is
defined to mean the value established by reference to the DORC,
December 2014, of the assets used in the provision of all of the services at the
Port and, unless otherwise agreed by PNO,
without deduction for user
contributions. As observed by the Tribunal in
(at [225]), in
context, the reference to “user contributions” in that definition
must refer to historic user funded contributions
(ie, contributions which
pre-date the DORC valuation date of 31 December 2014) and alludes to the dispute
in respect of user funded
contributions in the Glencore Coal arbitration (which
is summarised above). In its 2018 arbitral determination, the ACCC adopted
same capital base (ie, the DORC valuation as at 31 December 2014, indexed to
2018) save that the ACCC deducted its assessment
of the value of historic user
funded contributions.
163 The evidence shows that the issue of “user funded
contributions”, including particularly the manner in which they
treated in the pricing principles in the Pricing Deeds, has remained a major
area of disagreement between coal producers and
PNO and appears to be one of the
primary reasons why the coal producers have been unwilling to agree to the terms
of the Producer
Pricing Deed, including the level of the navigation service
charge stipulated by that Deed. In making that statement, the Tribunal
conscious that the views of the coal producers are unlikely to be uniform and
the concerns expressed about the issue of user funded
contributions may be held
more strongly by some coal producers than others. As referred to earlier, the
issue was a material area
of dispute between Glencore Coal and PNO in the
arbitration of the navigation service charge before the ACCC. Nevertheless, at
risk of generalisation (by ascribing a “collective” view to the
coal producers), the concern is that the current level
of the navigation service
charge enables PNO to recover the costs of historic capital investments made at
the Port that were not
incurred (directly or indirectly) by PNO but were
incurred by Port users. The concern appears to be exacerbated by the pricing
in the Pricing Deeds because, as set out above, those principles
require an arbitrator (when arbitrating a dispute about a future
price increase)
to take into account the DORC, as at 31 December 2014, of the assets used in the
provision of all of the services
at the Port without deduction for user
contributions (unless otherwise agreed by PNO).
164 Given the significance of the issue of historic user funded contributions
as a source of dispute between coal producers and PNO
and as a reason why the
coal producers seek to bargain collectively, it is relevant to provide further
detail about the issue. As
set out above, the issue of historic user funded
contributions was a material area of dispute between Glencore Coal and PNO in
arbitration of the navigation service charge before the ACCC. The ACCC
accepted Glencore Coal’s arguments that such contributions
deducted from the DORC valuation of the Port assets, upon which the capital
components of Port charges were to be calculated.
The ACCC determined the
optimised replacement cost of the relevant Port assets as $2,169.5 million (as
at 1 January 2018). The ACCC
adjusted that figure downwards to take account of
five instances in which improvements to the Port (specifically various dredging
projects) had been funded or undertaken by third parties. The ACCC identified
two major tranches of channel upgrades involving user
contributions, being the
Harbour Deepening dredging works from 1977 to 1983 and the South Arm and berth
pocket dredging primarily
from 1989 to 2010. On that basis, the ACCC deducted
$912 million from the optimised replacement cost valuation of the Port assets,
and determined a final DORC value of $1,163.8 million (as at 1 January 2018).
Ultimately, the ACCC determined that the navigation
service charge should be
$0.6075 (as at 1 January 2018). On review of that decision, the Tribunal
disagreed with the deduction of
historic user funded contributions from the DORC
valuation of the Port assets for the purpose of determining the navigation
charge under the provisions of Pt IIIA. The reasons for the
Tribunal’s disagreement are explained in detail in its decision:
Port of Newcastle Operations
at [263]-[365]. In essence, the Tribunal
concluded that the efficient pricing principles in Pt IIIA meant the DORC
valuation should
not be adjusted, and the associated allowed revenues reduced,
without clear evidence of current commercial obligations on the Port
future price concessions for past user contributions. The Tribunal found no
evidence of such obligations, restored the ACCC’s
unadjusted DORC
valuation and determined a final DORC value of $2,075.8 million and a navigation
service charge of $1.0058 (as at
1 January 2018). The disagreement between the
parties did not end there. As noted above, Glencore Coal sought judicial review
the Tribunal’s decision by the Full Federal Court which set aside the
Tribunal’s decision and remitted the issue to the
Tribunal for
re-determination in accordance with the reasons of the Court. However, PNO
appealed the decision of the Full Federal
Court to the High Court which recently
set aside the orders of the Full Federal Court (thereby reinstating the
determination of the
165 As stated above, following the decision of the Tribunal in
Newcastle Operations
(which was handed down on 30 October 2019), PNO
published a navigation service charge with effect from 1 January 2020 of $1.0424
(which was equivalent to the Tribunal determination, updated to 1 January 2020).
PNO also offered a lower navigation service charge
of $0.8121 on the terms of
the Pricing Deeds (which have a term of 10 years and annual agreed price
increases).
166 Within the framework for price arbitration in Pt IIIA of the Act, the
appropriate treatment of historic user funded contributions
is a contestable
issue which will depend on the available evidence of the size and nature of
those contributions and of the agreements
and understandings between parties
that facilitated them. In respect of the Glencore Coal arbitration of the
navigation service charge
at the Port, the issue has been finally determined by
the recent decision of the High Court. As the shipping channel service at the
Port is no longer declared under Pt IIIA, any future negotiation of the issue,
and its effect upon the navigation service charge,
can only be the subject of
private dealings between coal producers and PNO. Given the outcome of the
litigation that has occurred
in relation to the issue in the context of the
Glencore Coal arbitration under Pt IIIA, the Tribunal considers it unlikely that
will, in the future, agree to reduce the navigation service charge by
reference to historic user funded contributions (with or without
bargaining).
167 Again at the risk of generalisation (by ascribing a
“collective” view to the coal producers), the evidence also shows
that many coal producers are concerned that the Pricing Deeds do not provide
them with sufficient certainty with respect to future
increases in the level of
the navigation service charge. It can be accepted that the Pricing Deeds contain
provisions that permit
PNO to propose an increase in the navigation service
charge above the annual increase. However, the Pricing Deeds contain significant
constraints on PNO’s freedom to do so, and afford counterparties to the
Deeds significant rights. In particular: any such increase
must be consistent
with the pricing principles defined in cl 4.2 of Sch 3 of the Deeds; PNO must
give the counterparty a report prepared
by an independent appropriately
qualified professional which sets out the opinion of that person as to whether
the proposed variation
is consistent with the pricing principles (and material
facts and data on which that opinion is based); the counterparty may issue
price objection notice, whereupon the objection is referred to the dispute
resolution process which includes arbitration (applying
the pricing principles
set out in the Deeds) if the parties cannot resolve the dispute between
themselves. The Tribunal has the view,
consistently with that expressed in
at [239], that the dispute mechanisms in the Deeds are
consistent with reasonable terms and conditions of access and are reasonable
substitutes for arbitration under Pt IIIA of the Act.
168 The authorisation applicants submitted that the dispute resolution
process in the Pricing Deeds will be inefficient, because the
Deeds contemplate
multiple bilateral arbitrations. PNO submitted that the ACICA Arbitration Rules
make provision for the consolidation
of arbitrations and that the spectre of
multiple, overlapping arbitrations is not a realistic possibility. The Tribunal
accepts that
submission. Article 16.1 of the ACICA Arbitration Rules provides as
16 Consolidation of Arbitrations
16.1 Upon request by a party, and after consulting with the parties and any
confirmed or appointed arbitrators, ACICA may consolidate
two or more
arbitrations pending under these Rules into a single arbitration,
(a) the parties have agreed to the consolidation;
(b) all the claims in the arbitrations are made under the same arbitration
agreement; or
(c) the claims in the arbitrations are made under more than one arbitration
agreement, a common question of law or fact arises in
both or all of the
arbitrations, the rights to relief claimed are in respect of, or arise out of,
the same transaction or series
of transactions, and ACICA finds the arbitration
agreements to be compatible.
169 In circumstances where the Pricing Deeds contain common terms relating to
the navigation service and wharfage charges, including
with respect to a
material increase in the charges, the Tribunal considers that the arbitration of
a material price increase dispute
would inevitably be consolidated. Given the
inevitably of consolidated arbitrations, the Tribunal also considers that the
prior negotiation
and mediation of a material price increase dispute would
almost inevitably be conducted on a collective or consolidated basis.
The Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds
March 2020, PNO entered into Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds with vessel agents for
every coal carrying vessel calling at the Port
(which deeds have effect from 1
January 2020). As the Deeds have a 10-year term, the Deeds will continue to
determine the charges
in respect of navigation services supplied at the Port in
respect of the covered vessels for the next eight years. As a result, PNO
been charging all coal vessels calling at the Port the navigation service charge
as determined in accordance with the Vessel
Agent Pricing Deed. No charges have
been levied on any coal vessel under s 50 of the PAMA Act since the beginning of
2020 and PNO
does not expect to levy any charges under s 50 of the PAMA Act in
relation to any coal vessel for the 10-year duration of those s
67 agreements.
In effect, coal producers who export coal through the Port currently have the
benefit of the navigation service charge
specified in the Vessel Agent Pricing
Deeds, as all coal vessels using the Port pay that charge and not the higher
published charge.
171 Mr Byrnes gave evidence that the vessel agents who entered into the
Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds did not express concern with respect
to the level of
the navigation service charge in the Deed, although they expressed some concern
price adjustments under the Deed. To date, PNO
has not sought to increase the navigation service charge payable under the Deeds
the annual increase.
172 Clause 10 of the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds provides that PNO and each
vessel agent counterparty will meet at least twice in each
contract year to
consult on matters including:
(a) measures that can be introduced to improve the efficiency of delivery of
services by PNO to vessel agents;
(b) PNO’s delivery of vessel services, including (as they relate to the
delivery of such services) PNO’s capital expenditure,
proposed variations
to PNO’s fees and charges, PNO’s costs of operations and the future
needs of vessel agents; and
(c) respective market insights of the parties, including volume forecasts and
shipment destinations.
173 Mr Byrnes gave evidence that, since entering into the Vessel Agent
Pricing Deeds, PNO has met and consulted with vessel agent
counterparties
pursuant to cl 10. Mr Byrnes expressed the view that the meetings had been
beneficial to PNO, allowing PNO to strengthen
its relationships with vessel
operators and to understand the individual priorities and matters of concern for
each agent counterparty.
Application for declaration by NSWMC
23 July 2020, NSWMC lodged an application to the NCC under s 44F of the Act
seeking a recommendation that the Treasurer declare
the shipping channel and
berthing service at the Port for a period of 20 years. On 18 December 2020, the
NCC recommended that the
service not be declared on the basis that the criteria
in paragraphs 44CA(1)(a) and (d) of the Act had not been satisfied. On 16
February 2021, the Treasurer made a decision under s 44H of the Act not to
declare the service on the same basis. On 8 March 2021,
NSWMC applied to the
Tribunal for review of the Treasurer's decision under s 44K(2) of the Act. A
differently constituted Tribunal
reached the same conclusion that the criteria
in paragraphs 44CA(1)(a) and (d) of the Act had not been satisfied, for largely
same reasons as explained in the NCC’s recommendation and, on 4 August
2021, affirmed the Treasurer’s decision not to
declare the service (in
Why the authorisation applicants seek to bargain
collectively
supporting submission of the authorisation applicants that accompanied their
original application to the ACCC sought to address
the question of why the
authorisation applicants wished to bargain collectively with PNO. However, the
answer given by the authorisation
applicants was stated at a high level of
generality and, in the Tribunal’s view, was based on many assumptions that
expressly addressed in the submission.
176 A central submission advanced by the authorisation applicants was to the
effect that collective bargaining would better provide
the industry with
certainty for long term investment, particularly with respect to future price
increases. The submission did not
explain clearly why collective bargaining
would better achieve that outcome compared with individual bilateral
negotiations between
PNO and each coal producer. The submission referred on a
number of occasions to the fact that Port charges are presently unregulated,
also referred to an imbalance in bargaining power between the coal producers and
PNO. The implicit assumption in the submission,
although never articulated
clearly, is that collective bargaining would improve the balance of bargaining
power in favour of coal
producers and that the rebalancing would generate more
certain, and presumably lower, prices. The submissions contained the high-level
claims that:
... the authorisation will,
users to collectively, as an industry, discuss with PNO the basis on which costs
will be allocated by PNO and means for PNO
to more efficiently engage in capital
expenditure on a transparent basis. It is hoped that such increased transparency
on expenditure
and how costs are allocated, will lead to more efficient
investment and therefore the potential for reduced charges being imposed
mining industry over time.
... the authorisation will facilitate an industry discussion on industry issues
relevant to the Port as the only practical export
gateway from the Hunter
Valley, as to capital expenditure relating to services to be provided by the
Port for the mining industry,
and as to how user funding should be treated
within that framework. Any outcomes from negotiations would apply across the
and would benefit both PNO's customers and itself in terms of creating
certainty for investment and a long term pricing path.
... industry negotiations with PNO would lead to transaction cost savings for
both PNO and also the mining industry as they would
focus on key industry issues
that would otherwise be inefficient if PNO sought to negotiate mining company by
mining company –
for example, PNO's proposed capital investment program
that would affect the coal industry as a whole.
177 As noted earlier, senior representatives of three coal producers, Messrs
Dodd, Lewis and Rochester, gave affidavit evidence in
the proceeding. Senior
counsel for the authorisation applicants asked each of those representatives, at
the commencement of their
oral testimony, what was the benefit to their company
of obtaining future price certainty with respect to Port access charges? The
assumption underlying the question was that collective bargaining would in some
(unstated) manner contribute to future price certainty.
The answers given to
that question were unsurprising. Each witness explained that coal production is
a commodity business in which
the coal producers are price takers; the coal
producers therefore focus on cost control to improve profitability; the coal
seek certainty in respect of future costs so that they can assess
future cash flows and make investment decisions based on those
cash flows,
thereby reducing business risk. None of the witnesses addressed the more
significant questions of what degree of price
certainty was commercially
achievable in the context of an infrastructure asset such as the Port which may
require capital investment
in the future, how the desirable goal of business
certainty could best be achieved in that context recognising the respective
of the Port and the coal producers, and why collective bargaining
would be more likely to produce better commercial outcomes for
all parties
compared with individual bilateral negotiations between PNO and coal producers.
178 As observed by Mr Houston in oral testimony, business certainty cannot be
equated with lower prices or more efficient outcomes.
In order to achieve price
certainty over the longer term while at the same time recognising the business
risks and interests of all
parties to a transaction, it may be necessary to
increase prices over their previous level; in short, certainty usually has a
(or cost). Different coal producers may have different preferences in
respect of price certainty and may be willing to pay different
amounts for
certainty, reflecting the commercial circumstances of their respective
businesses. Further, a contractually fixed price,
whilst certain, may harm
economic efficiency by being set at a level that inhibits further investment in
productive capacity at the
Port that is needed by market participants (a
proposition which Mr Morton accepted).
Why PNO opposes collective bargaining
179 Neither
PNO’s submissions in chief, nor its evidence in chief, addressed the
question of why PNO was opposed to collective
bargaining by the coal producers.
During the hearing, the Tribunal put that question to PNO’s senior counsel
who, in turn,
put the question to Mr Byrnes at the commencement of his oral
180 Mr Byrnes’ response was to the effect that PNO wishes to discuss
and reach agreement individually with each of the Port’s
customers about a
range of issues relating to Port services, particularly Port and trade
development, as well as the price for Port
services and future price
adjustments. With respect to Port development, Mr Byrnes explained that the
Newcastle Coal Infrastructure
Group’s terminal is at the end of the Port
channel and PNO has approximately 250 hectares of land next to that terminal
is vacant. PNO wishes to develop that land in a manner that best improves
the businesses of Port users, giving the example of the
possible development of
a LNG terminal. Mr Byrnes also explained that the Port’s channels are
currently at 50% utilisation
and the Port wishes to discuss with Port users
opportunities for trade development that will see increased utilisation of the
giving the example of hydrogen export proposals. Mr Byrnes also said
that the Port wishes to improve customer satisfaction with Port
services by
better monitoring the impact on Port users from delays in vessels accessing the
Port and ways in which delays can be
reduced. Mr Byrnes expressed the opinion
that the Port can only achieve those objectives, designed to improve the
efficiency of Port
services and the Hunter Valley supply chain, if it can have
individual discussions and negotiations with each coal producer. Mr Byrnes
that PNO expected to maintain a uniform price for the shipping channel service
at the Port across Port users, but PNO contemplated
that individual Port users
might negotiate the supply of a particular service that would include a charge
to recover the costs of
that service.
181 Mr Byrnes expressed the view that, if PNO were to be drawn into
collective bargaining with the coal producers, the only issue
that would be
discussed is Port charges for the shipping channel. Mr Byrnes said that
PNO’s view about the likely consequences
of collective bargaining arises
from two aspects of its history of dealings with coal producers. First, PNO
considers that its inability
to agree a long term pricing arrangement with coal
producers has largely been driven by the ongoing arbitration dispute with
Coal. Mr Byrnes stated that Glencore Coal has told PNO that the
navigation service charge offered by PNO under the Pricing Deeds
acceptable to Glencore Coal (with Glencore Coal indicating that it would not
entertain any offer above the navigation service
charge determined by the ACCC
in the arbitration under Pt IIIA). PNO considers that Glencore Coal’s view
of the navigation
service charge influences (negatively) the willingness of
other coal producers to agree a higher charge with PNO. Second, PNO’s
perception is that, since the coal producers were granted an interim
authorisation by the ACCC for collective bargaining, the coal
producers have
been unwilling to engage in bilateral discussions about Port services and the
only communications with PNO have been
in relation to Port charges. Mr Byrnes
agreed in cross-examination that, if the authorisation were granted and the coal
sent a joint proposal to PNO, then PNO would review the document.
However, Mr Byrnes maintained that, notwithstanding the grant of
authorisation,
PNO would not participate in collective bargaining with coal producers.
182 Mr Byrnes’ evidence concerning Glencore Coal’s position with
respect to the navigation service charge, and Glencore
Coal’s influence
with other coal producers, was corroborated to some extent by the evidence of Mr
Dodd of Yancoal. Mr Dodd
confirmed that, in late 2019 and early 2020, when
Yancoal was negotiating a pricing deed with PNO, he was aware that Glencore Coal
did not want Yancoal to enter into the pricing deed with PNO.
183 Mr Byrnes also expressed the opinion that any transaction (bargaining)
cost savings that might be made by PNO and the coal producers
participating in a process of collective bargaining would be greatly outweighed
by the loss of the opportunity for the parties,
through individual negotiations,
to discuss issues concerning Port and trade development and the improvement of
Port services and
thereby add value to each party’s business.
Materiality of the navigation service and wharfage charges to
coal producers’ investment decisions
relevant consideration in this proceeding is whether and to what extent the
current or future levels of the navigation service
and wharfage charges might
influence investment decisions by coal producers. An integer of that
consideration is the materiality
of the navigation service and wharfage charges
relative to the revenues earned and costs expended by coal producers and
fluctuations
in those revenues and costs.
185 Mr Byrnes undertook calculations in an effort to show the quantum of the
navigation service charge and the wharfage charge relative
(a) the total costs incurred by coal buyers in purchasing and shipping Newcastle
thermal coal; and
(b) the total costs incurred by coal producers in producing Newcastle thermal
186 The analysis was based on data as at the time of PNO’s 2014 pricing
review and the post 1 January 2015 navigation service
charge and wharfage
charges, and the calculations were based on a number of assumptions including:
the average specifications of
coal-export vessels calling at the Port during the
period 2014-2015; a Newcastle thermal coal spot price of $84.02 per tonne; and
an export destination of Japan. The data was confidential to PNO. It is
unnecessary to reproduce the data as the ultimate conclusion
was not contested
in any significant way by the authorisation applicants. PNO’s analysis
showed that the navigation service
charge, paid by the buyer, represented on
average approximately 0.44% of the total costs incurred by coal buyers, while
the wharfage
charge, paid by the producer, represented on average approximately
0.12% of the total costs incurred by coal producers whose coal
is exported
through the Port.
187 As set out earlier, global thermal coal spot prices fluctuate on a daily
basis and routinely by more than 1%. During the past
five years, global thermal
coal prices have ranged between approximately US$49 and US$119 per metric tonne.
As at February 2021,
prices were around US$87 but had surged from mid-2021 to
reach approximately US$186 in September 2021 (all prices expressed in nominal
dollars). The World Bank forecast (as at 20 April 2021) is for Newcastle thermal
coal spot prices to be approximately US$71 in
2025 and falling to approximately
US$55 by 2035.
188 No evidence was adduced by the authorisation applicants that suggested
that the present level of the navigation service and wharfage
charges was having
an adverse effect on investment by coal producers in the Hunter Valley.
189 In response to questions from the Tribunal, Mr Dodd of Yancoal gave
evidence that:
(a) Yancoal enters into contracts to hedge the price of coal, but Mr Dodd was
unable to provide any detail about Yancoal’s
hedging arrangements or
(b) Yancoal’s business planning and investment decisions were based on an
analysis of expected revenues and costs, with the
navigation service charge
taken into account in the expected price of coal (as Yancoal sells its coal on
an FOB basis) and the wharfage
charge taken into account in forecast costs;
(c) Yancoal is not concerned about the current level of the navigation service
and wharfage charges, but its concern relates to possible
future increases in
those charges.
190 Similarly, in response to questions from the Tribunal, Mr Rochester of
Whitehaven gave evidence that the current levels of the
navigation service and
wharfage charges are not a material input into investment decisions, but that
significant increases in the
charges would impact investment decisions. A copy
of Whitehaven’s 2021 Annual Report was in evidence. The report discloses
that Whitehaven sells its coal on an FOB basis. The report also discloses the
risks relating to Whitehaven’s future prospects.
A large number of risks
are listed including volatility in coal prices, foreign currency risk, operating
risks associated with coal
mining, water security for the purposes of dust
suppression and coal washing, geology risk, cyber risk, counterparty risk,
environmental
risks, climate change risks and COVID-19 risks. The report
discloses that, despite the volatility in future coal prices, Whitehaven
not currently hedge against that volatility. Notwithstanding the long list of
disclosed risks, potential increases in Port charges
is not mentioned. In
contrast, a risk that is listed is the potential failure of transport
infrastructure providers (including the
Port) to increase capacity in order to
meet future export requirements.
191 The evidence of Mr Lewis of Bloomfield Collieries was to a similar
effect. Like Yancoal and Whitehaven, Bloomfield Collieries
sells coal from the
Port on an FOB basis such that the navigation service charge is incurred in the
first instance by the coal buyer
through the shipping costs. Bloomfield
Collieries sells coal on a contract and spot price basis (with the latter
representing approximately
30% of sales by volume). The spot price can fluctuate
on a daily basis with very large fluctuations. While contract prices can be
fixed for periods of one quarter or up to one year, the contract prices also
fluctuate from one contract period to the next (based
on movements in
international prices). Mr Lewis acknowledged that Bloomfield Collieries makes
investment decisions notwithstanding
that future coal prices are uncertain and
fluctuate in amounts that far exceed the quantum of the navigation service
charge. In response
to a question from the Tribunal, Mr Lewis acknowledged that
there had not been price certainty in terms of Port charges since the
privatised in 2014 and also acknowledged that, in that period, there had not
been a decision not to proceed with an investment
by reason of that
uncertainty.
Transaction costs of collective bargaining
second relevant consideration in this proceeding concerns the transaction costs
associated with collective bargaining compared
with individual bilateral
bargaining in relation to Port charges, and the relative quantum and materiality
of such costs. No party
adduced firm evidence or estimates of expended and
forecast transaction costs, and the submissions of the parties proceeded largely
on the basis of assertion and counter-assertion.
193 Mr Dodd gave evidence that NSWMC had formed a working group, comprising
representatives of each coal producer, to supervise the
conduct of the
application for authorisation of collective bargaining. Mr Dodd said that, since
the grant of interim authorisation
in April 2020, the working group had met
approximately once a month. Mr Dodd also gave evidence that NSWMC and coal
producers participated
in collective negotiations with the Australian Rail Track
Corporation (
) in respect of use of the rail tracks in the Hunter
Valley. In that context, a working group has also been formed with a
representative
of each coal producer, and the working group has also appointed a
smaller negotiating group to conduct the collective negotiations.
negotiating group takes its instructions from the working group and reports back
to the working group.
194 Mr Lewis expressed the opinion that collective negotiations, rather than
parallel negotiations with individual producers, would
reduce time and expense
because the range of issues in dispute are relatively narrow (principally
concerning future price uncertainty).
Mr Lewis also considered that the model of
collective negotiations used in dealings with the ARTC was an effective
Future negotiations between PNO and coal producers
third relevant consideration in the proceeding is the likely future behaviour of
PNO and coal producers in terms of commercial
discussions and negotiations, and
the outcome of such discussions and negotiations, with and without the
authorisation.
196 Collective bargaining typically involves two forms of conduct: collective
discussions within the bargaining group (here, the coal
producers) to formulate
a common or collective position on issues and then negotiations between the
bargaining group and the counterparty
(here, PNO). If authorisation is granted,
the authorisation applicants would be free to engage in collective discussions
themselves regardless of whether PNO was willing to engage in collective
negotiations. However, authorisation does not compel any
coal producer to engage
in collective discussions on any particular topic; and nor does authorisation
compel PNO to participate in
collective negotiations. Nevertheless, and as
discussed earlier, the Tribunal is required to assess the public benefits and
likely to result from the proposed collective bargaining conduct if
it were to be engaged in. In doing so, the Tribunal makes no
assumptions about
the outcome of the collective bargaining: that is a matter for findings (in the
nature of predictions) based on
the evidence.
197 Since the grant of the interim authorisation in April 2020, coal
producers have generally elected not to engage in individual
negotiations with
PNO and PNO has elected not to engage in collective negotiations with coal
producers, resulting in something of
a “stand-off”. The evidence of
Mr Byrnes is that the stand-off not only applies to the terms governing the
service and wharfage charges, but also applies generally to the
commercial relationship between PNO and the coal producers. Mr Byrnes
that the stand-off is inhibiting the parties from having meaningful discussions
that may be mutually beneficial to
PNO and individual coal producers. Mr Byrnes attributed the stand-off partly to
the grant of the
interim authorisation, but also to what he described as a
“litigation washing machine” that has engulfed the parties
2016, referring to the various applications made under Pt IIIA in respect of the
Port and the litigation that has accompanied
those applications.
198 In the Tribunal’s assessment, the interim authorisation (in itself)
has had little effect on the willingness of the parties
to engage in
negotiations concerning Port services. Rather, it has been the unresolved state
of the various applications made under
Pt IIIA, and now also under Pt VII, that
has inhibited commercial discussions. It is apparent that the coal producers
have applied
to have the shipping channel and berthing services at the Port
declared under Pt IIIA in the belief that the rights conferred under
will afford them greater bargaining power and control over the terms governing
the navigation service and wharfage charges.
While the original declaration of
the shipping channel and berthing services was revoked in about September 2019,
a subsequent application
for declaration was not finally rejected until
recently, in August 2021. Further, the Glencore Coal arbitration, which concerns
appropriate quantum of the navigations services charge, was only finally
resolved by the High Court in December 2021. For so long
as those applications
were outstanding, it is understandable that coal producers may have perceived
that it was in their interests
not to reach bilateral agreement on the
navigation service charge, or agree to the terms of the Producer Pricing Deed
PNO. Similarly, with this application for authorisation of collective
bargaining being unresolved, it is understandable that coal
producers may have
wished to refrain from concluding bilateral agreements.
199 In his article on collective bargaining (referred to earlier), Prof King
expresses the opinion that collective bargaining may
affect negotiation outcomes
in two ways: first, collective bargaining may help improve contracting by
changing the available information
and how it can be used in contract design (at
p 116); second, collective bargaining may enhance bargaining power for the
who join the bargaining group which may, in turn, change the incentives
for parties to invest in ways that raise the gains from bargaining
(at p 118).
Those opinions were supported by the economists who gave evidence in this
proceeding. Whether a change in bargaining
power or the availability of
information is likely to result in a change in bargaining behaviour and
outcomes, and whether any change
in bargaining outcomes is likely to result in a
public benefit (or detriment), depends on a consideration of all circumstances,
particularly the nature and number of parties to the negotiations, the
alternatives (and constraints) that the parties face and the
subject matter of
the negotiations.
200 As to the nature and number of parties to negotiations, the authorisation
applicants comprise a modest number (nine) of generally
large and sophisticated
companies. In financial terms, they are generally much larger than PNO. In the
Tribunal’s assessment,
each of the authorisation applicants would be
expected to be able to advance and prosecute their own individual interests with
to the export of coal through the Port.
201 As to the alternatives (and constraints) presently faced by the parties,
at the beginning of 2020 PNO published the Pricing Deeds
as a standing offer in
respect of the navigation service and wharfage charges. In about March 2020,
vessel agents representing all
coal vessels using the Port entered into the
Vessel Agent Pricing Deed (taking effect from 1 January 2020). Each of PNO and
producers have the benefit of the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds in the
sense that, if they are otherwise unable to reach agreement on
the terms of the
Producer Pricing Deed, the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds will apply in practice to
govern the navigation service charge
(being a lower rate than PNO’s
published rate that applies on an open access basis). In that sense, the Vessel
Agent Pricing
Deeds operate as a constraint on PNO’s pricing in that PNO
cannot increase the navigation service charge without complying
requirements of those Deeds. PNO may, however, elect to enter into a Producer
Pricing Deed which offers more favourable
terms to Port users in comparison to
the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds. If coal producers do not enter into the Producer
Pricing Deed,
PNO may also seek to negotiate an agreed increase in the
navigation service or wharfage charges with coal producers outside the framework
of the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed, but the negotiations would only be expected to
be fruitful if the outcome was perceived to be more
favourable than would be
achievable under the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed.
202 As to the subject matter of possible negotiations between the
authorisation applicants and PNO in respect of the navigation service
wharfage charges, three primary areas present for consideration:
(a) the current level and price path of the navigation service and wharfage
charges as proposed in the Producer Pricing Deed (which
replicate those set
under the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed);
(b) the contractual terms governing material increases in the navigation service
and wharfage charges proposed in the Producer Pricing
Deed (which also replicate
those set under the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed); and
(c) the resolution of any future dispute arising in respect of a material
increase in the navigation service and wharfage charges
under the Producer
Pricing Deed (if entered into), or under the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed, or
negotiated between PNO and coal producers
outside of any contractual
203 In relation to negotiations concerning the current level and price path
of the navigation service and wharfage charges as proposed
under the Producer
Pricing Deed, in the Tribunal’s assessment the proposed collective
bargaining conduct is unlikely to result
in a bargaining change or outcome that
differs from bilateral negotiations. In relation to the navigation service
charge, the terms
offered in the Producer Pricing Deed have already been
accepted by vessel agents under the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed. The current
and price path of the navigation service charge specified in the Vessel Agent
Pricing Deed is broadly consistent with the level
approved by the Tribunal in
the Glencore Coal arbitration, which decision was recently upheld by the High
Court. In relation to the
wharfage charge, the terms offered in the Producer
Pricing Deed are broadly consistent with the level as set by PNO on an open
basis, which is also consistent with the level agreed between the parties
in the Glencore Coal arbitration. In circumstances where
the Vessel Agent
Pricing Deeds will remain in force for many years to come, and the level of the
navigation service charge is broadly
consistent with the Glencore Coal
arbitration conducted under Pt IIIA, there is little incentive for PNO to alter
the level of that
charge. To the extent that there is additional information in
relation to coal production and exports that might persuade PNO to
current level of the charges, the Tribunal does not accept that collective
bargaining is required in order to advance that
information. Nor does the
Tribunal accept that any increase in the coal producers’ bargaining power
through collective negotiation
is likely to affect PNO’s incentives in
that regard or make any difference to negotiated outcomes in comparison to
negotiations.
204 In relation to the contractual terms governing material increases in the
navigation service and wharfage charges in the Producer
Pricing Deed, on the
evidence before it the Tribunal is not persuaded that the proposed collective
bargaining conduct has a prospect
of bringing about a bargaining change or
outcome that would not be achieved through bilateral negotiations. The evidence
the principal (common) concern of the authorisation applicants
relates to those terms, including particularly the pricing principles
govern the resolution of any dispute in respect of a material price increase.
The authorisation applicants consider that
the terms do not afford coal
producers certainty over future levels of the navigation service charge. The
evidence indicates that,
to date, there has been little negotiation between PNO
and the coal producers in relation to the pricing principles in the Producer
Pricing Deed that govern material price increases. The Tribunal considers that
there is a possibility that future negotiations between
PNO and coal producers
may bring about changes to the pricing principles. Even though the pricing
principles in the Producer Pricing
Deed replicate those in the Vessel Agent
Pricing Deeds, there is no reason to think that the terms are fixed and
unchangeable or
cannot be improved in the mutual interests of coal producers and
PNO. While a differently constituted Tribunal concluded that the
principles closely follow the mandatory considerations that the ACCC must take
into account when conducting an arbitration
under Pt IIIA, that Tribunal also
noted some differences and potential issues of interpretation that may arise
under those contractual
at [221]-[239]). In any
event, commercial parties, wishing to specify contractual terms to govern future
price increases, are not
limited to the adoption of mandatory considerations
under Pt IIIA and may be able to devise other terms that mutually afford the
parties greater commercial certainty. However, there is nothing in the evidence
that suggests that individual coal producers who
are members of the
authorisation applicants are incapable of negotiating such issues with PNO, or
that individual coal producers
are at a disadvantage in negotiations that can
only be remedied by collective bargaining. To the contrary, the authorisation
are large and sophisticated companies and many of the authorisation
applicants are financially much larger than PNO. The Tribunal
does not find
credible the contention, which rises no higher than assertion, that collective
bargaining in respect of the pricing
principles in the Producer Pricing Deed
would result in a different outcome in comparison to multiple bilateral
negotiations.
205 In relation to the resolution of a future dispute arising in respect of a
material price increase under the Producer Pricing Deed
(if entered into) or
under the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed, again the Tribunal is not persuaded that
the proposed collective bargaining
conduct would be likely to result in
bargaining outcomes that differ from outcomes without the proposed conduct. That
is because,
even without authorisation, there is likely to be a high degree of
commonality, if not collectivity, in the conduct of any dispute
process under the Producer Pricing Deed (if entered into) or under the Vessel
Agent Pricing Deed. The Pricing Deeds contain
uniform terms governing any
material price increase, including in respect of arbitration, and also contain a
“most favoured
nation” (non-discrimination) clause. Thus, the issues
in dispute in respect of a material price increase under the Pricing
Deeds will,
in all likelihood, be common to all affected Port users. As noted earlier, the
Tribunal considers that the arbitration
of a material price increase dispute
under the Pricing Deeds would inevitably be consolidated and that the prior
negotiation and
mediation of a material price increase dispute would almost
inevitably be conducted on a collective or consolidated basis. No party
suggested that the provisions of Pt IV of the Act would prevent coal producers
(and vessel agents) from engaging in collective discussions
with respect to any
such arbitration, or from appointing joint legal and economic advisers and
experts in any arbitration. The Tribunal
considers that the circumstances of a
material price increase dispute under the Pricing Deeds would also require PNO
to engage in
collective negotiations with all disputing parties. It follows that
there is no likelihood of the authorised collective bargaining
conduct producing
an outcome in respect of a material price increase dispute that would differ
from the outcome of negotiations and
arbitration conducted without
authorisation.
206 The Tribunal recognises the possibility that coal producers may refuse to
enter into the Producer Pricing Deed as they currently
receive the benefit of
the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds that have been entered into. In that
circumstance, the Tribunal has also given
consideration to the possibility that,
during the term of the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds, PNO may seek to negotiate a
material increase
in the navigation service or wharfage charge with coal
producers outside of the framework of the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds. As noted
above, such negotiations would only be expected to be fruitful if the outcome
was perceived to be more favourable than would be achievable
under the Vessel
Agent Pricing Deed (as the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed would continue to apply,
unless the parties agreed to a different
charge). The question that arises is
whether, in those circumstances, the proposed collective bargaining conduct
might result in
a different bargaining outcome compared to bilateral
negotiations. The Tribunal considers the prospect to be unlikely. If PNO were
persuade coal producers to negotiate a material price increase outside the
contractual framework of the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed,
it appears to the
Tribunal to be inevitable that PNO would engage with coal producers in a
collective manner. That is because the
alternative course available to PNO,
notifying an increase under the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed, would inevitably
involve a form of
collective negotiations. For that reason, the Tribunal’s
assessment is that there would be no difference in bargaining behaviour
outcome with or without authorisation.
F. EXPERT EVIDENCE ADDUCED ON THE APPLICATION FOR
Introduction
assist the Tribunal, the ACCC commissioned a report from Dr Smith that addressed
the following matters:
(a) the markets relevant to the assessment of the proposed collective bargaining
(b) the economic principles relevant to the identification of public benefits
(generally);
(c) applying economic principles, the public benefits and detriments likely to
arise from collective bargaining conduct (generally);
(d) applying the foregoing economic principles, the public benefits and
detriments likely to arise as a result of the proposed collective
208 In response, the authorisation applicants commissioned a report from Mr
Morton that addressed the following two matters:
(a) a response to Dr Smith’s report; and
(b) how PNO may be expected to act in setting prices and negotiating access,
given its economic circumstances and incentives.
209 PNO commissioned a report from Mr Houston that responded to the reports
of Mr Morton and Dr Smith.
210 The economic experts conferred prior to the Tribunal hearing and produced
the Joint Report. The Tribunal found the Joint Report
to be a helpful synthesis
of each expert’s opinion on the issues that arise in this proceeding. The
economic experts were also
cross-examined concurrently. Each of the economic
experts gave oral testimony appropriately, being responsive to the questions
of them. In considering the opinions expressed by the economic experts, it
is convenient to adopt the format of the Joint Report.
Economic framework
The economic principles relevant to the identification of
public benefits and detriments (generally)
noted earlier, a public benefit within the meaning of the Act includes an
increase in economic efficiency (and a public detriment
includes a decrease in
economic efficiency). There was no substantive disagreement between the experts
concerning the meaning of
economic efficiency. The differences between the
experts in the explanation of the underlying concepts can be described as
The differences do not have any substantive impact on the issues to
be determined in this proceeding and, for that reason, it is
unnecessary to note
the technical distinctions drawn by the experts. What follows is largely drawn
from the Joint Report.
212 As summarised in the Joint Report, the concept of increased economic
welfare or surplus is synonymous with increased economic
efficiency. Economic
welfare or surplus arising in a particular market can be defined as the sum of
the producer surplus, as measured
by economic profits earned by the firm
supplying the relevant goods or services, and the consumer surplus, as measured
by the total
value less total cost to the purchaser of those goods or services.
Any change in economic conduct or outcome that has the effect
of increasing
total economic welfare or surplus increases economic efficiency (and results in
a public benefit). Conversely, any
change in economic conduct or outcome that
has the effect of transferring economic surplus between a buyer and a seller
increasing total economic surplus) represents a private benefit to the
transferee and, correspondingly, a private detriment to the
transferor.
213 The extent of economic welfare or surplus arising in any market –
and so the potential for increases (or decreases) thereto
– is difficult
to measure directly. An alternative indicator of the potential for increased (or
decreased) economic welfare
to arise from a particular form of conduct is the
extent to which output – in either its quantitative or qualitative
– in any market is likely to increase (or decrease), as
compared to the counterfactual. Reliance on increased output as an
indicator of
public benefit involves the presumption that the economic value of any increased
output is positive and exceeds the
additional cost of its production. Increased
output in any market – and the presumptive increase in economic surplus
represented
by that increased output – may accrue either in a static
sense, where productive and allocative efficiency increase by reference
market conditions, and/or dynamically, where future productive and allocative
efficiency will be increased in the face of
changing market conditions, such as
may arise through more efficient investment in that market.
214 A change in economic conduct or outcomes that enables, in relation to any
market, the same output to be produced with fewer resources
(ie, a productive
efficiency gain) gives rise to a presumptive increase in economic surplus in
that market and an increase in economic
efficiency (making the standard
assumption that the resources saved are able to be redeployed elsewhere in the
The public benefits and detriments likely to arise from
collective bargaining conduct (generally)
215 The experts agreed
that the economic efficiency effects of collective bargaining conduct can be
organised into the following three
categories:
(a) the effects of the collective bargaining on the market in which the
bargaining occurs and any related market (which, for ease
of exposition, will be
referred to as
category (a) effects
(b) the effects of the collective bargaining on the transaction costs associated
with the process of bargaining (which, for ease
of exposition, will be referred
category (b) effects
(c) the risk of the collective bargaining conduct facilitating collusive conduct
directed at one or more markets beyond the contemplated
scope of the approved
collective bargaining (which, for ease of exposition, will be referred to as
category (c) effects
216 The Tribunal considers that the above three categories provide a useful
framework for considering the issues that arise in this
proceeding.
217 An unusual feature of the present application is that no attention, by
way of submissions or evidence before the Tribunal, was
directed to the effect
of the proposed collective bargaining conduct on competition in the market to
which the conduct is directed,
being the market for the supply of the shipping
channel and berthing services at the Port. Authorisation is sought for conduct
it is anti-competitive in nature and would or might contravene one or
more of the provisions of Pt IV of the Act. Anti-competitive
conduct typically
generates public detriment. In the present case, the authorisation would allow
the authorisation applicants, who
each acquire (directly or indirectly) the
shipping channel and berthing services, to negotiate the terms of acquisition of
services on a collective basis. Ordinarily, such collective conduct would
raise a concern over the reduction in competition between
coal producers in
respect of the acquisition of those services and whether that reduction would
result in public detriments. Despite
that, none of the parties, including PNO,
submitted that the conduct would result in a public detriment by reason of
lessening competition
in the market for the acquisition of those services. In
its Determination, the ACCC also dismissed the prospect of anti-competitive
detriment in a cursory manner, observing that the conduct is voluntary for coal
producers and concerns PNO’s published terms
for the supply of those
services (at [4.63]). The Tribunal proceeds on the assumption that the parties
considered the matter and
concluded that, in the circumstances of the present
application, no such anti-competitive detriments would be likely to arise. That
may be because the collective bargaining involves acquirers of the Port
services, the evidence indicates that there is no prospect
of capacity
constraint or scarcity in respect of the acquisition of those services, the
negotiations are not expected to address
any differentiation in service quality
between acquirers (in respect of which the acquirers might otherwise compete)
and PNO has
proffered uniform terms governing the price of supply in any event.
In those circumstances, the effects of the proposed collective
conduct can be analysed by assessing the change in the bargaining power of the
coal producers brought about by collective
bargaining and whether that change
would be likely to change the outcome of the negotiations in a manner that
affects economic efficiency.
That issue is considered as part of the category
(a) effects.
218 There was no substantive disagreement between the experts as to the
relevant economic considerations applicable to each of the
above categories of
effects. What follows is largely drawn from the Joint Report, although the
Tribunal has re-ordered some of the
considerations.
219 In relation to the potential category (a) effects, collective bargaining
will increase efficiency if it results in a change in
economic conduct (ie, the
form and outcome of negotiations are improved) which increases the sum of
consumer and producer surplus
(as indicated by an increase in either the
quantity or quality of output in the market for the service and/or one or more
markets). Collective bargaining conduct that alters the balance of
bargaining power so as to cause only a redistribution of the gains
between buyers and sellers represents a transfer of economic surplus, rather
than an increase in economic efficiency.
220 Whether a change in price of a service, resulting from collective
bargaining, will result in an increase in economic welfare or
surplus as opposed
to a transfer of economic surplus is affected by the elasticity of demand for
the service and the timeframe over
which the price change occurs or is
sustained. If demand for the service is highly price inelastic, small reductions
in price are
likely to have little to no effect on output of the service, and so
– relative to highly price elastic demand – are more
likely to give
rise to a transfer of economic surplus than an increase in efficiency. The
converse also applies. In general, demand
in a market is likely to be more price
elastic over a longer time period. Accordingly, changes in price applying over a
longer period
of time – relative to a shorter period of time – are
more likely to give rise to increases in efficiency (as well as
involving some
transfer of economic surplus).
221 Collective bargaining is more likely to achieve an improved economic
outcome in circumstances where a common position in the interests
of all buyers
can reasonably be expected to be agreed. Conversely, collective bargaining is
less likely to achieve an improved economic
outcome, and may produce a less
efficient outcome, where the requirements and preferences of the bargaining
group are heterogeneous.
In such a case, collective bargaining may create
pressure for individual members of the bargaining group to forgo preferences in
favour of a uniform approach and may reduce the incentives for innovation by
individual buyers and thereby decrease economic efficiency.
The risk of such
economic harm is reduced where participation in the bargaining group is
voluntary and members are free to pursue
individual negotiations to satisfy
their individual requirements and preferences.
222 In relation to the potential category (b) effects, collective bargaining
can affect transaction costs in two ways:
(a) a reduction in the transaction costs of members of the bargaining group (who
can pool resources when interacting with a counterparty)
and the counterparty
(who can deal with the bargaining group rather than the members separately)
associated with the negotiation,
monitoring and potential dispute resolution
over the terms of an agreement; and
(b) an increase in the transaction costs of members of the bargaining group
because the members must negotiate within the group and
agree on a common
223 The Joint Report noted that the transaction costs arising in relation to
intra-group negotiations are likely to be higher the
greater the heterogeneity
of circumstances affecting the preferences of the group as to the service being
acquired. The Joint Report
also noted that, if a service is supplied on terms
that include a “most favoured nation” (or non-discrimination)
some buyers may benefit from the negotiating effort of others without
incurring the same extent of transactions costs.
224 In relation to the potential category (c) effects, collective bargaining
increases the risk of collusive conduct between members
of the bargaining group
in relation to upstream or downstream markets in which the members also compete
(but which extend beyond
the market for which the collective bargaining is
approved). The extent to which collective bargaining increases the risk of
conduct depends on the existence of factors that facilitate or
discourage collusive conduct in the upstream or downstream markets.
Applying the economic framework
The factual and counterfactual
noted earlier, the statutory test for authorisation requires consideration of
the benefits and detriments likely to result
from the conduct for which
authorisation is sought, and involves a comparison of the future with, and
without, that conduct.
226 In the Joint Report, the experts agreed that the applicable factual and
counterfactual should be described as follows:
(a) in the factual (ie, the future with authorisation), coal producers have the
(i) to discuss between themselves the terms and conditions of access to the
(ii) to negotiate the terms and conditions of access collectively with PNO, in
the circumstance where PNO reconsiders its stance
in relation to collective
negotiation in the face of reduced coal demand and so profits; and
(iii) to negotiate individually with PNO, but to date have chosen not to do
(b) in the counterfactual (ie, the future without authorisation), coal
(i) do not have the ability to discuss between themselves the terms and
conditions of access to the Port;
(ii) do not have the ability to negotiate the terms and conditions of access
collectively with PNO; and
(iii) will be willing to negotiate individually with
227 Subject to one qualification, the Tribunal generally agrees with the
above statement of the factual and counterfactual. As noted
above, the proposed
collective bargaining conduct would extend to negotiation in respect of a
material price increase dispute arising
under the Producer Pricing Deed (if
entered into). For the reasons given earlier, the Tribunal considers that the
arbitration of
a material price increase dispute would inevitably be
consolidated and that the prior negotiation and mediation of a material price
increase dispute would almost inevitably be conducted on a collective or
consolidated basis. It follows that the factual (ie, the
future with
authorisation) and the counterfactual (ie, the future without authorisation)
would be materially the same in respect
of the negotiation, mediation and
arbitration of a material price increase under the Producer Pricing Deed.
Relevant markets and potential efficiency effects of the
proposed collective bargaining conduct
228 The experts agreed
that the services and associated charges directly affected by the proposed
collective bargaining conduct can
be described as those for the provision
(a) navigation and/or shipping channel access services supplied by PNO at the
Port in relation to the export of the producers’
coal, for which the
applicable charge is the navigation service charge which is paid by vessel
agents but in respect of which the
coal producers have an economic interest to
the extent they bear its ultimate cost; and
(b) the availability of a site at which stevedoring operations may be carried
out by PNO at the Port in relation to the export of
the producers’ coal,
for which the applicable charge is the wharfage charge which is paid by coal
229 In the Joint Report, the experts described the above services as
“port access services” although the services acquired
from PNO can
more accurately be described as shipping channel and berthing services (in
respect of which PNO levies the navigation
service and wharfage charges). In
what follows, those descriptions will be used interchangeably.
230 The experts agreed that the other markets that are relevant to the
assessment of the public benefits and detriments of the proposed
bargaining conduct are the upstream and downstream markets that are dependent on
Port access services, particularly what
is described as the coal tenements
market (which includes the acquisition and development of coal tenements) and
the coal export
market. Such markets are relevant in three potential ways,
reflecting the three categories of potential efficiency consequences of
proposed collective bargaining conduct identified earlier.
231 First (and in respect of category (a) effects), if and to the extent that
the proposed collective bargaining conduct is likely
to change the price or
other terms of supply of Port access services, that has the potential to affect
the quantity of Port access
services demanded by coal producers or vessel agents
and may cause output changes in upstream or downstream markets. In that regard,
the experts agreed that public benefits will arise from the proposed collective
bargaining conduct if two conditions are satisfied:
(a) the conduct results in a reduction in charges for, or improvement in the
quality of, Port access services; and
(b) the change in price or quality results in a change in the quantity of Port
access services demanded by coal producers or vessel
agents that, in turn, gives
rise to an increase in mine production and coal exports (in the near term) or an
increase in efficient
investment in mine production capability and future coal
exports (in the longer term).
232 In their reports, the experts also considered the possibility that the
proposed collective bargaining conduct might cause a coal
producer to forgo and
not pursue individual negotiations with PNO in respect of supply requirements or
preferences of that coal producer
(which differ from the requirements and
preferences of the majority of the collective group of coal producers). To the
extent that
occurred, and the effect was to diminish the growth prospects of the
coal producer concerned, there would be a decrease in economic
efficiency and a
public detriment.
233 Second (and in respect of category (b) effects), if and to the extent
that the proposed collective bargaining conduct reduces
the overall transaction
costs of bargaining (being the management, legal and other advisory costs
associated with bargaining), there
will be a productive efficiency gain in
either the upstream or downstream market (if the costs of the coal producers are
or the market for Port access services (if PNO’s costs are
234 Third (and in respect of category (c) effects), there is the potential
for the proposed collective bargaining conduct to facilitate
collusive conduct
between the coal producers in upstream or downstream markets which may reduce
output in those markets and thereby
reduce efficiency.
235 The Tribunal considers that the expert’s description of the
relevant markets and potential efficiency effects of the proposed
bargaining conduct is the appropriate framework within which to assess the
economic efficiency effects of the proposed
Economic considerations relevant to category (a)
236 In the Joint Report,
the experts expressed their joint opinion in relation to the economic factors
that are relevant to the bargaining
incentives of PNO and coal producers in
respect of Port access services which will impact upon category (a) effects.
There was substantial
agreement between the experts on those factors. The
Tribunal agrees with the joint opinions of the experts, which are as
237 The Port access services involve the use of a natural monopoly facility
that all coal producers require in order to reach coal
export markets. PNO can
be presumed to have an incentive to act so as to maximise its profits, assessed
over the term of its lease,
subject to the various constraints that it
apprehends as applying.
238 The nature of the economic relationship between the coal producers and
PNO can be described as one involving mutual dependence
in combination with
potential for the transfer of economic value between PNO and the coal producers.
The coal producers are dependent
upon the Port access services provided by PNO
to realise the value of export coal revenues, since that coal is transported to
markets via the Port. PNO is directly dependent upon the provision of
Port access services in relation to export coal being transported
to overseas
markets for approximately 70 per cent of its revenue, and indirectly dependent
on export coal for a yet further proportion
of its revenue – such as that
derived from its leases of Port land for the purpose of carrying out coal
export-related activities.
Neither the coal producers nor PNO have any close
substitutes available to them for the realisation of their respective revenue
Setting aside the negotiation of charges for the Port access services,
PNO and the coal producers have a mutual interest in ensuring
that there are no
unnecessary impediments or disincentives for the export of coal through the
239 PNO’s conduct in bargaining with coal producers in relation to the
price and other terms applying to Port access services
can be expected to be
constrained, to varying degrees, by:
(a) PNO’s strong medium term interest in encouraging efficient investment
in and ensuring the economic viability of all activities
associated with the
production of export coal, from which the demand for Port access services is
(b) the existence of approximately 50 per cent unused capacity at the Port,
PNO’s high dependence on export coal-related revenue
and the 98-year lease
term over which PNO is entitled to derive Port access service revenues;
(c) the terms of the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds, which establish an upper bound
on the navigation service charge that may be agreed
between PNO and coal
producers; and
(d) PNO’s apprehension as to the risks of regulatory intervention in
relation to the terms and conditions applying to Port
access services, by means
of declaration under Pt IIIA and/or the invoking of New South Wales-specific
regulatory measures and/or
legislative amendments.
240 Dr Smith and Mr Houston also agreed that PNO’s bargaining conduct
is likely to be constrained by its economic interest in
minimising the extent of
uncertainty in relation to the future terms and conditions for Port access
services so that efficient future
investment in the production of export coal is
encouraged. Mr Morton did not agree with that proposition. The Tribunal
that it logically follows from the preceding factors and agrees with
the opinion of Dr Smith and Mr Houston in that regard.
241 The experts agreed that, on the evidence available to date, PNO’s
pricing conduct is not consistent with the presence of
unconstrained market
242 The experts also agreed that, since the navigation service and wharfage
charges together represent a relatively small proportion
of other coal
production costs as well as the market value of export coal, the demand for Port
access services is highly price inelastic
over a significant range of potential
levels for those charges.
Economic considerations relevant to category (b)
243 The experts expressed
their joint opinions in relation to the economic factors that will affect the
likelihood and extent of transaction
cost savings from collective bargaining.
244 The experts agreed that, the more numerous the number of issues or
parameters to be negotiated and the more numerous the number
of counterparties,
the greater the potential for cost savings from collective bargaining.
Conversely, transaction costs may be increased
by collective bargaining if the
negotiations are affected by different circumstances or preferences of coal
producers. Such differences
might arise from factors such as:
(a) mine size, location and quality of coal reserves that cause relative
differences in marginal and average costs, thereby affecting
the potential for
shut down in the face of highly cyclical international coal markets;
(b) type and quality of coal produced, which affects its end market value;
(c) the nature of the agreements under which export coal is sold, which can vary
between a CIF or FOB price basis thereby affecting
the incidence of the
navigation service charge; and
(d) remaining mine life, which may influence the time-related preferences of
coal producers.
245 The experts agreed that the extent to which transaction costs may be
increased in the context of collective bargaining by reason
of the different
circumstances or preferences of coal producers depends on the extent to which
the diversity of interests as between
one coal producer and another can be
accommodated within the collective bargaining framework in respect of the
potential terms of
the Port access services.
246 The Tribunal agrees with the above joint opinions concerning transaction
cost savings, whilst noting that the opinions are stated
at a high level of
generality.
Economic considerations relevant to category (c)
247 The experts agreed,
in somewhat anodyne terms, that the economic considerations that are likely to
increase the risk of the proposed
collective bargaining conduct “spilling
over” in the form of collusive conduct directed at upstream or downstream
(a) the existence of markets for the sale of export coal in which the coal
producers’ individual interests in those markets
are more homogeneous, as
distinct from differentiated;
(b) the existence of markets for the procurement of inputs in which the coal
producers’ individual interests in those markets
are more homogeneous, as
distinct from differentiated; and
(c) in relation to all such dependent markets, the existence of factors that
facilitate (or contrarily, reduce) collusive conduct.
The experts’ opinions on category (a) effects
the Joint Report, each of the experts summarised their opinions on the category
(a) effects they consider are likely to arise
from the proposed collective
bargaining conduct. Their opinions, and the Tribunal’s assessment of those
opinions, follows.
249 In relation to
category (a) effects that may give rise to public benefits, Dr Smith expressed
the opinion that collective bargaining
may increase the efficiency of the
bargaining process by addressing the imbalance in bargaining power between the
parties, asymmetry
of information concerning supply costs, and any lack of
bargaining skill/experience of individual parties. Dr Smith expressed the
opinion that:
(a) PNO has some market power which affects its bargaining power (by reason that
the Port is a bottleneck facility for coal producers
and the demand for Port
services is relatively inelastic).
(b) Market power results in a dead weight loss.
(c) To the extent that export demand for coal is relatively elastic, increases
in Port charges are likely to be at least partially
absorbed by the coal
producers and, if this occurs, this reduces the ability of the coal producers to
(d) To the extent that the proposed collective bargaining results in reduced
Port charges or a slower increase in Port charges, producers’
invest is increased. Further, to the extent that collective bargaining results
in a more appropriate risk allocation between
coal producers and PNO, and this
results in greater certainty and less risk in decision-making in the future,
this provides an incentive
for more and/or more efficient investment by coal
producers. This would be a public benefit.
(e) To the extent that the proposed collective bargaining results in more
efficient supply of Port services, this may benefit ship
owners (giving the
example of quicker ship turn-around times) which may help to support exports if
export demand is relatively price
elastic, which would also be a public
250 Respectfully, there are many aspects of Dr Smith’s opinions in
respect of potential public benefits that the Tribunal does
not find persuasive.
Most importantly, the Tribunal considers that the evidence before it does not
provide a foundation for the assumptions
that underpin Dr Smith’s economic
conclusions, at least in the short to medium term. The Tribunal notes the
following matters
(a) As discussed earlier, the Tribunal considers that, in the future with
authorisation, PNO is unlikely to agree to alter the current
level of the
navigation service charge as offered in the Pricing Deeds. As a consequence, any
potential category (a) effect of authorisation
will be muted in the short to
medium term.
(b) While the Tribunal accepts that PNO may have some market power which affects
its bargaining power, the evidence before the Tribunal
does not support the
conclusion that the current levels of navigation service and wharfage charges
have resulted in a dead weight
loss. The experts agreed, and the Tribunal
accepts, that demand for the relevant Port services is highly inelastic. No
evidence has
been adduced by coal producers to substantiate a claim that coal
production in the Hunter Valley, or investment in future coal production,
been withheld or suppressed by reason of any past increase in, or the current
level of, the navigation service and wharfage charges.
Further, the conclusion
reached by the Tribunal in
Re Port of Newcastle Operations
indicates that
the current levels of the navigation service and wharfage charges (as offered
under the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed)
are equivalent to or less than the economic
costs of supply of the relevant Port services and therefore consistent with the
that would be expected in a competitive market.
(c) It follows that, in the Tribunal’s view, any reduction in Port charges
as a result of collective bargaining in the short
to medium term (which the
Tribunal regards as unlikely) will merely effect a transfer of surplus from PNO
to the coal producers without
any efficiency improvement. There would be no
public benefit from such a transfer.
(d) The Tribunal does not accept Dr Smith’s further opinion that
collective bargaining has any realistic potential to improve
the quality of Port
services supplied (such as by improving ship turn-around times). The Tribunal
considers that the Port and coal
producers have a mutual interest in the quality
of Port services that maximises the throughput of coal. There was no evidence
the Tribunal that suggested that bilateral negotiations with coal
producers were preventing or inhibiting agreement on quality of
service issues.
For completeness, and as discussed earlier, the Tribunal notes that it does not
accept the opposite opinion expressed
by Mr Byrnes in his evidence that the
interim authorisation has inhibited discussions between PNO and coal producers
of service issues; the Tribunal considers that the
“impasse” between PNO and coal producers reflects the disputation
respect of the application made under Pt IIIA and also the present application
for authorisation.
251 However, different considerations arise over a longer time horizon. PNO
has offered to supply, and currently supplies, the Port
access services on the
terms of the Pricing Deeds which have a term of 10 years from 1 January 2020.
Those Deeds permit PNO to seek
an increase in the navigation service charge and
(in the case of the Producer Pricing Deed) the wharfage charge where the
is material (an increase of more than 5%) and is in accordance with the
pricing principles stated in the Deed. The counterparties
to the Deeds have the
right to dispute the price increase and the contractual dispute resolution
process allows arbitration of the
dispute by an independent arbitrator.
252 The Tribunal accepts that, over the term of the Pricing Deeds, there is a
possibility that PNO might propose a material increase
to the level of the
navigation service and wharfage charges. While the Tribunal considers that
PNO’s market power is significantly
constrained by its dependence on
export coal and the threat of regulation, circumstances may arise in the future
that require considerable
capital expenditure at the Port to be undertaken by
PNO, including in respect of the proposed MDT. In the context of infrastructure
assets that have multiple categories of use and user, there is always the
potential for disputation over matters such as cost allocation
in the setting of
prices for the different categories. The Tribunal also accepts that, the larger
the potential increase in Port
charges, the greater the potential for the
increased Port charges to affect negatively output in dependent markets, and
thereby decrease
economic efficiency. However, for the reasons explained
earlier, in the resolution of a future dispute in respect of a material price
increase, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the proposed collective bargaining
conduct would be likely to result in bargaining outcomes
that differ from
outcomes without the proposed conduct. While PNO has stated that it will not
participate in collective negotiations
with coal producers, the Tribunal expects
that a dispute with respect to a future material increase in the navigation
wharfage charge would inevitably lead PNO to engage with Port users
on a collective basis, regardless of any authorisation. In the
view, the authorisation would not make any noticeable change to the conduct of
negotiations, mediation and arbitration
over such issues.
253 In relation to category (a) effects that may give rise to public
detriments, Dr Smith considered the potential for collective
bargaining to
disadvantage smaller mining companies and/or companies with different interests
from those engaged in collective negotiation.
Dr Smith observed that this would
give rise to a public detriment if it resulted in a net decrease in demand for
inputs and/or a
net decrease in exports. The extent of any such detriment would
be affected by the extent of the difference between the coal producers
relation to matters relating to Port services. If those differences are small,
then any detriment will be small. Dr Smith considered
that the risk of such
detriment is small.
254 The Tribunal agrees with Dr Smith’s opinion in respect of the risk
of public detriments. The focus of the authorisation
application is the quantum
of the navigation service and wharfage charges, not the quality of Port services
nor the requirements
and preferences of individual coal producers. The Tribunal
considers that PNO and the authorisation applicants are sophisticated
which will, in the future, adopt a common sense approach to the negotiation of
commercial arrangements that are mutually
beneficial. The Tribunal does not
believe that the pursuit of the proposed collective bargaining conduct will lead
to any coal producer
forgoing or not pursuing private bilateral negotiations
with PNO in respect of the coal producers’ individual requirements
preferences.
255 While Mr Morton
expressed agreement with the other experts in respect of many of the economic
principles and conclusions stated
in the Joint Report, Mr Morton’s
opinions with respect to the category (a) effects likely to arise from the
proposed collective
bargaining conduct that may give rise to public benefits
were expressed in far stronger terms than the other experts. In large part,
was due to Mr Morton maintaining opinions expressed in his primary report
concerning PNO’s market power and its expected
behaviour in setting prices
and negotiating access, given its economic circumstances and incentives. The
report expressed the opinion
that the constraints on PNO’s pricing
discretion are weak, that PNO would be expected to continue to increase Port
to maximise profits, and that the Pricing Deeds are ineffective in
constraining PNO’s market power. In expressing those opinions,
relied upon and made extensive reference to previous reports that he had
prepared (through his firm Synergies) on behalf
of Glencore Coal and NSWMC in
connection with the Pt IIIA applications that have been made in respect of the
Port (both declaration
and arbitration).
256 In the Joint Report, Mr Morton expressed the following (summary)
(a) While agreeing that the demand for PNO’s Port services are inelastic
over a significant range of prices, Mr Morton nevertheless
considered that a
change in Port prices can potentially have a greater impact on demand for Port
services where required investment
in additional coal production is not yet sunk
or where investment is required as existing mines reach the end of their mine
(b) While agreeing that there are a range of factors that currently constrain
PNO’s market power, Mr Morton considers that
the constraints are not
(c) Mr Morton considers that the offer of the Pricing Deeds, and the execution
of the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds, will provide only
a weak constraint on
PNO’s ability to significantly increase its prices. Mr Morton also
considers that the Deeds do not provide
pricing certainty and permit PNO to
significantly increase prices.
(d) Mr Morton considers that collective bargaining could assist coal producers
in effectively negotiating with PNO for three reasons.
First, acting
collectively, coal producers have a greater opportunity to seek regulatory
intervention in relation to PNO’s
pricing practices. Second, collective
bargaining can assist in reducing the asymmetry of information between coal
producers and PNO
in relation to negotiations. Third, collective bargaining can
allow a more effective pursuit of issues, through enhancing the negotiating
capacity of the coal producers, including as a result of the sharing of the cost
associated with appointing expert advisors.
257 The Tribunal did not find Mr Morton’s opinions concerning
PNO’s market power and its expected behaviour in setting
negotiating access, as expressed in his primary report and summarised in the
Joint Report, persuasive. In addition to
the matters referred to above in the
context of Dr Smith’s opinions, the principal (but not exhaustive) reasons
for the Tribunal’s
lack of persuasion as to Mr Morton’s opinions are
as follows.
258 First, and as stated in his primary report, Synergies (under Mr
Morton’s instruction) has previously prepared a range of
relation to access to services at the Port including:
(a) for Glencore Coal, a report prepared in 2015 in relation to its application
for the declaration of the shipping channel and berthing
services at the
(b) also for Glencore Coal, a series of reports to the ACCC during 2018 in
relation to the arbitration between Glencore Coal and
PNO of the charges to
apply for Glencore Coal’s use of the (then) declared shipping channel and
berthing services at the Port;
(c) also for Glencore Coal, a series of reports to the NCC over the period
2018-2019 in relation to PNO’s application for the
revocation of the
declaration of the shipping channel and berthing services at the Port; and
(d) for NSWMC, a report to the NCC in 2020 in relation to NSWMC’s
application to the NCC for declaration of the shipping channel
and berthing
services at the Port.
259 Mr Morton attached those previous reports to his primary report in this
proceeding and referred to those previous reports extensively.
260 The earlier Synergies reports were the subject of detailed consideration
and analysis by, relevantly, the NCC and the Tribunal
in connection with the
earlier Pt IIIA applications to which the reports were directed. Many of the
conclusions reached by the NCC
and the Tribunal were contrary to the contentions
advanced in the earlier Synergies reports. The Tribunal notes in
particular:
(a) In the 2018 arbitration between Glencore Coal and PNO, the Tribunal
disagreed with the conclusion of the ACCC and approved a
navigation service
charge of $1.0058 per gross tonne (as at 1 January 2018). Following the recent
decision of the High Court in
Port of Newcastle Operations
Tribunal’s decision in that regard has been reinstated. In the
Tribunal’s view, a navigation service charge of that
quantum was
consistent with the pricing principles in Pt IIIA of the Act, the object of
which is to promote the economically efficient
operation of, use of and
investment in the infrastructure by which services are provided, thereby
promoting effective competition
in upstream and downstream markets.
Subsequently, PNO offered a lower navigation service charge pursuant to the
terms of the Pricing
(b) In the 2019 application to revoke declaration of the shipping channel and
berthing services, the NCC concluded that access (or
increased access) to the
services, on reasonable terms and conditions, as a result of a declaration of
the services would not promote
a material increase in competition in any market.
In that connection, and contrary to opinions expressed in earlier Synergies
the NCC concluded that PNO did face material constraints on its pricing
discretion (see, by way of summary, para 1.9 of the NCC’s
recommendation
dated 22 July 2019 titled “Revocation of the declaration of the shipping
channel service at the Port of Newcastle”).
(c) In the 2020 application to declare the shipping channel and berthing
services, both the NCC and the Tribunal again concluded
that access (or
increased access) to the services, on reasonable terms and conditions, as a
result of a declaration of the services
would not promote a material increase in
competition in any market. In that connection, and contrary to opinions
expressed in earlier
Synergies reports, the Tribunal concluded that there are a
range of factors that are likely to constrain PNO’s market power
the medium term in setting prices for the services and that PNO would be
expected to set prices so as to recover long run
costs, but not to further
increase prices in a manner that would lessen future investment in the coal
tenements market or coal production
more generally: see
261 In his primary report prepared in this proceeding, Mr Morton ignores the
consideration given to his earlier reports by the NCC
and the Tribunal in the
context of the applications to which those reports were addressed, and fails to
explain why his opinions
should be preferred to the contrary conclusions reached
by the NCC and the Tribunal. An expert cannot be criticised for maintaining
particular opinion despite contrary views. However, the approach adopted by Mr
Morton, involving repetition of earlier opinions
directed to particular
regulatory decisions without engagement with contrary conclusions reached by the
relevant decision-maker,
has the appearance of advocacy. The approach is of no
assistance to the Tribunal.
262 Second, Mr Morton’s opinions concerning PNO’s expected
pricing behaviour, as expressed in his reports, bear little
relationship to
PNO’s actual pricing behaviour to date. Mr Morton’s primary report
states that Synergies’ previous
reports demonstrated that PNO’s
profit maximising incentive will be most effectively met by raising access
prices (and accepting
any likely consequential impact on volume) rather than by
maintaining lower prices in order to attract additional volume. Synergies’
modelling in earlier reports purported to show that, by increasing the
navigation service charge to $3 per tonne, PNO would increase
revenues which
would have a strongly positive impact on PNO profits. Further modelling
purported to show that PNO’s profit
would only start to decline at a
charge of $12.50 per tonne. Nowhere does the report attempt to explain why PNO
has set the navigation
service charge at approximately $1.00 per tonne (on an
open access basis) and at a lower rate under the Pricing Deeds when the profit
maximising price, according to Synergies’ modelling, is $12.50 per tonne.
If Mr Morton were correct as to PNO’s pricing
power and the profit
maximising price, PNO is voluntarily foregoing vast profits. The Tribunal
considers that Mr Morton’s opinions
in that respect are not credible.
263 Third, Mr Morton’s opinions in his primary report concerning
PNO’s price increases since privatisation are based on
a simplistic
analysis which fails to engage with relevant economic costs. Mr Morton’s
report calculated the percentage increase
in the navigation service charge since
the privatisation of the Port in respect of vessels of a certain capacity and
concluded that
the increase for Panamax vessels was up to 120%. Mr
Morton’s report also calculated that the percentage price increase at the
Port since 2014 far exceeded the percentage increase at other Australian coal
ports in that period. While citing percentage price
increases over a limited
time span may have an emotional appeal, the calculations have little relevance
to an informed assessment
of whether the current level of the navigation service
charge is at an inefficiently high level. In respect of the first percentage
calculation, Mr Morton’s unstated assumption appears to be that the
navigation service charge at the Port at the time of privatisation
was set at a
level that enabled recovery of efficient costs. Mr Morton provided no evidence
to support that assumption. Further,
and as noted above, the conclusion reached
by the Tribunal in the context of the Glencore Coal arbitration was that the
current level
of the navigation service charge (incorporating price increases)
enables a reasonable return to be earned on the DORC value of the
Port assets.
In respect of the second percentage calculation, any comparison between coal
ports is economically meaningless without
knowing the actual amounts of the
charges at each port and the costs incurred by each port in providing the
relevant services.
264 Fourth, the Tribunal does not accept Mr Morton’s opinion in his
primary report, and as summarised in the Joint Report, with
respect to the
operation of the Pricing Deeds. In that respect, Mr Morton expressed the opinion
that the Deeds offer only limited
certainty as to ongoing Port charges and
provide considerable opportunity for PNO to continue to exercise market power in
the setting
of Port charges. The Tribunal does not accept that opinion for the
reasons explained in
at [218]-[239]. Mr Morton’s report
failed to explain why, if PNO has unconstrained market power as he contends, it
should choose
to fetter its future pricing freedom by entering into the Pricing
Deeds. A firm with unconstrained market power would be free to
announce price
increases from time to time without submitting its prices to any form of
scrutiny or control by a third party. In
contrast, the Pricing Deeds,
voluntarily offered and entered into by PNO, require PNO to notify Port users of
price increases, provide
supporting material for the increase and, in the event
the increase is disputed, submit the increase to binding arbitration. The
Tribunal adopts the earlier conclusion expressed in
...the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds provide a reasonable
degree of pricing certainty to coal producers. While the Deeds allow PNO to
adjustments to the rate of the navigation service charge, any such
adjustment is subject to arbitration applying pricing principles
similar to those governing arbitrations under Division 3 of Part
265 Fifth, Mr Morton’s primary report is critical of the “most
favoured nation” (or non-discrimination) clause in
the Pricing Deeds,
arguing that the clause is likely to inhibit the ability of coal producers to
negotiate changes in the pricing
related provisions of the Deeds via bilateral
negotiations. In advancing that argument, Mr Morton appears to consider that
negotiations between individual coal producers and PNO are preferable,
enabling differentiated prices to be agreed with each coal
producer. The
evidence before the Tribunal, of which Mr Morton is apparently unaware, is that
the non-discrimination clause was inserted
in the Deeds at the request of coal
producers. Further, Mr Morton fails to explain how collective bargaining by the
coal producers
is consistent with his apparent preference for differential
prices through bilateral negotiations.
266 Sixth, Mr Morton’s primary report expresses a very tentative
conclusion on the question whether collective bargaining is
likely to produce
category (a) effects that may give rise to public benefits (at para 79):
While I am unable to predict the extent to which
collective bargaining by mining companies will actually achieve more efficient
I consider that collective bargaining will significantly reduce the
transaction costs associated with negotiating the Deed and, more
importantly,
present the best opportunities for the parties to negotiate a balanced contract
that will prevent the emergence of future
disputes by better articulating the
circumstances triggering future price adjustments, and in that event,
quantifying the impact
on future prices.
267 Mr Morton does not explain why, in light of his opinion concerning the
strength of PNO’s market power, collective bargaining
effect on the terms of the Producer Pricing Deed. As noted above, Mr Morton
sought to address that question in the Joint Report,
but the Tribunal again
finds his opinions unpersuasive.
268 The first reason given by Mr Morton is that acting collectively, coal
producers will have a greater opportunity to seek regulatory
intervention in
relation to PNO’s pricing practices. The Tribunal does not accept that the
coal producers require an authorisation
in order to act collectively in seeking
regulatory intervention. The history of regulatory intervention since the
privatisation of
the Port amply demonstrates that such intervention does not
require coal producers to act in a collective manner. Further, collective
by coal producers advocating regulatory intervention would not involve any
contravention of Pt IV of the Act and therefore
would not require authorisation.
269 The second reason given by Mr Morton is that collective bargaining can
assist in reducing the asymmetry of information between
coal producers and PNO
in relation to negotiations. Mr Morton did not explain the content of the
asymmetry he was referring to. In
any event, for the reasons given earlier, the
Tribunal is not persuaded that the proposed collective bargaining conduct in
of the navigation service and wharfage charges would be likely to result
in bargaining behaviour or outcomes that differ from bilateral
negotiations.
270 The third reason given by Mr Morton is that collective bargaining can
allow a more effective pursuit of issues, through enhancing
the negotiating
capacity of the coal producers, including as a result of the sharing of the cost
associated with appointing expert
advisors. Transaction costs savings are
considered below as a separate head of claimed public benefit. In relation to
negotiating
capacity, the evidence shows that the coal producers are large
sophisticated companies, many of which are far larger than PNO. The
does not suggest that any of the coal producers lack negotiating capacity.
Again, and for the reasons discussed earlier,
the Tribunal is not persuaded that
the proposed collective bargaining conduct in respect of the navigation service
and wharfage charges
will result in different outcomes.
271 In relation to category (a) effects that may give rise to public
detriments, Mr Morton considered that there was a low risk of
such detriments
arising for three reasons:
(a) First, the different circumstances applying to each coal producer are
unlikely to result in significant differences in the commonality
of the coal
producers’ interests in relation to the Producer Pricing Deed.
(b) Second, a range of measures can be adopted to accommodate individual
interests in a collective bargaining framework, including
negotiating a menu of
options that could be chosen by individual coal producers or negotiating an
agreed pro-forma contract with
finalisation of individual contracts managed
through bilateral discussions.
(c) Third, if any coal producer considered that its interests were not being
effectively addressed through the collective negotiation,
the coal producer
would be free to negotiate bilaterally.
272 The Tribunal largely agrees with Mr Morton’s opinion in respect of
the risk of public detriments for the reasons expressed
above in relation to Dr
Smith’s opinion.
273 In relation to
category (a) effects that may give rise to public benefits, Mr Houston expressed
the opinion that there is limited
scope for improvement in the terms of the
Producer Pricing Deed to be achieved by means of collective bargaining that
could not otherwise
be achieved through bilateral negotiations, and any
potential improvements that may be achieved are unlikely to give rise to an
in output in the market for Port access or the dependent markets in
either the near or long term. In support of that opinion, Mr
Houston referred to
the following two principal matters:
(a) The evidence shows that PNO is constrained by a number of factors, including
its dependence on coal exports as its principal
source of revenues, its excess
channel capacity and the threat of regulatory intervention.
(b) The absence of evidence that: the terms of the Pricing Deeds would induce
any loss of output in any market; the proposed collective
bargaining conduct
would make any material difference to the terms of supply of Port services; and
that any changes in the terms
of supply of Port services would increase output
in any market.
274 The Tribunal agrees with Mr Houston’s opinions for the reasons
explained in connection with Dr Smith’s opinions.
275 In relation to category (a) effects that may give rise to public
detriments, Mr Houston expressed the opinion that the proposed
bargaining conduct is likely to restrain the individual preferences of coal
producers when negotiating the terms of Port
access services, potentially
leading to less efficient contractual arrangements. In Mr Houston’s
opinion, the interests of
coal producers are unlikely to be compatibly aligned
on all parameters the subject of negotiation with the result that the individual
interests of coal producers must be restrained to reach a unified position for
the purpose of collective bargaining and dominant
producers are likely to be
able to obtain the terms most favourable to them, marginalising smaller
producers and reducing non-price
competition. Although the proposed collective
bargaining conduct is voluntary, it can be presumed that there will be
continuing pressure
for individual coal producers to conform with the
276 For the reasons explained in the context of Dr Smith’s opinions,
the Tribunal considers that the risks identified by Mr
Houston are small. The
preferences of the coal producers with respect to the navigation service and
wharfage charges are likely to
be closely aligned if not identical and, being
sophisticated commercial entities, PNO and coal producers can be expected to
individually in respect of particular service requirements and
preferences.
The experts’ opinions on category (b) effects
the Joint Report, each of the experts summarised their opinions on the category
(b) effects they consider are likely to arise
from the proposed collective
bargaining conduct. Their opinions, and the Tribunal’s assessment of those
opinions, follows.
278 Dr Smith expressed the opinion that the proposed
collective bargaining conduct is likely to result in a net decrease in
transaction
costs and so some public benefit resulting from the efficiency
gains, although they may be modest. Dr Smith considered that:
(a) Collective bargaining is likely to reduce the input of time and resources in
the bargaining process relative to numerous individual
negotiations with PNO and
so reduce transactions costs of the individual coal producers. However, at least
some of this saving will
be offset by the additional transactions costs incurred
due to the coal producers needing to arrive at an agreed bargaining position.
Those costs will be affected by the degree of diversity of views of the coal
producers with respect to issues relating to Port services.
However, it seems
likely that their views in relation to Port access services are less diverse (as
their aim is to export the desired
amount of coal as quickly and as cheaply as
possible), reducing the amount of additional costs.
(b) Collective bargaining will also result in a saving in transaction costs by
PNO to the extent that it will not need to negotiate
separately with each coal
(c) The extent of the saving in transaction costs (for the coal producers and
for PNO) is reduced the greater the degree to which
individual coal producers
opt out of collective bargaining.
(d) Some, though less, cost savings will be available even if PNO refuses to
negotiate collectively. This is because the authorisation
will enable the coal
producers to discuss a common position even if ultimately individual coal
producers negotiate separately.
279 Mr Morton expressed the opinion
(a) collective bargaining would provide for potential reductions in transaction
costs associated with the negotiation of the Producer
Pricing Deed, as a result
of reductions in costs for both coal producers (who can pool resources when
interacting with PNO) and PNO
(who will be able to negotiate with a single
collective group of producers, rather than in a series of bilateral
negotiations);
(b) even if collective bargaining would not reduce transaction costs in relation
to the terms of the Producer Pricing Deed, it would
be likely to reduce
transaction costs in respect of any price increase dispute that may arise under
the Deed (because such disputes
could be negotiated and even arbitrated
collectively, rather than through separate negotiations and arbitrations);
(c) the issues likely to require negotiation in relation to the Producer Pricing
Deed, and coal producers’ interests in respect
of those issues, are
sufficiently common that collective discussions between coal producers are
unlikely to give rise to significant
additional costs.
280 Mr Houston expressed the opinion that there is
no clear basis on which to conclude that the proposed collective bargaining
will cause either an increase or a decrease in transaction costs. This
ambiguity derives from:
(a) the additional transactions costs likely to be incurred by consequence of
the requirement for intra-group discussions between
coal producers that exhibit
multiple, relevant heterogeneous characteristics;
(b) the potential for duplication of costs in circumstances where coal producers
first need to negotiate internally to reach a common
position and then
subsequently engage in bilateral negotiations with PNO;
(c) the relatively limited scope of terms remaining to be negotiated in the
Producer Pricing Deed; and
(d) the “most favoured nation” (non-discriminatory pricing) clause
that is included in the Producer Pricing Deed, which
enables coal producers to
avoid costly negotiations by relying fully on the actions of others, thereby
reducing the transaction cost
savings that may arise under collective
bargaining.
281 In oral testimony, Mr Houston explained that although the proposed
collective bargaining is principally focussed on the navigation
service and
wharfage charges, there are a number of issues involved in the negotiation
including the price escalation path, the existence
of price reopeners (the terms
governing a material price increase) and the term of any contract. In Mr
Houston’s opinion, each
coal producer is likely to face heterogeneous
business conditions that will affect the coal producer’s preferences on
issues, including the remaining life of the producer’s mines and the
profitability of the producer’s mines. Mr Houston
also questioned the
likely materiality of any such savings.
The Tribunal’s view
282 The Tribunal accepts
the theoretical framework adopted by the experts in considering transaction cost
savings. However, the Tribunal
is not persuaded that the conclusions expressed
by the experts should be afforded any weight in the Tribunal’s assessment
the public benefits and detriments. None of the opinions rose much higher
than assertion. None of the experts made any enquiries
of the costs incurred by
the authorisation applicants in conducting bilateral negotiations prior to the
interim authorisation, nor
sought to obtain evidence of likely future costs with
or without authorisation. In so far as the experts relied on their general
experience in expressing conclusions, the Tribunal considers that its members
are in as good a position as the experts to form a
view about the likelihood of
transaction cost savings. The Tribunal’s assessment of the likelihood of
transaction costs savings
is set out in section H below.
The experts’ opinions on category (c) effects
the Joint Report, each of the experts summarised their opinions on the category
(c) effects they consider are likely to arise
from the proposed collective
bargaining conduct. Their opinions, and the Tribunal’s assessment of those
opinions, follows.
284 Dr Smith expressed the opinion that there is a
risk that the proposed collective bargaining conduct may result in inappropriate
exchanges of information and hence anti-competitive effects in input markets and
in the export market for coal. However, Dr Smith
considered that the risk of
collusive conduct in other markets is small and consequently so is the public
detriment. The reasons
for that conclusion are as follows:
(a) The conduct that was authorised by the ACCC is relatively confined and does
not involve the coal producers sharing individual
coal projection volumes,
customer pricing information or marketing strategies.
(b) Any attempt by the coal producers to raise prices in the coal export market
would be likely to be unprofitable and hence unsustainable
by reason that the
Hunter Valley coal producers are competing with other Australian coal mining
companies and other coal producers
around the world for sales and are price
takers on the world market.
(c) In respect of domestic sales, the worsening outlook for coal exports is
likely to provide an incentive for each producer to compete
vigorously for local
285 The Tribunal generally agrees with Dr Smith’s opinion.
286 Mr Morton expressed the opinion that, in order
to assess whether the risk of collusion is increased from the proposed
bargaining conduct in any market, it is first necessary to assess the
likelihood of collusion in the market under consideration and
then assess the
incremental impact of the proposed collective bargaining conduct on the
likelihood of that collusion. In doing so,
it is necessary to have regard to all
of the other opportunities that the parties have to plan and interact with one
another and
any other factors that make collusion less likely (including for
example, the risk that collusion would imperil future authorisation
applications
for collective bargaining).
287 Mr Morton referred to three factors that, in his view, make collusion
between the authorisation applicants unlikely. First, collusion
is unlikely to
be profitable in the coal export market because an output reduction is unlikely
to produce a price increase of similar
size (in circumstances where producers
are unable to reduce cost in the short term in response to an output reduction).
Second, the
benefits of collusion are unclear where the major coal producers
dominate output and several have a significant presence in other
markets. Third,
the coal producers already interact in multiple forums and rely on collective
bargaining for other aspects of their
operations, making it less likely that
they would use the proposed collective bargaining in respect of Port services as
the vehicle
for collusion.
288 The Tribunal agrees with Mr Morton’s opinion to the extent it
coincides with Dr Smith’s opinion. However, the Tribunal
does not agree
that participation by coal producers in other collective bargaining arrangements
reduces the risk that collective
bargaining in respect of Port charges will lead
to collusive conduct. The Tribunal considers that the prevalence of collective
arrangements in which the coal producers participate is more likely
to result in complacency or misunderstanding about the proper
boundaries of the
permitted bargaining behaviour and increase the risk that coal producers will
contravene the prohibition against
collusive conduct.
289 In Mr Houston’s opinion, the proposed
collective bargaining conduct materially increases the risk of collusive conduct
coal producers in relation to the export market for thermal coal. Mr Houston
considers that it is highly likely that a coordinated
reduction in supply by a
group of infra-marginal producers exporting coal from the Port would affect the
world price of thermal coal,
giving rise to inefficient outcomes in related
markets. Mr Houston also considers that there is a potential risk for the
collective bargaining conduct to present opportunities for coal
producers to engage in collusive conduct in relation to procurement
decisions in
local input markets, such as for labour, tenements, and mining equipment.
290 The Tribunal does not accept Mr Houston’s opinion in so far as it
relates to the coal export market, for the reasons expressed
by Dr Smith and Mr
Morton. The Tribunal agrees, though, that the proposed collective bargaining
conduct creates some risk of collusive
conduct between coal producers in the
context of input markets, as identified by Mr Houston. However, the Tribunal
considers that
the risk is small.
G. PORT AUTHORITY OF NSW
Port Authority of NSW filed a submission with the Tribunal supporting
PNO’s application for review and opposing the
grant of authorisation. The
submission raised discrete issues and it is convenient to address those issues
separately in this section.
292 The Port Authority elected not to appear at the hearing of this
application. Accordingly, the Tribunal must assess the Port Authority’s
contentions solely on the basis of the submission filed with the Tribunal (and
the accompanying agreements).
293 The Port Authority’s submission attached two agreements entered
into between the Port Authority and PNO, being the Port
Services Agreement dated
17 December 2013 (
) and the Harbour Management System Access Agreement
dated 17 December 2013 (
). The contents of the agreements are
confidential to the Port Authority and PNO and directions restricting the
disclosure of their
contents were made by the Tribunal. However, the Port
Authority’s submission to the Tribunal (which is not confidential) made
reference to certain aspects of those agreements, particularly the PSA, and the
reasons that follow are confined to those non-confidential
294 In short, the Port Authority submitted that the proposed collective
bargaining conduct would be likely to result in public detriments
(a) pursuant to the PSA and the HMSAA, the Port Authority provides a range of
services at the Port to facilitate safe port operations;
(b) a large proportion of its costs in providing those services are fixed;
(c) a significant proportion of its revenues earned in providing those services
are paid under the PSA and are effectively calculated
as a percentage of
PNO’s navigation service charge; and
(d) the proposed collective bargaining conduct is likely to result in
PNO’s navigation service charge being reduced, which
will reduce the
revenues earned by the Port Authority under the PSA.
295 The Port Authority’s primary contention is that, in the event that
PNO’s navigation service charge is reduced, it
would need to fund its
reduced revenues (in order to cover its costs) in one of two ways. First, it
could increase pilotage revenue
at the Port, but it submitted that this would
constitute an inefficient redistribution of the relative cost burden of the Port
Authority’s
operations at the Port away from coal exporters and onto other
Port users. Alternatively, it could fund the reduced revenues through
earned at other ports, but it submitted that this would constitute an
inefficient redistribution of the relative cost burden
of the Port
Authority’s operations at the Port away from coal exporters at the Port
and onto users of other ports in NSW.
296 Although not stated expressly in its submission, the Tribunal understands
the Port Authority’s contention to be that the
above-claimed consequences
of the proposed collective bargaining conduct are a public detriment. In that
regard, the Port Authority
did not submit that any reduction in revenues
resulting from the proposed collective bargaining conduct would diminish or
detrimentally
affect the services provided by it at the Port or the safe
operation of the Port. Rather, the submission was confined to a claim
would be an inefficient cross-subsidy of certain Port costs. That claim is
considered below.
Facts relied upon
facts set out below are drawn from the Port Authority’s submission.
Neither PNO nor the authorisation applicants challenged
those facts.
298 The Port Authority is a state-owned corporation established under the
State Owned Corporations Act
and the PAMA Act. It is responsible for and manages
the navigation, security and operational safety needs of commercial shipping
the Port of Newcastle, as well as Sydney Harbour, Port Botany, Port Kembla and
the ports of Eden and Yamba.
299 Under the PSA and HMSAA, the Port Authority provides services to PNO to
facilitate safe operations at the Port including:
(a) vessel scheduling functions (facilitating vessel movements);
(b) emergency response to incidents in the marine environment;
(c) harbour management system access services; and
(d) vessel tracking services.
300 Separately, the Port Authority is also responsible for providing pilotage
services to Port users, under the
Marine Safety Act 1998
301 The PSA and HMSAA were entered into as part of the Port privatisation
process undertaken by the State of NSW between 2013 and
2014. On 13 December
2013, the Treasurer of NSW directed Newcastle Port Corporation (now the Port
Authority) to enter into each of
those agreements.
302 The Port Authority receives two sources of revenue in respect of its
operations at the Port:
(a) under the PSA, PNO is required to pay the Port Authority a quarterly fee
which is calculated as a fixed proportion (9%) of the
“Navigation
Charge” that PNO receives from Port users (the “Navigation
Charge” being defined as the amount
of the navigation service charge
imposed by PNO in respect of the entry by vessels into the Port excluding
wharfage charges, site
occupation charges and port infrastructure charges);
(b) in respect of pilotage services, the Port Authority levies a statutory
pilotage charge on all commercial vessels using the Port
(subject to limited
exceptions).
303 The Port Authority has no contractual or other legal right or entitlement
to vary the fee payable by PNO under the PSA or to terminate
304 The following table shows the historical revenue ($’000s) earned by
the Port Authority from its operations at the Port by
Proportion of Navigation Charge
Pilotage charge
305 The Port Authority incurs costs in respect of its operations at the Port.
Overall, approximately 95% of the Port Authority’s
operating costs are
largely independent of the volume of vessel movements and are fixed. The
following table shows the Port Authority’s
historic operating costs and
allocation of corporate overhead costs ($’000s) in respect of its
operations at the Port:
Operating costs
Corporate overheads
306 The above tables show that the Port Authority’s revenues in respect
of its operations at the Port exceed its operating costs
but, once the
allocation of corporate overheads is ta
ken into account,
the Port Authority’s costs in respect of its operations at the Port exceed
its revenues.
307 The Port Authority expects its operating costs to continue to increase in
future years, to $25.8 million by FY25 and $29.1 million
by FY30, driven by
increased costs for salary and wages, including anticipated additional pilots
and training for those pilots, maintenance
and spare parts. The Port Authority
also expects to incur $14.9 million in capex costs over the next 10 years. The
Port Authority
has budgeted to incur $2.3 million of those capex costs in FY22
and $2 million in FY23.
Consideration
its Determination, the ACCC observed that, by entering into the PSA and agreeing
to payments from PNO that are linked to the
navigation service charge payments
PNO receives, the Port Authority accepted the risk that those payments may go up
or down over
time. On that basis, the ACCC did not consider that any potential
flow on impact on the Port Authority’s revenue from the proposed
collective bargaining conduct is a relevant consideration in the assessment of
the application for authorisation. The ACCC concluded
that the Port
Authority’s obligations to operate the Port safely, or to cover future
expenditure, are its own separate responsibility
and a matter for commercial
negotiation between the Port Authority and PNO.
309 The Tribunal does not agree that the matters raised by the Port Authority
are irrelevant considerations in the assessment of the
application for
authorisation. The Port Authority has raised a concern with respect to the
efficiency implications of the proposed
collective bargaining conduct. As such,
the concern is a relevant consideration. However, the Tribunal is not persuaded
proposed collective bargaining conduct will result in a public
detriment by reason of those matters.
310 The initial premise for the Port Authority’s contention is that the
proposed collective bargaining conduct is likely to
result in a reduction in the
navigation service charge levied by PNO, which will flow through in a reduction
of the fee payable to
the Port Authority under the PSA. For the reasons
explained in the next section, the Tribunal assesses that there is a low
that collective bargaining would cause PNO to reduce the current
level of the navigation service charge. By itself, that implies
bargaining is unlikely to cause public detriment through an impact on Port
Authority funding. However, even if collective
bargaining were to reduce the
navigation service charge and the fee payable by PNO to the Port Authority were
reduced, the material
put forward by the Port Authority is insufficient to
establish a public detriment.
311 As noted earlier, the Port Authority did not submit that any reduction in
the fee earned from PNO under the PSA would force it
to reduce its operations at
the Port or decrease safety. The Port Authority submitted that the reduction
would require it to fund
its operations at the Port from other sources of
revenue, being the statutory pilotage charge or revenues earned at other NSW
It contended that this would constitute an inefficient redistribution of
the relative cost burden of the Port Authority’s operations
312 The difficulty with the Port Authority’s contention is that it
presupposes that the charges currently levied by the Port
Authority to fund its
operations at the Port are efficient and that changes in the imposition of those
charges will reduce efficiency.
However, the Port Authority did not adduce any
evidence to support those propositions.
313 As observed by the ACCC, by agreeing to the terms of the PSA and
specifically the payment of charges by PNO that are a percentage
navigation service charge, the Port Authority accepted the risk that the charges
might decrease. The Tribunal accepts
the submission of the Port Authority that
it has no contractual or other legal entitlement to require PNO to renegotiate
thus, the risk accepted by the Port Authority is long term (for the
duration of the PSA). The Port Authority submitted that it was
directed to enter
into the PSA by the NSW Treasurer as part of the privatisation of the Port. No
explanation was provided for the
structure of that charge and why it was set as
a percentage of PNO’s navigation service charge. In circumstances where
vast majority of the Port Authority’s costs at the Port are fixed, it
is not obvious why the charges imposed on PNO under the
PSA would be set as a
percentage of PNO’s navigation service charge. Not only might PNO choose
to vary that charge, but the
charge is in itself a variable charge (based on
vessel movements and vessel capacity).
314 As to the efficiency effects of a reduction in PNO’s navigation
service charge (the claimed inefficient redistribution of
the cost burden),
issues concerning the existence of cross-subsidisation of costs between
different users or beneficiaries of services,
and whether such cross-subsidies
are efficient or inefficient, are notoriously difficult to assess. In order for
the Tribunal to
assess the relative efficiency of different charges levied by
the Port Authority, the Tribunal would need detailed evidence relating
(a) the different services provided by the Port Authority at the Port;
(b) the costs incurred in providing those services;
(c) the beneficiaries or users of those services;
(d) the charges imposed by the Port Authority in respect of those services;
(e) the extent to which the charges reflect the underlying costs and/or the
benefits or use of those services.
315 No evidence of that nature was provided by the Port Authority to the
Tribunal. In the absence of evidence, it is impossible for
the Tribunal to form
any conclusion about the relative efficiency of different charges levied by the
Port Authority in order to fund
its services at the Port.
316 It follows that the Port Authority has failed to persuade the Tribunal
that the proposed collective bargaining conduct would or
would be likely to
result in a public detriment.
H. THE TRIBUNAL’S ASSESSMENT OF BENEFITS AND
Introduction
this section, the Tribunal sets out its assessment of the public benefits and
detriments likely to arise from the conduct sought
to be authorised. In doing
so, the Tribunal draws on the factual findings and economic conclusions as
stated earlier in these reasons.
318 In the Tribunal’s view, many of the contentions advanced by the
parties in this proceeding have an air of unreality about
them. The contentions
were put as a matter of economic theory, but with little regard to the
underlying facts and circumstances (which
were not the subject of any
significant dispute). In the case of the authorisation applicants, the
contention that collective bargaining
would improve contractual certainty and
thereby increase investment was not supported by any information or data
concerning investment
in upstream markets (particularly relating to coal
production) and whether and to what extent the navigation service and wharfage
charges impacted investment decisions. The contention that collective bargaining
would reduce transaction costs was not supported
by any information or data
contention that collective bargaining
would cause the marginalisation of the
individual interests and preferences of coal producers ignored the fact that the
collective bargaining conduct is directed to the terms governing the
navigation service and wharfage charges, which PNO has published
as common terms
for coal producers (through the Producer Pricing Deed).
319 While the application for authorisation was framed in broad terms,
applicable to any and all arrangements between the authorisation
applicants and
PNO concerning access to the Port, the evidence and submissions of the
authorisation applicants were focussed solely
on the navigation service and
wharfage charges and the terms of the Producer Pricing Deed proffered by PNO.
The terms of the Producer
Pricing Deed were almost exclusively focussed on the
setting of the navigation service and wharfage charges over the term of the
Deed. Only one clause was directed to the subject of service quality (cl 10) and
that clause merely required the parties to meet
twice yearly to consult on
service delivery and means to improve the efficiency of service delivery. While
the evidence and submissions
of the authorisation applicants contained some
complaints about the current level of the navigation service charge, the
concern advanced was the prospect that PNO may make a material
increase to that charge in the future. The authorisation applicants
argued that
that prospect created commercial uncertainty which had adverse efficiency
effects. They argued that collective bargaining
would result in more efficient
contracting and reduce the transaction costs associated with bargaining.
320 The Tribunal observes that the authorisation applicants provided no
support for the authorisation of collective bargaining in
respect of dealings
with PNO beyond the use of the shipping channel and berthing services for the
shipment of coal (and the accompanying
charges). No evidence was adduced about
other commercial dealings or arrangements between the authorisation applicants
and PNO. In
the absence of such evidence, it is not possible for the Tribunal to
make any assessment of the potential public benefits or detriments
result from collective bargaining in respect of any broader commercial
arrangements. In those circumstances, the Tribunal
could not be satisfied that
collective bargaining in respect of access to the Port generally would be likely
to result in a net public
benefit. Accordingly, if the Tribunal were to grant
authorisation, it would be limited to collective bargaining in respect of the
use of the shipping channel and berthing services for the shipment of coal (and
the accompanying charges).
Public detriments
the Tribunal’s assessment, collective bargaining in respect of the use of
the shipping channel and berthing services
for the shipment of coal (and the
accompanying charges) is unlikely to result in any public detriments. The two
claimed detriments
are the risk of collusive conduct and the marginalisation of
the individual interests and preferences of coal producers.
Risk of collusive conduct
322 With respect to the
potential for the conduct to facilitate or encourage collusive conduct, the
Tribunal considers that all forums
in which competitors meet together increase
the risk of collusive conduct. However, the proposed collective bargaining
the authorisation applicants, directed to the terms governing the
shipping channel and berthing services at the Port (and particularly
of the navigation service and wharfage charges levied in respect of those
services), creates an immaterial or remote risk
of unlawful collusive conduct in
other markets. That is for the following reasons.
323 First, the authorisation granted by the ACCC was restricted such that the
authorisation applicants were not permitted to share
competitively sensitive
information that relates to customers, marketing strategies or volume/capacity
projections for individual
users. If authorisation were to be granted, the
Tribunal would impose the same limitation. The limitation would significantly
the ability of the authorisation applicants to collude.
324 Second, collective bargaining in respect of the navigation service and
wharfage charges does not readily create an opportunity
for collusive conduct in
respect of upstream inputs to coal production which are supplied in entirely
different markets.
325 Third, and as observed by Dr Smith, any attempt by the coal producers to
raise prices in the coal export market would be likely
to be unprofitable by
reason that the Hunter Valley coal producers are competing with other Australian
coal mining companies and
other coal producers around the world for sales and
are price takers on the world market.
326 During the hearing, a question arose whether collusive conduct in the
coal export market would constitute a relevant public detriment
in the sense of
being a detriment to the Australian public. The answer to that question is
complex. On the one hand, an increase
in prices in export markets may benefit
producers in Australia and thereby constitute a public benefit. On the other
hand, if the
export commodity is transformed into, or used in the production of,
other products which are imported into Australia, an increase
in the price of
the export commodity may result in an increase in price of an imported product.
No evidence or submissions were advanced
on that issue and it is accordingly
unnecessary to address it further.
Marginalisation of individual interests and
preferences
327 With respect to the
potential for the collective bargaining conduct to marginalise the individual
interests and preferences of
coal producers, the significance of the issue
diminishes when it is appreciated that the authorised conduct is directed to the
governing the navigation service and wharfage charges. PNO itself has
unilaterally proffered uniform terms governing those charges,
being the open
access terms and the Pricing Deeds. Indeed, there was a high degree of unreality
in PNO’s protestations that
coal producers have individual requirements
and preferences that would be suppressed or inhibited by collective bargaining
seeks to put in place uniform terms.
328 The Tribunal accepts that, in other areas of commercial dealings with
PNO, coal producers may have individual requirements and
preferences. However,
as the Tribunal has noted, the authorisation applicants did not advance
submissions or evidence about any such
arrangements and the Tribunal would not,
therefore, grant authorisation in such broad terms. If authorisation is limited
to the terms
governing the navigation service and wharfage charges, PNO and coal
producers would be expected to conduct individual negotiations
in respect of the
supply of Port services in which the individual requirements and preferences of
the coal producers would be taken
into account.
329 In respect of the terms governing the navigation service and wharfage
charges, the issues that fall to be negotiated between coal
producers and PNO
are relatively narrow. The primary points of contention between the parties
concern the principles that govern
any material increase in the navigation
service and wharfage charges and the duration of any agreement governing those
charges. The
two issues are related. While the Tribunal accepts that individual
coal producers may have different views on aspects of those issues,
the evidence
indicates that any differences are within a narrow compass. To the extent that
any coal producer considers that its
views are not being recognised through
collective bargaining, it is free to cease its participation. Overall, the
Tribunal gives
this issue no material weight.
330 In conclusion, the
Tribunal considers that the proposed collective bargaining conduct in respect of
the use of the shipping channel
and berthing services for the shipment of coal
(and the accompanying charges) would not be likely to result in any public
having any material weight.
Public benefits
the evidence before it, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the proposed
collective bargaining conduct in respect of the use
of the shipping channel and
berthing services for the shipment of coal (and the accompanying charges) is
likely to result in any
public benefit. The two claimed public benefits are more
efficient contracting and reduced transaction costs.
More efficient contracting
332 The Tribunal agrees
with the theoretical framework advanced by Prof King in assessing whether
collective bargaining may result
in public benefits, including by resulting in
more efficient contracts, being contractual terms that increase economic
efficiency.
However, whether collective bargaining in a given market context is
likely to do so depends on a consideration of the facts and circumstances
concerning the goods or services being supplied, including the number and nature
of the parties to negotiations, any information
asymmetries between the parties
to the negotiations, the existence of market power in the supply or acquisition
of the goods or services
being supplied, the alternatives faced by the parties,
and the likely effects in related markets of any change in the terms of supply
of those goods or services.
333 Despite the wide range of potential impediments to efficient contracting
that might be alleviated by collective bargaining (as
discussed by Prof King in
his article), in the present case the conduct in which the authorisation
applicants wish to engage has
a relatively narrow focus: the terms governing the
navigation service and wharfage charges. The question to be addressed is: how
might collective bargaining result in a more efficient contract governing those
charges? It is necessary to consider the current
level of charges and the terms
governing material increases in those charges. In doing so, it is convenient to
adopt the three areas
of possible negotiations between the authorisation
applicants and PNO in respect of the navigation service and wharfage charges
were considered earlier:
(a) the current level and price path of the navigation service and wharfage
charges as proposed in the Producer Pricing Deed;
(b) the contractual terms governing material increases in the navigation service
and wharfage charges proposed in the Producer Pricing
(c) the resolution of any future dispute arising in respect of a material
increase in the navigation service and wharfage charges
under the Producer
Pricing Deed (if entered into), or under the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed, or
negotiated between PNO and coal producers
outside of any contractual
Negotiations concerning the current charges and price
334 In relation to the
current level and price path of charges, PNO is contractually bound to the level
of charges stipulated in the
Vessel Agent Pricing Deed for a period of 10 years
from 1 January 2020 (being the period of authorisation determined by the ACCC).
In those circumstances, the contention that collective bargaining would be
likely to result in a public benefit through more efficient
contracting depends
upon three premises: that the current level of charges has been set at an
inefficient level (in other words,
at a level that is harming economic
efficiency); that collective bargaining would be likely to cause a change
(reduction) in the
current level of charges (in comparison to bilateral
negotiations); and that the reduction in charges would result in a public
None of the premises have been shown to be likely on the evidence
before the Tribunal.
335 First, the final determination of the navigation service and wharfage
charges in the Glencore Coal arbitration indicates that
the current charges are
not set at an inefficient level, and there is no evidence before the Tribunal
suggesting that the current
level of charges has reduced economic output in any
336 Second, for the reasons given earlier, the Tribunal considers that the
proposed collective bargaining conduct is unlikely to result
in a bargaining
change or outcome that differs from bilateral negotiations.
337 Third, even if collective bargaining were to result in some reduction in
the current level of charges (in an amount that differs
from what would be
achieved through bilateral negotiations), there is no evidence to support a
conclusion that the reduction would
improve economic efficiency in any market.
The arguments advanced by the authorisation applicants were not supported by any
or quantitative evidence concerning the coal tenements market (or any
other upstream market), its structure, prices or expected returns.
There is also
a complete absence of evidence before the Tribunal concerning investment
decisions in coal production (or any other
upstream market) and whether and how
Port charges factor into such decisions. On the evidence before it, the Tribunal
conclude that a reduction in the current level of charges would
result in a transfer of surplus from PNO to coal producers, which
increase economic efficiency and is not otherwise a public benefit.
Negotiations concerning the contractual terms governing
material increases in charges
338 In relation to the
terms governing material increases in the navigation service and wharfage
charges, the contention that collective
bargaining would be likely to result in
a public benefit again depends upon three premises: that the current terms are
harming economic
efficiency or giving effect to the current terms will harm
economic efficiency; that collective bargaining would be likely to cause
change in the terms (in comparison to what would be achieved through bilateral
negotiations); and the change would result in a
public benefit. Again, the
premises have not been shown to be likely on the evidence before the
339 In relation to the first premise, that the current terms are harming
economic efficiency, the principal contention advanced by
the authorisation
applicants is that the material price increase terms in the Producer Pricing
Deed are uncertain which has a negative
effect on coal producers’
investment decisions. The two components of the contention require
consideration: that the material
price increase terms in the Producer Pricing
Deed are uncertain (and, on the second premise, can be made more certain through
bargaining); and that the uncertainty is having a negative effect on
coal producers’ investment decisions (and, on the second
premises, which will be remedied by more certain terms).
340 Uncertainty in relation to future input costs is an unexceptional aspect
of commerce. The risk of future input cost increases
may be able to be reduced
by contracts that fix prices and/or price increases over the period of the
contract. However, contracts
typically involve an allocation or transfer of
risk. While the risk of future price increases may be eliminated or reduced for
contracting party, typically a corresponding risk is transferred to the
other contracting party. At best, contracts can minimise
the overall impact of
risk by allocating responsibility or exposure to different sources of risk to
the parties best able to control
341 Currently, PNO offers the shipping channel and berthing services on two
bases. The first is an open access basis where prices
are set from time to time
and there are no contractual constraints on future price increases. The second
is under the Pricing Deeds
where increases in price during the term of the Deeds
are governed by the provisions of those Deeds.
342 It can be accepted that the material price increase provisions in the
Pricing Deeds are uncertain in the sense that they require
the application of
economic and commercial principles which in turn require the exercise of
judgment and about which minds may differ.
However, the Tribunal disagrees with
the implicit premise of the contention of the authorisation applicants that
price uncertainty
is only faced by coal producers (and vessel agents). The
material price increase provisions also involve uncertainty for PNO. It
bear the risk of increases in costs that, although not insignificant,
nevertheless fall below the threshold of materiality set
in the Deeds. Further,
in the event of a dispute in respect of a material price increase, PNO must
abide by the decision of an independent
arbitrator as to the application of the
pricing principles stated in the Deeds. PNO has no control over the level of any
approved by an arbitrator.
343 Critically, though, the authorisation applicants have failed to
substantiate their contention that uncertainty in the terms governing
in the navigation service and wharfage charges is having a negative effect on
coal producers’ investment decisions.
As already noted, the authorisation
applicants failed to adduce any evidence concerning investment decisions in coal
production (or
any other upstream market) and whether and how Port charges
factor into such decisions. The evidence that was adduced by the authorisation
applicants, through Messrs Lewis, Rochester and Dodd, did not provide any
support for the contention. As noted earlier, Whitehaven’s
2021 Annual
Report contains an extensive list of business risks faced by Whitehaven, but
potential increases in Port charges is not
mentioned. In his evidence, Mr Lewis
acknowledged that there had not been price certainty in terms of Port charges
since the Port
was privatised in 2014 and also acknowledged that, in that
period, Bloomfield Collieries had not made any decision not to proceed
investment by reason of that uncertainty.
344 In relation to the second premise, that collective bargaining would be
likely to cause a change in the terms which could not be
achieved through
bilateral negotiations, the Tribunal considers that unlikely for the reasons
given earlier. In short, while the
Tribunal considers that there is a
possibility that future negotiations between PNO and coal producers may bring
the pricing principles in the Producer Pricing Deed, there is
nothing in the evidence that suggests that individual coal producers
members of the authorisation applicants are incapable of negotiating such issues
with PNO, or that individual coal producers
are at a disadvantage in
negotiations that can only be remedied by collective bargaining. The Tribunal
does not find credible the
contention that collective bargaining in respect of
the pricing principles in the Producer Pricing Deed would result in a different
outcome in comparison to multiple bilateral negotiations.
345 In relation to the third premise, that a postulated change in the terms
governing material increases in the navigation service
and wharfage charges
would result in a public benefit, again there is a complete absence of evidence
to support such a conclusion.
First, and as stated above, there is no evidence
before the Tribunal concerning investment decisions in coal production (or any
upstream market) and whether and how Port charges factor into such
decisions. Second, there is no evidence before the Tribunal that,
in the period
since privatisation, any investment decisions have been delayed, deferred or
otherwise altered by reason of uncertainty
over Port charges when, on the case
advanced by the authorisation applicants, such uncertainty has existed. Third,
the Tribunal has
earlier indicated its agreement with the conclusion of a
differently constituted Tribunal in
(at [240]) that the terms
of the Pricing Deeds provide a reasonable degree of pricing certainty to coal
producers, with any price
increase subject to arbitration applying pricing
principles which are similar to those governing arbitrations under Div 3 of
Negotiations concerning any future dispute arising in respect
of a material increase in charges
346 In relation to
future disputes governing a proposed material increase in the navigation service
and wharfage charges, the Tribunal
is not satisfied that the authorised
collective bargaining conduct would be likely to result in a public benefit. For
the reasons
expressed earlier, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the proposed
collective bargaining conduct would be likely to result in bargaining
that differ from outcomes without the proposed conduct. In short, even without
authorisation, there is likely to be a high
degree of commonality, if not
collectivity, in the conduct of any negotiations and dispute resolution process
in respect of a material
price increase. This is because, as discussed earlier,
the Pricing Deeds contain uniform terms governing any material price increase,
including in respect of arbitration, and also contain a “most favoured
nation” (non-discrimination) clause. The Tribunal
considers that the
arbitration of a material price increase dispute under the Pricing Deeds would
inevitably be consolidated and
that the prior negotiation and mediation of a
material price increase dispute would almost inevitably be conducted on a
or consolidated basis. The Tribunal considers that there is no real
likelihood of the authorised collective bargaining conduct producing
in respect of a material price increase dispute that differs from negotiations
and arbitration conducted without the authorised
Reduced transaction costs
347 The Tribunal
accepts, at a theoretical level, that collective bargaining may reduce
transaction costs. The Tribunal also accepts
that a reduction in overall
transaction costs improves productive efficiency and is a public benefit.
However, collective bargaining
also has the potential to increase overall
transaction costs (because contracting parties may incur two levels of costs,
in forming their own views and seeking advice, and externally when
participating in collective discussions with members of the bargaining
Whether transaction costs are likely to increase or decrease and whether any
change is more than trivial depends on the specific
circumstances in which a
particular contract is negotiated, the number of contracting parties involved,
the degree of homogeneity
of interests of the contracting parties and the extent
to which each contracting party will wish to be involved in individual
negotiations
and collective negotiations.
348 In the present application, almost no evidence was adduced by the
authorisation applicants on the question of transaction costs.
It would have
been possible for the authorisation applicants to adduce evidence as to the
collective bargaining procedures implemented
by them to date (pursuant to the
interim authorisation) and proposed to be implemented in the future, the likely
budget for such
collective bargaining procedures, the likely budgets for
individual costs to be incurred in the course of negotiations, and an estimate
of overall cost savings for each authorisation applicant. However, no such
evidence was adduced. The contentions with respect to
transaction cost savings
barely rose above assertion.
349 In the present case, it is not self-evident that collective bargaining in
respect of the terms governing the navigation service
and wharfage charges would
result in transaction cost savings. The evidence of Messrs Dodd, Lewis and
Rochester suggests that many,
if not all, of the nine coal producers who form
part of the authorisation applicants have a strong interest in those terms. It
reasonable to infer that each such coal producer would wish to be represented
in collective discussions amongst the bargaining group,
but would also wish to
consider the contractual terms within their own management teams and potentially
take their own advice on
the issues raised. Further, the Tribunal accepts the
evidence of Mr Byrnes that PNO will engage in individual meetings and
discussions
with coal producers in the ordinary course of business in relation
to the services supplied by PNO including the shipping channel
and berthing
services. In the absence of collective bargaining, negotiations with respect to
the navigation service and wharfage
charges would be expected to occur in such
bilateral forums. Collective bargaining would require additional forums to be
for negotiations, but it is unlikely that individual meetings and
discussions would cease.
350 Overall, it is not self-evident that collective bargaining with respect
to the terms governing the navigation service and wharfage
charges would result
in transaction cost savings of any significance. In the absence of some evidence
concerning expected transaction
cost savings, the Tribunal is unable to infer
that collective bargaining would be likely to result in a net saving in a more
trivial amount.
351 In conclusion, the Tribunal considers that the
proposed collective bargaining conduct in respect of the use of the shipping
and berthing services for the shipment of coal (and the accompanying
charges) would not be likely to result in any public benefits
material weight.
I. DETERMINATION
the reasons given in this determination, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the
proposed collective bargaining conduct would
result, or be likely to result, in
a benefit to the public. Accordingly, the Tribunal’s determination is that
the conduct should
not be authorised and the determination of the ACCC should be
set aside. It also follows that the interim authorisation granted to
authorisation applicants on 2 April 2020 should be revoked.
I certify that the preceding three hundred and
fifty-two (352) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Determination
herein of the Honourable Justice O'Bryan, Dr D Abraham and Ms D
Dated: 18 February 2022
RTF format (1.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format