Pita & Anor & Manard & Anor [2013] FMCAfam 296 (11 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
PITA & ANOR &
MANARD & ANOR
[2013] FMCAfam 296
FAMILY LAW – Children – parenting
– Vae Tama: Samoan Traditional adoption – separation of
parents – parental responsibility – application
by gifted mother for equal shared parental responsibility with parents
opposed by parents and ‘gifted’ father – consideration of
effect of ‘gifting’ upon determination
of parental responsibility
– definition of parent/adoptive parent and legal effect of traditional
adoption – distinction
between parents and ‘gifted parent’
– order for equal shared parental responsibility vesting in biological
FAMILY LAW – Children – parenting – Application for equal
or substantial and significant time by Samoan traditional
adoption mother
– consideration of bond between child and ‘gifted mother’ and
child and biological parents –
significance of relationships with siblings
in biological parents’ home – effect of different financial
circumstances
in each home and consequences for a child moving between two
different households – significance of culture, family and traditional
values in biological parents’ home – effect and consequences of
different views as to culture, family and traditional
values in ‘gifted
mother’s home – consideration of long-term effects and difficulties
in a child moving between
two such homes – effect on relationship with
biological parents and siblings if moving between homes – consideration
possible long-term consequences for child and relationship with siblings –
preference on balance to have child primarily
live in home of biological parents
and siblings.
Family Law Act 1975
, 61DAC, 61DAE,
Tomas and Anor & Murray
[2011] FamCA
Lansa & Clovelly
[2010] FamCA of 80
(1999) 199 CLR 160
[2002] HCA 36
(2002) 211 CLR 238
Chappell and
(2008) FamCAFC 143
(2008) FLC 93-382
Applicants:
MS PITA & MR E PITA
Respondent:
Second Respondent:
File Number:
TVC 120 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing dates:
10-12 December 2012
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Applicants:
Solicitors for the Applicants:
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Solicitors for the First Respondent:
KLP Family Law
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
Solicitors for the Second Respondent:
Purcell Taylor Lawyers
(1) That the Mother, MS PITA, and the Father, MR E PITA,
have equal shared parental responsibility for decisions relating to the major
long term issues of the child, [X] born [in] 2008, including but not limited
child’s education (both current and future);
child’s religious and cultural upbringing;
child’s health;
child’s name.
(2) That notwithstanding Order 1 herein:
(a) The Mother
and Father shall be responsible for the day-to-day care, welfare and development
of the child whilst she is living
with them; and
(b) The Aunt
shall be responsible for the day-to-day care, welfare and development of the
child whilst she is spending time with her.
(3) That the child live with the parents, MS PITA and MR E PITA.
(4) That the child spend time with the Aunt, MS MANARD, at all times as may be
agreed and in particular:
(a) For one
weekend per month from February to November in each year, being the third
weekend from 6.00pm Friday to 8.00am Monday,
with the third weekend defined as
the weekend which commences with the third Friday in that month.
(b) For one
week during the gazetted Christmas school holiday period, being the first week
of the holiday period in odd numbered years
and the fifth week of the holiday
period in even numbered years.
(5) That for the purposes of defining the first and fifth week of the Christmas
school holiday period, the following apply:
(a) The first
week of the gazetted Christmas school holiday period commences from 5.00pm on
the Friday following or the Friday on
which school concludes until 6.00pm on the
following Friday;
(b) The fifth
week of the gazetted Christmas school holiday period commences from 6.00pm on
the Friday 28 days after the conclusion
of school until 6.00pm on the following
(6) That the Aunt have telephone communication with the child at all reasonable
times as may be agreed, but failing agreement, between
6.00pm and 6.30pm Monday,
with the Aunt to be responsible for making the call to the parents’ phone
and the parents to ensure
the child is available to take the call in a quiet and
private environment.
(7) That the child may communicate with the parents or the Aunt at any time that
she is in the care of the other party and the other
party will facilitate such
communication.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this
judgment under the pseudonym
Pita & Anor & Manard &
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
TVC 120 of 2012
MS PITA & MR E PITA
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
proceedings are indeed complex. They involve arrangements sought to be made
with regard to the future parenting of the child
[X]. [X] was born [in] 2008
and has therefore just recently turned five years of age. She is the child of
Ms Pita and Mr E Pita
whom I shall refer to as the mother and the father.
respondents to the application are Ms Manard whom I shall refer to for
convenience as the aunt, and Mr I Pita, known as [omitted],
whom I shall refer
to as the uncle. The involvement of the aunt and uncle in these proceedings
arises from a traditional Samoan
adoption of the child by the aunt and the
uncle. It is pursuant to what is referred to as ‘Vae Tama’, and I
will obviously
address that issue later in these reasons.
circumstances that have led to the proceedings being brought by the mother and
father arise from the separation of the aunt and
the uncle. The child, [X], had
been “gifted” to the aunt and the uncle for the purposes of them
raising the child, when
[X] was about five months of age.
when the aunt and uncle separated some time ago, it led to a situation where [X]
commenced to spend significantly more time
with her mother and father than had
previously been the case when the aunt and uncle remained a couple, and to all
intents and purposes
were acting in the role of parents to the child.
Circumstances
also changed more radically in about February 2012 when proceedings were
commenced by the mother and the father seeking
orders with regard to [X] living
with them, and there being a total discharge of any arrangements in relation to
parenting of the
child by the aunt and the uncle, other than, perhaps, the
normal interaction that would occur within a family group, of that nature.
is also an additional issue that arises in relation to the relationship between
[X] and the aunt which complicates the issue,
in that it appears acknowledged by
all, except perhaps the biological father, that the relationship between [X] and
her aunt is one
with a bond equivalent to that of a mother and child. However,
because of the breakdown in the relationship and issues of “blood”,
the interaction or involvement that would normally be had by the aunt with the
child would be radically reduced, if not wholly terminated,
and that then gives
rise to questions or concerns relating to the welfare and the best interests of
matter was heard over a number of days in December 2012 and due to issues of
concern with regard to the complexity of the matter,
written submissions from
the legal representatives of each of the parties were requested to be provided.
I have had the opportunity
of considering those written submissions in relation
to the judgment in this matter.
respectfully adopt the first two paragraphs of the introduction provided on
behalf of the uncle in the written submissions provided
in relation to this
matter, because in my assessment, they encapsulate the difficulties that arise
in relation to this matter. Counsel
for the second respondent
has a marriage breakdown caused such distress and upheaval to as wide a group of
people as was evident in this case.
The grief, loss, shame and regret of the
various witnesses was obvious through their evidence and inevitably exacerbated
their emotions
and attitudes.
is no doubt that the parties all love [X], and it was acknowledged by and large
that [X] loves all of them. The challenge
for the Court is to weigh up these
attachments against the numerous other factors which are relevant in this
matter, most particularly:
Samoan culture which is [X]’s birthright;
benefit to [X] from her relationships with her siblings; and
incompatibility of the attitudes to parenting between Ms Manard’s
household and Mr and Mrs Pita’s household (and
Mr I Pita’s
household).
introduction has obviously been prepared by counsel for the second respondent,
and I am mindful of the position of the second
respondent, in relation to the
matter, but there are other factors that also need to be considered in relation
to the matter, including
of course, the welfare and the best interests of the
child now and into the future, particularly being mindful of the considerations
that are to be noted pursuant to the provisions of
section 60CC(2)
Family Law Act
particular, I am mindful of an additional issue which arises from the effect of
any change in the parenting arrangements that might
occur as a result of the
orders of the Court upon the child. In this instance, [X] has until perhaps the
last year or so, lived
significantly, if not exclusively in the household of the
aunt, and that must be considered as a factor, particularly with regard
effects upon [X] of any significant reduction in the time that might be spent
with the aunt.
there are many issues that need to be determined in relation to the proceedings.
The parties themselves struggled with an
understanding of exactly what might be
the best interests and arrangements for [X] in relation to her long-term
parenting. That was
exhibited clearly in the fact that there were numerous
changes in positions by each of the parties in relation to proposals with
to the parenting of the child.
initiating application that was filed by the mother and the father on 3 February
2012 sought orders of a very specific nature
in relation to [X]. The orders
could be refined down to the following:
That the child
live with the mother and the father.
That the mother
and the father have full parental responsibility for the child.
That the uncle
spends time with the child when requested.
That if the aunt
requests time with the child, the child’s siblings be included in the
That additional
opportunities be made available to the aunt and the uncle to be involved in the
child’s life, including during
family occasions and events in the
child’s life.
situation changed somewhat when the parties filed an amended application which
detailed in significantly greater particularity
proposals in relation to time to
be spent by the uncle and the aunt with the child, including specifically
proposals for the aunt
to spend time with the child, at times as agreed, but
more specifically as follows:
two weekends per month from 6 pm Friday to 8 am Monday.
2 pm Christmas Day to 2 pm Boxing Day in 2012 and every even-numbered year
thereafter.
2 pm Christmas Eve to 2 pm Christmas Day in 2013 and in every odd-numbered year
thereafter.
10 am Good Friday to 6 pm Easter Sunday in 2014 and every alternate year
thereafter.
the aunt’s and the child’s birthday
during the week the child is in the care of the parents or uncle, from after
school until 6 pm.
a weekend and the child is in the care of the parents or uncle, from 2 pm to
proposals were included in the amended initiating application filed on 5
November 2012. They were in fact specifically repeated
in the case outline
which was filed pursuant to directions given with regard to preparation and
delivered up to the Court prior to
the commencement of the hearing on 10
December 2012.
during evidence in relation to the matter, it became clear that the position of
the father, Mr E Pita and it would seem following
on from that, the position of
the mother, Ms Pita, changed in that there was a reduction proposed in relation
to the time that the
aunt might have specifically provided in relation to time
to be spent with the child.
final proposals in relation to the aunt’s time to be spent with [X]
initially were that there be no specific times whatsoever
outlined in relation
to [X] spending time with her aunt, but that there be the opportunity for
agreement to be reached between the
mother, the father and the aunt in relation
to such time.
father certainly appeared agreeable to such arrangements being made and made
reference to spending a few hours with the child
for the purposes of dinner or
other arrangements of that nature. It was noted in the case outline filed on
behalf of the parents,
however, that following comments that were made by me in
relation to the difficulties inherent in this matter and the concerns with
regard to ensuring that there was at the very least some significant and
substantial time spent by [X] with the aunt, that the parents
again changed
their position with regard to the aunt’s opportunity to spend time with
final proposals therefore, in relation to the aunt’s opportunity to spend
time with [X] were as follows:
That the aunt spend time with child
at all times as agreed with the parents, but in particular as follows:
one afternoon per week after school for two hours;
one weekend per month;
holidays to be discussed.
I indicated, there were clearly significant changes that occurred in relation to
the proposals with regard to particularly the
aunt’s time to be spent with
[X] and, of course, it still remains somewhat undefined, specifically with
regard to additional
times as agreed and school holiday periods as agreed.
turning to the position of the aunt in relation to the matter it is perhaps
appropriate that I should address the position
of the uncle. I say that
because, to all intents and purposes it is the case that the uncle supports the
stance taken by the parents
in relation to the matter, including a significant
reduction in his previous time spent with [X].
parent’s proposals, accepted by the uncle, coincide with the proposals
made in relation to the aunt, in that they suggest
that the uncle’s role
should be that of a much loved uncle and leader of the family unit, but that
there should be no particularity
in relation to the time to be spent either by
him or the aunt with the child.
is noteworthy, however, that his position as detailed in the outline of case
which was filed on his behalf on 9 December 2012 did
provide specifically, that
in the event of the aunt being successful in obtaining orders in terms of those
which she seeks then that
there should be particular time made available to him
to spend time with [X], 2 weekends per month from after school Friday afternoon
to before school Monday on the first and fourth weekend of each month. That
would generally accord with the parents and the aunt
then having one weekend
less per month with the child, than would be the position pursuant to their
original proposals.
position of the aunt in relation to the matter was similar to the position of
the parents, in other words, one that changed over
time. In the original
response filed on 4 April 2012 the aunt proposed that she should have sole
parental responsibility for the
child but that she keep the parents informed of
significant parenting issues and further proposed that the child should live
then went on to detail proposals and arrangements suggested in respect of time
to be spent with the applicant parents and the
uncle, for alternate weekends to
be spent with the parents from 4 pm Friday until 5 pm Sunday and for the uncle
to have the opportunity
to spend time with [X], but only during such times as
[X] would be, pursuant to her proposed orders, spending time with the aunt
uncle. Special days were also the subject of lengthy proposals in relation to
arrangements with regard to time.
were then a significant number of procedural-type orders in relation to the
child’s residence, telephone communication,
costs of support for the child
and the like. The position of the aunt, however, changed from April 2012 to
December 2012 because
in the case outline that was filed on 7 December
2012, the proposals with regard to [X] and to decisions to be made in respect of
her life and her care were varied to provide for the following arrangements:
That the parents
and the aunt have equal shared parental responsibility for the child;
That the child
live with the parents and the aunt on an equal shared care basis week
That [X] spend
time with the uncle at times as may be agreed between the uncle and the parents
but only to coincide with times that
[X] would be in the care of the
Special days
including birthdays, Mother’s Day and Father’s Day, Christmas and
New Year were to be shared on an alternating
basis to coincide with those
special occasions;
Holiday time was
to be spent in block periods with the parents and the aunt;
arrangements were then proposed in relation to changeovers, holiday travel,
telephone communication, meeting of the child’s
expenses and other
specific arrangements in relation to the parenting of the child.
considered those particular issues, however, during the trial and no doubt
having heard the evidence and comments made by me
in relation to the
proceedings, the aunt incorporated within the submissions that were filed on her
behalf, amended orders in relation
to the parenting of the child. They were a
reflection again of those arrangements which were detailed in the case outline
on 7 December 2012 but included an alternative proposal in relation
to time to be spent by [X] with each parent. The alternative
was in these
That the child spend time with each party at all reasonable
times as may be agreed but failing agreement in each fortnight as follows:
(1) With the aunt from the end of day care or school (whichever is relevant) on
Friday in the first week until the start of school
on Wednesday in the second
week (with the time to be begin on Friday, 21 December 2012) and alternated each
week thereafter; and
(2) With the parents at all other times.
the aunt’s proposals in relation to arrangements with regard to special
days, holidays and communication were not
the subject of variation. What is
clear is that the fall-back position, if I can describe it that way, by the aunt
was to not seek
equal time in the alternative but substantial and significant
time as defined pursuant to the provisions of the
Family Law Act
, including five
days in each 14 during the gazetted school term.
EVIDENCE – THE PARTIES AND THEIR WITNESSES
is clear, the positions of the parties were moveable in relation to this matter
and more particularly were difficult for all to
specify, because of the real
concerns that all had, as to the welfare and best interests of this little girl.
Much in this matter
turns on the evidence of the parties as well as issues with
regard to the child’s cultural and personal affiliations with the
effect of Vae Tama, Samoan traditional adoption, is also significant, and a
considerable amount of evidence was called in that
regard, though unfortunately
there does not appear to be anyone who might be called expert in the
consideration of exactly what might
be the consequences of Vae Tama, in the
event of the separation of the persons having the “gifted child” in
their care.
parties gave different evidence in relation to their interpretations and
understandings of what might or might not occur
and, of course, the evidence of
all needs to be considered in relation to this matter.
however, the evidence of the parties to the proceedings themselves must be
considered though, perhaps, more than is even
normally the case, the position of
other members of the Pita family must also be considered, in light of the
culture which is significant,
certainly to the parents as well as developing
from that, issues of respect in relation to the wishes of other members of the
turning to the evidence of those parties, and I might add, the evidence of the
report writer, however, it is necessary for
me to also consider the evidence of
various witnesses called in relation to the proceedings including those not
required for the
purposes of cross-examination. I turn then firstly to the
affidavit of Ms T, the maternal grandmother of [X].
her affidavit sworn 4 December 2012 and filed electronically on 6 December 2012
Ms T makes reference to her observations of the
family unit at the current time
and the difficulties that she notes arising from that, but also noteworthy are
her comments with
regard to the circumstances of the delivery up of [X] to the
aunt and the uncle. She says at paragraphs 11 and 12 the following:
[X] was about four (4) months old, Mr E Pita mentioned for the first time to me
that [X] was about to be given up to
Mr I Pita and Ms Manard. I did
not think that I heard right the first time so I asked what it was he’d
said. I noticed then
that Mr E Pita and Ms Pita exchanged looks. I did not say
any more until the next day when Ms Pita came to me after [omitted] and
Pita were both at work.
Pita explained that Mr E Pita’s mother [omitted] had been asking her and
Mr E Pita even before [X] was born, if they could
give their baby for Mr I Pita
and Ms Manard as they did not have a child of their own. My initial reaction
was anger. I was angry
as it became clear to me that Mr E Pita and Ms Pita have
had these conversations with Mr E Pita’s mother for a long time and
they have only decided to tell me at this late stage. I said to Ms Pita that
day, if it wasn’t Mr I Pita whom I respect
and that I knew would generally
love and care for [X], I would never let her give away my granddaughter. My
husband and I love this
child so much that it broke my heart that she was
leaving us. I have always told my four (4) daughters not to give away their
to anybody else as they are a blessing and their own responsibility
from God. At that conversation with Ms Pita, I just broke down
crying. Ms Pita
cried with me. It was very hard to accept Mr E Pita and Ms Pita’s
decision to give away my granddaughter.
My heart also broke for my daughter Ms
Pita, because I knew it was very hard for her to let go of her own
Ms T was distraught at the time of the traditional adoption being advised to her
as occurring but it was also noteworthy and
she was not challenged in relation
to it, that the mother was distressed at the time of the gifting of the child
and that whilst
it occurred, it occurred out of respect for the Samoan cultural
arrangements and respect particularly for the uncle and paternal
grandmother,
the heads of the household.
T also spoke of her observations of the current arrangements with regard to the
care of [X] and of [X]’s reactions with regard
to movement between the
various households. She said at paragraph 24:
immediately that [X] comes to our house sometimes and then is not there at other
times. I asked Ms Pita and she explained
that an agreement of some sort is in
place for the time being until the matter is finalised in Court. I was angry
because when I
first heard about Ms Manard walking out of the relationship
leaving [X] with Mr I Pita and his family, I thought Ms Manard understood
[X] was to be left with her own flesh and blood when there is no more
relationship between herself and Mr I Pita.
is perhaps only a passing reference to Vae Tama and the expectations that arise
with regard to Vae Tama in the event of a separation
of the parties who have had
the child gifted to them, but Ms T was not challenged in relation to her
understanding of Vae Tama and,
more particularly, what she understood was
required of the aunt and which the aunt understood to be the case.
T more particularly, however, makes reference to her observations of [X] in the
times that she is with her parents and her siblings
and notes that [X] runs to
hug her sisters and brothers, telling them that she missed them. I have no doubt
that that is also the
case. More particularly, however, Ms T emphasised the
different positions taken within the households of the aunt and the parents
in respect of only a very minor matter, noted that there were differences
between the expectations in relation to the children
living with the parents and
[X] who had two sets of rules. She reported [X] as indicating that she was able
to stay up at her aunt’s
and then she could go to sleep.
T commented upon the fact that [X] was confused as to whom she should listen to
and that that confusion arose from the different
routines in the households of
the aunt and the parents. She noted as follows:
arrangement continued where [X] spends a bit of time with Ms Manard, Mr I Pita
and her own parents and siblings, [X] will
suffer in the long run trying to
understand the different upbringing and different values in each household.
was assisted by Ms T’s unchallenged evidence in relation to this matter,
both with regard to the circumstances of the gifting
of [X] to the aunt and
uncle and also her observations of the difficulties that are now experienced by
[X], being a child within
a number of households.
on behalf of the second respondent, the uncle, but not required for
cross-examination were various friends as well as the minister
of their church.
Each of their affidavits were short but spoke about their understandings of Vae
Tama in circumstances when a relationship
breaks down. Ms B gave evidence in
her affidavit of 14 November 2012 of her understanding of the consequences of a
breakdown in
a relationship when there is a ‘gifted child’. She
says at paragraph 8 the following:
aware of the breakdown of the relationship between
Mr I Pita and Ms
Manard and it is within the cultures of both Maori and South Sea Islander that
the child would be returned to her
bloodline relatives. Culturally, it is
important in all Islander culture that you know where you came from and that is
in both the
Maori culture and the South Pacific Island culture and the knowledge
of your ancestors and who you are within the family often dictates
inheritances,
family hierarchy and you simply would not put a child with a stranger in blood.
The stranger in blood in this case
is Ms Manard and given the age of [X] she
would normally be expected to stand back from the family since she is not the
blood relation.
The bloodline issue is very important to our culture and for
instance I know in my bloodline going back for some hundreds of years.
concept of family and bloodline is a very deep rooted part of our lives and
B was not challenged in relation to that evidence and whilst she is clearly not
what might be termed an expert, her understanding
of the culture of Maori and
South Sea Islander peoples is significant in relation to this matter, because of
her involvement in the
two cultures. Noteworthy also are her comments in
relation to [X]’s interaction with her uncle as well as with other members
of her paternal family. She says at paragraph 9 the following:
numerous occasions observed [X] in the presence of
Mr I Pita and [X]
since the separation. She has a very good relationship with Mr I Pita and goes
to him very naturally. Similarly
she appears to have a deep and loving
relationship with her mother Ms Pita, but it is in particular when you see her
in the company
of her brothers and sister that she seems part of a more complete
family. [X] interacts very well with her siblings and certainly
perspective I consider it good for her to be part of the family group and she
seems very happy with them.
accept Ms B’s evidence in relation to this matter, particularly with
regard to her observations of the close alignment between
[X] and her mother and
F gave evidence by way of affidavit and was not required for cross-examination.
He confirms that he is Tongan by birth and grew
up in New Zealand. He indicates
an understanding of those cultures and it is noteworthy that he has worked now
as a project officer
with the Department of Aboriginal and Multicultural
Affairs. It reflects upon his knowledge in relation to issues upon which he
notes, at paragraph 7 of his affidavit, that he was aware that [X] came into the
lives of Mr I Pita and Ms Manard by way of an
informal form of adoption. He
refers to the Tongan term, ‘Pusiaki’, which he notes is widely
practiced throughout the
Pacific Islands and is something with which he had
notes additionally that within his family, such an arrangement had occurred
where one of his brothers had given his daughter up
to his youngest brother,
pursuant to a gifting type arrangement and noted that it is a common practice,
exercised within the Maori
and South Sea Islander cultures and one in which he
saw no difficulties for a child the subject of a traditional adoption. He
at paragraph 10, however, about his understanding of the circumstances
that arise when a relationship between the parties who have
been gifted a child
breaks down. He says:
circumstances where there are break ups of the adopting family unit through
death or divorce the position of the parties has to
be considered, but a very
powerful consideration in our culture is the bloodline which is very significant
in relation to the history
of the child and which also involves inheritances and
your family. That idea of the bloodline and the extended family to whom you
related is extremely important to Pacific Island culture and there is plenty of
situations of children living with aunts and
uncles for very lengthy periods of
time and no one thinking very much about it because they are family, but it does
not happen outside
that bloodline relationship.
then goes on, at paragraph 11, to say:
year old child to be in a situation where the adopted parents have split, you
would not leave the child with a non-blood
family member. The connection to the
blood line would be paramount.
notes that a distinction might be drawn, in a situation where the child were,
perhaps, 10 or more years, older than [X] here, where
the child might make an
informed assessment but notes that with a child as young as [X], she would
invariably, as he put it:
with the natural parents who are her bloodline family.
F makes reference to his observations of [X]’s settled and comfortable
position in the home of her parents and makes reference
specifically to
[X]’s enjoyment in mingling and spending time with her siblings. Again,
whilst not an expert in relation to
this matter, Mr F made comments about his
understanding of traditional adoption within Pacific Islander groups and
commented also
within the household of her parents.
V, a congregational church Minister, gave evidence in his affidavit, dated 15
November 2012. I note that Mr V has not signed each
page of the affidavit but
has only initialled each of the first three pages and has signed the final page,
however no objection was
taken in relation to that particular aspect of the
matter and as I indicated, Mr V was not required for cross-examination. He
at paragraph 4 of his affidavit, the following:
I have been
requested to comment as an expert in relation to the concept of vaetama by the
Second Respondent in these proceedings
Mr I Pita, but apart from that request I
know none of the people directly involved in this case.
expertise, he indicates, arises from his theological studies and his close
involvement with the Samoan community as a Minister,
both in Samoa and New
Zealand, for in excess of 25 years. He also notes his personal experience as a
father of two Vae Tama children.
Mr V then goes on to explain, from his
perspective at least, the concept of Vae Tama. He says, at paragraph
In terms of
the concept of vaetama in the Samoan understanding I say that the word literally
means to “separate a son or daughter
from his or her biological
parents”. The practice is always exercised within close family ties and
connections. This is so
because the child’s interests, heritages and
genealogical connections need to be protected and secured within the family for
the future of the child.
V then goes on to talk a little about the distinction drawn between heritage and
legal rights, particularly in relation to land
and the consequences of Vae Tama
when it happens outside the family unit. Most significantly, however, Mr V
speaks about what he
refers to as the proper Vae Tama process and at paragraphs
8 through 11, speaks of the expectations that are placed upon the adopting
parents and the consequences that arise from the breakdown of a relationship
between the adopting parents.
V also speaks of Samoan cultural and theological understandings of Vae Tama if
the child continues to be under the care of a person
without the bloodline and
finally, addresses what might be the case in relation to the aunt in this
particular matter, in the circumstances
of separation between the parents to
whom the child has been gifted.
Mr V says, at paragraphs 8 through 11, the
proper vaetama process it is entered into with proper motives by the adopting
parents. They must want and be ready to provide
love to the child. They are
accountable for the welfare of the child. The child has a right to expect to
receive love and care
from both parents just as the child would receive from
his/her own biological parents.
vaetama child is always returned to his or her biological parents in the event
that they can no longer offer the love and
care rightfully expected by the
child. The purpose being that the best interests of the child to be cared for is
a priority. Where
the vaetama parents separate, given that there is no parental
relationship anymore, the child returns to the biological parents.
Samoan cultural and theological understanding of vaetama if the Child continues
to be under the care of the person without
the bloodline the child would be
deprived of his or her rights to parental care, rights to genealogical heritage,
rights to family
and blood relations as a Samoan. In particular in the case
discussed with the Pita family where one party is of a different culture
Maori, the child would certainly be returned to her bloodline parents so that
she has the opportunities and genealogical rights
of her bloodline
separated adopted mother would not necessarily be excised completely from the
child’s life, but within our culture
they are certainly not equal. She
would normally have some ongoing contact with the child, if she wanted to have
it, but that would
be discussed between the child’s parents and her.
Normally a consensus would be reached as to her time involved with the child
long as the overall care and ongoing raising of the child remained with the
biological parents. These issues would be determined
on the bond between the
two of them, the age of the chid and the wishes of the bloodline
was particularly assisted by the unchallenged evidence of Mr V in relation to
this matter. He certainly appeared to have some basis
upon which it could be
suggested that his knowledge in relation to Vae Tama extends simply beyond what
might be family understandings
passed on from one generation to the next and it
is noteworthy that, as he says in his affidavit, he does not know any of the
directly involved in relation to this case.
called, in relation to the proceedings and, required to give evidence in
relation to the matter, was the aunt’s partner,
Mr S. Mr S swore an
affidavit in these proceedings on 16 November 2012. Mr S indicated that he was a
social worker by training but
confirmed that he now worked as a family dispute
resolution practitioner in [M] and had done so since May of 2011.
S spoke of his relationship with the aunt and of the fact that that gave him the
opportunity to interact significantly with [X]
and therefore, to comment upon
the relationship between [X] and her aunt. More particularly, he says that he
was a chief within
his own family and as such, was able to comment upon the
Samoan culture and traditional adoption. His understanding of Vae Tama
significantly different to that which is understood to be the position by the
uncle, the parents and those witnesses to whom I
have already made
says, at paragraph 18 of his affidavit, the following:
if a child has been informally adopted, and there is a separation of the
adoptive parents, traditionally the child remains
in the care of the adopted
parent they are most closely attached to.
then goes on to give an example from his own family of his first cousin, upon
separation from her husband, retaining care of the
adopted child. Mr S comments
with and underpinning
Vae Tama, but says that they have evolved or changed over
time. The issue of respect, he notes, towards the adoptive parent has
there is embarrassment and/or anger involved or pride has been challenged, or,
as is the case clearly in this matter, there
is competition between the
biological family and at least one member of the adoptive family.
S speaks of what he considers to be the motivations of the mother and father and
the more extended Pita family in relation to seeking
[X]’s return to their
care and speaks of anger, outrage, change of heart or mind, or belated concern
as being sufficient motive
for a biological parent to take a child back,
therefore negating the initial arrangement. He says, however, that that is not
line with the traditional Samoan culture of adoption which is based on
respect, and he says that his understanding of Vae Tama is
that the child is not
automatically returned to the natural parents, but, rather, that there is
specific consideration given to the
child’s attachments when considering
the child’s future care arrangements.
S notes, however, that it is his experience that, traditionally, in Samoan
culture, the “blood” relationship is uppermost.
There are times
when the blood relationship is not the only significant factor to be considered,
but must be looked at in line with
considerations of the child’s emotional
attachment and overall wellbeing when deciding with whom the child should be
S was challenged in relation to many of the statements that he made in that
particular regard. He acknowledged, I think quite
properly, that whilst his
experience in relation to this matter was generally as a chief of the Samoan
culture, there were often
family differences as to how culture was applied, and
he further acknowledged that in a more “traditional family”, it
the husband who often decides such matters.
confirmed, understandably, that the blood ties were significant, but reinforced
the statements contained within his affidavit,
that the bloodline was
significant, but was not necessarily enough to sever an existing adult/child
relationship. He acknowledged,
however, that in some families, perhaps most
specifically traditional families still living pursuant to Samoan cultural
conditions,
that blood would be the most significant factor and, in relation to
this particular matter, he acknowledged that it could be the
S was questioned particularly about issues of shame or guilt and the effects
that that might have upon members of a traditional
Samoan family. He
acknowledged that different families operated in different ways, but that in
relation to some personal issues and,
it would seem, that the future parenting
of [X] would be classed as a personal issue, that there are instances in some
families where
the decisions are kept within the family and that outsiders are
not privy to such issues and, in other families, it might not be
of such concern
S did acknowledge, however, that at least in the Pita family, and particularly
with respect to the mother and the father, there
was a degree of distress that
they experienced as a result of these family issues being known outside of the
S did not have the best relationships with Mr I Pita, the uncle in these
proceedings. He noted to the report writer, for example,
that he thought that,
“Mr I Pita’s community work was self-serving and that it was
utilised by Mr I Pita to give him
some control over the Samoan community”.
He indicated that he had made such statements, but that they were statements
he had made relating to his observations in or about 2009 and were not his
was noteworthy, however, that such comments were made, and I must say that I
gained the impression from both Mr S and Mr I Pita,
that there was little
respect between the two, and little appreciation, particularly on the part of Mr
S as an outsider looking into
the family, of the role of Mr I Pita as
‘matai’, as well as an appreciation of the position taken by the
mother and the
father, in relation to the future parenting of [X].
S finally was asked in re-examination about difficulties that [X] might
experience as a result of the fact that she would, if the
application were successful, be living in two households with two different sets
of rules and attitudes. He responded
that she would be getting the better of
both worlds and that it would be enriching for her.
gained the impression, however, that Mr S, whilst no doubt a caring and
significant person in the child’s life, was motivated
in much of what he
said by his intention to assist Ms Manard in obtaining continued involvement in
the life of the child, and that
he did not fully and frankly discuss the
importance of bloodline, particularly with regard to traditional Samoan
families, as well
as the real difficulties that would be experienced by [X] in
living in two households with different attitudes and traditional beliefs.
on behalf of the second respondent, Mr I Pita, was his sister,
Ms S. Ms S is
a family dispute practitioner now living in [M]. She is also, however, or was a
lawyer in practice in Samoa and was
involved in the preparation of the adoption
documents, which took some significance in relation to these proceedings.
her affidavit, which was filed on 19 November 2012, she details her
understanding of the arrangements that were in place with regard
Manard and Mr I Pita having [X] come into their care. At paragraph 9 of her
affidavit, she says the following:
The situation involving [X],
as I understood it, was more of the concept of the adoption or as we call it in
Samoan culture the “vaetama”.
The concept of vaetama is a more
formal process of adoption than say the situation of my children where I did not
intend to give
children, [names omitted], were referred to previously as being in the care of
Ms Manard and Mr I Pita for a number of years.
She then goes on, at paragraph
10, to say:
In terms of the legal document that was signed with
regard to [X], I was at that time working for an [omitted] company in Samoa as
Lawyer and was asked because of my connection to the family to assist prepare
documentation. I prepared the documents, but my
understanding is that although
they were signed, they were never formally lodged and that the arrangement has
never been formalised
under Samoan law. I thought it was a
“vaetama” involving [X] and not in a way just helping out our
brother Mr E Pita,
as had occurred with me.
S goes on to say that following the separation of Mr I Pita and
she and her husband went to live with Mr I Pita and at that time, Mr I Pita had
[X] in his care. She states her view in
relation to this matter at paragraph 12
and one can, perhaps, extrapolate from that, that it is a reflection of her
understanding
of what constitutes Vae Tama, at least within the Pita family.
She says at paragraph 12:
My view of [X] was that she would
keeping in mind I was
then living with Mr I Pita, is that matters between Mr I
Pita and Ms Manard were cordial and if Ms Manard phoned and asked to see
I Pita would facilitate it. In the early part of the separation I assumed they
would work things out and ultimately get
S goes on to note that once it became clear that there was to be no
reconciliation between Ms Manard and Mr I Pita she assumed
would, “gradually disassociate herself.” She then goes on to note
that in or about the early part of 2011:
... there were
discussions between myself, Ms Pita and
Ms Manard as to what to do in
relation to [X]. Again my understanding was that the supremacy of the bloodline
operated in everybody’s
thinking. Certainly [Ms Manard] wanted to make
sure that [X] was brought up in a loving family, but the concept was eventually
Ms Manard would distance herself and leave the family and get on with her
own life leaving [X] to be brought up with her own family
statements that were made by Ms S, were clearly indications of her beliefs and
understanding as to Vae Tama, but it is noteworthy
that she was not
cross-examined in relation to them. Her statements in relation to the basis
upon which the discussions occurred
between she,
Ms Manard and the mother,
were unchallenged, certainly in so far as her understanding that the blood line
was first consideration
and that Ms Manard would eventually distance herself
from relations with the child.
S was cross-examined about the adoption documents that were prepared by her. In
fact, it became clear that they were not prepared
specifically by her, as she
noted in her affidavit that she was working for an [omitted] company at that
time and that she did not
have any particular expertise in respect of family law
indicated in her evidence that she sought the assistance of a friend with some
expertise in that area of law and that the friend
prepared the papers and sent
them to her to arrange execution. It perhaps explains to some extent the lack
of clarity in relation
to what might or might not have occurred with regard to
indications given as to the effect of the documents, because it appears from
S’s own evidence that she was not fully apprised of the significance of
those documents.
that regard she noted, particularly, that she had explained the document to the
mother and the father and noted that that was to,
“make travel with [X]
easier.” Only when pressed did she acknowledge that the document, in fact,
appeared to be a document
which had a far wider compass, in that it appeared to
allow legal adoption of the child and that, if it had been registered, it would
have had the effect of recognising Ms Manard and Mr I Pita as the legal mother
and father of [X].
Ms S generally confirmed what she has observed in relation to [X]’s
attendance at the home of the mother and the
father. She says, at
paragraph 17 of her affidavit, as follows:
I can say that
within the environment of Ms Pita and Mr E Pita and their other three children,
[X] is in her element. She plays with
her siblings and treats them as such.
They mix together naturally and seem to be a perfectly happy family
and again significantly, Ms S makes comments about the terms of the relationship
that [X] has with the mother and Ms Manard.
She also states what her opinions
might be in relation to what is in the best interests of the child, which is
not, of course, of
great assistance in relation to this matter, but she does go
on then to explain her understanding of Vae Tama and the practice that
occur if a break up occurred. At paragraph 20 she says:
and Ms Manard are not equal in terms of [X]. Ms Pita is her Mother and Mr E
Pita is her Father and it is in my view best
that she remain in the family unit.
No matter if a bond exists between Ms Manard and [X] it is my view that it is
inappropriate in
the circumstances to have two mothers and be trying to raise
her in two households. Within the Samona [sic] culture [X] would always
returned in these circumstances to the natural parents and it is mos [sic]
important that this occurs
S’s evidence in relation to this matter was of some assistance in relation
to both further clarification of the position
understood within the Pita family
as to what constitutes Vae Tama and also in respect of her unchallenged
statements with regard
to [X]’s comfort in the family household and her
interaction with the siblings.
turn now to the evidence of the mother, the father, Ms Manard, the aunt and Mr I
Pita, the uncle. As I indicated at the very beginning
of these reasons, there
is no doubt as to the love that all of these persons have for [X], and she is,
indeed, a fortunate child
to have so many significant persons in her life.
Unfortunately, that significant involvement of persons in her life gives rise to
the very great difficulties that now exist in relation to this matter.
as the father was concerned, I must say that I was generally impressed with him.
I thought that his answers given in relation
to the matter were honest and frank
and, even in situations where they would not necessarily be of such great
assistance to his case,
he gave the honest and open answer.
example, when challenged about the position taken by him in respect of any time
to be spent by the aunt with the child, he retreated
from the position which was
outlined in the amended application and case outline filed only a matter of days
before the hearing of
the matter, and expressed his real concerns in relation to
[X] and the difficulties that arise as a result of the breakdown in the
relationship between
Ms Manard and Mr I Pita.
he spoke of the importance of education and I think very genuinely spoke of the
pride that he had in the educational achievements
of his siblings. In
cross-examination he noted that he came from a family of 11 children, that they
were very poor and that they
grew up to be doctors and lawyers and he said,
‘one [occupation omitted]. He said that he wanted more for his children
that, but I should note here that the father’s evidence and his
self-deprecating statements in relation to him being a [omitted]
did him great
credit as a man and as a father. He recognised the importance of education and
he wanted more for his children.
I gained the impression that he was a simple man. That is not, however, said in
any way disrespectfully and I have no doubt
that as a [occupation omitted] he
was particularly adept and skilled at his tasks. It relates more to his view of
was not, however, so simple as to fail to understand the adoption process which
was entered into in 2009. He emphasised on a number
of occasions that he
thought they were not adoption papers that he signed but rather provided
something akin to guardianship. He
commented, however, that he had read the
documents, and it was noteworthy also, that his sister, who had facilitated the
preparation
of the documents gave evidence that she had explained the documents
distinct impression that I gained was that the intent, though perhaps grudgingly
given initially by the father and the mother,
was for [X] to be the child in all
respects of the uncle and the aunt, and only when it became clear that the
adoption papers had
not been filed and that, therefore, there was only in place
a traditional adoption arrangement, did the father and the mother take
stance that they have taken, in relation to this matter.
flows particularly from the fact that when the uncle and aunt separated ,it was
not initially the case that the biological parents
were involved in any
discussions with regard to the future arrangements with respect to the parenting
of [X] and it was decisions
that were made by Ms Manard and Mr I Pita, which
were acceded to by the parents.
Notwithstanding
that the stance now taken might be seen as, to at least some degree,
opportunistic in light of the breakdown in the
relationship between Ms Manard
and Mr I Pita I was otherwise enormously impressed by the determination of the
father and his desire
to do what he considered to be best, not only for [X], but
for all of his children. He was, I would assess, a man very much attuned
traditional and cultural expectations of a Samoan father and husband.
agreed to the initial arrangements in relation to [X] going into the care of his
brother and his wife. He also was very firmly
of the view that blood and blood
lines were most significant in relation to the parenting of children and, that
when the relationship
Ms Manard and Mr I Pita had broken down, that
it was only appropriate that [X] should return to the care of he and the
acknowledged however, that he had seen the aunt with [X] and that they did
things together as would be expected between a mother
and child. He noted
though that it was his observation when the uncle and aunt were a couple that he
saw Ms Manard and [X] as a
mother and her child doing things together.
traditional views and their effects upon him on a day to day basis became clear
especially when he was asked whether he thought
Ms Manard loved [X].
He took some time to answer and then said “I don’t think so.
She’s the one that walked away.”
It was in some respects a troubling
answer but also one that was understandable in light of the very significant
position that the
father took in relation to family.
was asked whether he acknowledged that in fact it was the case that Ms Manard
walked away from Mr I Pita and not [X] and I thought
that his answer was
considered and understandable. He indicated that it was not his role to
determine that particular aspect of
the matter but it was important for him to
appreciate that if Ms Manard and Mr I Pita wanted the best for [X], then they
better than they had done. By that I assume he meant to let their
relationship break down.
indicated then that he had spoken with his wife, and that they had agreed that,
“we didn’t want our kid in the middle
of this”. It was a hard
answer but it was also one that I thought stemmed from his understanding of his
role as the biological
father of the child and a very real and genuine respect
for [X] and her rights to have, as happy and stable a life as possible.
father’s position in relation to this matter was perhaps a little
difficult to accept when one comes from, as counsel for
the parents said, the
white European culture but is, by the same token, an entirely understandable
position when one considers, as
must be appropriate in this case, the
traditional Samoan cultural ways.
father indicated that he wished to have significant reductions in the time spent
by [X] with Ms Manard. He also indicated, and
I accept without hesitation, that
he would comply with any orders of the Court.
was asked to comment upon the fact that [X] had moved between the households of
he and his wife and Ms Manard as well as, to a
lesser degree, the household of
Mr I Pita for over a year and he indicated that that had occurred but that he,
like it”. I thought that his answer given in
relation to the matter was honest and open and reflected his concerns in
to what he believed were the appropriate arrangements to be made with
regard to the future parenting of [X].
also accepted as genuine his statements made in relation to
Ms Manard. He
indicated that whilst he didn’t agree with any time being spent of a
structured nature between [X] and Ms Manard,
he accepted that she was a good
lady but that she was no longer part of the family and, of course, as I have
indicated, in his view
the issue of family and blood was paramount.
father impressed me very much as a man doing all that he could for his family,
working hard and raising them with respect for
their culture and traditions.
Toward the end of cross-examination by counsel for Mr I Pita, he was asked about
the issue of respect
and whether in fact Ms Manard gave him any respect as the
biological father of the child and, more particularly, as a person steeped
Samoan tradition. He indicated that he did not believe that Ms Manard gave him
respect and that it was hurtful as well as embarrassing
for him, as the
biological father of the child to be in a situation where he was fighting for
the child, when he genuinely believed
that the proper course and only course
pursuant to a traditional adoption, was for the child to return to his
also commented that other people in [M], outside the family, knew of the
situation that existed and that he was troubled by it
and was having a hard
time. He then said with tears in his eyes, “I love my family”, and
I accept that that is the case.
He spoke of his family and his wife in the most
respectful and loving of ways. He noted his wife’s care for the children
and commented that it was very good and that she reads to the children from
Bible stories and she assists with their schooling and
then said, “My wife does a great job as a mother. I feel blessed.”
I accept that as a genuine statement of a man
struggling to deal with
circumstances beyond his full comprehension or control, particularly, when he
very much was of the view that
the proper and only course to follow, was to have
[X] revert to the care of he and his wife.
J Pita is the mother in these proceedings. Again, I was enormously impressed by
her. She confirmed that she was supportive of
the more limited time that the
father suggested might be appropriate to be spent between [X] and Ms Manard, but
noted that while
she agreed with what he proposed, it was not because he was
head of the family but because it was what she believed was appropriate
own perspective and more particularly, from the perspective of what was in the
best interests of [X].
mother indicated early in cross-examination by counsel for
Mr I Pita that
she, like the father, wished to maintain the relationship with [X] and I think,
very tellingly, she said, “I
was always the mother of four children and
that included [X].” The mother was indicating that she never intended to
of [X]’s life and that appears reflected clearly in the fact
that, after Ms Manard and Mr I Pita moved to [M], the mother and
the father,
along with their three other children, took steps to move, to remain near to
accept that that bond between mother and child is incredibly strong and that the
mother is an extremely able and capable parent
of her children. In that
respect, I note specifically the comments of the report writer, Ms P, when she
noted, for example, that
the mother was an incredibly impressive parent, and
that what she provided in relation to the parenting of these children was
outstanding.
also thought that the mother was a most intelligent and perceptive woman. She
was asked about her concerns expressed in her affidavits
with regard to the
disruption to [X] in the various movements between the households. She was asked
why she was concerned about that
and her answer was most insightful. She said,
words to the effect, “because it was not in [X]’s best interests, it
in the interests of the adults”.
accept, absolutely, that the arrangements which currently exist, having the
child moving between three households, with numerous
household changes each
month, is something focused far more on the parents and the aunt and uncle and
their wishes, than a reflection
of the best interests of the child.
I thought the mother was most perceptive in talking about the difficulties that
flowed from the different households and
lifestyles of she and the father, as
opposed to Ms Manard and Mr I Pita. In that respect, she was asked about
whether Mr I Pita
would respect her role as a parent, and she indicated that she
had some concerns. Those concerns stemmed from the fact that Mr I
Pita had, as
the mother put it, lots of money and therefore was able to do very much with [X]
and therefore it gave rise to a situation
of what she described as,
“unfairness to she and the father and their other children”, as they
had less funds available
noted, that her assessment was that Ms Manard also treated [X] the same way, and
that the child was certainly able to have made
available to her, significantly
more than would be the case within the household of she and the father.
mother was asked about the circumstances of the traditional adoption and in
particular the execution of the ‘consent of
natural parents to
adoption’. The mother’s position was to say that she did not really
read those documents and just
signed them, and that as she understood it, it was
the same situation as the father believed to be the case, in that it provided
more for guardianship of the child and an opportunity to travel, though she did
acknowledge later, as did the father, that the child
already had the opportunity
to travel, holding a passport.
was a little troubled by the mother’s evidence in this regard, because
noting, as I did previously, that she is a capable
and intelligent woman, there
appeared to be, at least a degree of opportunism arising from the fact that the
legal adoption did not
occur, and when the relationship between the uncle and
the aunt broke down, there was the opportunity to have [X] returned to her
the same token, however, I understand the position taken in relation to matter,
and whilst there was acquiescence on the part of
both the mother and the father
to [X] being traditionally adopted, at least by Ms Manard and Mr I Pita, there
was also a very real
desire to remain closely involved with the child and, upon
the breakdown of the relationship between the uncle and aunt, to immediately
reconsider their role in relation to the parenting of the child.
mother was more able to agree than the father however, that there was a close
bond between Ms Manard and [X]. She acknowledged
that [X] looked toward Ms
Manard as a mother figure, but did not accept the concerns that were expressed
by Ms Manard and also by
the report writer that [X] might suffer emotional harm
if Ms Manard were excluded from any relationship with the child or even were
have a significantly reduced interaction with [X].
mother’s position there, was to simply say that she did not see that there
would be any difficulties with that, because
[X] would be living with her
family. Such a position stems, I think in part, from the over-arching
significance of family and tradition
within the household of the mother and the
father, but I accept without hesitation, that it is a genuinely held view in
to the child.
mother was an impressive witness. Whilst again, there may be some concern as to
the lack of a full appreciation of the possible
consequences for [X] in severing
ties or reducing opportunities for interaction with Ms Manard, I accept that the
views of the mother
are genuinely held and that they stem from her concerns to
ensure that the best interests and the welfare of the child are to the
that those views arise from the very traditional beliefs that continue within
the home of she and the father.
respect of those traditional beliefs, the mother noted that whilst her agreement
to [X]’s traditional adoption in 2009 was,
as she put it, “The
hardest decision she had ever made,” she indicated that she gave respect
to her husband, to her mother-in-law
and to Mr I Pita. When asked to explain
what that meant, she became a little distressed, but I thought it only
emphasised the hurt
and the difficulty that the mother experienced at the time
of her child being traditionally adopted, when she said, “That’s
we grew up. We respect our elders and all blessings come from that.”
was asked whether, in the circumstances, she could have refused the adoption and
she said, I think rather tellingly, “To
mother was a traditional Samoan woman. She held the concept of respect in very
high regard and it influenced her in so many ways
in respect of her actions and
behaviours. She was also, however, insightful in relation to her child and it
did her great credit.
was asked in re-examination about her comments with regard to the unfairness
that flowed from the fact that [X] spent significant
time within the households
of her aunt and her uncle and that that caused difficulties for [X]. She was
asked what she meant by that
and responded with words to the
goes to three homes it is not in her best interests; that is because, when she
is with us we share everything within the
family and between the kids and us.
She is treated differently by her aunt and her uncle and it gives rise to
difficulties in behaviour
within our home.
explanation is, I think, a genuine and insightful one and reflects the very real
concerns that exist in relation to the future
parenting of this child should
such circumstances, as suggested by Ms Manard, continue.
turn now to the evidence of Ms Manard, the aunt. Ms Manard, like the mother,
the father and Mr I Pita, was a very impressive witness.
She is clearly a most
intelligent woman and I have no doubt that her motivations, in relation to the
orders sought in relation to
these proceedings stem, only from what she
considers to be in the best interests and the welfare of the child. Her own
evidence in
relation to the matter however, exemplifies the difficulties that
will face the adults, but more particularly the parents, if orders
are made in
terms of those which are sought by her.
say that because, very early on in cross-examination, she indicated to counsel
for the parents that her understanding of the issue
of respect is very different
to that of the mother and the father. I noted earlier that the mother said that
she acceded to the
request for a traditional adoption of [X] because of the
request being one made by her mother-in-law and brother-in-law, Mr I Pita,
heads of the family and because of the issue of respect that arose.
Manard did not agree that that was the case, and noted quite specifically that
she could have rejected the view of her mother-in-law
in relation to an adoption
or otherwise, if she had considered that to be appropriate.
Manard said that she realised the significance of blood relations and how that
might affect the family unit. She indicated, however,
that different families
operated in different ways. She noted, for example, that because she and Mr I
Pita were so busy in their
lives, they shared many of the tasks involving the
parenting of [X] between them, but that that did not necessarily happen in other
exemplified the difficulty that arises in relation to this matter and the
different understandings that all might have, in relation
to traditional Samoan
Manard acknowledged that she also saw some difficulties with [X] when moving
between the households, but from her own perspective
she saw the child as
settling into her home, but noted that when the child returned to her care she
was, as she put it “initially
tense” and that [X] could be verbally
and physically aggressive and insistent on
Ms Manard’s attention.
Manard very properly acknowledged the importance of “blood” to the
Pita family and indicated that she understood that
that position affected the
mother and father and their wish for [X] to return to their family unit. She
said, however, and I accept
that it was a very appropriate assessment, that she
has tried to give [X] up to the Pita family when she had placed [X] primarily
the care of Mr I Pita, so as to break the bond between she and [X], but that it
had not worked.
Manard had attempted to act in a manner which respected the traditional views of
the Pita family, but had, at least from her own
perspective, seen the affects
upon [X] and recognised, again from her own perspective, that the wants of the
child and the possibly
damaging consequences for the child overrode those
traditional Samoan concepts. It did Ms Manard great credit that she recognised
those various competing considerations and simply characterised the caring,
loving and compassionate nature of Ms Manard.
Manard also noted the differing values within the houses of she and the mother
and the father and noted that there would obviously
be difficulties for [X] in
moving between the two homes and therefore the two lifestyles, as well as the
difficulties in making adjustments
within the households. Ms Manard, when
considering that particular aspect of the matter, acknowledged that there may be
made for [X] to return primarily to the home of her parents and she was
asked whether she would still want to see [X]. She responded,
I think, very
impressively and most insightfully, that it would also depend on how it affected
Manard was a most impressive witness. Her sole motivator in relation to this
matter was what she considered to be in the best
interests of the child, and
whilst her views were very different to those of the mother and the father, she
had the grace to acknowledge
that their views were matters which genuinely
needed to be considered in relation to these proceedings.
is not to say that like each of the witnesses called in relation to the matter
there were not criticisms that could be drawn
and made in relation to the
witnesses. In that regard I was troubled obviously by the stance taken by Ms
Manard in respect of her
continued interaction with the two boys, [names
omitted], who had been cared for by she and
had been a part of the household for a considerable period of time, eight years
or more, leading up to the time of separation,
Ms Manard had not sought
to have an opportunity to interact with them or spend any significant time with
them. It appears that Ms
Manard was less inclined in that regard to consider
the possible emotional harm to the children than would be the case with respect
to [X], though I acknowledge the difference in ages of the children.
was also somewhat troubled by the fact that Ms Manard acknowledged that she and
Mr I Pita were experiencing difficult times in their
relationship at the time of
the traditional adoption of [X] and that there had been no direct discussions
between she and the mother
and the father, in relation to the traditional
adoption until after there had been discussion with Mr I Pita and his mother,
leading female member of the family, and agreement had been reached with
regard to [X] being traditionally adopted.
acknowledged that the mother and the father may not have been aware of the
difficulties in the relationship and, of course, that
specific issue is one that
has given rise to the difficulties that now exist in relation to the future
parenting of [X], as a result
of the breakdown in the relationship between she
and Mr I Pita.
Manard continued to show respect, at least in terms of what she considered
respectful behaviour, toward the Pita family. She could
have understandably been
angry with the family, as a result of the position taken in respect of this
matter, but noted when talking
not angry with her, but were very understanding, and they were, as a family, sad
that the breakdown of the relationship had occurred.
Manard acknowledged the importance of blood and more particularly, indicated
that as a result of her recognition of that, knew
that the parents would not
agree to [X] being placed with her. More particularly, she understood that it
would become an issue in
relation to her future parenting and would lead to the
difficulties that have now given rise to these proceedings.
Manard knew that this issue would arise in relation to the matter, and I must
say that it surprised me, therefore, that she gave
evidence that when she had
decided to leave, she spoke to the parents to tell them of that and indicated,
that if they had said to
her that she could not take [X], then she would have
had to rethink her decision to separate. Her own evidence would indicate that
she knew that they would not agree, and that, therefore, there was a very
well-known consequence of the separation but it was only
one of the many factors
that needed to be considered in relation to this proceeding.
situation that presently exists is not ideal. It leads to the confusion that a
number of witnesses spoke of, from [X]’s
perspective, and clearly then
leads to the behavioural issues that the mother, the father and Ms Manard have
spoken of. It goes further
than that, however, in that there are simply
different lifestyles and beliefs held by the various parties to these
proceedings, and
in particular that became clear when Ms Manard, in answer to a
question which was to the effect, “Did she realise that differences
households could lead to confusion for [X]?”, Ms Manard indicated that she
has raised the child “to question things”.
acknowledged that that did teach her to act in a manner which would be very
different to that within the Pita family unit and
that it did then have the
potential to be destructive for [X] and to certainly give rise to concerns for
the affect upon [X].
Manard spoke very positively of her relationship with [X], and it also appears
clear that there was and remains a generally positive
relationship between the
mother and Ms Manard. However, I was troubled by Ms Manard’s attitude to
the mother’s present
care of the child, when the mother had cared so
significantly in the past when
Ms Manard and Mr I Pita were still together,
but that circumstances had now changed.
is clear that on occasions, the work commitments of Ms Manard mean that she is
required to be absent at times when the child is
to be with her, and she then
makes arrangements, either for her niece or for Mr S to care for the child.
When asked whether it was
better for [X] to be cared for by her mother than by
Ms Manard’s niece, she responded, I thought rather strangely that,
was not the case whilst the child was in her care, because it was
not better for [X] as the transition is too upsetting.”
however, the orders that are sought by Ms Manard will involve significant
occasions for transition between the two households,
and if the upset would be
too great for periods of care at after school time, then one can only imagine
that there would similarly
be concerns as to the regular transitions that would
occur otherwise.
was also troubled by the stance taken by Ms Manard in early 2012 when she
holidayed in Samoa with Mr S. At that time, she had the
child in her care, but
did not tell the mother and the father of the fact that she was leaving and left
the child in the care of
her sister, rather than making alternative arrangements
with the parents. She said that she thought that that was an appropriate
and a good idea, but, more troublingly, knowing the concerns that the parents
have in relation to the parenting of this child,
indicated that she did not
think that it was something that would give rise to a concern and that she would
do it again.
Manard spoke about the difficulties in relation to transitioning, but
acknowledged that it may be the case that [X] transitioned
mother’s and father’s residence more easily than might be the case
of her transitioning to she or Mr I Pita’s
residence, because she had her
siblings there and was able to immediately fall back into that sibling
interaction role. She acknowledged
that that may be a very real factor in
relation to the matter, and though it may have been difficult for her to
acknowledge, indicated
also that it might explain the other difficulties with
regard to transition into her household.
speaking about the issue of parental responsibility and the fact that she now
proposes equal shared parental responsibility,
she indicated that she was of the
view that equal shared parental responsibility was possible and that, in her
view, both she and
the parents had the capacity to make fundamental changes to
their views, in order to work together. However, within a few questions
perhaps with some reality testing, Ms Manard acknowledged that there may be
greater difficulties in that regard.
example, she indicated that whilst the parents sought for her to have limited
involvement in the child’s life, and, therefore,
in decisions to be made
with regard to the child, she still thought that equal shared parental
responsibility was workable, but when
challenged acknowledged that equal time
may have fundamental difficulties unless there could be movement. When asked,
however, whether
she could change her attitude to, for example, the traditional
view of respect for elders, she did not think that that could occur,
rather there would need to be some discussion or talk in relation to the matter.
acknowledged, however, when it was put directly to her that neither she nor the
parents could change in relation to that fundamental
issue, and it seems that
that would be telling in relation to the difficulties that would then arise with
regard to the parents and
Ms Manard seeking to make joint decisions in
relation to the child.
I say, I was impressed by Ms Manard. She gave me the distinct impression that
she was caught between a rock and a hard place.
She realised the traditional
and cultural beliefs of the mother and the father and how that influenced their
thinking in relation
to the appropriate arrangements with regard to the child.
She had to balance that against what she considered to be in the best
of the child, and that included maintaining significant and substantial
interaction between she and [X], but by the same
token it gave rise to the very
real difficulties that the child would experience on almost a daily basis moving
between the two households
with the different cultural and lifestyle beliefs and
expectations.
turn now to the evidence of Mr I Pita. Mr I Pita was questioned about his role
as the ‘matai’ or chief of his family
and his responsibilities
within the family. The impression I gained of Mr I Pita was that he took that
role very seriously and that
the traditional expectation upon him as the chief
of the family gave rise to his very firm views in relation to the appropriate
to be followed with the parenting of [X].
I Pita spoke about the traditional adoption, ‘Vae Tama’ and
indicated that in this case it was an arrangement within
the family, effected by
a blood connection rather than an adoption of a child without a blood
connection. He acknowledged that it
had come about as a result of Ms Manard
speaking with him about the possibility of a traditional adoption and that
whilst he was
not necessarily initially receptive to the proposals, realising
that there were difficulties in their relationship, the influence
bear by his mother who was the female head of the family was significant, and
that that had influenced the decision toward
a traditional adoption.
I Pita acknowledged that there had not been any discussion about what might
happen to [X] in the event of something happening to
the relationship between he
and Ms Manard but said that as he understood Vae Tama, it was very clear that if
there were a breakdown
of that nature that the child would return to bloodline.
He indicated that it may have been the case that the child could have been
placed with him, but his understanding and certainly the circumstance here was
that it would usually be the case that the child would
I Pita spoke of the difficulties that arose following separation and the various
attempts made to discuss reconciliation and then
arrangements in relation to the
parenting of [X]. He indicated that at the end it appeared to be resolved, that
whilst the situation
would be difficult to resolve it would be the case that Ms
Manard and the mother would decide how the caring was to be shared. He
asked why as chief and the “gifted father” of the child, that he
would not be involved and I think rather insightfully,
he indicated that that
would not be appropriate because of the difficulties in communication between he
and Ms Manard and that therefore
there would be problems in reaching an
I Pita acknowledged the close attachment that [X] had with the mother and the
father and also the close attachment with her siblings.
Mr I Pita confirmed
that his view at separation was that the appropriate course would be for [X] to
and the father and their extended family. He
indicated that that did not occur however because Ms Manard opposed it and as no
agreement could be reached, the alternative arrangements were put in
I Pita was a most impressive witness. He, like Ms Manard in particular, had
insight into the real difficulty that arose as a result
of the conflict between
the traditional views of the mother and the father and the more liberal
attitudes, particularly of Ms Manard.
Mr I Pita was an impressive witness in
many respects. He spoke about the meeting between he, Ms Manard and Mr S at
[omitted] in
[M] in August 2005* and that the recollection of Ms Manard of what
occurred on that occasion was very different to what had occurred
between he and
is perhaps unnecessary and would not be helpful for me to make any specific
findings in that regard but I should note that I thought
Mr I Pita was
a composed, calm and caring man and I would be surprised if he had, as is
alleged, made threats to kill Mr S or to have
been violent towards Ms Manard. By
the same token, I note that
Ms Manard was not cross-examined in relation to
those particular aspects of the matter and fortunately do not find that it is
for me to make specific determinations one way or the other, in
relation to such an issue.
I Pita commented upon the difficulties that [X] currently finds herself in with
a bond clearly between she and Ms Manard as well
as a clear bond between she and
her mother and a developing bond between she and her father. He acknowledged
that there would be
confusion and hurt but noted also that he had a particular
concern as to confusion that the child experienced going from house to
appears to have been observed by all involved in the child’s life.
I Pita recognised that Ms Manard is very significant in the child’s life.
He noted, for example, that whilst she was not
blood and that they had
separated, that Ms Manard still had a certain role in the child’s life
because she had contributed
so significantly to her life. I gained the distinct
impression that Mr I Pita was trying to walk a fine line between the more
traditional
views of the mother and the father and the more liberal attitudes of
I Pita generally impressed me in relation to this matter. I felt that he was
caught in a situation similar to many others involved
in these proceedings, in
that he was trying to balance the beliefs and wants of the mother and the father
with an appreciation of
the best interests and the welfare of the child.
accept, however, that he very genuinely is of the view that the traditional and
cultural considerations loom large, particularly
with a child of the tender
years of [X] and that the long term best interests and welfare of the child are
to be met by her reincorporation
within the family unit of her mother and
father. In other words, the re-establishment of the bloodline, because to do
otherwise would
lead to continuing confusion and difficulties for the child now
and into the future.
EVIDENCE – THE REPORT WRITER
turn now to the evidence of Ms P. Ms P is a psychologist in private practice
and prepared, at the request of the parties, a private
family report. It was
agreed, however, that in the circumstances she would be called as a witness on
the part of the Court, so as
to enable all parties to have the opportunity to
direct cross-examination to her. Such a course was followed.
P confirmed her report filed on 30 October 2012, noting, however, that one
amendment was required at paragraph 167(b). That amendment
included the addition
of the word “cultural” to the recommendations as to what should be
the areas of shared parental
responsibility. Paragraph 167(b) then
Ms Pita, Mr
E. Pita and Mr I Pita exercise shared joint responsibility in regard to
[X]’s religious and spiritual development.
P’s report was extensive. In summary, at paragraph 166, she talks of what
she sees is the prime motivator in relation to
this matter, that is, the
reliance by Mr I Pita and the mother and father upon traditional cultural
practices. She says:
evident Ms Pita, Mr E. Pita and Mr I Pita prioritise traditional cultural
practices above child-parent attachment. Within
that context, when considering
[X]’s living arrangements, Ms Manard’s qualities as a parent and
[X]’s bond with
Ms Manard have become immaterial. The writer notes Ms
Pita, Mr Pita and Mr I Pita’s position appears to be at odds with the
shared care arrangement that was implemented post separation. From the
writer’s perspective, [X] is securely attached to Ms
Manard. The writer
is of the opinion it is in [X]’s best interest that a balance needs to be
that regard, Ms P then goes on to put forward the various recommendations that
she makes in relation to time to be spent with each
of the relevant parties, as
well as responsibility in relation to decisions to be made in respect of the
long-term and day-to-day
care, welfare and development of the child. Those
recommendations included more general proposals in relation to the distance that
relevant parties should live apart from each other, as well as for there to be
opportunities for overseas travel, subject of course
to there being sufficient
notice available in respect of any such travel arrangements, and flowing on from
that, recommendations
in respect of arrangements with regard to the
child’s passport being held. The primary issues that were recommended,
were detailed in paragraphs 167, 168, 169, 175 and 176. They were in
these terms:
writer recommends parental responsibility be exercised as
Manard and Mr I Pita, in consultation with Ms Pita and Mr Pita, exercise shared
joint responsibility for [X]’s health
and education;
b. Ms Pita,
Mr Pita and Mr I Pita exercise shared joint responsibility in regards to
[X]’s religious and spiritual development.
writer recommends [X] live with Ms Pita/Mr Pita and Ms Manard on an equal shared
writer recommends Mr I Pita spend time with [X] and such time be primarily event
based (i.e. ad hoc). On that basis, [X]’s
time with Mr I Pita may fall
within time [X] would have normally spent with either Ms Pita/Mr Pita or Ms
writer recommends a three year rotation be implemented in regards to Christmas
writer recommends [X] be made available to spend her birthday, her siblings
birthday and Ms Pita and Mr Pita’s birthday
with Ms Pita and Mr
P was cross-examined in relation to her report and recommendations.
Understandably, the first line of inquiry related to her expertise
in relation
to Samoan cultural issues. Ms P indicated that she did not have any particular
expertise in relation to such matters,
and, in fact, acknowledged that at
paragraph 16 of her report. Under the heading, ‘Traditional Samoan
Adoption’, she
had drawn down information from members of the family.
Paragraph 16 is in these terms:
interviewed Ms Pita, Mr Pita, Mr O, Mr I Pita, Ms S and Mr S all informed the
there are no
legal proceedings regarding a traditional Samoan adoption
parents and receiving parents verbally agree that the receiving parents will
raise the child
the giving of
a child does not sever the parental rights of the biological parents
parents maintain contact with the child
understood that the child will be raised knowing who their biological parents
is noteworthy that Ms P indicates that there was unanimity of information
provided in relation to the various factors which were
detailed. In other
words, at first blush, the report would appear to indicate that the mother, the
father, Mr I Pita, Ms S and Mr
S, as well as Mr O, the maternal grandfather
confirmed the various factors arising in relation to traditional Samoan
adoption. I
make that specific comment because I note that the third dot point
includes reference to the giving of a child, not severing the
parental rights of
the biological parents. If that is the case, then, of course, the parental
rights which are sought to be exercised
here fall clearly within what might be
properly anticipated as occurring in circumstances where, for whatever reason,
the Vae Tama
is not considered to be any longer appropriate in relation to
arrangements with regard to the care and parenting of a child.
P indicated in her report, and also in her oral evidence, that the relationship
that she saw existing between Ms Manard and [X]
was the equivalent of a
mother/child relationship. It should be noted, however, that those observations
occurred some 10 months
or so before the hearing of this matter, and I note that
particularly as Ms P had noted the relationship between the father and [X]
developing, but it would appear clear that all, including Ms Manard, acknowledge
that the relationship between [X] and the
father and [X] and her siblings is one
which has continued to develop and grow.
P, however, concentrated on her assessment of the relationships that existed
between [X] and her two mother figures. Ms P had noted
the father’s
involvement with the child as a more passive, but, she indicated, appropriate
relationship, somewhere between
a father and an uncle. However, the passing of
time appears clearly to have developed further rapport in that regard.
P acknowledged that there was, as she put it, ‘a strong alignment with
family in the cultural aspects of Samoan life’
and noted further that
issues of blood line and blood in family were of great significance,
particularly if there were a traditional
view taken of the significance and
importance of the Samoan culture.
is important that that be noted because, as I have indicated earlier in these
reasons, my assessment in relation to the mother
and father in particular, is
that they are strongly aligned with the Samoan culture, including, in
particular, the more traditional
ways of that culture. It contrasts with Ms
Manard’s views, and, in fact, Ms P specifically noted that Ms Manard had
not adopted
Samoan cultural or traditional values, but rather, in discussions,
had compared and contrasted Maori and Samoan adoption and, of
traditional considerations.
P was understandably concerned about the possible consequences for [X] of a
change in the very strong relationship that existed
at present between Ms Manard
and [X]. She commented upon that on a number of occasions and in a number of
ways, which can perhaps
be summarised as:
(a) a reduction in time
spent between [X] and Ms Manard would impinge upon the significant relationship
that currently exists;
(b) if time spent by Ms Manard with [X] were reduced, it would eventually
wind down to what the mother and father seek, which is perhaps
a niece/aunt
relationship; but
(c) if that were to occur, there was also the possibility of the child
suffering emotional harm in that there would be a feeling of
being abandoned by
her gifted mother.
P’s principal considerations and what, in my assessment, significantly
influenced her in relation to this matter and the
recommendations, were those
considerations quite properly looked at when one considers a Eurocentric
approach to family and the considerations
Family Law Act
, including
particularly the provisions of
section 60CA
relating to the paramount
consideration, being the welfare and the best interests of the child.
this case, however, just as strong, an additional and in some ways contrary
consideration arises, with regard to the traditional
Samoan cultural issue, and
the possible effects upon [X] of those being ignored or diluted, in order to
facilitate an arrangement
with regard to the parenting of the child which fails
to recognise the very traditional nature of the mother and the father’s
P’s position in relation to this matter was a difficult one and her
recommendations were clearly matters that she had given
considerable thought to
before making those recommendations. Ms P, however, acknowledged that there may
be some opportunities for
variation of the current arrangements which might more
fully reflect what would be appropriate in respect of a balance between the
child’s best interests, the wishes of Ms Manard and the recognition of the
very strong traditional and cultural considerations
existing within the
parents’ household.
P acknowledged that if Ms Manard were to remain in [X]’s life, her
emotional well-being could be “managed”, and
in that regard Ms P
acknowledged that that could be the case, but it would still have to reflect
considerable time being spent with
Ms Manard, to ensure that there was not that
continued feeling of abandonment.
P acknowledged that there needed to be consideration also of the attachments
that [X] now had with her father and siblings, describing
the relationship
between the father and [X] as somewhere between uncle and father and in her
assessment in February 2012, she similarly
described the relationship between
[X] and her siblings as one that currently falls between cousin and sibling
bonds, but noted that
[X] is now learning of the situation and appeared to be
adapting to the changed relationship with her siblings.
Interestingly,
Ms P’s recommendations with regard to Ms Manard’s significant
continued involvement in the child’s
life including her involvement in
decisions to be made with regard to [X]’s health and education were not
reflected in some
of the comments that were made by Ms P, in relation to what
was termed the reconfiguration of
Ms Manard’s relationship with [X],
such that it was recognised as one as an aunt rather than a mother.
P noted, “It’s already started as she is spending time with her
parents, and is becoming established in that family.”
Ms P noted that
there was, as I described it previously when speaking of Mr I Pita, a fine line
to be followed, in relation to arrangements
with regard to [X]. She indicated
that whilst there may be some difficulties for [X] in having two households,
including one which
involves siblings and another without her siblings being
present, she was of the view that [X] would cope with such a process and
was important to balance that against the need to not only develop the
relationships with the parents and the siblings, but
also to maintain the bond
Interestingly,
Ms P made comment about a concern raised on the part of the parents that it may
not be in the interests of [X] to have
two mother bonds, and how that might be
dealt with. Her response was not to deal with that particular aspect of the
question, but
rather to seek to suggest that there might be a “tit for
tat” situation, in that she said words to the effect, “I
with the Pitas saying you can have two fathers but not transferrable to two
however, clarified that by saying that whilst Mr I Pita and the mother and the
father seemed to be pushing toward a situation
where Mr I Pita would be
recognised by [X] as a loving uncle, it did not appear to Ms P that [X] was
viewing the relationship that
way, and still seemed to consider Mr I Pita more
in the role of a second father.
pressed and asked to look into the future as to the situation that might exist
if there was one father figure and one uncle,
but two mothers and the confusion
that that might cause for [X], Ms P went back to the emphasis which she
previously noted in relation
to the strong bond with Ms Manard.
I indicated, whilst I have no doubt as to the strength of that bond, I note that
it was recognised by many, not just Ms P and Ms
Manard. It is clear that there
were not specifically considerations of the alternate and perhaps detrimental
consequences if that
were to continue when one of the mother figures was in a
relationship with the only father figure, and their views in relation to
were very different to that which was forced upon them, as a result of orders
made by a Court or otherwise instigated.
P emphasised the importance of the continued involvement of
Ms Manard, and
when challenged as to the difficulties that that might lead to in situations
where, for example, there is not agreement
in relation to what arrangements
should be put in place with regard to the parenting of the child, or decisions
with regard to her
long-term care, Ms P went, with the greatest respect, to what
I thought was a rather pat answer, but not one that dealt with the
here. She suggested that with shared care “we work on coming to a
compromise”.
was not aware, however, of the fact that in a number of respects compromise
could not be reached, for example, it was noted earlier
in these reasons that Ms
Manard herself acknowledged that a compromise in relation to the issue of
respect within the family hierarchy
was something that would not be able to be
agreed or compromised by either of the parties to this situation.
P was asked about the advantages or perhaps asked to consider what disadvantages
there might be in [X] having two mothers and two
consider, for example, the difficulties that might arise where there were
different family components, for
example, one mother figure being a [occupation
omitted] and the other a wife and homemaker, as well as different parenting
and lifestyles.
P indicated that she was looking at giving [X] two environments where the child
would benefit, both from the mother’s home
and family-oriented view of the
world, balanced against Ms Manard’s home environment and a situation where
[X] would be the
centre of attention.
P, with respect, gave me the distinct impression that she was seeking to impose
upon the parties, but more particularly upon the
child, an opportunity for a
perfect blend of two cultures and views of the world which would be available to
the child to pick and
choose the best and most appropriate points from. That,
however, was not going to occur.
parents and Ms Manard were very different people. They had different lifestyles,
different financial circumstances and different
expectations in relation to the
world. The suggestion of a socially-engineered and workable arrangement in
relation to the parenting
of this child gave rise to very real concerns as to
how workable, certainly in any long-term way, such an arrangement might be.
pressed in relation to such matters, Ms P did acknowledge that the child would
struggle with living in two family units where
different views of the world and
approaches to parenting were taken. For example, she agreed that there would be
a clash between
circumstances of what might be called an authoritative family
and a family with authority, as well as difficulties between the traditional
family unit, as practised within the home of the mother and father, as opposed
to a more liberal family unit as practised within
the home of Ms Manard.
Interestingly,
what arose as an issue in Ms P’s evidence, but which did not appear to in
any real degree arise in other evidence,
were concerns about the relationship
between the mother and the father. The questions which led to such an issue
arising, and it
was troubling in a number of ways, related to the fact that Mr
and Mrs Pita may want to live by traditional Samoan cultural mores
and whether
that should be an opportunity open to them, putting to one side the legal
aspects arising in relation to each parent
or family’s right to choose
their lifestyle.
Ms P indicated that she would support such a decision by
the mother and father:
as there was no risk, physical or emotional, to [X].
pressed as to why she had made such a statement, she indicated that she had not
seen any issues of physical or emotional risk
to the child or, in fact, any of
the children when she had visited the Pita home. She noted that the children on
that day were happy
and, as she put it, compliant. She noted, as she said, that
they were comfortable with the mother and that the mother was quite
skilled with
all of the children. Additionally, she indicated that when the father came home
he took on a passive role and that
it was particularly significant that the
children all appeared content and happy.
was questioned about whether there might be indicators of concern with regard to
issues at home in school reports and noted that
in relation to the two older
children of the mother and the father, there were no indications of any problems
with the children’s
academic progress or behaviour at school, and that
they were most impressive reports. Ms P then said words to the
said the mother was very compliant and subject to domestic abuse.
gave rise to a number of concerns including to questions as to whether, in fact,
it were the case that Ms P may have had some preconceived
view as to the nature
of a family relationship within a Samoan family and that it would be one which
constituted issues of domestic
violence. Ms P strongly defended herself in that
regard, indicating that she did not have any such view and had not witnessed
that would give rise to such a concern in relation to this family unit.
was troubling, however, was that Ms P noted the comment made by Ms Manard in
relation to the matter but then went on to indicate
that she had not in any way
raised the issue with any of the other parties such as Mr I Pita when it had
been suggested that there
was domestic violence within the relationship between
he and Ms Manard, and which suggestion in court he had strongly denied, as
as raising with either the mother or the father the nature of their
relationship.
was a troubling comment made in passing by Ms P, therefore, which gave rise to
concerns as to the very basis upon which any recommendations
were made, in
relation to the parenting of [X].
was also noteworthy that Ms P, as I indicated earlier in these reasons, did not
appear to have to any real extent addressed issues
in respect of the sibling
relationship. Initially she indicated that it wasn’t really a relevant
consideration because, in
her view, it would be necessary to go back to the
original situation that existed after the traditional adoption, and if the
relationship
had remained together, then there would not have been a sibling
relationship. When challenged as to the fact that the Court and
the families
must look to the future, not the past, she then accepted and agreed that it was
important to maintain and foster the
sibling relationships and went on to then
note the sibling relationship is the foundation for the future.
asked about the importance of that and how it could be facilitated when, on her
recommendations at least, the child would be
one week within the sibling
relationship and one week without any interaction with her siblings, she noted
that they would be at
the same school, and they would be in daily contact,
though when suggested that there was no evidentiary basis upon which that could
be suggested and that at best it might be a tenuous opportunity for additional
interaction, she acknowledged that that was the case.
P was also questioned about the time that had passed since the making of the
report and conduct of interviews. She acknowledged
that at the time the
interviews were done, [X] would still have been adapting to the new situation
that had been put in place by
agreement between the various adults and indicated
that the relationship that she already had with the mother would be growing and
developing.
P indicated that she was more inclined to the use of the word
“consolidated” but acknowledged that there would have
been growth
and change in the nature of the relationship which she had already observed as
strong and positive. Additionally, she
accepted that the bond over the 10
months between interview and trial that existed between the siblings would grow
stronger, as would
the relationship between the father and [X].
real issue for Ms P was not the benefits that would flow from the further
development and strengthening of the family ties involving
the mother, the
father and the siblings, but rather a consideration of possible negative effects
upon [X]. As she put it, “It
was a question not of the child’s
capacity to transition to the family unit that could easily occur, but rather a
consideration
of how the child might cope with separation from Ms Manard.”
for Mr I Pita took on a role in cross-examination which was a little unusual,
though I should say understandable. Because
Mr I Pita’s position was to
generally support what was proposed by the mother and the father, it was not a
situation in cross-examination
where he sought to reinforce any particular
position taken by him. Rather, his instructions to counsel were to seek to
the various issues of concern and significance in relation to what was
in the best interests of the child. To that end, when asked
to accept that
there were numerous factors to weigh up, Ms P acknowledged that that was the
case, and in relation to each of the
following indicated that they were factors
to be considered. Those included:
a consideration
of whether there is the potential for confusion for [X] in living in two
households;
the developing
relationship with siblings;
child’s right to an appreciation and understanding of her Samoan
an appreciation
and understanding of the fact that family is the fundamental consideration in
traditional Samoan life and that a bond
with ancestors is important to safeguard
their heritage into the future;
that respect is
a fundamental of traditional Samoan culture and that in the Pita family it is a
matter of particular significance.
asked about her previous comments relating to the issue of domestic violence,
she indicated that her concerns arose not only
from the statements made by Ms
Manard but also from her observations and discussions with the mother, where she
gained the impression
that the mother questioned certain issues arising in
relation to respect, as considered in Samoan culture.
P, I thought, drew a rather long bow in suggesting that whilst there was no
mention of domestic violence by the mother, and it
was not raised with the
mother or the father, she still was of the view, that as there was a suggestion
of domestic violence, there
might be an issue that needed to be addressed. When
pressed, however, she agreed that with the little information that was available
in relation to the matter, and the very specific denials that were made, there
was little that could be considered an issue, in relation
to domestic
asked whether domestic violence had played on her mind in making any
recommendations, she indicated subsequent to the first series
of questions
directed to her by counsel for the parents that it had possibly influenced her
and when pressed on the point, indicated
that she had an “underlying
feeling”. Such a position taken in relation to the matter was troubling,
particularly in
light of the denials that were made by all other parties to
these proceedings, in relation to issues of domestic violence, as well
acknowledged observation of a well adjusted high functioning family in all
P went on to indicate that the feeling stemmed in part from the fact that the
father admitted that there has been some yelling
in the relationship, but I must
say that my own view in relation to that was that without any evidence of
domestic violence, and
I saw none, that yelling maybe nothing more than the
forceful determination on the part of all parties to the proceedings to get
their viewpoint across and that it, in no way, constituted an issue of domestic
P became a little defensive after that in relation to the questions that were
directed to her on that part of Mr I Pita. She was
asked whether she considered
the possibility of “a culture of domestic violence” because it was a
Samoan family, and
she denied that that was at all the case.
was asked then to consider her report in light of there not being found to be
any concern as to domestic violence and in the circumstances
it might then be
the case that [X] could cope with more time with the parents and less time with
the mother. At that stage, Ms P
indicated that there would need to be a
definition of what constituted less time, and she was advised that as it was
currently a
situation of 11 nights in 28 spent with Ms Manard, that it was
suggested by the parents that there be less time than that, and Ms
P indicated
that, in her view, that would probably be the minimum.
P went on in further cross-examination by counsel for Ms Manard to indicate that
there certainly could be improvements on the arrangements
that were currently in
place with regard to time spent by [X] with Ms Manard, Mr I Pita and the mother
and father. She noted, for
example, that more appropriate arrangements might be
block time spent with the parents and Ms Manard rather than the frequent
that are currently occurring.
also strongly indicated, that in her assessment, the relationship between [X]
and Ms Manard was such that the parents suggestion
of one weekend a month and
two hours on one day during the school week would not be sufficient, and, in
fact, insofar as the two
hours would be concerned, it would probably be more
detrimental to the child as it would not facilitate sufficient time for
transition,
and therefore it would be, in fact, inadvertently cruel to [X].
P commented upon the matter that I had previously noted, being the approach that
outsiders might consider with regard to the traditional
Samoan cultural issues.
Ms P noted, for example, that Mr I Pita said that he recognised the closeness of
the attachment between [X]
Ms Manard, but as he put it, “blood won
out” and that from an outsider’s perspective, that would seem harsh.
she did go on to acknowledge that it was necessary to consider the
cultural arguments and traditional arrangements that existed,
particularly
within the household of the mother and the father.
Ms P commented upon the positives that the mother and
Ms Manard brought to
[X] through their involvement in her life. She noted that the mother was, for
example, a calm gentle lady, child
focused, and able to advise the children
was a credit to her and as Ms P described it, “she was amazed at
how well the mother balanced the various issues of her parenting”.
as Ms Manard was concerned, she indicated that in her assessment she was child
focused, that she engaged [X] in learning,
and singing, and games, and provided
leniency in those games which allowed her to develop her own thoughts but then
also was able
to remind her about the rules and therefore to provide proper
conditioning.
the end, Ms P noted that she did not see [X] upset in either the household of
the mother and the father or in the household of
Ms Manard. As counsel for
Ms Manard put to Ms P at the commencement of his cross-examination, the key in
relation to this matter is
the relationship with the mother and the aunt with
[X]. Ms P’s evidence in relation to this matter was of considerable
assistance,
because it identified the very real and competing matters that need
to be balanced in order to reach a decision with regard to ensuring
that future
arrangements for parenting are in the best interests of the
is not, however, simply a case of addressing, in usual terms, the attachments of
the child to each of the parties significant in
relation to the proceedings but
also necessary to balance the very real issues that arise with regard to culture
and family. I turn
then to the issue of Vae Tama and how it should, if at all,
be considered in relation to these proceedings.
was assisted to some degree by the various submissions that were provided in
relation to the matter and, of course, also had the
opportunity to consider the
article, “Adoption and Vae Tama in Samoa”. That article is by
Jennifer Corrin, the Director
of the Centre for International Public and
Comparative Law and Associate Professor at the TC Beirne School of Law at the
of Queensland. Lalotoa Mulitalo is a PhD student at the University of
Queensland and was formerly parliamentary counsel of Samoa.
Their article is
contained within a series of articles on family law, the International Survey of
Family Law (Jordan Publishing Limited,
Bristol 2011).
article relates to an examination of the difficulties that arise between
customary law and state law and notes that the tension
particularly acute in the area of family law, where the influence of custom and
culture is strong.” Such a
situation arises here, though it should be
noted that in this instance there has not been an adoption pursuant to statute,
that was considered at one stage, but for a number of reasons, never
occurred. What the article does do, however, is to identify
many of the
practices and beliefs attaching to Vae Tama and provides at least some
assistance in respect of understanding the competing
authors note, at page 1 of the article, that most adoptions in Samoa take place
within the extended family according to customary
law and practice. It goes on
to note, however, that there are formal adoptions also which occur and that
those are generally pursuant
to the legislation which has been introduced based
on foreign legislation and
legislation has not always provided the necessary protection, nor has it always
sought to accommodate local values or practices
and in many cases it is
incompatible with the local values and practices.
a concern would have more specifically arisen here if the formal adoption, which
was contemplated, had occurred but that is not
an issue which needs to be
directly considered in the determination of this matter. What is significant
however, is the concept of
Vae Tama and its direct effect upon the various
parties, including particularly the biological parents. As was emphasised in
of the evidence that was given, particularly on behalf of the parents,
family and respect were paramount. Corrin and Mulitalo commented
upon same when
at page 2 of their article they said:
concept of family is very different from the Western understanding of the term.
In the Samoan setting, family is the
institution that shapes and determines a
person’s future. The family into which they are born determines their
duties in the village as well as the extent of entitlement to
customary land. ...There is a Samoan saying “O oe ma lou aiga”
which translates to “you and your family”, meaning that whatever a
person does reflects on their whole family. If a
person excels, this enhances
the reputation of their family; if they go astray, it is not only they who are
disgraced but their whole
family. The whole family also pays the penalty for
the person’s wrongdoings.
description of family and its significance to the biological parents was
obvious, particularly when the father and, to perhaps
a lesser extent, the
mother spoke of the embarrassment that they felt as a result of the breakdown in
the relationship between the
uncle and the aunt, and the consequential
circumstances for [X]. They clearly saw shame reflected on them, their other
and, particularly, [X] as a result of the breakdown, and such concerns
are far more clearly understandable when one is mindful of
the impact in a
traditional family of the Samoan saying, “you and your family”.
attempting to understand, but also distinguish, customary adoption from the
western notion of adoption, the comments contained
in Corrin and
Mulitalo’s article are of particular assistance. At page 5 they
difficult to equate “adoption” in the western sense to
“customary adoption”, given the substantive
differences in the
rationale that supports it and the spirit in which it takes place. Certainly,
where the state process involves
an application by strangers to become adoptive
parents of a child, severing relationships with all blood relations, there is no
equivalent. Where a child is given into the care of another under
custom, this does not sever the ties with the biological parents.
It is taken
for granted that the child remains the child of the biological parents and may
even return to the care of the biological
parents at a future date. Customary
adoption is underpinned by cultural structures.
the authors of the article were speaking about customary adoption, they made
reference to the process being transparent, of there
being no secrecy attached,
and noted specifically that the ties with the natural parents are not severed.
Quoting Brown K from “Reconciling
Customary Law and Received Law in
Melanesia: the Post-Independence Experience in Solomon Islands and
Vanuatu”, they noted:
principle in non-customary systems that adoptions severs the biological family
and creates a new family, has no real imperative
in custom where the dominant
motives are to maintain family links, assist childless kin-folk or invest a
distinction is clear and was commented upon in
Tomas and Anor &
[2011] FamCA 641
, where Justice Loughnan was required to consider a
not dissimilar situation in respect of a four year old child and the
determination
of whether she should live with her former adoptive parents in
Australia or with her birth mother in Western Samoa. His Honour was
with considerable evidence relating to Vae Tama and noted at paragraph 100 of
the judgment the following:
describes the Samoan cultural practice of Vaetama as a form of cultural
adoption. She says:
usually occurs within the family, is very flexible and the ties with biological
parents are never severed;
child grows up knowing who his or her biological parents are or is informed of
them later on;
child is free to move between his biological and adoptive parents;
That, when an
individual decides to adopt out their child, an understanding is formed between
the parties. For example, if a mother
promises her unborn child to be adopted
by relatives, the adoptive parents have a reasonable expectation that the mother
her promise;
That there is
however no strict cultural obligation on the mother to give up her child in the
event that she changes her mind;
That, where
the biological parents desire for the child to be returned, both parties
consider and discuss the following factors:
as to why the biological parents want the child returned;
quality of care which has been provided by the adoptive
is in the interests of the child; and
the child desires.
outcome of those discussions vary. The child might stay with the adoptive
parents or return to the biological parents. However
the decision is considered
to be mutual. If the biological parent obtains the child through different
means, the adoptive parents
have no redress.
can be seen, one of the considerations that together makes up the cultural
practice of Vae Tama is what might be the course followed
where the biological
parents desire the return of the child. Significant here is the first of the
factors noted, the reasons as
to why the biological parents want the child
returned. Those reasons have been elaborated upon in commentary already made
the evidence of the parties, but they can be summarised as, from the
biological parents’ perspective, a condition precedent
to the traditional
adoption of [X] was the continued marital relationship between the uncle and the
aunt. The severing of that marital
relationship brought to an end, at least
from the parents’ perspective, the basis upon which the
“gifting” of [X]
had occurred.
Interestingly,
the final dot point notes that if the biological parent obtains the child
through different means, the adoptive parents
have no redress. Such a situation
would not arise if there was a formal adoption, as was originally contemplated,
but as I have
indicated that never occurred and therefore the various elements
that were identified by Dr T for the court in
Tomas and Anor &
, are still applicable and mean that at least on a cultural level, as
best I can understand the point, if the parents were to simply
hold [X] over,
the Vae Tama would be at an end.
the credit of all parties, however, such action has not been taken and it may
simply be reflective of the fact that what Dr T described
as the Samoan cultural
practice was a more localised practice than universal. That appears a clear
possibility in light of the various
lay opinions that were given by witnesses as
to exactly what constituted Vae Tama.
the cultural considerations which are of great significance to the biological
parents, and perhaps to the wider Pita family,
need to be balanced against the
law in Australia and of course, the paramount consideration being the welfare of
the child, [X].
In that instance, it would seem that there is much that weighs
in favour of the biological parents because culturally the notion
of family is
central to their beliefs and to the way they raise their children and live their
lives, as well as needing to recognise
that, however it may have come about, the
uncle and aunt were not adoptive parents and therefore could be considered
anything other
than significant persons in the child’s life, and persons
concerned with her future care, welfare and development.
final point is significant when one considers, as will be necessary in these
reasons, the objects and the principles of the Act,
as well as the
considerations which must be looked at pursuant to the provisions of
and (3) and the fact that the first of those primary considerations set
section 60CC(2)(a)
relates to the benefit of the child having a
meaningful relationship with her parents.
the issue of Vae Tama, but also family, loom large in this matter. It is
however clear that there has not been a formal
adoption and that therefore the
only parents of [X] are the mother and the father in these proceedings.
Cultural considerations
are relevant but they are only one of the many factors
to be considered pursuant to the provisions of the
Family Law Act
particular,
, relating to children. Additionally, when one notes the
principles underlying the objects in
section 60B
, it is noted that children have
a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with
other people who share
that culture) except when it would be contrary to the
child’s best interests. In that regard, family and siblings are again
significance and weigh in favour of the position taken by the parents.
issues of Vae Tama are no doubt significant to all involved in these
proceedings, but they are also, with respect, only one of
the factors to be
considered in determining what is ultimately in the best interests of this
little girl. The consideration of culture,
at least if this were an Aboriginal
or Torres Strait Islander family, would be specifically referable to the
provisions of
section 60CC(3)(h)
Family Law Act
and in particular
sub-section (2) requiring consideration of the likely impact any proposed order
might have on the right to enjoy
culture, but in my assessment similar
considerations in this family unit arise because of the general catch-all
contained in
section 60CC(3)(m).
objects, principles and considerations set out in the Act, therefore, still are
the beacons which provide guidance and direction
as to the determination of this
matter, and whilst traditional adoptions and cultural considerations were the
subject of significant
evidence, in the end the paramount consideration remains
as it always must be, the welfare of the child.
of the central issues in relation to this matter is the determination of
parental responsibility and time for all to spend with
the child. In
a decision of Murphy J being
[2010] FamCA 80
decision handed down on 11 February 2010. His Honour there, under the heading,
“Parental Responsibility” set out at
length issues in respect of the
determination of parental responsibility, and commented through from paragraphs
136 to 152 about
the issues to be looked at. They express clearly the position
in relation to this matter and were as follows:
RESPONSIBILITY
[136] The parents of children each have, by the fact of parenthood alone,
parental responsibility for each of those children.
that each parent has, in respect of each child, “all the duties, powers,
responsibilities and authority which,
by law, parents have in relation to
That situation is not affected by any change in
the nature of the parent’s relationship, for example by them separating or
re-marrying
(s 61C(2)).
[137] Parental responsibility can, though, be altered by the making of a
parenting order by the court but only to the extent that
the order confers
duties, rights, responsibilities or authority in relation to the particular
child or children the subject of the
order. However, a parenting order does not
per se remove or diminish any aspect of parental responsibility; the order must
do so or doing so must be necessary to give effect to the order.
[138] But, when a court is to make a parenting order, it must apply a
presumption that it is in the best interests of the subject
children for their
parents to have “equal shared parental responsibility” for those
children. The latter expression
is not defined, but reference to
would seem to render a meaning that all of the duties, powers, responsibilities
and authority which, by law, parents have in relation
to children are to be
shared, and shared equally.
[139] The statutory presumption just referred to is rebuttable in
circumstances where the court has reasonable grounds to believe
exists abuse or family violence as defined
or where the court
considers that it is in the bests interests of the children for the presumption
to be rebutted.
(s 61DA(4)).
[140] No statutory provision other than
governs how best
interests is to be determined in that context.
Section 60CC
, it has been noted,
is headed “how a court determines what is in a child’s best
interests”. It is, then, again
called into use in this context.
[141] The ambit of the legislative provisions referred to thus far is
narrowed by reference to
and the Note to
section makes it clear that sharing parental responsibility (whether equally or
not) is not a passive activity; it requires
those having shared parental
responsibility, or aspects of it, to make joint decisions and to consult and
attempt to reach agreement
in order to do so. However, the section goes on to
provide that consultation is not required unless the decision is about a
long-term issue” – an expression that is
Section 65DAE
and its Note underline the last point by providing
that there is no necessity to consult a person who has or shares parental
responsibility
time that the child is spending with that person, that are not
decisions about
“major long-term issues”. It is to be noted that the section is
made subject to any provision to the
contrary in a parenting order.
(s 65DAE(2)).
[143] “Major long-term issues” is defined in
major long-term issues
in relation to a child, means issues about
the care, welfare and development of the child of a long-term nature and
includes (but
is not limited to) issues of that nature
child’s education (both current and future);
child’s religious and cultural upbringing; and
child’s health
child’s name;
(e) changes
to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more
difficult for the child to spend time with a
doubt, a decision by a parent of a child to form a relationship with a new
partner is not, of itself, a major long-term
issue in relation to the child.
However, the decision will involve a major long-term issue if, for example, the
relationship with
the new partner involves the parent moving to another area and
the move will make it significantly more difficult for the child to
with the other parent.
[144] Thus, if the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is
not rebutted, then, absent specific provision in the parenting
orders, the
consultation and genuine effort to reach a decision required by
applies, but (subject to specific provision in the Orders) only in respect of
“major long-term issues”.
[145] Equally, the application of the presumption will mean that decisions
during time spent between parent and child that are not
long-term issues”, can be made by the parent exercising the time without
the necessity for the consultation
and joint effort otherwise required in
respect of “major long-term issues”.
(s 65DAE(1)
[146] Each of these matters has relevance, as it seems to me, to a decision
as to whether the children’s best interests require
the rebuttal of the
presumption. A particular aspect of that is the role that entrenched and
apparently intractable conflict might
play in any such decision.
[147] A further issue arises by reference to the use of the expression
“sole parental responsibility” which is in wide
use in orders sought
by parties and, indeed, in orders made by this court (and which has been in use
for many years, including prior
to the passing of the Reform Act which
introduced into the Act the sections just referred to). The expression is
neither now, nor
was then, defined or used in the Act. A question arises as to
what might be meant by the expression “sole parental responsibility”
in the context of the current legislation.
[148] The definition of “parental responsibility” in s 61B
refers to “all of” the powers, duties etc of parents.
strongly arguable, then, that the expression “sole parental
responsibility” means, or is intended to mean, that
the specified parent
has “all of” the powers, duties etc in relation to the specified
children. If so, it seems to me
equally strongly arguable that the expression
means, or is intended to mean, that the other parent has no parental
responsibility
– that is none of the duties, powers, responsibilities and
authority over their child otherwise conferred by law.
[149] If that is the meaning of the expression, then, in my view, a court
should take account of a particular additional consideration
s 60CC(3)(m)): the exercise of discretion in favour of excluding one
parent from the decision making and responsibilities for
their children in
respect of “major long-term issues” in the manner just outlined -
particularly where, as here, there
are many years until the children turn 18
– is, it seems to me, a very significant interference with the fundamental
of a person. There is no doubt that those rights must give way in favour
of an outcome which is found to be in the best interests
of the children. But,
the fact that this is the paramount consideration does not, in my view, mean it
is the sole consideration
nor that the legitimate fundamental rights of a parent
are irrelevant. (cf AIF v AMS (1999) 199 CLR 160; U v U
[2002] HCA 36
(2002) 211 CLR
[150] The expression “sole parental responsibility” is
frequently used without otherwise distinguishing between “major
issues” and decisions made during periods of time with the children. Or,
it is used in conjunction with expressions
used in now-repealed legislation such
as, for example, “long-term care, welfare and development”.
[151] An order that simply provides, without more, for one party to have
“sole parental responsibility” is, at least
arguably, an order
making provision contrary to s 65DAE(2) and, arguably, an order expressly
providing for the diminution or “taking
away” of parental
responsibility within the meaning of s 61D(2).
[152] Those matters too, have relevance as it seems to me in assessing
whether the best interests of children require the rebuttal
of the statutory
presumption and, if so, the form of the orders that might be made in respect of
parental responsibility. In Chappell
and Chappell
(2008) FamCAFC 143
(2008) FLC 93-382
Court said:
order to rebut the presumption it is necessary for the Court to make a finding
that it would not be in the best interests
of the child
presumption to be applied. We accept that in determining what is in the
child’s best interests the Court must take
into account the prescribed
matters in ss 60CC(2) and (3), one of which requires the Court to consider
whether it would be preferable
to make the order least likely to lead to the
institution of further proceedings. In our view, it would be an appropriate
of discretion in some cases to find that application of the presumption
would not be in the child’s best interests because
the track record of the
parents would suggest a high probability of deadlock, which would inevitably
lead to further proceedings.
In such cases, however, the process of reasoning
required to rebut the presumption would involve findings related to the welfare
of the child, rather than findings concerning, for example, the likelihood that
schools and hospitals would find it easier to deal
with one parent rather than
two. [emphasis in original]
also envisage circumstances in which the Court, in the proper exercise of
discretion, might make very specific orders
in relation to issues which could be
loosely described as relating to the “management” of particular
aspects of a child’s
welfare. Thus, for example, in the present matter his
Honour might appropriately have made an order that the wife have responsibility
for making of appointments with the speech therapist, as this has been a point
of contention. However, where the Court proposes (as
his Honour did in this
case), to give one of the parents a form of responsibility for issues as broad
as “health” and
“education”, we consider this should
ordinarily be done by use of the concepts prescribed by the legislation
the issue of parental responsibility is significant because of the unusual and
divergent positions of the parties. I note
Lansa & Clovelly
a case where Murphy J was dealing with what he referred to as “pervasive
and apparently intractable conflict.” In
this case, because of the
circumstances themselves, such a situation arises here. The perspective of the
biological parents and,
in particular, the father, is not one that will change
and, as such, the intractable nature of the conflict will continue. The
therefore that there should be some form of shared parental
responsibility, including the aunt, is problematic, to say the least.
suggestion, as detailed in Ms Manard’s proposed orders, that the parents
and she consult with each other in respect of any
significant parenting issue,
excluding those relating to the child’s religion and culture, flies in the
face of the evidence
given, particularly as to the attitude of the father. How
it could be suggested that they would be able to agree on educational
arrangements, unless the parents or the aunt were prepared to acquiesce to the
view of the other, is hard to imagine. Similar difficulties,
no doubt, would
arise in relation to decisions relating to the child’s health and whilst
no doubt all would be determined to
ensure that appropriate decisions were made,
it is not hard to envisage differences being suggested as a result of the type
treatment, the place for such treatment, or agreement as to how to
fund the costs of such treatment.
would think that whilst all would seek to consult, particularly if that were
ordered to occur, there would still be the inherent
difficulties to which I have
referred. It is also unlikely that there would be a fundamental change in the
attitude or behaviours
of the parents or the aunt, the father acknowledging that
from the start in his evidence, and Ms Manard eventually acknowledging
difficulties would arise at least in some respects.
difference between
Lansa & Clovelly
and this case, however, is that
there was some indication that the report writer in that case was hopeful that a
decision about parenting
would see an abatement of the conflict between the
parties. There was also evidence in
Lansa & Clovelly
of the fact
that the parties had been able, at least in part, to make decisions and to work
together with regard to the decision-making
process with regard to the long-term
interests of the child.
is no such indication in relation to this matter and, as I have said, to suggest
that there might be a change in attitude or
approach of either or both sides of
the dispute here, would be a clear example of a triumph of hope over experience.
Whilst in the
past Ms Manard would say that the parties were able to work
together, I would think that that was to a significant degree a consequence
Mr I Pita’s continued involvement in decisions regarding [X], and
therefore stemmed in the past from matters of respect
and family authority.
61DA provides that there is a presumption of equal shared parental
responsibility, but pursuant to subsections (2) and (4),
it is a rebuttable
presumption in circumstances of family violence, or in circumstances generally
where the court considers that
it is in the best interests of the children for
the presumption to be rebutted.
61DA is in these terms:
making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a
presumption that it is in the best interests of
the child for the child’s
parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a
parent of the child (or a person who lives with
a parent of the child) has
engaged in:
of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the
parent’s family (or that other person’s
family); or
the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court
considers that it would not be appropriate
in the circumstances for the
presumption to be applied when making that order.
presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would
not be in the best interest of the child for
the child’s parents to have
equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
did comment when speaking of the evidence in relation to this matter, about the
passing concern of the report writer, Ms P, relating
to domestic violence within
the household of the parents, and therefore affecting [X]. There is no basis
upon which such a finding
could be made and I am not at all concerned as to
issues with regard to domestic or family violence, and in any event note that
is absolutely no suggestion of violence as between the parents and Ms
Manard, and if anything, a cooperative arrangement appears
to exist between the
mother and the aunt.
there is the general provision contained within sub-section (4) relating to
other matters that might satisfy a court that
equal shared parental
responsibility should be rebutted. In this instance, I have already detailed
the concerns that I have about
the parties’ capacity to work together,
particularly when only some issues of long-term care, welfare and development
are proposed
by Ms Manard to be shared, and am not satisfied that such an
arrangement would be either in the best interests of the child or even
Additionally,
and perhaps unnecessarily, I would also note that there is a very clear
indication within section 61DA(1) that the presumption
relates to a
child’s parents having equal shared parental responsibility for the child
and in this instance, there are only
two parents.
Ms Manard is a significant
person in this little girl’s life but she is not a parent, adoptive or
otherwise, and the legislation
repeatedly draws a clear distinction between the
role and status of a parent and of others concerned with the welfare and care of
a child. In that respect, I note the distinction drawn and reinforced in the
objects and principles, section 60B, and the considerations
as detailed in
section 60CC.
Family Law Act
, headed “Interpretation”, is as relevant,
in these terms:
Act, the standard Rules of Court and the related Federal Magistrates Rules,
unless the contrary intention appears:
when used in Part VII in relation to a child who has been adopted, means an
adoptive parent of the child.
an adoptive parent of the child can be considered for these specific purposes,
but in this case there is a cultural or traditional
adoption but no formal
adoption. Whatever may have been contemplated at the time that the
“gifting” of [X] occurred,
it is clear that a formal adoption did
not take place and whilst at least from the parents’ perspective their
consent was given
mistakenly, it has now been withdrawn and there is no basis
upon which adoption of a formal nature could occur. If anything, the
here is an even more clear-cut example than that which arose in
Anor & Murray
. There, an adoption had occurred, but was discharged in
Samoa, though without the knowledge of the applicants, but Loughnan J noted
paragraph 128 the legislative position and intent of the
Family Law Act
Honour said:
provisions of
distinguish between parents and grandparents and others.
The Murrays and the Tomases have all been the child’s parents. Ms
is the biological mother of the child and to the extent that her status was
changed by the 2008 Samoan adoption, as at the
date of the hearing, the Samoan
adoption has been discharged. There is no definition of ‘parent’ in
the Act but by
of the Act ‘parents’ include those who adopted a
child according to law, including outside Australia. Therefore the
Tomases were
adoptive parents. The legislation does not refer to those who “are or who
were ever parents” but only to
those who “are
it were necessary, and I have already indicated that I do not consider that to
be the case, I would without hesitation find that
Ms Manard is not a parent of
this child pursuant to the definition or otherwise as envisaged within the
legislation, and that therefore
the position or status of the biological parents
takes precedence, at least insofar as the issue of parental responsibility is
am satisfied that the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is
therefore rebutted as not being in the best interests
of this child and intend
to order that the parents have equal shared parental responsibility as between
them, to the exclusion of
is not necessary, legislatively, for me to consider those matters that arise
pursuant to the provisions of
section 65DAA
because of the finding that equal
shared parental responsibility, at least between the parents and Ms Manard, is
not in the best
interests of the child. However, that does not mean that
consideration of equal time or substantial and significant time, as defined
section 65DAA
, is not appropriate in light of the type of application that is
before the court. If one is to consider the best interests of the
paramount, then all proper possibilities should be considered.
that regard, therefore, whilst addressing the considerations set out in
, (2), (3) and (6), those matters of reasonable practicality, as
explained in
section 65DAA(5)
, should also be to the fore in any discussion.
Section 60CC(1)
, (2), (3) and (6), and
section 65DAA(5)
are in these
Determining
best interests
60CC(1) Subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's
best interests,
must consider the matters set
out in subsections (2) and (3).
Primary considerations
60CC(2) The primary considerations are:
benefit to the child
of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's
need to protect the child
from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse,
neglect or family
In applying the considerations set out in subsection (2),
the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph
Additional considerations
60CC(3) Additional considerations are:
views expressed by the child
and any factors (such as the child's
maturity or level of understanding) that the court
are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's
the nature of the relationship of the child
of the child's
persons (including any grandparent or other relative
of the child);
extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take,
the opportunity:
participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the
spend time with the child; and
communicate with the child;
extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to
fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain
(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's
circumstances, including the likely effect on the child
of any separation from:
of his or her parents;
other child,
or other person (including any grandparent or other relative
of the child),
with whom he or she has been living;
(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child
spending time with and communicating with a parent
and whether that difficulty
or expense will substantially affect the child's
right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents
on a regular
(f) the capacity of:
of the child's
other person (including any grandparent or other relative
of the child);
for the needs of the child,
including emotional and intellectual needs;
(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle,
culture and traditions) of the child
and of either of the child's
and any other characteristics of the child
that the court
thinks are relevant;
(h) if the child
or a Torres Strait Islander child:
(i) the child's
right to enjoy his or her Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander culture
(including the right to enjoy that culture
with other people who share that
culture); and
likely impact any proposed parenting
order under this Part will have on that right;
(i) the attitude to the child,
and to the responsibilities of parenthood,
demonstrated by each of the child's
(j) any family
violence involving the child
or a member
of the child's
(k) if a family
violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the
child’s family – any relevant
inferences that can be drawn from the
order, taking into account the following:
nature of the order;
circumstances in which the order was made;
evidence admitted in proceedings for the order;
findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order;
other relevant matter;;
(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least
likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings
in relation to the child;
(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court
thinks is relevant.
Right to enjoy Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander culture
60CC(6) For the purposes of paragraph (3)(h), an Aboriginal
child's or a Torres Strait Islander child's
right to enjoy his or her
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander culture includes
maintain a connection with that culture; and
(b) to have
the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary:
explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's
age and developmental level and the child's
(ii) to develop a
positive appreciation of that culture.
65DAA(5) In determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2)
whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal
substantial and significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the
court must have regard to:
(a) how far apart the parents live from each other; and
(b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an
arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and
significant
time, with each of the parents; and
(c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with
each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing
arrangement of that kind; and
(d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child;
(e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.
of the considerations required to be looked at to determine what is in
[X]’s best interests are not overly significant
in the final determination
required, with regard to this matter. I would emphasise however that that is
not because of any negative
connotation that might be drawn but rather because
there are so many positives in the family and lifestyle of this child. That is
best exampled by the fact that [X] has a meaningful relationship with both of
her parents, as well as of course the very significant
relationship with her
aunt, the “gifted mother”. There is no counter-balancing need to
protect the child from physical
harm, though as will be addressed a little
later, there will be a need to consider issues with regard to the child’s
psychological well-being.
issues relating to the child’s wishes and the nature of the relationship
that she has with her parents and others
significant in her life, are all
positive. The parents and the “gifting parents” have taken every
opportunity to participate
in the child’s life, to spend time with her and
to communicate with her, and have as best they have been able, involved
in decisions to be made with regard to the life of the child.
differing degrees, but not so significant as to influence the determination of
this matter, all involved have a capacity to provide
for the needs of the child,
including her emotional and intellectual needs, and have shown a responsible
attitude to the parenting
of [X], and to the obligations that arise from
parenthood.
they were the only factors needed to be considered in relation to the matter,
then the proposals for equal time or significant
and substantial time would be
almost unanswerable. But the issues relating to the parents’ and the
aunt’s capacity to
implement an arrangement for the child spending equal
time or substantial and significant time with each, as well as their capacity
communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that would arise from such
an arrangement, loom large. Most significant
of all, however, is the concern as
to the impact that such an arrangement would have upon [X].
father’s attitude to the involvement of the aunt to any significant degree
or at all would, to many, seem harsh and impracticable.
He appears unable to
recognise the attachments that exist between [X] and Ms Manard and from the
previously referred to “western
perspective”, is hard to comprehend.
The father however, must be seen as a man who is the product of his culture, his
and his upbringing. He is not rejecting the attachment between [X] and
the aunt out of bloody-mindedness or determination to achieve
his own wishes for
the future parenting of the child, but rather because he cannot comprehend a
world in which family is not the
pivotal factor in determining attitudes and
family and respect are all pervasive for the father and the mother, and of
course, if this were a proceeding involving an
Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander child, then the provisions of
section 60CC(3)(h)
and (6) would be to
the fore. In my assessment, however, when one considers the fact that the best
interests of the child is paramount,
and that the court is required pursuant to
the provisions of
section 60CC(3)(m)
to consider any other fact or circumstance
that may be relevant, the culture and family beliefs and traditions are of
significance
in the final determination of this matter. Also significant,
however, are the different family groupings and lifestyles within the
of the biological parents and Ms Manard.
significance in relation to the determination of this matter is the long-term
affects upon the child [X]. A concern certainly was
expressed on the part of the
parents that the financial circumstances of the two households, as well as the
cultural beliefs, was
a matter that would raise concerns in respect of the child
and her ability to adjust to two different families and lifestyles.
household of the biological parents is one that consists of mother, father and
siblings of [X], though until recent times [X]
knew them as an aunt, uncle and
cousins. Notwithstanding that however, the court in any orders that are made
must be forward-thinking,
as is emphasised by
section 60CC(3)(l)
consideration of orders that will be least likely to lead to further proceedings
in relation to the child, as well as
section 65DAA(5)(d)
, requiring the court to
look at the possible future consequences of arrangements that are made with
regard to the parenting of the
now lives for a significant period each 28 days in the household of her mother
and father. It is acknowledged that she has a
close and important relationship
with the mother and a relationship with the father that a year ago was described
as somewhere between
father and uncle, but which was also acknowledged as
developing and which, in my assessment, would have improved insofar as a
relationship is concerned. She was, pursuant to the previous
arrangements, spending eleven nights with the biological parents, eleven
with her aunt, and was to spend six nights in each 28 with her uncle. That was
not what was occurring however, and Mr I Pita
had already determined that his
role in the child’s life was to be one of a much-loved uncle, rather than
a conflicting role
of father figure balanced against the biological father of
Accordingly,
[X] was spending the majority, if not the entirety, of any time to be spent with
Mr I Pita with her biological parents,
and he was seeing the child more in the
role of a visiting family member than in any way as a father figure. On a
purely mathematical
basis, therefore, more than 60 per cent of the child’s
time was already spent in the home of the parents and, more particularly,
spent in close interaction with her siblings.
P acknowledged the obvious relationship between [X] and her siblings and whether
that was one that could be characterised as brothers
and sisters together, or
cousins together, as was the understanding until recent times, it is important
to recognise that the relationship
is a significant one and one that needs to be
recognised, particularly in light of the differences within the two households.
is, in the parents’ home, one of four siblings, all of whom have to be
dealt with in a fair and balanced way together.
At the present time, 60 per
cent of her life is made up of shared experiences with her siblings and with an
understanding that not
all that is hoped for or sought can be provided. Quite
simply, she needs to know that there are boundaries or limitations on what
might wish for and that what is available to her within the home is available to
her siblings as well. Such a situation does
not arise in the home of Ms Manard.
There, she is an only child and one who it would seem is generally accepted as
receiving all
that she could reasonably wish for and would no doubt be much
loved and, without intent on the part of Ms Manard, spoilt and indulged.
seemed certainly to be the case now that [X] understood and accepted the
distinctions between what could be available to her in
the two homes and moved
between the two without any real difficulty, though it should be noted that Ms P
observed some concerns,
though they could be explained as arising from tiredness
or exasperation at the number of changes that occurred at the time of interview.
at the present time, [X] has just turned 5 and her siblings are progressively a
little older. They are able no doubt at
this time to ignore such differences
and to simply enjoy their time with each other, when and how it might be
available. As they
grow older, however, concerns must be held as to the future
relationship between the siblings, stemming either from feelings by [X]’s
older siblings that they are deprived of the opportunities available to her
because of significant interaction with Ms Manard, or
alternatively and perhaps
even more troublingly, a feeling of entitlement by [X] that she can have and
require more than is available
to her siblings.
father, in particular, alluded to such concerns, when noting the distinctions
between his career and that of his siblings, as
well as of course, Ms Manard.
The aunt and the uncle are both [occupation omitted] They have no biological
children, though there
was certainly some responsibility, at least until
separation, for the boys, [names omitted]. [X]’s life and the
opportunities
available to her, if the aunt and uncle remained as a couple, were
very different to those of her siblings within the parents’
following the separation the opportunities available to [X] in Ms Manard’s
available to her siblings.
a distinction is not one that in my assessment can be ignored. The relationship
that [X] has with her siblings is, one would
expect, one which will have a more
significant length than will be the relationship with either the parents or Ms
Manard, and therefore
is a most important one to see fostered and developed. To
make orders which would see a gulf open between [X] and her siblings in
of their future expectations and, more importantly, their relationship with each
other, is an order which would give rise
to very real concerns as to its impact
upon [X] and her future relationships. That is a matter which is of particular
respect of any final determination of this matter and which would, in
my assessment, be of real concern to the future well-being
of the child.
issue of culture also is important. The parents are traditional in their
acceptance of the importance of family and respect in
all elements of their
lives. As noted by Corrin and Mulitalo in their article, “family is the
institution that shapes and
determines a person’s future.” Respect
for one’s elders and the hierarchy within the family is essential to
in and accepting the position of all within the family.
Manard certainly spoke of elements of respect and of her understanding of the
significance and importance of family to the biological
parents. Notwithstanding
that appreciation of the importance of such matters, however, she certainly did
not see them as all-encompassing
in relation to [X]’s future and to the
and articulate
woman who would teach [X] to question and challenge what was
suggested to be the norm or the expectation of her traditional family
did not, however in my assessment, appreciate the future difficulties that that
might reasonably be expected to cause for
was concerned particularly by Ms Manard’s and also Ms P’s belief
that [X] could move between the two households and
between two sets of standards
or expectations, without difficulty. Both Ms Manard and Ms P, with respect,
seemed to suggest that
as [X] moved between the homes as a four or five year
old, was an indicator of the ease that she would be able to move between the
Manard and Ms P, in my assessment, minimised the future difficulties for [X] and
suggested that the challenges that might be thrown
up as a result of the
child’s observations at school of her peers and their lifestyle, would be
similar to those that would
arise from living within two homes in which there
were two different sets of rules, two different sets of financial circumstances,
two different sets of beliefs and in one home, three siblings experiencing only
one set of rules, financial circumstances and beliefs,
failed to in any way
appreciate the future impacts upon the child and therefore the unsettled nature
of the child’s life.
issue of the impact upon the child and the future consequences for her, of
living within two such different homes, is a matter
which in my assessment is
unanswerable. The future consequences for the child, including particularly her
future relationships with
her parents and her siblings, is a matter of great
significance in relation to the determination of the parenting arrangements with
regard to [X], as well as any determination of what time should specifically be
spent in the households of the parents and Ms Manard.
was noted by a number of witnesses and also within the article “Adoption
and Vae Tama in Samoa”, customary land and
the entitlements of a person
born to a Samoan mother or Samoan parents to customary land is of significance.
No specific evidence
was available in relation to the effect of a shared
parenting arrangement in relation to entitlements of that nature, but certainly
a concern was expressed that such orders may affect rights into the future, not
only of [X], but of her children as well.
future entitlements are of course not a matter upon which specific findings can
be made by me, but if as properly required, consideration
needs to be given to
the impact of such arrangements, then it is another factor to be included in the
weighing up of what arrangements
are in the best interests of this child in the
have at length addressed issues here in respect of responsibilities with regard
to future decisions to be made in relation to the
parenting of [X], and also
indicated the concerns that I have in relation to orders which would provide for
equal time or even substantial
and significant time being spent between the
be the obvious recognition of the relationship between [X] and her
aunt, the “gifted mother”, and the need for that to
be fostered and
developed. To simply sever such a relationship could not be contemplated as
being in the best interests of [X], but
it must be balanced against the need to
foster, develop and build a meaningful relationship between [X] and her parents,
and in particular,
her father, which relationship was observed a year ago to be
less than that which one would expect of a father and daughter, as well
foster and develop the most important relationship that exists between [X] and
her siblings.
parents’ proposal, at least until the matter was under way before the
court, included a recognition of there being a need
for some time to be spent
between [X] and Ms Manard, but that it be recognised as of lesser significance
than the relationship between
[X], her parents and her siblings. At trial, the
position of the parents enunciated by the father, was that there be no specific
time, other than that which might be agreed, but of course that envisaged a
respectful and considered communication between the parents
and Ms Manard, which
despite the best intentions of all concerned, would not necessarily occur.
am more of the view that some specific arrangements for opportunities to be
spent by [X] with her aunt, recognising their close
attachment, but also
acknowledging the primary importance of family, is the most settled and
understandable basis for [X]’s
relationship with her aunt to be continued.
Some time needs to be available for the special relationship between [X] and her
mother” to continue but it must be recognised that it is a
relationship without the primacy of two parents living together
with the other
children of the relationship.
as it may be in the short term for [X] and also for Ms Manard, an opportunity
for time significantly less than that which
is presently occurring is in my
assessment the appropriate arrangements now and into the future. It allows the
continuation and recognition
of the close bond between [X] and her aunt, as she
will over time become, rather than her “gifted mother”, but also
properly recognises the importance of family, culture and respect.
am satisfied that an opportunity for one weekend per month, as well as a holiday
of one week per year, will ensure opportunities
for the relationship that exists
to be continued, but at the same time to recognise that it is not the primary
familial bond that
must be fostered and developed, particularly in a continuing
close and loving family. The orders of the court will be as outlined
Orders page at the commencement of these reasons.
I certify that
the preceding two hundred and seventy-two (272) paragraphs are a true copy of
the reasons for judgment of Coker FM
Date: 11 April 2013
RTF format (546 KB)
Signed PDF/A format