Toltz v Keane [2025] FCA 1386 (14 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Toltz v Keane
[2025] FCA 1386
File number:
NSD 951 of 2025
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
REPRESENTATIVE PROCEEDINGS
application to continue proceeding as a representative proceeding – where
the first respondent made a post on social
media "naming and shaming" the
applicants and proposed represented persons – where the pleadings as
drafted would allow the
proposed represented persons to share in any damages and
compensation
– whether the applicants and proposed represented
persons have the same interest pursuant to r 9.21 of the
Federal Court Rules
(Cth) and are entitled to the same relief – whether in the
interests of justice to convert proceeding where the risk of bearing
orders is higher for the respondents than the applicants and represented persons
pursuant to
Australian Human Rights Commission Act 1986
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– strike out –
where the first and second respondent effectively seek that parts of the amended
originating application
and amended statement of claim be struck out on the
basis that they are evasive, ambiguous, or fail to disclose a reasonable cause
of action under
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
whether some of the allegations objected to are matters for evidence at a later
time – whether other allegations
objected to are so broad as to require
evidence of a global nature – whether objections to some of the
allegations may be remedied
by better particulars
– where applicants submitted that prayers for relief in the amended
originating application were not intended to mean what they
prima facie said
Australian Human Rights Commission Act 1986
(Cth) appears to limit the ability for a respondent to recover costs –
whether first respondent entitled to costs
Legislation:
Australian Human Rights Commission Act
Criminal Code Act 1995
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) r 9.21
Cases cited:
Carnie v Esanda Finance Corporation
[1995] HCA 9
(1995) 182 CLR 398
Toltz v Riemer
[2025] FCA 1385
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
13-14 October 2025
Counsel for the Applicants:
Solicitor for the Applicants:
Rotstein Commercial Lawyers
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Marque Lawyers
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
R Dick SC with B Byrnes
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
Ashurst Australia
NSD 951 of 2025
JOSEPH TOLTZ
SUZANNE RUTLAND
Second Applicant
(and another named in the Schedule)
Third Applicant
THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
Second Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1 and 2 of the applicants’ interlocutory application filed on 1 August
the interlocutory application
) be dismissed.
3 of the interlocutory application be dismissed in so far as it seeks leave to
amend the originating application.
applicants have leave to amend the statement of claim in the manner set out in
the version of that document provided to the respondents
on 5 September 2025 and
appearing in Annexure DPM-2 to the affidavit of Daniel McCoach dated 1 October
2025, save that:
(a) the following material (identified by reference to the paragraph numbers in
that version) is to be removed from the document
prior to its filing:
(i) the words proposed to be added to [8], including the proposed
particulars;
(ii) [9] to [11] and the references to “the persons in Schedule A”
proposed to be added to [2], [38], [51] and [64];
(iii) “descent” in [12(a)];
(iv) [25], [28] and [35]; and
(b) “nationality” in [12(b)] is to be amended to read
“national origin”.
28 November 2025 the parties provide to the chambers of Justice
(a) agreed or competing short minutes of order providing a timetable for
necessary steps up to the close of pleadings, including:
(i) the provision of particulars to ASOC [23];
(ii) the filing of an amended statement of claim that complies with the above
orders; and
(iii) the filing of any further application to amend the statement of claim or
the originating application arising from these orders
or these reasons; and
(b) notification of whether they are content for such orders to be made in
be granted to join Andy Smidt as the fifth applicant to the proceeding.
costs of the interlocutory application be reserved.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
first respondent (
Professor Keane
) is a Professor of Politics at the
University of Sydney (
the University
). In October and November 2023 he
made two posts on his X page relating to the events in Israel on 7 October 2023
and controversies
within the University in the aftermath of those events.
first and second applicants (
Professor Rutland
and were at the time of Professor Keane’s posts, members of the academic
staff of the University. The third applicant
) is an officer of
the Australasian Union of Jewish Students and, at the time of Professor
Keane’s posts, was a student at the
University. The fourth applicant
) was at that time, and remains, a staff member of the
University. Each of the applicants pleads that they are a
or someone who is, or is eligible to be, an Israeli citizen
“Israeli person”
applicants seek declaratory and injunctive relief, compensation and other
redress against Professor Keane and the University under
Australian Human
Rights Commission Act 1986
the AHRC Act
), on the footing that
Professor Keane’s posts contravened
Racial Discrimination
). Relief is sought against the University on
the footing that it is vicariously liable for Professor Keane’s conduct
of the RDA.
applicants filed their originating application and statement of claim on 13 June
proceeding has, so far, been case managed concurrently with
Joseph Toltz
& Ors v Nick Riemer
(NSD950/2025) (
), a proceeding commenced by the same applicants which involves
allegations of contraventions of
by another staff member of the
University. On 14 November 2025 I delivered judgment on interlocutory
applications that sought summary
dismissal of part of the applicants’
claim in that case and to strike out parts of the amended statement of claim
Toltz v Riemer
[2025] FCA 1385
an interlocutory application filed on 1 August 2025 the applicants
(a) leave for Dr Toltz and Professor Rutland to continue the proceeding on their
own behalf and on behalf of 13 other named persons
the proposed represented
(b) leave to file an amended originating application (
) and an amended
statement of claim (
) in the form annexed to an affidavit of Dr
Toltz, making amendments to include the proposed represented persons and some
amendments concerning how the applicants describe themselves.
filed that interlocutory application, the applicants considered their position
further and proposed to file a different form
of amended originating application
and amended statement of claim. At a case management hearing on 21 August 2025,
orders were made
to the effect that:
(a) the applicants were to provide drafts of these documents to the respondents
by 5 September 2025;
(b) the respondents were to file and serve any “objections” to these
documents by 19 September 2025;
(c) the applicants were to file and serve any “response” by 26
September 2025; and
(d) any dispute was to be set down for hearing on 13 and 14 September 2025 (at
the same time as the interlocutory applications in
Toltz v Riemer
referred to above).
versions of the AOA and the ASOC were sent to the respondents’ solicitors
on 5 September 2025. The revised AOA would
add a fifth applicant (
) and would specify that Dr Toltz and Ms Rutland also bring the
application on behalf of the proposed represented persons. The respondents
raised objections to these documents and the applicants responded pursuant to
the orders made on 21 August 2025. In effect, the objections
and the response
constitute the written submissions of the parties on the proposed
amendments.
no amended interlocutory application has been filed, the process that has been
undertaken following the orders of 21 August
2025 make it appropriate to treat
the application filed on 1 August as including an application to join Mr Smidt
as fifth applicant
and to treat the 5 September 2025 versions of the AOA and the
ASOC as the documents sought to be filed.
to the AOA and the ASOC in what follows are to the versions circulated on 5
September 2025. Where I quote from those documents
I will not reproduce the
markup in the 5 September versions unless it is necessary to understand the
issues that arise.
Keane filed submissions on 22 September 2025. In those submissions he did not
oppose the joinder of Mr Smidt as an applicant
but did oppose the continuation
of the proceeding as a representative proceeding. He submitted that, if the
proposed represented
persons wished to participate in the proceeding, they
should be permitted to be joined as applicants. He also objected to some
parts of the ASOC and said that the document should only be accepted
for filing on the basis that these parts are deleted. Most of
the passages
objected to form part of the original statement of claim.
University filed its submissions on 19 September 2025. It did not object to the
continuation of the proceeding as a representative
proceeding but reserved its
position in relation to the standing of one of the proposed represented persons
who apparently does not
identify as Jewish (
Professor Morgan
). It raised
objections to specific parts of the ASOC which partly overlapped with those
advanced by Professor Keane. Again, some
of the words objected to are already in
the statement of claim.
30 September 2025 the applicants’ solicitors sent to the solicitors for
the respondents proposed new versions of the AOA
and the ASOC. These documents
are annexed without further explanation as Annexure DPM-3 to the affidavit of
the applicants’
solicitor (Mr McCoach) of 1 October 2025. The provision of
further proposed versions of the documents had not been provided for in
orders of 21 August 2025 and, if it was foreshadowed in correspondence, that
correspondence is not before the Court.
there are differences between the 5 September and 30 September 2025 versions of
the AOA and ASOC they are not marked (so far as
I can see) and no reference was
made to them in the parties’ submissions. Counsel for the applicants said
at one point during
the hearing that the latter version was the one his clients
were moving on, which is curious given that it was not served in accordance
the Court’s orders and was provided after the respondents had filed their
submissions. I have focused my attention on
the 5 September 2025 versions of the
AOA and ASOC.
Section 18C
of the RDA provides as follows.
(1) It is unlawful for a person to do an act, otherwise than in private, if:
(a) the act is reasonably likely, in all the circumstances, to offend, insult,
humiliate or intimidate another person or a group
of people; and
(b) the act is done because of the race, colour or national or ethnic origin of
the other person or of some or all of the people
in the group.
Note: Subsection (1) makes
certain acts unlawful.
Section 46P
Australian Human Rights
Commission Act 1986
allows people to make complaints to the Australian Human
Rights Commission about unlawful acts. However, an unlawful act is not
necessarily
a criminal offence.
says that this Act does not make
it an offence to do an act that is unlawful because of this Part, unless
Part IV expressly says
that the act is an
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an act is taken not to be done in
private if it:
(a) causes words, sounds, images or writing to be communicated to the public;
(b) is done in a public place; or
(c) is done in the sight or hearing of people who are in a public place.
(3) In this section:
public place
includes any place to which the public have access as
of right or by invitation, whether express or implied and whether or not a
charge is made for admission to the place.
Outline of the pleaded case
Introductory matters
noted earlier, it is pleaded that each of the applicants:
(a) is a Jewish person; or
(b) is, or is eligible to be, an Israeli citizen (defined at [8] as an
“Israeli person”
ASOC proposes to add to [8] an allegation that each applicant “identifies
as a Zionist” and then add the following
by way of particulars.
Zionists are predominantly Jewish people and/or Israeli people who believe in
Israel being a nation state and the national home of
and for the Jewish people.
A substantial proportion of Jewish and/or Israeli people identify themselves as
[9] and [10] propose to add the details of the proposed represented persons and
ASOC [11] would allege that those persons have
the same interest, and are
entitled to the same relief, as the applicants.
is alleged at [12] that, for the purposes of the RDA:
(a) Jewish persons constitute a group of people with a “shared race,
descent and/or ethnic origin”; and
(b) Israeli citizens and Israeli persons constitute a group of persons with a
“shared ethnic origin and/or nationality”.
[13] alleges that Israel is a nation state and “the national home of and
for the Jewish people”. Its citizens “are
mostly Jewish
pleading some general matters about the respondents and Professor Keane’s
X page, the ASOC asserts some propositions relating
to Hamas, including its
listing as a terrorist organisation under the
Criminal Code Act 1995
the Criminal Code Act
) (at [21]-[25]), and the events that
occurred on 7 October 2023 (at [26]-[27]).
The impugned publications
The “Hamas Flag Post”
[29] is as follows.
On or about 8 October 2023, the first day after the 7 October 2023 Hamas
terrorist attacks described in [26]-[28] above, Professor
Keane published the
following picture on his Keane X Page, which shows 5 green Hamas flags with
Arabic writing visible on them (
the Hamas Flag Post
[30] alleges that the Hamas Flag Post remained visible as at the date of the
amended statement of claim and had about 6,232 views
at that time.
is then alleged that each of the flags depicted in the post:
(a) was a “Hamas flag”, used by the Hamas military wing (ASOC
(b) was known to Professor Keane to be such a flag (ASOC [31]); and
(c) “was, or is,” known by the applicants and the represented
persons to be such a flag (ASOC [32]).
[36] is as follows.
The Hamas Flag Post conveyed the following imputations:
activities described in [26]-[28] above of Hamas on October 7, which involved
the killing, rape, maiming, sexual abuse, kidnapping
and torture of Jewish and
Israeli persons, because they were believed to be Jewish or Israeli, was an
event that was to be celebrated,
endorsed, supported and approved of.
Keane celebrated, endorsed, supported and approved those activities.
and its objectives (including those outlined in [22], [23], [24] and [28] above)
were to be celebrated, endorsed, supported
and approved.
Keane celebrated, endorsed, supported and approved of Hamas and its objectives
(including those outlined in [22], [23],
[24] and [28] above).
[37]-[40] articulate how the Hamas Flag Post is alleged to have contravened s
Keane’s posting of the Hamas Flag Post was an act which caused images to
be communicated to the public. They were:
in a public place; and were
in the sight and hearing of people who were in a public place; and
acts done in private.
Keane’s posting of the Hamas Flag Post and its non-removal, by conveying
any, all or some of the imputations alleged
in [36] was reasonably likely, in
all the circumstances, to offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate the
Applicants, the persons in
Schedule A, as well as other Jewish persons and
Israeli persons in Australia.
posting and its non-removal was made or done because of the race, national or
ethnic origin of the people reasonably likely to
be offended, insulted,
humiliated or intimidate [sic] by the posting including because:
subject matter of the post, considering its timing, was directly related to
events that were themseves [sic] directly related
to the race, ethnic origin or
national origin (Jewish and/or Israeli) of the victims of the events of October
posting was plainly calculated to convey a message about or concerned with the
race, ethnic origin or national origin (Jewish
and/or Israeli) of the victims of
the events of October 7;
posting was actuated or motivated by considerations of race, ethnic origin or
national origin or, in the alternative, race, or
ethnic or national origin was
otherwise a factor in Professor Keane’s act.
the premises set out in [16]-[39] above, Professor Keane contravened s 18C of
the RDA and engaged in unlawful discrimination within
the meaning of ss 3(1) and
46P of the AHRC Act
The “Staff Members” Post
[41]-[42] allege that Professor Keane placed a post on his X page on 8 November
2023, which is reproduced at [42] as follows
(ASOC [41] expressly pleads the
making of the statement that appears above the pictures in this post) (
Staff Members post
to ASOC [43] the post had the following attachments:
(a) an email sent by Associate Professor Avril Alba to Professor Keane and the
Vice-Chancellor of the University, and copied to “a
large number of Sydney
University groups”, on 7 November 2023, with a photograph of Professor
(b) a picture showing the names of 17 academics at the University, including the
proposed represented persons, all of whom (except
Professor Morgan) were
“Jewish and/or Israeli academics”; and
(c) a letter purporting to be Professor Keane’s response of 6 November
2023 to an earlier communication from the Vice-Chancellor
to all staff and
[44] alleges that the earlier communication from the Vice-Chancellor (not
attached to Professor Keane’s post or reproduced
in the ASOC) had said
that the University would not tolerate support for Hamas’s recent
terrorist acts.
[45] alleges that Professor Keane had not sought or obtained authorisation from
any of the 17 academics named in his post to
publish their names “or the
content of their email”.
[46] alleges that the Staff Members post remained on Professor Keane’s X
page until it was removed around 21 May 2024 as
the result of a University
disciplinary process. According to ASOC [47], the post was viewed about
30,000-31,000 times in that period.
[48] is as follows.
Professor Keane’s Staff Members Post conveyed the following imputations:
named Jewish and Israeli staff members regarded, treated, considered and were
convinced that Palestinians are “non-humans”
(meaning something less
than or other than human beings).
named Jewish and Israeli staff members were racists who regarded, treated,
considered and were convinced that Palestinians challenging
Israel as a Jewish
named Jewish and Israeli persons, in seeking to defend the existence of Israel
should be condemned and publically [sic] exposed
as self-righteous racists
without any morals, scruples or conscience.
persons and Israeli persons believe that Palestinians or Palestinians
challenging Israel as a Jewish homeland or as their “Promised
are “non humans”.
and Israelis, or the named Jews and Israelis, were acting like the Nazis in
considering Palestinians as “non-humans”
or as something less than,
or other than, human beings.
[49] pleads the falsity of these imputations, ie:
(a) the staff members identified in the post were not racists and did not hold
the opinions allegedly being attributed to them; and
(b) “Jewish persons and Israeli persons as a group or otherwise” did
not hold the opinions allegedly being attributed
[50] is as follows.
The reference to “non-humans” has particular resonance for Jewish
and Israeli persons given its historical use to describe
Jewish persons in that
[51] pleads that the applicants and the proposed represented persons suffered
distress, loss and damage by reason of the Staff
Members post.
[52]-[55] articulate how the Staff Members post is alleged to have contravened s
Keane’s posting of, and failure to remove prior to 21 May 2024,
Keane’s Staff Members Post were acts which
caused words and images to be
communicated to the public. They were:
in a public place; and were
in the sight and hearing of people who were in a public place; and
acts done in private.
Keane’s posting of, and his failure to remove prior to 21 May 2024,
Keane’s Staff Members Post, by conveying
any or all of the imputations
alleged above and by attributing the false characteristics alleged to those
named Jewish and Israeli
Staff Members and to Jewish persons and Israeli persons
on the basis of their group membership or otherwise, was reasonably likely,
all the circumstances, to offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate the Jewish and
Israeli Staff Members named in Keane’s
Staff Members Post and other Jewish
persons and Israeli persons.
posting and its non-removal prior to 21 May 2024 was made or done because of the
race, national or ethnic origin of the people
reasonably likely to be offended,
insulted, humiliated or intimidate [sic] by the posting including because:
post referred to and criticised only Jewish and Israeli people;
did so by reference to their position as being “pro-Israel”;
subject matter of the post was related by context to events that were themseves
[sic] directly related to the race, ethnic origin
or national origin (Jewish
and/or Israeli) of the victims of the events of October 7;
posting was plainly calculated to convey a message about or concerned with the
race, ethnic origin or national origin (Jewish
and/or Israeli) of the people
Keane had earlier posted the Hamas Flag Post which provides context for the real
reason why the Staff Members Post was actuated
by race and/or ethnic origin
and/or national origin or, in the alternative, race, or ethnic or national
origin was otherwise a factor
in Professor Keane’s conduct; and
Keane has a tendency to engage in conduct which does and is intended to offend
and/or insult and/or humiliate and/or intimidate
Jewish people and Israeli
the premises set out in [41]-[54] above, Professor Keane contravened s 18C of
the RDA and engaged in unlawful discrimination within
the meaning of ss 3(1) and
46P of the AHRC Act.
Vicarious liability of the University
[56]-[60] allege that the Staff Members post was made in connection with
Professor Keane’s duties as an employee of the
University and the
University is therefore vicariously liable pursuant to s 18E of the
Complaint under the AHRC Act
[61]-[63] allege that the applicants lodged a complaint with the Australian
Human Rights Commission (
) and that the complaint was terminated
under s 46PH(1B)(b) of the AHRC Act. These are necessary prerequisites to the
commencement
of proceedings for an alleged contravention of the RDA in this
Court which are not presently in issue.
Continuation as a representative proceeding
for the applicants referred to the proposed represented persons several times as
persons who had been “doxed”
by Professor Keane. This description
may have been intended as shorthand but it was ambiguous and unnecessarily
inflammatory. According
to the website of the eSafety Commissioner,
“doxing” includes revealing the identity of someone who was
previously anonymous,
revealing information about someone that allows them to be
sensitive information about someone that could cause them damage. According to
the applicants’ pleading, what Professor Keane
revealed about the proposed
represented persons was their names and the fact that they were signatories of a
message directed to
him. Emails generated within a few hours after the Staff
Members post, which led to the disciplinary process pleaded at ASOC [46]
are annexed to the affidavit of Mr Bradley, upon which Professor Keane relied),
indicate that the message Professor Keane reproduced
in the post with a list of
its signatories was part of a “university-wide email debate”. I was
told from the bar table,
and it does not appear to be in dispute, that both
Professor Keane’s “open letter” to the Vice-Chancellor and the
response which he highlighted in his post had been circulated to a large number
of people on a University mailing list. Professor
Keane might well be said to
have been “naming and shaming” the applicants and the proposed
represented persons in a way
that merits criticism (and potentially contributes
to or exacerbates a contravention of the RDA); however, neither the pleading nor
the evidence presently before the Court indicates that he was revealing anything
number of people.
noted earlier, ASOC [11] would plead that each of the proposed represented
persons has the same interest in the proceeding and
is entitled to the same
relief as Dr Toltz and Professor Rutland (cf r 9.21 of the
Federal Court
)). Although Professor Keane argued
against this proposition, I consider that it is correct in so far as the
question of contravention
of s 18C is concerned (leaving aside the question of
Professor Morgan’s standing, as to which the University reserved its
This is because contravention of s 18C(1) depends relevantly on the
likelihood of a hypothetical reasonable member of the group being
insulted, humiliated or intimidated and not on proof of actual harm or its
extent. The different perspectives and responses
of the five applicants and the
twelve proposed represented persons become significant if and when a
contravention has been established
and questions of remedy arise.
addition to declarations, injunctions and an order for a public apology, which
if granted would operate in the same way regardless
of who the applicants are
and whether they represent other persons, the originating application, as filed,
seeks the following order
in prayers 5 and 6.
Injunctions
requiring Professor Keane and Sydney University to perform any reasonable act or
course of conduct, including to pay and/or
redress any distress, loss or damage
(including harm to repute) and psychological injury suffered by any of the
complainants or the
persons they represent, in a form to be determined, and to
pay aggravated and punitive damages by reason of Professor Keane's and
University's unlawful discrimination.
order for payment of damages by way of compensation for loss and damage
(including harm to repute and aggravated and punitive damages)
and for distress
and psychological injury suffered by any of the Applicants or persons they
represent, suffered by the seventeen
staff members named in Keane's Staff
Members Post because of the unlawful discrimination arising from or by reason of
is obviously overlap between these prayers and some infelicity in their
drafting. The reference to “complainants”
in prayer 5 is confusing,
and as things currently stand the references to “persons they
represent” in both prayers appear
to be surplusage. It is not clear how
the present applicants have standing to pursue a claim for redress or damages on
the other persons identified in the Staff Members post unless the
proceeding is treated as a representative proceeding. However,
it is reasonably
clear that, if contraventions of s 18C are made out, prayers 5 and 6 will
require detailed evidence (including expert
evidence) as to the loss, damage,
distress and psychological injury alleged to have been suffered by each of the
applicants. The
inclusion of these prayers in the originating application will
very likely result in the trial being split between issues of liability
, and may have the result that the proceeding takes years to
resolve in the absence of settlement.
AOA, in addition to specifying that the proceeding is a representative
proceeding, would recast prayers 5 and 6 as follows.
Injunctions
requiring Professor Keane and Sydney University to perform any reasonable act or
course of conduct, including to pay and/or
redress any distress, loss or damage
(including harm to repute) and psychological injury suffered by any of the
complainants
or the persons
the First and Second
represent, in a form to be determined, and
to pay aggravated and punitive damages by reason of Professor Keane's and Sydney
University's
unlawful discrimination.
payment of damages by way of compensation for loss and damage (including harm to
repute and aggravated and punitive damages) and
for distress and psychological
injury suffered by any of the
First and Second
Applicants or persons they
suffered by the seventeen
staff members
named in Keane's Staff Members Post
because of the unlawful
discrimination arising from or by reason of the
alternatively,
at their option, an order for the payment of an amount equal to the compensation
to which they would be entitled paid
to a charity or charities nominated by
the proposed AOA would seek the payment of damages to Dr Toltz and Professor
Rutland and all of the “persons they
represent”. It is thus unclear
whether the third to fifth applicants no longer seek the same relief (in which
case a question
might arise as to whether they should be separately
represented), have fallen out of prayer 6 as the result of a drafting slip, or
are intended to be included within the phrase “persons they
represent”. The third to fifth applicants would still stand
from the redress sought in prayer 5, but they would come within the amended
prayer 6 only on the footing that they are
persons whom Dr Toltz and Professor
Rutland “represent”.
that as it may, it is clear that what these amendments (combined with the
continuation of the proceeding as a represented proceeding)
would do is bring
all of the represented persons (currently proposed to be twelve, but that number
may change) within the class of
those who would benefit from redress under
prayer 5 and/or damages under prayer 6. Taking into account the joinder of Mr
the fifth applicant, this takes from four to seventeen the number of
persons as to whom evidence of loss, damage, distress and psychological
would need to be adduced, responded to and assessed in the event that
contraventions are established. Obviously, also, it
greatly increases the
potential exposure of the respondents. If the proceeding reaches this stage it
will, almost certainly, no longer
be the case that the “same
interest” test in r 9.21 is satisfied.
may rightly be said that, if Professor Keane has engaged in unlawful conduct, he
and his employer must suffer the consequences
provided for by law including
orders to compensate those who have been harmed by the conduct. However, this is
not the only consideration
in play in relation to procedural decisions such as
whether a proceeding should be conducted as a representative proceeding.
for Professor Keane drew attention to s 46PSA of the AHRC Act, which provides as
46PSA Costs
(1) This section applies to proceedings (including an appeal) in a court that
relate to an application made by a person (the
under section 46PO in respect of one or more respondents to a terminated
When respondent liable for costs
(2) Subject to subsection (4), if the applicant is successful in
proceedings on one or more grounds, the court must order each respondent
whom the applicant is successful to pay the applicant’s costs.
(3) The court may order that the costs to be paid by the respondent be assessed
on an indemnity basis or otherwise.
(4) If the court is satisfied that the applicant’s unreasonable act or
omission caused the applicant to incur costs, the court
is not required to order
the respondent to pay the costs incurred as a result of that act or omission.
When applicant liable for costs
(5) Subject to subsection (6), the applicant must not be ordered by the
court to pay costs incurred by another party to the proceedings.
(6) The applicant may be ordered to pay the costs if:
(a) the court is satisfied that the applicant instituted the proceedings
vexatiously or without reasonable cause; or
(b) the court is satisfied that the applicant’s unreasonable act or
omission caused the other party to incur the costs; or
(c) all of the following apply:
(i) the other party is a respondent who was successful in the proceedings;
(ii) the respondent does not have a significant power advantage over the
(iii) the respondent does not have significant financial or other resources
relative to the applicant.
Representative applications
(7) In the case of a representative application, subsection (6) does not
authorise the court concerned to award costs against a person
on whose behalf
the application is made other than the person who made the application.
provision was enacted in substitution for the previous version of s 46PSA by
Schedule 1 to the
Australian Human Rights Commission (Costs Protection) Act
(Cth) with effect from 2 October 2024 and applies to the present
proceeding. Its evident intention is to protect applicants in proceedings
commenced under the AHRC Act, by
costs to be awarded against
the respondent if an applicant succeeds on one or more grounds (other than costs
incurred by reason of
an “unreasonable act or omission”) (s
46PSA(2)-(4)) and significantly
the circumstances in which the
Court may award costs against an applicant (s 46PSA(5)-(6)). Despite these
limitations there is some
prospect of Professor Keane being able to recover some
of his costs if he is successful, without having to show that the proceeding
vexatious or the applicants had acted unreasonably, under s 46PSA(6)(c). It is
much less likely that the University will be able
to recover any of its
additionally (and significantly here), s 46PSA(7) stands in the way of any order
for costs against a represented person.
The consequence is that, if the
proceeding continues as a representative proceeding on the basis of the proposed
amendments, the
proposed represented persons will be able to recover damages or
redress for such losses as can be proven (and
prima facie
the applicants
will be entitled to recover the costs of that exercise if successful), but will
not bear the burden of any costs order
if the claims advanced on their behalf do
not succeed. A costs order may be able to be made in Professor Keane’s
favour against
the applicants (who presumably are prepared to take on this
risk), but they are individuals and there is no evidence concerning their
capacity to satisfy such an order.
short, the proposed representative persons would enjoy the fruits of success but
would not bear any of the risk associated with
failure. This is significant in
circumstances where, from their point of view, involvement in the proceeding
would be in substance
a money claim. I describe it in this way because they
(along with other Jewish and/or Israeli persons) would enjoy vindication by
of declaratory relief, and the benefit of Professor Keane being enjoined to take
down the impugned posts and not repeat his behaviour,
whether or not the
proceeding is formally conducted on their behalf.
these circumstances it is not in the interests of justice to allow the proposed
amendments to the originating application and statement
of claim converting the
proceeding into a representative proceeding. If the case is to be prolonged and
the costs burden increased
by claims for compensation or redress brought on
behalf of persons other than the present applicants, those persons should seek
be joined as applicants. Professor Keane has indicated that he would not
oppose this.
for the applicants submitted that the intention of the proposed amendments was
only to allow the proposed represented persons
to take the benefit of the
declaratory relief, so that they could rely on
res judicata
claims against Professor Keane and the University in separate proceedings should
they wish to do so (referring to
Carnie v Esanda Finance Corporation
[1995] HCA 9
(1995) 182 CLR 398
at 423 (Toohey and Gaudron JJ)). If the proposed
amendments to prayers 5 and 6 were framed in this way, that would take much
all) of the force out of Professor Keane’s objection to the
proceeding continuing as a representative proceeding.
the submission flies in the face of the terms in which the amendments are
drafted. As discussed above, in their terms, prayers
5 and 6 as proposed to be
amended constitute claims for damages and other forms of redress on behalf of
the proposed represented
persons. The suggestion that they should be read as not
having that effect was perplexing. They were drafted and settled by experienced
practitioners and their import is, in this respect at least, clear.
difficulty cannot be avoided by refusing leave to amend prayers 5 and 6 but
allowing the other amendments. This is because prayers
5 and 6 in their current,
unamended, form also refer to the persons whom the applicants
“represent”. Allowing the other
proposed amendments to the
originating application would bring this language into play and create the
unfairness discussed above.
If left in their current form, prayers 5 and 6 would
still fail to reflect what counsel says his clients (and those whom they wish
represent) are seeking.
will therefore refuse the interlocutory application in so far as it seeks to
amend the originating application and to insert ASOC
[9] to [11] (and
consequential references in the ASOC to the proposed represented persons). It is
not the role of the Court to redraft
the amendments sought by the applicants;
nor is it desirable to leave an interlocutory application which has been fully
limbo while yet another version of the proposed amendments is drafted
and discussed. If the applicants redraft their proposed amendments
prayers 5 and 6 do not give rise to the issues discussed above, the question of
a representative proceeding can be re-agitated
by filing a fresh interlocutory
application and may face less resistance.
noted earlier, each of the respondents seeks to exclude certain passages of the
ASOC. Their position is that leave to file the
ASOC should be granted only on
the basis that these passages are excluded from it. This is in substance a
strike-out application
as to some of the passages that are objected to, because
these already appear in the existing statement of claim.
“Or is eligible to be” in ASOC
Keane objects to these words. The same objection was taken to identical words in
an equivalent paragraph of the amended
statement of claim in
repeat what I said in my reasons in that case at [106]-[114].
Aspects of the ASOC [8] and the associated
particulars
Keane objects to the words “predominantly Jewish people and/or Israeli
people” and to the allegation that “[a]
substantial proportion of
Jewish and/or Israeli people identify themselves as Zionists” in the
particulars to ASOC [8]. The
same objections were taken to parts of [10] of the
amended statement of claim in
, but the second was ultimately not
pressed. I understood counsel to be taking the same approach to ASOC [8] in the
present case.
I repeat what I said in
at [116]-[120].
University makes a broader objection. It seeks to prevent the insertion of the
closing words of ASOC [8] (“and identifies
as Zionist”) and the
associated particulars (which are devoted to explaining the meaning of that
University correctly points out that (in contrast to
impugned posts in the present case make no reference to Zionists or Zionism. The
term “Zionist” does not appear
again in the ASOC, except in the
purported quotation from the “Hamas covenants” at ASOC [23] (and in
the descriptions
of the proposed represented persons at [9]). It is thus not a
concept that plays any role in the pleaded case.
is (or at least should be) uncontroversial that Zionism is a political
philosophy or ideology and not a race or an ethnic group;
that not all Jewish or
Israeli people are Zionists; and that disparagement of Zionists or Zionism is
disparagement of a race or ethnic group (see
at [93]-[99] and the cases discussed there; see also [119]). It can be accepted
that evidence is likely to demonstrate a very substantial
overlap between the
set of persons who are or see themselves as Zionists and the set of persons who
are Jewish or Israeli, and the
circumstances of particular cases may be such
that what purports to be criticism of Zionism is (or is likely to be perceived
in substance an attack on Jewish or Israeli people. However, there is no
indication that that is what is sought to be proved in this
case. The reference
to Zionism in ASOC [8] and the attempt to impose a meaning on that term (some
aspects of which may be contested)
is therefore a distraction which has the
potential to prolong the proceeding unnecessarily.
will therefore not allow the proposed addition in ASOC [8].
“Descent” in ASOC [12(a)] and “and/or
nationality” in ASOC [12](b)
respondents object to “descent” and Professor Keane objects to
“and/or nationality”. The same objection
was taken to the inclusion
of these words in [8] of the amended statement of claim in
repeat what I said in that case at [115] and will strike out the word
“nationality”.
University also submits that “descent” should be struck out from the
first paragraph of the AOA. However, while the
argument that this word should
not be used obviously has force, the word already appears in the originating
application and there
is no application before me to strike out parts of that
document. I intend to treat the first two paragraphs of the originating
application
(which summarise the applicants’ claims) as having been
overtaken by the more detailed articulation in the ASOC.
Keane objects to ASOC [23], which is in the same terms as [28] of the amended
statement of claim in
. An objection was taken to that paragraph
which I determined could be dealt with by provision of particulars. ASOC [23]
dealt with in the same way.
ASOC [25] and [35]
Keane objects to ASOC [25], which is part of the pleading in relation to Hamas.
It reads as follows.
Under s 80.2E ‘
Prohibited symbols’,
which is part of
Subdivision CA—Publicly displaying, and trading in, prohibited
symbols and giving Nazi salute’
, a prohibited terrorist organisation
symbol is defined as:
symbol that a terrorist organisation (within the meaning of Division 102) uses,
or members of a terrorist organisation use, to
identify the organisation;
that so nearly resembles a symbol to which paragraph a. applies that it is
likely to be confused with, or mistaken for,
that symbol.
legislative reference in this paragraph appears to be to the Criminal Code Act,
pursuant to which Hamas has been listed as a terrorist
organisation.
is a long time since the rules relating to pleadings prevented the pleading of a
point of law (see now r 16.02(3) of the Rules).
However, it is at least
customary to plead only points of law that have a bearing on the case being
ASOC [25] links with ASOC [35] in which it is alleged that the Hamas Flag Post
was “a post of a ‘
prohibited terrorist organisation
’” (original emphasis). However, neither the ASOC nor the
submissions of the applicants on these paragraphs explain how
the effect of a
definition in the Criminal Code Act is relevant to the issues raised by s
18C(1)(a) and (b) in relation to either
of the impugned posts by Professor
Keane. It may be the case that Professor Keane has exposed himself to criminal
prosecution by
posting a picture showing Hamas flags, or flags that are very
similar to Hamas flags, but that is not an issue in this proceeding.
criminality of the conduct (if that is what is alleged) may be part of the
“circumstances” in which the post occurred,
but it is not a
circumstance without some articulation of how it is said to
affect the reaction of a hypothetical group member to that conduct or
demonstrate that Professor Keane was motivated by a protected characteristic of
the group. The point is not picked up in the imputations
pleaded at ASOC [36] or
in ASOC [38] or [39]. Additionally, if it is alleged that Professor Keane
committed a criminal act, that
should be pleaded with clarity and not left to
inference. ASOC [25] and [35] should not be permitted to remain in the
is appropriate to note here that there may be a controversy concerning whether
the flags shown in the Hamas Flag Post really are
Hamas flags and whether it
matters if they are not. Counsel for Professor Keane pointed to an email,
forming part of the correspondence
related to the disciplinary proceeding
referred to above, in which one of the proposed represented persons (Dr Babicz)
this post as depicting “five
green flags
Palestinian flags, but
flags)” (original
emphasis). The response of the applicants was, in substance, that this did not
matter because Hamas is a
militant Islamic organisation. While that response can
perhaps be criticised, it is not clear what Dr Babicz meant in the email
to. Nor is there any indication of whether he has special expertise in
this area, whether he spoke for the applicants, what his current
view is, or how
other Jewish or Israeli people understood the flags depicted in the post. I do
not consider that the propriety of
the pleading is undermined by this factor.
Whether the flags shown were those of Hamas, or would be understood by a
reasonable reader
to show affiliation with or support for Hamas, will be a
matter for evidence in due course.
respondents object to ASOC [28]. It is materially the same as [32] of the
amended statement of claim in
and will be struck out for the
reasons set out at [130] of my reasons in that case.
ASOC [54](e) and (f)
[54] (which is set out above) is a central element of the pleaded case. It
alleges that the Staff Members post was made “because
of” the race,
national or ethnic origin of the persons reasonably likely to be offended,
insulted, humiliated or intimidated.
The sub-paragraphs of ASOC [54] set out the
reasons why the applicants contend that this conclusion should be reached. The
objects to sub-paras (e) and (f).
Sub-paragraph
(e), which pleads the making of the Hamas Flag Post, is said to operate
prejudicially to the University. It is submitted
that the University is alleged
to be vicariously liable only for the Staff Members post and should not be
called on to address a
publication in respect of which it is not said to be
do not accept this submission. ASOC [54] is an allegation about Professor
Keane’s motivation in carrying out a particular
act (an act for which the
University is alleged to be vicariously liable). Sub-paragraph (e), at least as
I read it, is put forward
as a reason why the allegation in the
of the paragraph should be found to be made out. While I presently have some
difficulty in seeing how this follows, that will no
doubt be the subject of
detailed submissions at a later time. The point for present purposes is that the
making of the Hamas post
is pleaded as a matter of fact from which an inference
(as to Professor Keane’s state of mind) is alleged to arise in relation
the making of the Staff Members post. That alleged inference is part of what the
University must necessarily deal with in meeting
the claim arising from the
Staff Members post. It does not follow that the University will be required to
take a position on whether
the Hamas Flag Post contravened s 18C.
Sub-paragraph
(f) alleges that Professor Keane has a tendency to engage in conduct which
“does and is intended to” offend,
insult, humiliate or intimidate
Jewish people and Israeli people. This is equivalent to [88(c)] of the amended
statement of claim
, which I declined to strike out for reasons
set out at [149]. The University objects to sub-para (f) on the ground that
no need to prove “intention” for the purposes of s 18C, and
seeking to prove this element by reference to a (currently)
unidentified set of
other acts of Dr Keane will unnecessarily prolong the proceedings.
also reject this submission. Again, I presently have some difficulty in
understanding how the foreshadowed “tendency”
evidence will be
useful but assume that this will be elaborated in detail at a later time. The
important point for present purposes
is that the alleged “intention”
to offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate is pleaded not as an element of a
contravention
of s 18C but as a characteristic of behaviour which Professor
Keane is alleged to have a tendency to engage in. This tendency is
alleged to be
a basis for a finding about Professor Keane’s state of mind at the time of
making the Staff Members post.
will therefore allow [54](e) and (f).
Disposition
the reasons set out above I will make orders to the following effect.
(a) Prayers 1 and 2 of the interlocutory application (which seek leave to
continue the proceeding as a representative proceeding
and to amend the title of
the proceeding accordingly) will be dismissed.
(b) Prayer 3 of the interlocutory application will be dismissed in so far as it
seeks leave to amend the originating application.
(c) Leave will be granted to the applicants to amend the statement of claim in
the manner set out in the version of that document
provided to the respondents
on 5 September 2025, save that “nationality” is to be changed to
“national origin”
in [12(b)] and the following are to be removed
from the document prior to its filing (by reference to the paragraph numbers in
(i) the words proposed to be added to [8], including the proposed
particulars;
(ii) [9] to [11] and the references to “the persons in Schedule A”
proposed to be added to [2], [38], [51] and [64];
(iii) “descent” in [12(a)];
(iv) [25], [28] and [35].
(d) The parties will be directed to file agreed or competing short minutes of
order providing a timetable for necessary steps up
to the close of pleadings,
(i) the provision of particulars to ASOC [23];
(ii) the filing of an amended statement of claim that complies with the above
orders; and
(iii) any further application to amend the statement of claim or the originating
application arising from these orders or these reasons.
(e) Leave will be granted to join Andy Smidt as the fifth applicant to the
proceeding.
the applicants nor the University sought costs. Professor Keane sought his costs
of the interlocutory application.
s 46PSA of the AHRC Act, I would order that the applicants pay 50 percent of
Professor Keane’s costs of the interlocutory
application on the basis that
he was put to the expense of mounting a detailed argument against the
application for the proceeding
to continue as a representative proceeding which
was not effectively answered except by a submission that the prayers for relief
in the AOA were not intended to mean what they said on their face (resulting in
this aspect of the interlocutory application having
to go back to the drawing
board). I am inclined to think that an order along these lines can be made in
accordance with s 46PSA,
in the light of subs (6)(b).
as explained in
, in the light of how s 46PSA(2) is expressed,
there is some uncertainty as to how the section operates in relation to the
interlocutory applications. I will therefore reserve the costs of the
interlocutory application so that submissions can be made on
this question at an
appropriate time.
I certify that the preceding eighty-one (81)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 14 November 2025
Fourth Applicant:
RTF format (4.84 MB)
Signed PDF/A format