1500513 [2015] MRTA 846 (25 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 846
(25 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
Mr Ahmed Mohammed Dhabab
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
BCC2014/3372595
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Bruce MacCarthy
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision to cancel the
applicant’s Subclass 571 Schools Sector visa.
Statement made on 25 June 2015 at 8:23am
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision dated 5 January 2015 made by a
delegate of the Minister for Immigration to cancel
the applicant’s
Subclass 571 Schools Sector visa under s.116 of the
Migration Act 1958
delegate cancelled the visa under s.116(1)(b) on the basis that the applicant
had not complied with Condition 8532 of his visa.
The issue in the present case
is whether that ground for cancellation is made out, and if so, whether the visa
should be cancelled.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 17 March 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The Tribunal also received oral
evidence from the person
acting as the applicant’s guardian in Australia. The Tribunal hearing was
conducted with the assistance
of an interpreter in the Arabic and English
the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the decision to cancel
the applicant’s visa should be affirmed.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
s.116 of the Act, the Minister may cancel a visa if he or she is satisfied that
certain grounds specified in that provision
are made out. Relevantly, to this
case, these include the ground set out in s.116(1)(b). If satisfied that the
ground for cancellation
is made out, the decision maker must proceed to consider
whether the visa should be cancelled, having regard to all the relevant
circumstances, which may include matters of government
Does the ground for cancellation exist?
visa may be cancelled under s.116(1)(b) if the Minister or the Tribunal is
satisfied that the holder did not comply with a condition
of his visa. In this
instance, two of the conditions attached to the applicant’s visa were
Conditions 8202 and 8532 (cl.571.611
of Schedule 2 to the Regulations).
Relevant extracts of those conditions are attached to this decision.
to the applicant’s situation, Condition 8202(2) required him to continue
to be enrolled in a course of a kind prescribed
for Subclass 571, and Condition
8532 required him to stay in Australia with either a parent or a person who had
custody of him, or
a relative nominated by a parent or a person who had custody
of him, that relative being over the age of 21 and of good character.
the arrangements for the applicant’s accommodation support and general
welfare had to be approved by the education
provider for the course to which the
applicant’s visa related.
Condition 8532
the hearing, the applicant confirmed that he had not yet turned 18 and he was
neither an AusAid student nor a Defence student.
Given this evidence, the
Tribunal finds that the provisions of Condition 8532 apply to him.
the hearing, the applicant said that when he first came to Australia, he was
staying with his step uncle. He said that that man
was the husband of his
maternal aunt [which would make him the applicant’s uncle in accordance
with normal Australian usage].
He said that his uncle had sent him back to
Saudi Arabia in early November 2014, but he returned later that month. The
circumstances
in which this happened are discussed in greater detail below.
person with whom he was now staying was not a blood relative but was regarded as
a close relative in Islamic society because,
in his infancy, he had been breast
fed by the applicant’s mother.
Tribunal accepts that this is the case but, it is clear that the person with
whom the applicant is now staying is not a person
of a kind referred to in
Condition 8532(a). He is not a parent of the applicant, a person who has
custody of the applicant or a
“relative” within the meaning of that
term as defined in r.1.03.
there is no evidence before the Tribunal that the arrangements for the
applicant’s accommodation, support and general
welfare have been approved
by the education provider for the course he proposes to undertake. It was made
clear to the applicant
at the hearing that the Tribunal required such evidence.
9 April 2015, at the Tribunal’s request, an officer attempted to contact
the applicant by phone regarding this matter and,
having failed to do so, send
him an email message drawing his attention to the fact that he had still not
provided evidence of a
current enrolment or evidence that his education provider
had approved the arrangements for his accommodation, support and general
welfare. The message advised the applicant that, without this evidence the
Tribunal might decide to affirm the decision to cancel
the visa. On 13 April
2015, the applicant said he was having some difficulty obtaining relevant
documentation required by his education
provider. He asked for further
Tribunal waited a further two months, but no further submissions were received.
On 15 June 2015, at the Tribunal’s request,
an officer of the Tribunal
wrote to the applicant (by email) stating that, in response to his message of 13
April 2015, the Tribunal
had waited a further 8 weeks but had not received any
further submissions. The applicant was advised that the Tribunal would wait
until 23 June 2015 for further submissions but, without evidence of a current
enrolment and evidence that his proposed education
provider had approved the
arrangements for his accommodation, support and general welfare, the Tribunal
may decide to affirm the
cancellation of his visa.
at the date and time of this decision,
the applicant has not provided any
evidence that his proposed education provider has approved the arrangements for
his accommodation,
support and general welfare,. In these circumstances, the
Tribunal finds that the applicant has not complied with Condition 8532
ground for cancellation in s.116(1)(b) exists.
Condition 8202
the hearing, the applicant confirmed that his only substantive visa was the
Subclass 571 visa that was cancelled. In addition
to confirming that he was
neither an AusAid student nor a Defence student, he advised that he was not a
secondary exchange student.
In these circumstances, he was required to be
enrolled in a registered course (Condition 8202(2)(a)).
enrolment requirement in condition 8202 is a continuing requirement and does not
allow the visa holder to cease to be enrolled
in a course, even to the extent of
a temporary gap in enrolment (
Liu v MIMIA
[2003] FCA 1170 (Cooper
October 2003), at [19]-[20]). Furthermore, the enrolment must relate to and be
an enrolment capable of satisfying the criteria
and conditions of the visa. For
a Subclass 571 visa, the enrolment must be an enrolment that would satisfy that
Chen v MIAC
[2011] FMCA 177 (Burnett
FM, 8 April 2011) at
[31]-[35]. The types of courses that would satisfy Subclass 571 were,
relevantly to the applicant’s case,
set out in the instrument IMMI 12/037.
In that instrument, the following courses were specified for Subclass 571:
Secondary School
(including Junior Secondary and Senior Secondary); and
Exchange Programs.
discussed with the applicant at the hearing in accordance with the provisions of
s.359AA of the Act, PRISMS records indicate that
the applicant’s enrolment
in Senior Secondary (Years 11 and 12) ended on 17 November 2014. The records
show that, as at 3
March 2015, he had no further enrolment in any course of
study. The Tribunal pointed out that his failure to maintain enrolment
registered course could lead it to conclude that he was in breach of Condition
8202, and that this would be an independent ground
for cancellation, or a factor
to be taken into account when considering whether the visa should be cancelled.
When invited to comment
on, or respond to this information, the applicant asked
for, and was granted further time to respond. However, he said that he had
enrolled in an English language course at ILSC Language Schools between 2
February and 6 March 2015. He provided evidence supporting
that assertion
though, as pointed out by the Tribunal, there is no record of any such enrolment
upon the evidence before it, the Tribunal finds that the applicant was not
enrolled in any registered course from 17 November
2014 until 2 February 2015.
Even though the Tribunal accepts the evidence presented at the hearing that the
applicant was enrolled
in an English language course between 2 February and 6
March 2015, this was not an enrolment in a course of a kind prescribed for
Subclass 571.
noted above, the applicant was advised on 9 April 2015 that, without evidence of
enrolment, the Tribunal might decide to affirm
the decision to cancel his visa.
He was reminded of this in the Tribunal’s email message of 15 June 2015.
As at the date
and time of this decision, there is no evidence before the
Tribunal of any suitable enrolment. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied
the applicant has not complied with Condition 8202 (2)(a) and that,
independently of the conclusion in paragraph 15 above, the
cancellation in s.116(1)(b) exists.
Consideration of discretion
found that the applicant has not complied with a condition of the visa, the
Tribunal must consider whether to exercise its
discretion to cancel the visa.
There are no matters specified in the Act or Regulations that are required to be
considered in relation
to the exercise of this discretion. However, the
Tribunal has had regard to matters raised by the applicant as to why the visa
not be cancelled, and government policy guidelines contained in the
Department’s Procedures Advice Manual (PAM3), though the
acknowledges that these guidelines are not binding on
The purpose of the applicant’s travel and stay in Australia
applicant came to Australia for the purposes of study. He studied the first
year of senior secondary school in 2014. According
to PRISMS, he notified
cessation of studies and his enrolment was cancelled on 17 November 2014.
However, he told the Tribunal that
it was his uncle who gave that advice.
said his uncle sent him home in early November 2014, but his parents returned
him to Australia later that month. He has provided
evidence indicating that he
has been trying to re-enrol since then.
all the circumstances, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant genuinely
came to Australia for the purposes of study.
The circumstances in which ground for cancellation arose
ground for cancellation arose when the applicant ceased to stay in Australia
with a person of a kind mentioned in Condition 8532(a).
The applicant explained
that at some stage while he was staying with his uncle, he had some disagreement
with him. He said that
his uncle had suddenly told him, in November 2014 that
he had to return to Saudi Arabia. His uncle put him on a plane and sent him
applicant’s wider family, and the family send him
continue his studies, suggesting he reside with the person regarded as a
that person is not a person who meets the strict definition of
“relative” as that term is defined in r.1.03, the
applicant has
submitted evidence that satisfies the Tribunal that the person is a person
nominated by the applicant’s parents,
and is a person regarded in their
country is a close relative. The Tribunal is satisfied that that person is over
the age of 21
and has no reason to believe he is anything other than a person of
good character. At the hearing, the Tribunal gained the impression
person concerned genuinely intends to act in the applicant’s best
Independently,
a ground for cancellation also arose because of the applicant’s failure
to be enrolled in a course of study
of a kind specified for Subclass 571. The
Tribunal considers that the applicant has had more than enough time to rectify
that situation.
He was reminded at the hearing (and in writing on two
subsequent occasions) of the need to provide details of any relevant
The reason for, and extent of, the breach of Conditions 8532 and 8202
the hearing, the applicant said that he had not been well treated by his uncle
and that he was not happy during the time he stayed
with his uncle. He said
that his family were not happy with what his uncle did, and that our satisfied
with the current arrangements.
The applicant provided a copy of an application
for the applicant’s enrolment in a New South Wales government school. In
that document, the person with whom the applicant is now living has been
nominated by the parents as a person appropriate to provide
accommodation and welfare. That document nominates the person as the
applicant’s “second cousin” though
the Tribunal accepts the
applicant’s oral evidence that this is how the relationship is regarded,
not a strict biological relationship.
As mentioned above, the applicant has
provided evidence that his family regard the person with whom the applicant is
as being equivalent to a brother.
applicant has now passed the age of 17. The breach of Condition 8532 will only
exist for approximately 10 months more until the
applicant turns 18.
Nevertheless,
the applicant has been in breach of Condition 8202 since he returned to
Australia in November 2014. He has satisfied
the Tribunal that he applied to
the New South Wales Education Department and to TAFE but was refused. He
believes he was refused
because of adverse comments made by his uncle to those
organisations. He told the Tribunal in March that he was “waiting for
letter of offer “ from Holmes High school and that he needed to obtain
“some paper work from Saudi Arabia” requested
by Holmes for this
purpose. In April, the applicant advised the Tribunal that he could not provide
information requested by the
Tribunal as Holmes College would not provide
relevant documents until a Federal police check have been completed. He later
copies of a number of documents, including a receipt for a fee paid for
a Federal police check, but he did not provide evidence of
an enrolment or
evidence that his proposed education provider had approved the arrangements for
his accommodation, support and general
noted above, after waiting for a further period of approximately 2 months, the
Tribunal advised the applicant, in an email message
that it would allow a
further week for such evidence to be provided, but he has provided no further
information.
this background, the Tribunal regards the continuing breach of Condition 8202 as
a serious one. The Tribunal acknowledges
that the applicant was enrolled in an
English language between February and March 2015, but is of the view that he has
had more than enough opportunity since then to enrol in a course of
study appropriate to his visa.
The degree of hardship that may be caused to the applicant and any family
the Tribunal accepts that cancellation of the visa will in all likelihood mean
that the applicant will have to leave Australia
without obtaining any
educational outcome, the Tribunal does not regard this as being of great weight
when considered in the context
of the extent of the breach of Condition 8202.
There is no evidence that the decision will cause any financial hardship to him
members of his family.
The applicant’s past and present conduct towards the department
Tribunal is not aware of any adverse conduct by the applicant in relation to the
Department.
Whether there would be consequential cancellations under s.140
is no evidence to suggest that any other person’s visa would be cancelled
under s.140 if the applicant’s visa were
Whether any international obligations would be breached as a result of the
cancellation
is no evidence to suggest that the cancellation of the visa would result in the
breach of any of Australia’s international
obligations.
Any other relevant matters raised by the applicant.
discussed above, the Tribunal accepts that the applicant’s problems arose
because of the action of his uncle in late 2014.
Nevertheless, the Tribunal
believes the applicant has had more than sufficient time to secure an
alternative enrolment of the appropriate
Considering
the circumstances as a whole, the Tribunal concludes that the visa should be
Tribunal affirms the decision to cancel the applicant’s Subclass 571
Schools Sector visa.
Bruce MacCarthy
Migration Regulations 1994
holder (other than the holder of a Subclass 560 (Student) visa who is an AusAID
student or the holder of a Subclass 576 (AusAID
or Defence Sector) visa) must
meet the requirements of subclauses (2) and (3).
(2) A holder meets
the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the holder is enrolled in a registered course; or
(b) in the case of the holder of a Subclass 560 or 571 (Schools Sector) visa
who is a secondary exchange student — the holder
is enrolled in a full
time course of study or training.
If the holder has not turned 18 and is
AusAID student
Defence student
holder must stay
in Australia
with a person who is:
of the holder or a person who has
of the holder; or
of the holder who:
(A) is nominated by a
of the holder or a person who has
of the holder; and
turned 21; and
(C) is of good character; or
(b) the arrangements for the holder’s
accommodation, support and general welfare must be approved by the
for the course to which the holder’s visa relates, and the
holder must not
before the day nominated by the education provider as the day on
which those arrangements are to commence.
RTF format (164 KB)
Signed PDF/A format