Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Building and Construction General On-Site Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 988 (31 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(AM2009/122)
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION GENERAL ON-SITE AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT LAWLER
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 31 DECEMBER 2009
This decision arises from an application by the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU) to vary the
Building and Construction General On-site Award 2010
(the modern award). First, the application seeks an allowance for working on second-hand floor coverings. Secondly, the application
seeks to include classifications in relation to floor covering and finishing in the relevant broadbanded classification definitions.
Specifically, the CFMEU variations are:
“1. Insert a new cl.22.3(s) after the existing cl.22.3(r) as follows:
‘(s) Second-hand floor covering
An employee working on second-hand floor covering must be paid 25% of the minimum wage applicable to the employee’s classification
extra while engaged on such work.
All work on floor coverings once they have been laid and fixed, must be classed as second-hand unless such floor coverings have been
thoroughly cleaned by subjection to a shampooing process involving lifting in the case of floor coverings. Provided, however, that
the second-hand rate must at all times apply to sewers of second-hand floor coverings.’
2. Insert into cl.B.2.1(e) in alphabetical order the following:
“• Sewer, gluer or seamer of carpets, linoleums or other floor coverings.’
3. Insert into cl.B.2.3(d) in alphabetical order the following:
“• Layer of carpet, vinyl, linoleum, parquetry or other floor coverings;
• Polishing, sealing or otherwise finishing wood and timber floors.’”
The variations were sought by the CFMEU so that the industrial activities of laying floor coverings and finishing wood and timber
floors will be covered by the modern award. It submitted that the activities are within the scope of the
Furnishing Industry National Award 2003,
(Furnishing Award 2003) and related state awards of similar scope, parts of which have been incorporated into the
Manufacturing and Associated Industries and Occupations Award
(Manufacturing Modern Award) and the
Timber Industry Award 2010
(Timber Modern Award)
respectively.
The CFMEU submitted that neither the Manufacturing Modern Award not the Modern Timber Award covers the laying of floor coverings
or finishing wood and timber floors. The variations were sought to prevent loss of award coverage for the floor covering and finishing
industry and locate the industry within an appropriate modern award which reflects existing terms and conditions of employment in
many respects.
The CFMEU submitted that floor covering and finishing is included within the scope of the Furnishing Award
2003 by the following part of the application clause
in the award:
“4.11.1(b) Carpet or floor covering cutting, planning, measuring, laying or machining;
6.1.18 sanding or sealing wooden floors preparatory to either the laying of floor coverings or the application of all types of lacquers
and polish;
6.1.19 applying all types of lacquers and polishes to wooden floors;
6.1.20 preparing or sealing floors (other than wood) where such preparing or sealing is necessary to ensure the correct laying of
the required floor coverings;”
6.1.28 planning, designing, cutting, laying, measuring, repairing, and/or fixing and sewing of floor coverings”
The CFMEU submitted that the floor covering and finishing activities formerly covered by the Furnishing Award 2003 are not within
the scope of any modern award made to date. It conceded that the Manufacturing Modern Award
includes the manufacture of “flooring products made from other than wood”, which might conceivably refer to the manufacture
of products such as vinyl and linoleum, the “repair, refurbishment, reconditioning, maintenance, installation, testing and
fault finding” of the manufactured products within the scope of the award and “every operation, process, duty and function
carried on or performed in or in connection with or incidental to any of the foregoing industries, parts of industries or occupations”.
It submitted nevertheless that the award does not cover all of the floor covering and finishing activities formerly covered by the
Furnishing Award 2003. It went on to submit that the coverage of work in relation to products manufactured under the Manufacturing
Modern Award does not cover
the manufacture of carpets, which is within the scope of the
Textile, Clothing, Footwear and Associated Industries Award 2010
(Textile Modern Award), or the manufacture of wood and timber flooring, which is within the scope of the Timber Modern Award.
The CFMEU submitted that the industry of floor covering and finishing is a distinct industry from the industry of the manufacture
of flooring products. It is not appropriate that modern award coverage of the industry be reduced to an incident of the manufacturing
process as there is no industrial nexus between the industry of those who manufacture floor coverings and those who lay them. It
submitted that employers currently covered by the Furnishing Award 2003 do not manufacture the floor covering product which they
The CFMEU also submitted that the
modern award is the appropriate award for coverage of floor covering and finishing. It contended that the laying of floor coverings
and finishing and sealing of flooring are self-evidently processes which occur during the construction and refurbishment of buildings,
such that they fall within the definition of general building and construction set out in cl.4.7 of the modern award. The CFMEU also
submitted that it is not appropriate to separate coverage of the installation of flooring other than wood and timber, from the modern
award coverage of other types of floor covering like carpet.
The Furnishing Industry Association of Australia Ltd (FIAA) indicated that, following discussions between it and the Floor Covering
Association of NSW (FCANSW), and the CFMEU, it supports the entire application. Both FIAA and the FCANSW have members who are involved
in the setting, laying, preparing, covering and otherwise finishing of floors. They submitted that coverage by a single award makes
sense of the award modernisation process.
The application was also supported by the Floorcovering Association of Victoria, which described the variation as common sense in
that it would result in a single award covering its industry. It submitted that its members constitute 95% of the Victorian industry
and predominantly carry out work on construction sites.
The Australian Industry Group (AiGroup) opposed the application. It submitted that most of the work concerned is not carried out
on construction sites but rather in homes and offices and that the modern award contains costly and inflexible conditions which are
not appropriate for the employers typically involved in laying carpet, vinyl and linoleum, and the finishing and sealing of timber
AiGroup also submitted that, contrary to the submissions of the CFMEU, the manufacture and installation of non-timber floor coverings
such as vinyl, linoleum, carpet, carpet tiles with rubber backing and cork tiles have been taken into account by the Commission and
included within the coverage of modern awards, with coverage of the Furnishing Award 2003 split between the Timber Modern Award and
the Manufacturing Modern Award.
It submitted that the Manufacturing Modern Award applies to the manufacture of “flooring products made from other than wood”
(cl.4.3(ii)), the “installation” of flooring products made from other than wood (cll. 4.2(a)(iii) and 4.3(ii)) and the
manufacture and installation of rubber underlay (cll. 4.2(a)(ii) and (iii), 4.3(s) and 4.3(ii)). Any overlap in the coverage of the
Textile Modern Award and the Manufacturing Modern Award in relation to the manufacture of carpet is addressed by the overlapping
coverage provisions in the two awards. It further submitted that the finishing (eg. polishing) and sealing of timber floors is potentially
covered under the
Joinery and Building Trades Award 2010
(Joinery Modern Award), which applies to carpenters, painters and some other building trades, and also may possibly be covered under
the Timber Modern Award, which covers an extremely wide range of processes relating to timber. It suggested that if the Commission
is of the view that the finishing and sealing of timber floors is not adequately covered under a modern award, extending the coverage
of the Joinery Modern Award would be a far more appropriate approach than extending the coverage of the modern award.
Consideration
The application concerns the appropriate modern award coverage of floor covering and finishing and the inclusion of a second-hand
floor covering allowance to apply to employees engaged in floor covering and finishing work.
There appears to be little dispute that floor covering and finishing is included within the scope of the Furnishing Award 2003, through
the application clause as set out above.
The primary issue is which modern award or awards should cover employees engaged in floor covering and finishing work. Related questions
are the extent to which employees engaged in floor covering and finishing work are already covered by modern awards and whether some
employees currently covered by the Furnishing Award 2003 are not covered by a modern award at all. The CFMEU’s position, supported
by the employer representatives identified above, is that all floor covering and finishing work should be covered by the modern award
The AiGroup contends that such work should be covered by a number of awards, depending on the type of flooring or, alternatively,
all work should be covered by the Joinery Modern Award. We deal first with the present modern award coverage.
The Manufacturing Modern Award covers part of the work. Subclause 4.2(a)(iii) covers the repair, refurbishment, reconditioning, maintenance,
installation
, testing and fault finding of any of the items referred to in clause 4.2(a)(i), which includes all products made from or containing
plastic or rubber, or substitutes for plastic or rubber (cl. 4.3(s))
and flooring products made from other than wood (cl. 4.3(ii)). The Manufacturing Modern Award does not cover floor covering and finishing
work in relation to carpets or timber flooring.
Textile industry, as defined in the Textile Modern Award, includes carpets but does not expressly refer to the installation of carpets.
The Timber Modern Award
covers the following activities, which arguably might encompass floor covering and finishing employees working with wood, although
it appears not to cover installers of wooden flooring:
assembling and construction of products from processed timber in the milling and processing sector (cl.4.2(b)(iv));
planning, setting-up and assembling products from board, panel or veneer and associated components in the panel products sector (cl.4.2
(c)(v)); and
planning, setting-up and assembling wood components and associated attachments into products in the manufacturing sector (cl.4.2(d)(iii)).
The Joinery Modern Award does not appear to cover floor covering and finishing.
The modern award covers employers throughout Australia in the on-site building, engineering and civil construction industry - the
industry of general building and construction, civil construction and metal and engineering construction, in all cases undertaken
on-site - and their employees in the classifications in the award (cl. 4.1). Subclause 4.7(a) defines general building and construction
as the construction, alteration, extension, restoration, repair, demolition or dismantling of buildings, structures or works that
form, or are to form, part of land, whether or not the buildings, structures or works are permanent and maintenance undertaken by
employees of employers covered by clause 4.1 of such buildings, structures or works. Subclause 4.2(a) provides that the award does
not cover employers covered by the Manufacturing Modern Award. The modern award is intended to cover employers engaged in floor covering
and finishing work, undertaken on-site, as part of a building project, but it is not intended to cover employers engaged in work
which is not part of a building project. This is so even where the work is carried out at a location which is, or has recently been,
a commercial building site. The relevant term of the modern award
is subcl.4.7(a)(i), which in conjunction with cl.4.6 requires, among other things, a clear connection between the work and the activities
of an employer in the construction industry. The classifications of tilelayer and floor layer specialist are included in the CW/ECW
3 classification and the classification of tradesperson’s labourer appears in the CW/ECW 1 classification.
In our view, floor covering and finishing, to the extent that it is undertaken on-site, as part of a building project, should remain
covered by the modern award. Where the work is otherwise undertaken, we think it should be covered by one modern award. We are not
persuaded that the modern award
is the appropriate modern award for that purpose. The conditions it contains relate to on-site construction and do not reflect the
conditions in the Furnishing Award 2003, which currently covers the work. Examples are found in the industry allowance and industry
specific redundancy scheme in the modern award which are not found in the Furnishing Award 2003.
In our view, the most appropriate award to cover floor covering and finishing work other than that undertaken on-site, as part of
a building project, is the Manufacturing Modern Award. There are several reasons. Firstly, the Manufacturing Modern Award will already
cover floor covering and finishing work in relation to products made from or containing plastic or rubber and flooring products made
from other than wood. Although not manufacturing activity, the inclusion of floor covering and finishing work generally is consistent
with the coverage in subclause 4.2(a)(iii) of the installation of manufactured products. Second, the terms and conditions in that
award are consistent with those in the Furnishing Award 2003. Third, the Manufacturing Modern Award contains a provision for redundancy
payments for small furnishing employers in subclause 23.4, reflecting the pre-2004 provisions of the Furnishing Award 2003
Fourth, the award already contains a special rate, in cl. 32.3(x), for an employee working on second-hand floor covering.
While the classification structure in the Manufacturing Modern Award
does not include all of the relevant indicative jobs, the
following classifications for floor covering and finishing work in the Furnishing Award 2003 could be readily included:
(a) clause 21.1.5(a) and (b) - floor finisher and/or floor coverer
(tradesperson level 1) at the C10 level ($637.60);
(b) clause 21.1.16(a) - production employee level 3 (sewer and/or gluer and/or seamer of carpets, linoleums or other floor coverings)
at C12 ($583.00);
(c) clause 21.1.16(a) - production employee level 2 (non-tradesperson engaged upon the cleaning up of wooden floors, the punching
of nails and the application of sanding of wooden floors by machine or hand and/or engaged upon the application of all types of sealers
and plastic coatings on wooden floors) at C13 ($560.50).
To give effect to this change we will include a further dot point (as underlined) in cl. 4.2(a)(iii) of the Manufacturing Modern
Award, so it will read:
the repair, refurbishment, reconditioning, maintenance, installation, testing and fault finding of:
any of the items referred to in clause 4.2(a)(i); or
floor covering; or
plant, equipment and buildings (including power supply) in the industries and parts of industries referred to in clauses 4.2(a)(i)
and (ii); or
plant, equipment and buildings (including power supply) in any other industry.”
The award already contains a special rate, in subclause 32.3(x) - second-hand work - which provides that an employee working on second-hand
floor covering must be paid an additional 25% of the minimum wage applicable to the employee’s classification extra while engaged
on such work. Accordingly, it is not necessary to vary the award to include a second-hand floor covering allowance.
An order to give effect to this decision will be issued in due course.
BY THE COMMISSION:
An employee, who is capable of and is engaged in measuring, planning and cutting of carpets in the workroom and on site; the testing
(wood and concrete), sanding (rough and fine), polishing, underlaying, grinding, levelling and sealing of floors; the installation
of seamless flooring, parquetry, cork, vinyl and linoleum and the laying of stick down, broad loom and body carpets.
A carpet planner and/or layer of carpets, linoleum or other floor coverings.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR992155>
No downloadable files available