R and Credit Reporting Agency [2011] AICmrCN 12 (22 December 2011)
Case citation: R and Credit Reporting Agency
[2011] AICmrCN 12
(22 December
Subject heading
of credit information
Section 18G(a) of the
The complainant became aware the credit reporting
agency had linked their consumer credit information file with the credit files
other individuals. The complainant advised the credit reporting agency that
they were not connected to the other individuals. The
credit reporting agency
refused to remove the links.
Section 18G(a) of the
states that a
credit reporting agency in possession or control of a credit information file
must take reasonable steps to ensure
that personal information contained in the
file or report is accurate, up-to-date, complete and not misleading.
The Commissioner investigated the matter under
section 40(1)
The credit reporting agency advised that it had used information from a law
enforcement agency to link the complainant’s credit
file to the credit
files of other individuals. This agency had issued the credit reporting agency
with a notice for information.
The credit reporting agency advised that, in
linking the other individuals with the complainant, it did not rely on the law
enforcement
agency’s notice but on ‘other information’
provided by the agency. In response to the Commissioner’s inquiries,
law enforcement agency advised its records showed there had been no contact
between it and the credit reporting agency, apart
from the notice it provided to
the credit reporting agency.
The Commissioner considered the law enforcement agency’s notice was
insufficient for the purposes of linking the complainant’s
credit file
with those of other individuals. On this basis, the Commissioner formed the view
that by the linking of the complainant’s
personal information to other
individuals, the credit reporting agency had failed to take reasonable steps to
ensure the information
it contained in its records about the complainant was
accurate and not misleading. Accordingly, the Commissioner found that the
credit reporting agency had not met the requirements of section 18G(a) of the
The credit reporting agency and complainant agreed to conciliate. The credit
reporting agency agreed to remove the links to the other
individuals from the
complainant’s credit file. The Commissioner subsequently closed the
complaint under
section 41(2)(a)
on the ground that the
credit reporting agency had adequately dealt with the matter.
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
December 2011
RTF format (805 KB)
Signed PDF/A format