Application by Glencore Coal Pty Ltd (No 2) [2016] ACompT 7 (16 June 2016)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by Glencore Coal Pty Ltd (No
[2016] ACompT 7
Review from:
THE DECISION BY THE COMMONWEALTH TREASURER
SUBSECTION 44K(2)
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT 2010
RELATION TO THE APPLICATION FOR DECLARATION OF A SERVICE PROVIDED BY PORT OF
NEWCASTLE OPERATIONS PTY LTD
File number:
ACT 1 of 2016
MANSFIELD J (PRESIDENT)
MR RF SHOGREN (MEMBER)
STEINWALL (MEMBER)
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
COMPETITION
– Application for review
of a decision by the Minister under
Competition and Consumer
(Cth) (the Act) not to declare a service – where decision of
Minister is varied and service declared – where applicant
applies for
costs against monopoly infrastructure provider under
– application for costs by applicant upon review of a
decision by the Minister under
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth) (the Act) not to declare a service – considerations
relevant to exercise of discretionary power of Tribunal under
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
National Third Party Access Code for Natural Gas Pipeline
Gas Pipelines Access Law
Trade Practices Act 1974
Cases cited:
Duke Eastern Gas Pipeline Pty Ltd
MGV Pty Ltd v Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd
[2000] ACopyT 8
Perry v Comcare
[2006] FCA 33
(2006) 226 ALR 724
R v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal; ex parte 2HD
[1979] HCA 62
(1980) 144 CLR
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
Date of hearing:
Heard on the papers
Date of last submissions:
South Australia
General Division
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for Glencore Coal Pty Ltd:
AC Archibald QC with N DeYoung
Solicitor for Glencore Coal Pty Ltd:
Clifford Chance
Counsel for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
J Kirk SC with CG Arnott
Solicitor for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
Webb Henderson
Counsel for the National Competition Council:
RCA Higgins
Solicitor for the National Competition Council:
ACT 1 of 2016
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW OF THE DECISION BY THE
COMMONWEALTH TREASURER UNDER
SUBSECTION 44K(2)
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER
(CTH) IN RELATION TO THE APPLICATION FOR DECLARATION OF A SERVICE
PROVIDED BY PORT OF NEWCASTLE OPERATIONS PTY LTD
GLENCORE COAL PTY LTD
MANSFIELD J (PRESIDENT)
MR RF SHOGREN
MR R STEINWALL (MEMBER)
DATE OF ORDERS:
THE TRIBUNAL DIRECTS/ORDERS THAT:
decision of the Acting Federal Treasurer made on 8 January 2016 not to declare
the following service under
Competition and
Consumer Act 2010
the provision of the right to access
and use the shipping channels (including berths next to wharves as part of the
channels) at the
Port of Newcastle (Port), by virtue of which vessels may enter
a Port precinct and load and unload at relevant terminals located
Port precinct and then depart the Port Precinct,
be set aside.
following service is declared pursuant to
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), commencing on 8 July 2016 and
expiring on 7 July 2031:
the provision of the right to access and
use the shipping channels (including berths next to wharves as part of the
channels) at the
Port of Newcastle (Port), by virtue of which vessels may enter
a Port precinct and load and unload at relevant terminals located
Port precinct and then depart the Port precinct.
be no order as to the costs of the application.
REASONS FOR
THE TRIBUNAL:
31 May 2016, the Tribunal published its reasons for decision in an application
by Glencore Coal Pty Ltd (Glencore) for review of
a decision made by the Acting
Federal Treasurer (the Minister) not to declare certain services provided by
Port of Newcastle Operations
Pty Ltd (PNO) by means of the shipping channels at
the Port of Newcastle. The Tribunal decided that it should set aside the
of the Minister, and instead make an order declaring the service.
order is the Order 1 made at the time of publishing these reasons for
the time of publishing those reasons, the Tribunal provided a timetable for any
party to the proceeding to seek an order as to
costs under
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) (the Act). That was at the
invitation of the parties, made during the course of submissions on the
principal hearing.
now seeks an order pursuant to
of the Act that PNO pay its costs of
the application.
was inserted into the Act by the
Trade Practices Amendment
(Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
(Cth). That act was to streamline certain
administrative processes which applied to the National Competition Council (NCC)
with matters which it was required to consider. Clearly, s 44KB was
inserted to provide the Tribunal with a discretion to order
costs in reviews of
decisions of the Minister to declare, or not to declare, a service under
of the Act.
44KB(1) provides:
If the Tribunal is satisfied that it is appropriate to do so, the Tribunal may
order that a person who has been made a party to proceedings
for a review of a
declaration under s 44K pay all or a specified part of the costs of another
person who has been made a party to
proceedings.
Section 44KB(2) restricts the
circumstances in which an order for costs might be made against the Minister,
having regard to the Minister’s
conduct of the proceedings, in particular
whether conduct was engaged in without due regard to the costs to be incurred or
required by other parties to the proceedings as a result of that
conduct. It is not necessary to refer to that subsection in any
Sections 44KB(3)-(5) deal with the means of assessing or fixing the amount of
the costs and for their recovery if a costs
order is made.
date, there have been no other decisions of the Tribunal, or of a Court,
concerning the circumstances in which, or the manner in
which, the Tribunal
should exercise its discretion under s 44KB(1).
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Trade Practices Amendment
(Infrastructure Access) Bill
makes the following
Unlike most court proceedings, and unlike matters arising in the Tribunal in
relation to the regulation of gas pipelines, there are
no provisions for costs
to be paid or awarded with respect to applications to the Tribunal for review of
a decision-maker’s
decision in relation to a declaration application.
Requiring unsuccessful applicants to pay costs should reduce incentive for
tactics, frivolous review applications or other inappropriate
behaviour. This amendment was proposed by the NCC in its
Annual Report
as a means to reduce the substantial costs and delays currently
experienced during review proceedings.
apparent, the focus of the provision appears to have related to there being a
meaningful issue to address and then the means
by which an applicant (or another
party) may have conducted the proceeding. It is an attempt to reduce the
substantial costs and
delays experienced during review proceedings.
is one decision of the Tribunal which has particular significance to the present
Duke Eastern Gas Pipeline Pty Ltd
[2001] ACompT 3
), the Tribunal (Hely J, Dr MJ Messenger and Miss MM Starrs)
considered an application for costs in a proceeding to review a decision
Minister that a particular gas pipeline be covered under the
National Third
Party Access Code for Natural Gas Pipeline Systems
(the Code). The decision
of the Minister under the Code was subject to review by the Tribunal under the
Gas Pipelines Access Law
(the Law). Section 38(10) of the Law
The relevant appeals body may make such orders (if any) as to costs in respect
of a proceeding as it thinks fit.
applied for costs against AGL, the pipeline operator, but not against the NCC or
the Minister.
Tribunal noted that its power to award costs under s 38(10) of the Law (as it
was at that time) was unique in relation to the
Tribunal’s review role
under Pt IIIA, IX or XIC of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) having
regard to the relevant provisions under the Code, and the Tribunal’s role
under the Law. At [5] the Tribunal appropriately
observed that the proceedings
before the Tribunal are not, either in substance or in form,
inter partes
litigation so that there is no particular reason for applying principles
developed in general
inter partes
litigation in the Courts to an
application for costs under
of the Law.
Tribunal at [6] made the point that the inclusion of the words “if
indicated that in proceedings before the Tribunal, at
least of that character, there is no presumption that orders as to costs will
made at all. The Tribunal also noted that
(Cth) confers a discretion on the Copyright Tribunal to make costs orders in
relation to proceedings in that Tribunal. It is nevertheless
the ordinary
practice of that Tribunal not to make orders for costs: see per Burchett P in
MGV Pty Ltd v Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd
It is said that a reason for that practice is that decisions of that
Tribunal often affect wider interests than those arising between
the immediate
parties to the particular proceeding. See also per Greenwood J in
[2006] FCA 33
(2006) 226 ALR 724
, the Tribunal after referring to the particular words used in
of the Law, emphasising the words “if any”, made the
following observations at [7] and [8]:
Whether the statutory criteria for coverage of a pipeline are met will often be,
as the present case illustrates, a matter on which
there can be different points
of view and legitimate differences of opinion. It is important that the
Tribunal be acquainted with
all factors which are potentially relevant to its
determination. Responsible intervention by interested parties who have a
contribution to make ought not to be discouraged by fear of adverse
costs orders. The review process benefits from such participation.
a pipeline operator be discouraged from exercising its statutory right of review
by fear that costs orders may be made
against it if unsuccessful, potentially in
favour of multiple parties. For these reasons, the adoption of a general rule
in the case of
inter partes
litigation to the proceedings
before the Tribunal would not be conducive to the effective discharge by the
Tribunal of its statutory
Costs orders should only be made in proceedings before the Tribunal where there
are circumstances which justify the making of an
order. The fact that a
particular outcome of proceedings before the Tribunal may be seen as conducive
(or not conducive) to the
commercial interests of a party, would not ordinarily
provide, of itself, a sufficient reason for making a costs order for (or
that party. In principle, the power to order costs should be exercised
sparingly, and not so as to discourage participation in the
review process.
Generally the power to award costs should be reserved for cases where a
party’s participation in the proceedings
before the Tribunal materially
and unnecessarily increases what would otherwise have been the costs of those
proceedings.
Tribunal as now constituted respectfully endorses those observations. It
considers that they reflect the subject matter, scope
and purpose of s 44KB:
R v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal; ex parte 2HD
[1979] HCA 62
(1980) 144 CLR 45
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
the statutory regime addressed in
was a little different from that
applicable to the present application under
of the Act, it is not
different in material respects. The comments made by the Tribunal in
at [7]-[8] apply equally to the present circumstances.
it is accepted that the proceedings in this matter are not the equivalent of
inter partes
litigation, for reasons which are apparent, the Tribunal
considers that the discretion to order costs against a party should not
exercised unless there is, in the particular circumstances, a reason to do so
arising out of the nature of the issue or issues
raised or put of the conduct of
that party in the conduct of the matter. As in
, it is important for
the Tribunal to have the benefit of the identification of all factors relevant,
or potentially relevant, to
its determination. The determination may have
effect on a much wider group than the parties. That was said to be a feature of
present case: if the declaration were made, others may take advantage of it.
That process, generally speaking, is facilitated or
supported by responsible
intervention by interested parties and should not be discouraged by fear of
adverse costs orders. In particular,
as the NCC submitted, the Tribunal’s
ability to assess the application for review may be impeded if cost
disincentives hinder
or prevent a service provider from fully and properly
participating in the review. Nor should a potential applicant for review be
discouraged from exercising its statutory right of review by fear of costs
orders, if it is unsuccessful, except if the matters it
raises are not
substantial or there is an unsatisfactory feature of the way its case is
presented. Consequently, given the nature
of the jurisdiction, the Tribunal
reaffirms that the adoption of a general rule applicable in the case of
litigation to proceedings before the Tribunal would not be conducive
to the effective discharge by the Tribunal of its statutory
Tribunal is prepared to take the step, urged by Glencore, of finding that PNO
was a party to the proceeding. Although there was
no formal direction to that
effect, that is the basis upon which its role was pursued. It was treated as a
party. It did not seek
leave to intervene. It appeared at all stages of the
proceeding, and as noted in the principal reasons it filed a Notice of
in respect of criterion (f) which required separate consideration.
Indeed, its Counsel raised during the course of the hearing the
prospect of it
seeking an order for costs against Glencore if the Glencore review application
was unsuccessful.
the Tribunal does not consider that the conduct of PNO by its Notice of
Contention or in the course of the proceeding warrants
the exercise of the
discretion to order that it pay Glencore’s costs, or some of its costs, of
the proceeding. To a significant
extent, it acted as a contradictor to
Glencore’s claim or submissions, but it did so in a manner complementary
to, and broadly
consistent with the contentions of the NCC. It did not unduly
prolong the hearing by those submissions. Its submissions were focused
was entitled to put on a Notice of Contention, particularly having regard to the
submissions as to the nature of the “public
interest” to which
criterion (f) refers and as to the scope of the considerations appropriately
considered in respect of criterion
short, the Tribunal, in the exercise of its discretion, does not consider that
it is appropriate to accede to the application for
costs made by Glencore.
I certify that the preceding nineteen (19)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment herein of the
Justice Mansfield, Mr RF Shogren and
Dated: 16 June 2016
RTF format (286 KB)
Signed PDF/A format