Kaur (Migration) [2024] AATA 4049 (11 October 2024)
Kaur (Migration)
[2024] AATA 4049
(11 October 2024)
DECISION RECORD
Migration & Refugee Division
REVIEW APPLICANT:
Mrs Kiranjeet Kaur
VISA APPLICANT:
Ms Gurjot Kaur
REPRESENTATIVE:
Mr Amber Gupta (MARN: 0533773)
CASE NUMBER:
BCC2023/4160800
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the application for a Visitor (Class FA)
visa for reconsideration, with the direction that the visa applicant
following criteria for a Subclass 600 (Visitor) (Class FA) visa:
of Schedule 2 to the Regulations.
Statement made on 11 October 2024
MIGRATION – Visitor (Class FA) visa – subclass 600 (Visa)
– Sponsored Family stream – visit Australian family
personal and financial circumstances – incomplete studies and her part
time work – no negative visa breach
history – visa applicant
genuinely intends to stay temporarily in Australia – decision under review
LEGISLATION
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
, Schedule 2, cl 600.211
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR
This is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the
Minister for Home Affairs on 25 July 2023 to refuse to
grant the visa applicant
a Visitor (Class FA) visa under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (the Act).
The visa applicant applied for the visa on 21 July 2023. At the time the visa
application was lodged, Class FA contained one subclass,
Subclass 600 (Visitor),
with a number of different streams. In this case the applicant applied for the
visa seeking to satisfy the
primary criteria in the Sponsored Family
The criteria for a Subclass 600 visa are set out in
of Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) (the Regulations). Relevantly to
this case, they include cl 600.211, which requires the visa applicant to
satisfy the Minister
that the visa applicant genuinely intends to stay
temporarily in Australia for the purpose for which the visa is granted.
The delegate refused to grant the visa on the basis that the visa applicant did
not meet cl 600.211 because they were not satisfied
that the visa applicant
genuinely intended to stay temporarily in Australia.
review and visa applicants appeared (separately) by video before the
Tribunal on 11 October 2024 using the Microsoft Teams Application
evidence and present arguments. The visa and review applicants gave their
evidence in English.
The review applicant was represented in relation to the review, and the
representative participated by video.
For the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the matter should be
remitted for reconsideration.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
The issue in this case is whether cl 600.211 is met, which requires the
Tribunal to be satisfied that the visa applicant genuinely
intends to stay
temporarily in Australia for the purpose for which the visa is granted, having
regard to whether the applicant has
complied substantially with the conditions
to which the last substantive visa, or any subsequent bridging visa, held by the
was subject; whether the applicant intends to comply with the
conditions to which the Subclass 600 visa would be subject; and any
relevant matter.
In the present case, the visa applicant seeks the visa for the purposes of
visiting her sister, brother-in-law and nephews. This
is a purpose for which a
visa in the Sponsored Family stream may be granted: cl 600.231.
In considering whether a visa applicant genuinely intends to stay temporarily
in Australia for this purpose, the Tribunal must consider
whether he or she has
complied substantially with the conditions of the last substantive visa held, or
any subsequent bridging visa
(cl 600.211(a)).
The visa applicant has previously held a visitor visa and visited Australia
from 28 November 2022 to 22 February 2023. The information
department’s file and her movement record suggests that she complied with
the conditions of that visa. At that time,
her mother was also in Australia and
complied with the conditions of her visa.
I have had regard and give significant weight to the visa applicant’s
previous compliance with the conditions of an Australian
visa as supporting her
claimed intention to visit temporarily. I consider that the delegate appears
not to have had regard to this
required aspect in the decision under
The Tribunal must also consider whether the visa applicant intends to comply
with the conditions to which the Subclass 600 visa
would be subject
(cl 600.211(b)). The conditions to which a visa in the circumstances of
this case would be subject are as follows
(cl 600.612):
must not work in Australia
must not engage in study or training in Australia for more than 3 months
entitled to a substantive visa, other than a protection visa, while remaining in
must not remain in Australia after end of permitted stay.
The visa applicant gave her evidence clearly and without hesitation. She gave
evidence that she and her parents want to visit the
sponsor and her family who
are building their own home and intend to celebrate a housewarming over the
Christmas holidays this year.
Last time (2022) she was in Australia for New
Year’s Eve and really enjoyed the parties with the sponsor and her friends
is keen to be visit again. She would be on holidays from her studies and
could take some leave from her part time work and intends
to stay for around 15
– 20 days. Her parents already have visas and will also come to Australia
to celebrate the housewarming
and see the sponsor and their grandchildren.
The sponsor said that she has no desire or intention to study or work in
Australia. She would be on holidays. She also stated
that she has no desire or
intention to migrate to or remain in Australia or apply for any other visa in
Australia. She gave evidence
that she has a good life in India, is the only
child living there with her parents, and that they support her in everything she
I accept that the visa applicant’s evidence and that she intends to
comply with the conditions of the visa if granted, including
not remaining in
Australia after the end of a permitted stay.
The Tribunal has also considered all other relevant matters
(cl 600.211(c)). The visa applicant advised that she completed a Diploma
of Computer Applications last year and is now enrolled in a Bachelor of Arts,
first year. She doesn’t have a particular career
in mind yet, but wants
to increase her options by completing her degree. The visa applicant also gave
evidence that she works part
time at a Private Bank and is paid on a commission
basis for insurance policies she sells. She has savings of around 5 Lakhs
AUD$8,000) and her parents have significant savings and assets. She
lives with her family and they pay her day to day expenses.
The family owns
four shops at the front of their home and they earn rental from those shops.
The visa applicant noted that her
parents are both in good health, however her
mother has some mobility (knee) issues and so the visa applicant helps with a
the household chores. She therefore provides some support to them every
The parties gave evidence that their father is retired and the family is very
comfortable financially, with significant savings
and properties. The sponsor
has provided extensive evidence to both the department and the tribunal,
including bank and tax statements
for the applicant, her parents and the sponsor
which establish and supports her evidence that the family and the applicant are
a fortunate and very comfortable financial position in India. I consider
that there are greater incentives for the visa applicant
to return to India at
the end of a permitted stay than there are for her to remain in Australia where
she would be without work and
be unable to complete her studies, or to support
her parents.
Having considered the visa applicant’s personal and financial
circumstances, her incomplete studies and her part time work,
the purpose and
period of her stay, her previous travel history and that of her family, I am
satisfied and accept that the visa applicant
genuinely intends to stay
temporarily in Australia or the purposes of visiting her sister.
I find that the requirements of cl 600.211 are met.
The Tribunal remits the application for a Visitor (Class FA) visa for
reconsideration, with the direction that the visa applicant
meets the following
criteria for a Subclass 600 (Visitor) (Class FA) visa:
of Schedule 2 to the Regulations.
RTF format (185 KB)
Signed PDF/A format