Cherokee & Cherokee [2025] FedCFamC1A 191 (24 October 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Cherokee & Cherokee
FedCFamC1A 191
Appeal from:
Cherokee & Cherokee
[2025] FedCFamC2F 22
Appeal number
NAA 159 of 2025
File number
CAC 1533 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – PROPERTY
– DFRDB SUPERANNUATION PENSION – Where the wife sought a splitting
order at trial in
respect of the husband's DFRDB pension – Where the trial
judge concluded a splitting order was not able to be made on the basis
DFRDB pension was a "financial resource" – Where this misapprehension led
to a failure to consider the matters in
Family Law Act
(Cth) as they may relate to the DFRDB pension – Where trial
judge's reasons do not make clear whether the findings regarding
the husband's
initial contributions were diminished by a gift soon after cohabitation –
Where nearly half of the property settlement
received by the wife at trial was
in the form of superannuation assets to which she did not have present access
– Where the
trial judge did not have sufficient regard to the nature and
characteristics of the wife's superannuation entitlements – Where
parties seek re-exercise of discretion if appeal allowed – Appeal allowed
– Re-exercise of discretion – Consideration
contributions.
Legislation:
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
Family law Act 1975
(Cth) ss 75, 79, 90SM, 90XC, 90XS 90XT
Family Law (Superannuation) Regulations 2001
Cases cited:
Hall v Hall
(2016) 257 CLR 490
Preston & Preston
(2022) FLC 94-108
[2022] FedCFamC1A 157
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
Robb & Robb
(1995) FLC 92-555
[1994] FamCA 136
Semperton & Semperton
(2012) 47 Fam LR 626
[2012] FamCAFC
Shinohara & Shinohara
FedCFamC1A 126
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
7 August 2025 and 29 September 2025
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr Puckey KC (7 August 2025)
Solicitor Advocate for the Appellant:
Ms Kennedy (29 September 2025)
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Farrar Gesini Dunn
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms Mooney KC (7 August 2025), Mr Dickson KC (29 September 2025)
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Dobinson Davey Clifford Simpson
CAC 1533 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
MS CHEROKEE
MR CHEROKEE
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal is allowed.
1 is varied to delete “$400,000” and replace it with
“$813,808”.
appellant is granted a costs certificate pursuant to the provisions of
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
(Cth) being a certificate that,
in the opinion of the Court, it would be appropriate for the Attorney-General
to authorise a payment
under that Act to the appellant in respect of the costs
incurred by her in relation to Appeal NAA159/2025.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Cherokee & Cherokee
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
is an appeal against final property orders made by a Judge of the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2)
filed on behalf of the
appellant (wife). For the reasons which follow, the appeal will be allowed.
parties sought that if the appeal were permitted I re-exercise the discretion
and make property adjustment orders. I propose
to do so. The parties have had
the opportunity to file written submissions which engage with amendments to the
Family law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”) in the period between
trial and appeal. Neither party sought to file further evidence or challenge
factual findings of the primary judge which I will adopt.
parties sought an adjustment of their interests in property at the conclusion of
a relationship which the primary judge found
was 6 years 3 months in
Relevantly,
the parties, in addition to real and personal property, had the following
superannuation entitlements:
(a) Husband’s interest in the Super Fund 1 fund, an accumulation fund in
the growth phase;
(b) Husband’s interest in Defence Force Retirement Benefit pension in the
payment phase (“DFRDB pension”);
(c) Wife’s interest in Super Fund 2 defined benefit fund in the growth
phase (“Super Fund 2 defined benefit fund”);
(d) Wife’s interest in the Super Fund 1 fund, an accumulation fund in the
growth phase.
wife sought the following order from the primary judge:
in accordance with
section 90XT(1)(a)
Family Law Act
(the Act), whenever a splittable payment within the meaning of section 90XE of
the Act becomes a payable to, or on behalf of the
Husband from his interest in
the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Scheme (DFRDB), the Wife is
entitled to be paid (by
the Trustee of DFRDB) the amount calculated in
accordance with
Family Law (Superannuation) Regulations
, using a base amount of $720,000 and there is a corresponding reduction
in the entitlement the Husband would have had but for these
husband resisted the making of an order which split his DFRDB pension.
primary judge declined to make a superannuation splitting order in respect of
the husband’s DFRB pension.
primary judge identified as an issue to be determined whether “the
Husband’s defined benefit superannuation interest
in the DFRDB should be
treated as property or a financial resource?”
wife’s expert, Mr C, gave a capital valuation of the husband’s
interest in the DFRDB pension at $2,873,570.60 in accordance
Law (Superannuation) Regulations 2001
(Cth) (“the
Regulations”).
primary judge understood the wife sought a splitting order when she said at
The Wife seeks a superannuation splitting order from the Husband’s
interest in the DFRDB. It is important to note that the
Husband’s pension
cannot be commuted into lump sum form however,
Defence Force
Retirement and Death Benefits Act 1973
(Cth) together with the
Force Retirement and Death Benefits (Family Law Superannuation) Orders 2004
(Cth) permits a splitting order to be made. If a splitting order is made, an
associate pension would be created for the Wife pursuant
Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Act 1973
setting out the wife’s contention that the DFRDB interest should be
treated as a superannuation asset with a capitalised
value and the
husband’s contention that it should be treated as a financial resource,
the primary judge undertook an analysis
of the law and then expressed a
conclusion under the heading ‘Conclusion as to whether the DFRDB is
property or a financial
reasoning by which the primary judge concluded that “the Husband’s
DFRDB pension is a financial resource and is not
an asset” is set out in
paragraphs [74] – [80] of the reasons for judgment.
wife did not argue that the primary judge was obliged to adopt the capitalised
value for the purpose of determining the asset
pool but rather, by reference to
the capital values of the parties’ respective defined benefit funds, and
the financial decisions
which had been made by them during the relationship, she
submitted justice and equity required the making of a splitting order from
DFRDB pension which could be split.
primary judge proceeded to treat the husband’s DFRDB pension as a
financial resource but included the wife’s defined
benefit in the growth
phase as an asset with a capitalised value.
90XC(1) of the Act says that a superannuation interest is to be treated as
property for the purpose of paragraph (ca) of the
definition of
“matrimonial cause” in s 4.
enlivens the jurisdiction of the Court to make a splitting order as
superannuation is to be treated as “property of the
parties of the
marriage or either of them”.
expression “is to be treated as property” does not mandate the
result. It does not oblige a judicial officer to make
a splitting order. It does
not ignore the nature and characteristics of the property, but it unequivocally
states that it is to be
treated as property.
90XS says that in proceedings under ss 79 or 90SM with respect to the property
of spouses, the court may, in accordance with
this Division, also make orders in
relation to superannuation interests of the spouses.
guidance on whether and, if so, how to make a superannuation splitting order
comes from s 79 of the Act.
79(4) required the Court to take into account financial and non-financial
contributions of the parties to the property of
the parties or either of them.
It did not mention financial resources. Section 75(2)(b) (as it was at the time
of trial) required
the Court to consider each party’s financial resources
and consider the extent to which a party had contributed to the income,
capacity, property and financial resources of the other party: s 75(2)(j). They
are distinct considerations.
is amenable to an order for adjustment, financial resources are not.
various grounds, discussed below, the wife submits the primary judge failed to
follow principles established by the case law which
pertain to defined benefit
pension funds in the payment phase. The difficulty with submitting that a
primary judge has acted in keeping
with or in contradiction to principle drawn
from case law is in ensuring that the decisions which are cited as authoritative
sufficient factual similarity to make the application of principle
mandatory and derogation from same legal error.
1. In circumstances where the wife sought a splitting order
with respect to the husband’s Defence Force Retirement and Death
Scheme defined benefit entitlement (‘the Husband’s DBE’), the
learned primary judge:
1.1. Erroneously applied Semperton & Semperton
[2012] FamCAFC 132
and its related authorities to reach the conclusion that the
Husband’s DBE ought be omitted from the list of existing interests
property to be considered for division;
1.2. Erroneously concluded that the
considerations in s 79(4) could not or should not be applied to the
Husband’s DBE;
1.3. Failed to consider whether it was just and
equitable that there be a splitting order directed towards the Husband’s
that the wife was seeking a splitting order, it was incumbent on the primary
judge to consider that application and, in refusing
it, give reasons. The
Reasons for Judgment record at [256]:
The Wife has sought a superannuation splitting order from the Husband’s
DFRDB however, as I have determined that this is a
financial resource and not an
asset, the only superannuation interest that would be amenable to a
superannuation splitting order
is the Husband’s Super Fund 1.
primary judge was led astray when the husband submitted “...there should
be one pool but that it should not,
and as a matter of law cannot
include as an asset the Husband’s DFRDB in payment phase” (emphasis
added). At trial, the respondent relied on the decision
[2022] FedCFamC1A 157
(2022) FLC 94-108
) in support of the
proposition that the husband’s DFRDB pension in the payment phase should
be regarded as a financial resource
(or as income and not an asset) without
highlighting that the case was different in three material respects: firstly and
most importantly,
because no superannuation splitting order was sought in
, secondly because the pension which had been valued in that case
was a medical pension which had the capacity to cease if the medical
deemed resolved and thirdly, because the methodology the primary judge adopted
in that case had the effect of counting
the pension twice (as property and as
primary judge was entitled to decline to make a splitting order but not in
reliance upon a conclusion that the husband’s
interest was a financial
resource. It is necessary to say something about language. The Act uses the
expressions “property”,
“income” and “financial
resource”. They are not defined (except in so far as property is defined
as “property
to which those parties are, or that party is, as the case may
be, entitled, whether in possession or reversion”).
the High Court stated in
Hall v Hall
[2016] HCA 23
(2016) 257 CLR 490
The reference to "financial resources" in the context of s 75(2)(b) has long
been correctly interpreted by the Family Court to refer
to "a source of
financial support which a party can reasonably expect will be available to him
or her to supply a financial need
or deficiency."
(Footnotes omitted)
needs to be observed that a superannuation pension may have the character of
property (because the Act says it is to be treated
as property), a financial
resource because the party in receipt has a reasonable expectation of receipt of
a benefit from that source,
and an income stream. The difficulty which arose in
this case arose because it appears on its face that the primary judge determined
the DFRDB pension had only the character of a financial resource and hence was
unsplittable. The proper course would have been to
determine that in the
circumstances of this case it was best characterised as income and, as a
consequence, that the primary judge
proposed to decline the application for a
splitting order, not because same was unavailable, but because same would not be
say that a superannuation pension is more properly considered as an income
stream is sound. It is a particular way in which the
Court is able to recognise
the nature and characteristics of that particular species of property. But the
fact that it is more properly
considered as an income stream does not make it
unsplittable, albeit it may persuade a judicial officer to exercise the
in that manner.
Counsel for the husband argued that “not amenable” in [52] should be
read as synonymous with “I ought
not” as opposed to “I
can’t”. I am not persuaded that “not amenable” means
anything other than
“cannot” in this context.
steps which the authorities would suggest were appropriate given the
parties’ competing contentions were:
(a) Make a determination as to whether it was appropriate to make the splitting
order sought by the wife;
(b) If the splitting order was made, have regard to the capitalised value of the
particular species of asset;
(c) If the splitting order was made – give reasons for making the
splitting order;
(d) If the splitting order was declined – give reasons for declining the
splitting order;
(e) If the splitting order was declined – consider what (if any) relevance
the capitalised value has in the making of just
and equitable orders having
regard to the parties’ contributions (direct and indirect over whatever
period), any special characteristics
of the asset – liquidity, terms on
which it may cease, age of the recipient, income paid and to be paid to the
the primary judge focused on a binary choice between property or financial
resource, she did not engage in an analysis of
the reasons why she was declining
to make the order which the wife sought. It follows that I am persuaded that
Ground 1 has merit
and the appeal must be allowed.
2. Having concluded that the nature and characteristics of the
Husband’s DBE were such that it was a financial resource and
that it was
to be omitted from the list of existing interests in property to be considered
for division, the learned primary judge:
2.1. Erroneously included the wife’s defined benefit
entitlement in the Public Service Superannuation Scheme, despite it having
same characteristics and nature as the Husband’s DBE; and
inadequate reasons for so doing.
1, 2 and 3 are inter-related. The effect of the primary judge’s decision
to characterise the DFRDB pension as a “financial
resource” was that
she did not consider the matters in s 79(4) as they related to the DFRDB
contrast, the primary judge concluded that the wife’s Super Fund 2 defined
benefit fund should be included in the pool of
assets against which she assessed
s 79(4) matters.
wife had submitted at trial that a two pool approach was to be preferred, as
that would permit an analysis of the parties’
respective contributions and
also relevant s 75(2) matters in respect of property and accumulation interest
superannuation on the
one hand and defined benefit fund superannuation
entitlements on the other. While it is accurate to note that the husband’s
pension could not be commuted to a lump sum, while the wife retained the right
to elect to take her defined benefit fund interest
as a lump sum or a pension,
they were otherwise similar in nature in so far as a valuation pursuant to the
Regulations produced a
capitalised value which may or may not represent the
eventual value of the interest to the member. The ground is
established.
3. The learned primary judge erred in failing to adopt a
two-pool approach with respect to the parties’ defined benefit
superannuation
entitlements and other property interests.
wife had contended for a two pool approach. The primary judge was not obliged to
adopt a two pool approach. The error lay in failing
to consider that by
including the wife’s defined benefit superannuation entitlements in the
“asset pool” the primary
judge did not have regard to its nature and
characteristics (including in due course that the wife may have elected a
a matter which was reflected in its present day valuation. The
ground is established.
4. In giving ‘significant weight’ to the
husband’s initial contribution, the learned primary judge:
4.1. Gave no regard to the payment made by the husband to
his sister of some $460,000 shortly after the commencement of the relationship
such as to reduce the husband’s initial contribution by that
4.2. Failed to properly evaluate the wife’s non-financial
contributions in the context of the marriage; and
4.3. Gave inadequate
reasons for so doing.
parties ran their cases on the basis that whatever the husband’s initial
contributions may have been, they were diminished
by his gift to his sister of
$450,000 shortly after cohabitation. The husband’s senior counsel
expressly conceded same in closing
submissions.
the Reasons for Judgment do not record the fact of the gift or the concession
for Judgment do not make plain
whether or not the primary judge considered the fact and the concession.
the primary judge’s conclusions about the parties’ respective
contribution-based entitlements concluded that the
husband’s initial
contributions should be given significant weight, it is unclear to what extent
the primary judge considered
(if at all) the impact of the husband’s
significant gift shortly thereafter.
primary judge assessed the contributions of the parties as favouring the husband
70/30. Given the primary judge’s conclusion
at [210] then, the
differential is explained by their initial contributions. Absent any discussion
of the manner in which the initial
contribution was diminished by the agreed
gift, it is not possible to determine whether the primary judge had regard to a
material matter and the ground is established.
5. The learned primary judge failed to give consideration to
the justice and equity of making orders resulting in the wife receiving
substantial component of her overall entitlement in the form of a defined
benefit superannuation entitlement as opposed to presently
accessible property,
and gave inadequate reasons for so doing.
primary judge’s orders provided that the wife receive assets and
superannuation with a net value of $1,445,264. The wife
was 51 years old at the
time of hearing. The property settlement she received was compromised as to 46%
of superannuation assets
to which she could have no recourse until she met a
condition of release. There is no discussion of this in the Reasons for
I am satisfied that the failure to consider the nature of the assets
which the wife was to receive was in error.
RE-EXERCISE
party sought to place updating evidence before the Court. I was told in
submissions that monies in the solicitor’s trust
account would have been
applied to legal fees. I accept that may well be the case (and to that extent
the husband has had the benefit
of those funds). I am limited by the
parties’ decision not to remit and file evidence about changes to their
financial circumstances.
parties are also at issue about how the court should treat the assets which the
wife received after separation (represented by
her interest in a property in
Suburb B, trading account and car). Again, I do not have either an agreement
parameters of the curtailed manner in which the parties approached the
re-exercise.
regard to the analysis set out above I find that the assets, liabilities and
superannuation interests of the parties are as
Description
[Suburb D] property
$1,895,000.00
[Motor Vehicle 1]
[To be sold and divided between parties]
[To be sold and divided between parties]
[To be sold and divided between parties]
NAB account #..13
$216,803.00
NAB account #..07
NAB [Cherokee] Trust account #..71
[E Bank] account #..01
[Cherokee] consulting invoice dated 9/12/24
Payment from husband
NAB account #..80
[Motor Vehicle 2]
Interest in property at [Suburb B]
NAB trading account less loan
LIABILITIES
Tax Debt FY 2023-2024
Estimated tax/super liabilities for funds in NAB [Cherokee] Trust account #...71
Estimated tax/super liabilities for [Cherokee] Consulting invoice dated 9/12/24
Payment to wife
$429,158.00
NET ASSETS & LIABILITIES
ACCUMULATION SUPERANNUATION
Name of Fund
[Super Fund 1]
Accumulation
[Super Fund 1]
Accumulation
NET ASSETS & LIABILITIES (INCL. SUPERANNUATION)
above superannuation amounts are after implementation of the split ordered by
the primary judge. The table of assets and liabilities
also reflects the payment
of $400,000 by the husband to the wife in compliance with the final orders and
the transfer of the vehicle
in the wife’s name to the husband.
parties also have the following
entitlements:
HUSBAND’S PENSION
Name of Fund
Capitalised Value
$2,873,570.60
DEFINED BENEFITS
Name of Fund
Capitalised Value
[Super Fund 2]
Defined Benefit (growth)
$576,800.00
matter was heard and determined by the primary judge before amendments to the
Act which took effect on 10 June 2025 and the decision
of the appellate Court in
Shinohara & Shinohara
FedCFamC1A 126
is necessary for me to consider the impact of those two changes on the manner in
which the primary judge approached the category
of “addbacks”.
parties had included the following under a heading “addbacks” in the
joint balance
Funds withdrawn from joint account for [Suburb B] property deposit
Funds received as interim property settlement
$ 290,000.00
[Company F] insurance payout
Wife’s legal fees
Husband’s legal fees
$379,832.00
is plain from the above table, in order to ensure that the resulting orders are
just and equitable, I must have regard to the fact
that the wife has had the
benefit of $376,816 since the parties separated. The husband has also applied
$72,571 to payment of his
legal fees.
have approached the parties’ superannuation on the basis that it is
appropriate that I consider the accumulation interests
of the parties as
property in the first pool.
will separately consider the husband’s DFRDB pension. I accept the
submission that there are two qualitative differences which
warrant its separate
consideration. The first is that, according to the valuation evidence, it was
valued at $2,873,570.60 at the
commencement of the parties’ cohabitation.
It had this value because of the lengthy service of the husband which predated
parties’ relationship. The second is that, as a consequence of the
election which was made during the relationship, the pension
is not commutable.
That is not to say that it does not have significant value to the husband, but
it cannot be realised as a lump
finally, I will separately consider the wife’s defined benefit scheme
entitlement with the Super Fund 2. The wife has no
present entitlement to these
funds. The wife may elect to commute some or all of the sum when she meets the
conditions for payment.
However, if she elects to take a pension, then the
superannuation will (at that point) assume the same character as the
Contributions
parties made financial and non-financial contributions in the context of their
relationship between early 2016 when they married
and began to live together and
separation in mid-2022. I accept both also continued to make contributions
between the date of separation
and the date of hearing.
take into account the parties’ initial contributions which I find were as
per the primary judge’s reasons at [155] –
155 At the commencement of the parties’ marriage, the Wife had the
(a) A property at [G] Street, [Suburb H], New South Wales;
(b) A property at [J] Street, [Suburb H], New South Wales;
(c) A property at [K Street], [Suburb H], New South Wales;
(d) A property at [L Street], [Suburb M], Queensland;
(e) A modest motor vehicle and furniture; and
(f) Super Fund 2 defined benefit superannuation entitlements of $310,309.
Wife’s evidence was that the combined equity in the four properties she
owned was approximately $450,000.
157 At the commencement of the parties’ marriage, the Husband had the
(a) A property at [N Street], [Suburb O], Australian Capital Territory with
equity of $877,000;
(b) Cash at bank of $954,939;
(c) A motor vehicle and furniture;
(d) DFRDB defined benefit superannuation entitlements of $2,258,805.88;
(e) Defence Force (Superannuation) (Productivity Benefit) superannuation
entitlements of $140,594.79; and
(f) Commonwealth Super Corporation superannuation entitlements of $187,698.48.
note that the husband’s cash was diminished by the $450,000 gift to his
sister soon thereafter.
contribution-based entitlements of the parties’ arising out of the capital
they introduced at the commencement of the relationship
(less the gift)
overwhelmingly favours the husband.
the relationship the parties each made financial contributions. The financial
contributions of the husband were greater than
those of the wife, but the
non-financial contributions of the wife were greater than those of the husband
such that I accept that
the contributions each made during the relationship were
equivalent.
is necessary for me to consider the contributions to the various categories of
property. The husband made contributions to his
defined benefit superannuation
pension over 32 years which predated the parties’ cohabitation. The
wife’s own defined
benefit superannuation was substantially accrued by her
prior to the parties’ marriage.
were no direct contributions by the wife to the DFRB pension nor by the husband
to the wife’s defined benefit scheme superannuation.
Any indirect
contributions were, given the length of the employment and the length of the
marriage minor.
regard to the husband’s significant initial contributions, the length of
the relationship (and the parties’ other
assets), I assess the overall
contributions as favouring him 70/30.
is necessary to consider whether any of the matters in s79(5) of the Act would
result in an adjustment to the parties’ contribution-based
entitlements in
order to ensure that the resulting orders are just and equitable.
has long been considered that the Court may, when considering what, if any,
adjustment is appropriate between parties to a marriage,
consider the
contributions which one party has made to a child from a previous marriage in
reliance upon s 75(2)(o) of the Act (as
it was prior to 10 June 2025).
Robb & Robb
[1994] FamCA 136
(1995) FLC 92-555
the Full Court said in circumstances
where one party did not have a legal obligation to provide financial or
non-financial contributions
in respect of a child but did in fact provide
financial and/or non-financial contributions for a child then such a matter may
addressed as a matter arising under s 75(2)(o) of the Act.
to s 79 have removed the reference to matters listed in s 75(2) and instead, s
79(5) permits a Court to have regard to
listed matters under the heading
Considerations relating to current and future financial
circumstances
”. This raises the question as to whether past
contributions (financial or non-financial) can be considered under s 79(5)(v)
whether that subsection is limited to matters relating to “current and
future financial circumstances”. While a heading
will not generally be
regarded as an operative part of the Act, it is regarded as indicative of the
intent of what follows. Here
the reference to “considerations relating to
current and future circumstances” does not only appear in the heading but
appears in s 79(3)(b)(ii). This would appear on a plain reading to confine the
considerations which may be taken into account pursuant
to s 79(5)(v) to matters
relating to current and future financial circumstances. This would appear to
preclude consideration of past
contributions under this catch-all. It is not
immediately apparent that such contributions may be considered under any other
sub-paragraph.
solicitor advocate for the wife submitted that the consequence of the amendments
was to preclude consideration of such contributions
under s 79(5)(v)
because they did not pertain to the current and future financial circumstances
of either party. King’s counsel
for the husband accepted that s 79(5) is
said to relate to current and future financial circumstances but that it did not
to have been the intention of Parliament to legislate in a manner which
impacted upon the capacity to recognise such contributions.
The failure to refer
to this consequence in the Second Reading Speech was said to indicate that there
was no intention to alter the
existing position.
husband submitted that it was necessary to have regard to s 79(5) in its
entirety to interpret s 79(5)(v). Section 79(5)(d) which
is directed to
consideration of “material wastage” is plainly retrospective in
nature notwithstanding the words in s
79(3)(b)(ii), as is the reference to one
party’s contributions to the income-earning capacity, property and
financial resource
of the other in s 79(5)(n). By analogy, the husband submitted
that s 79(5)(v) might be deployed to consider financial contributions
children of one’s spouse for whom one did not have a legal obligation. It
was submitted that past financial acts (wastage
or contribution to stepchildren)
have an impact on the current financial circumstances of the parties.
High Court in
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
, at 381–382 (McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ)
Conflicting statutory provisions should be reconciled so far as
primary object of statutory construction is to construe the relevant provision
so that it is consistent with the language and
purpose of all the provisions of
the statute. The meaning of the provision must be determined “by reference
to the language
of the instrument viewed as a whole”. In
Commissioner
for Railways (NSW) v Agalianos
, Dixon CJ pointed out that “the
context, the general purpose and policy of a provision and its consistency and
fairness are
surer guides to its meaning than the logic with which it is
constructed”. Thus, the process of construction must always begin
examining the context of the provision that is being construed.
legislative instrument must be construed on the prima facie basis that its
provisions are intended to give effect to harmonious
goals. Where conflict
appears to arise from the language of particular provisions, the conflict must
be alleviated, so far as possible,
by adjusting the meaning of the competing
provisions to achieve that result which will best give effect to the purpose and
of those provisions while maintaining the unity of all the statutory
provisions. Reconciling conflicting provisions will often require
“to determine which is the leading provision and which the subordinate
provision, and which must give way to the
other”. Only by determining the
hierarchy of the provisions will it be possible in many cases to give each
provision the meaning
which best gives effect to its purpose and language while
maintaining the unity of the statutory scheme.
(Footnotes omitted)
is necessary to consider whether the fact of having introduced the words
“current and future financial circumstances”
was intended to
displace the existing capacity to consider all matters which may retrospectively
touch on the justice and equity
of orders adjusting the interests of the
parties. In the absence of evidence supporting such an intention and construing
this remedial
legislation as a whole, I am satisfied that it remains permissible
to take into account past financial contributions to the children
of a spouse
where justice and equity requires. This is because such contributions may be
regarded as having had an impact on the
current financial circumstances of that
spouse. In that regard the husband made contributions to the wife’s child
of a previous
relationship (including significant contributions to rent, bond
and educational expenses) which I have regard to when considering
which would be just and equitable.
Other s 79(5) matters
find that the birth of the parties’ child had an impact on the
wife’s income, her earning capacity and contributions
superannuation entitlements. She left full-time work in late 2016 and did not
start working full-time until early 2023.
wife has re-entered the work force after a break which involved long service
leave and maternity leave followed by casual and
part-time work. The
wife’s income and earning capacity have been impacted by time out of the
work force. The employment opportunities
available to the wife given her age and
past work force participation support the conclusion that the wife is exercising
her present
earning capacity.
wife has a requirement to provide housing for herself and the parties’
child who lives with her on a half time basis.
husband’s current income from all sources is substantially greater than
that of the wife. Even if the husband were to cease
work, he will retain a
significant income in the form of his pension.
wife is 51 years of age and the husband is 59 years of age. Two things arise
from this: the first is that the wife will not meet
a condition of release for
her superannuation for some time, the second is that she may be expected to have
a longer period in the
workforce than the husband.
have above identified the existing assets of the parties, but it is necessary to
have regard to the use which the wife has had of
property which existed at
separation when considering the parties’ respective entitlements. The wife
received the benefit of
monies paid to her pursuant to s 79 of the Act. Those
funds totalled $290,000. The wife also received $60,000 from the parties’
joint funds. The husband applied funds outlined above to paid legal fees. Those
funds are not represented in the above table of the
parties’ property and,
accordingly, must be taken into account as impacting the current financial
circumstances of each, if
the resulting orders are to be just and
am weighing the wife’s receipt of funds after separation (discussed above)
as a matter which relates to her current financial
circumstances (having
permitted payment of the deposit on real property and a car, not otherwise
recognised in dollar value, in my
assessment).
am satisfied that having regard to those s 79(5) matters which favour the
husband: past financial contributions to the wife’s
child, his shorter
prospective workforce participation and the wife’s receipt of significant
funds after separation (both by
court order and otherwise); and those which
favour the wife: lesser income and earning capacity, significantly lesser
defined benefit
superannuation entitlements, impact of parenting on workforce
participation and superannuation both retrospectively and prospectively,
appropriate that there be a further adjustment in favour of the wife calculated
by reference to the pool which contains property
and accumulation superannuation
How should the orders be structured?
do not propose to make a splitting order in respect of the husband’s DFRDB
pension, not because I cannot make such an order
but because two factors
persuade me that it would not be just and equitable: the first is that the
husband’s interest was almost
entirely the result of his employment
predating the parties’ relationship and the second is his age.
fact that I do not propose to make an order which splits this interest does not
mean that I can ignore its significant value to
the husband as an income stream.
propose to exclude both parties’ defined benefit interests from the assets
against which I propose to make adjustment orders.
That is because inclusion of
them as assets and recognition of their value as an income stream would
potentially result in double
reality of this approach, however, is that there will need to be an adjustment
to the pool containing the assets and accumulation
superannuation in order to
ensure that the resulting orders are just and equitable. In my view a further
adjustment of 5 per cent
to the wife is an appropriate way to recognise the
matters set out above (those which favour her balanced against those which
the husband).
result is that the husband will receive:
(a) Suburb B property $1,895,000
(b) Motor Vehicle 1 $55,000
(c) NAB account #1413 $216,803
(d) NAB account #6807 $46,300
(e) NAB Cherokee trust account $36,077
(f) E Bank account $7,369
(g) Cherokee consulting invoice $13,068
(h) Tax debt ($9,523)
(i) Estimated tax/super liabilities
For Cherokee Trust ($14,411)
(j) Estimated tax/super liabilities
Cherokee Consulting ($5,224)
(k) Payment to wife ($400,000)
(l) Super Fund 1 $254,866
: $2,095,325
addition, the husband will have his pension entitlements, with a capitalised
value of $2,873,570.60 (or a present annual income
of $196,000).
the wife will receive:
(a) Interest in Suburb B Not valued
(b) Motor Vehicle 2 Not valued
(c) NAB Trading account Negligible
(d) NAB account $2,294
(e) Payment from husband $400,000
(f) Super Fund 1 $89,354
addition, the wife will also receive her defined benefit superannuation
entitlements with a capitalised value of $576,800 (or annual
value if taken as
pension of $37,416 per annum at time of valuation).
order to ensure that the resulting orders are just and equitable, it is
necessary to make an adjustment measured against the pool
of assets and
accumulation superannuation. Taking into account the assets which the wife has
in her possession, it is necessary for
the husband to pay her the further sum of
$413,808 to ensure that she receives 35% of the assets identified above at [43]
of my reasons.
appeal has succeeded on an error of law. The wife submitted that the error was
induced by the submissions in the husband’s
case, therefore justifying a
costs order against the husband. As indicated above, there is some force to that
argument. However,
ultimately that fact persuades me that the wife should have
the benefit of a certificate but the husband ought not.
I certify that the preceding eighty-six (86)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 24 October 2025
RTF format (616 KB)
Signed PDF/A format