Jaymes & Richa [2025] FedCFamC1A 207 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Jaymes & Richa
[2025] FedCFamC1A 207
Appeal from:
Richa & Jaymes & Ors
[2025] FCWA 163
Appeal number:
NAA 360 of 2025
File number:
4847 of 2018
Judgment of:
AUSTIN, SUTHERLAND AND RIETHMULLER JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – PROPERTY
– Appeal from property settlement orders – Where appellant ordered
to indemnify the respondent
for potential capital gains tax liability –
Where the Full Court is satisfied the primary judge did not intend to make this
order – Order corrected under the “slip rule” – Appeal
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) r 10.13
Evidence Act 1906
Family Court Rules 2021
Cases cited:
Adler & Parrow
[2024] FedCFamC1A
Daily & Daily (No 2)
(2023) FLC 94-151
[2023] FedCFamC1A
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Richa & Jaymes & Ors
[2022] FCWA 193
Richa & Jaymes & Ors
[2022] FCWA 83
Richa & Jaymes & Ors
[2022] FCWA 42
Richa & Jaymes & Ors
[2021] FCWA 186
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Litigant in person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Bannerman Solicitors
PTW 4847 of 2018
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
AUSTIN, SUTHERLAND AND RIETHMULLER JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
orders of 11 July 2025 in file number PTW 4847 of 2018 be amended pursuant to
r 10.13(1)(e) of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court Rules 2021
(Cth) by deleting Order 12(a).
the appeal is dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
Jaymes & Richa
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
AUSTIN, SUTHERLAND & RIETHMULLER JJ:
appellant appeals against orders made in property settlement proceedings between
him and his former wife, the respondent.
appellant had failed to comply with many previous orders, including injunctions
restraining him from dealing with corporate interests
in the complex structures
of companies and trusts that he had established, and orders for him to file
affidavit material. As a result
of his failure to comply with directions with
respect to the preparation of the matter, orders were made for his response to
out and for the matter to proceed on an undefended basis. The
appellant then chose to appear at the final hearing, where the primary
heard his submissions before giving judgment.
appellant’s participation in the litigation was challenging not only
because of his failure to comply with his obligations
to make full and frank
disclosure, but also because of his failure to comply with directions for
management of the proceedings. After
his lawyers (including a senior counsel)
ceased acting for him, he sent a notice to the primary judge setting out, inter
i, state for the record that i, am not representing [appellant],
i, will be presenting i, as [appellant], a man;
i, understand that the legal system takes non action as compliance; as such i,
will do my best to express my situation to you here;
i, state that i am not a practicing lawyer and as such I cannot get a fair
outcome by competing with one who has many years of experience;
as such i, am
relying on common law that is the law common to i, i, being a man who's law is
second only to God; in as much as i,
have caused no harm to another man or his
property, which i, have not;
i, ask is it your intention to be complicit in the theft of i, or is it your
intention to provide reasonable and fair remedy;
(As per the original)
complexity of the business structures that the appellant created (which appear
to have been for the purpose of divesting himself
of property) is apparent from
the summary given by the primary judge at [10] to [22] of the judgment.
respondent has suffered a brain injury. Her brother was appointed her litigation
guardian. Ultimately, she did not pursue the
complex case to set aside
transactions pursuant to
Family Law Act
primary judge found that the identifiable property of the parties consisted of
modest chattels, savings and shareholdings identified
in the respondent’s
Financial Statement filed on 22 May 2024 of approximately $33,000,
superannuation of the parties in a self-managed
superannuation fund of
$800,722.17 (of which the respondent’s interest was $335,926.97) and
superannuation of the appellant
in an industry fund of $5,861 (at [107]). His
Honour found:
I comfortably conclude that on the balance of probabilities it is likely that
the [appellant] has significant undisclosed equitable
interests in property,
cash reserves and other undisclosed legal interests in property, and significant
financial resources. For
obvious reasons, it is not possible to attempt to
quantify the property and financial resources available to him.
primary judge considered the contributions of the parties, finding that:
over the course of the relationship the contributions of all forms made by the
[respondent] at least equalled those of the [appellant],
and that there is
nothing in the [appellant’s] post separation actions to which he could
point to suggest that subsequent contributions
should appropriately be
considered in a manner favourable to him.
primary judge then turned to consider the future needs of the parties, noting
that the appellant was able to support himself,
but that the respondent has
permanent brain damage and is in assisted living accommodation. Whilst the
respondent currently receives
a NDIS package of $488,663 and social security,
this does not cover the entirety of her needs. There was nothing to indicate
the respondent’s circumstances may improve in the future.
Significantly,
the primary judge found that:
already noted, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
[appellant] has property and financial resources which
have not been disclosed.
The fact that I cannot quantify them is neither here nor there and is entirely a
result of the approach
the [appellant] has chosen to take to the litigation and
to his dealings with the [respondent] more generally. To any extent that
determination of the proceedings might have led to a more favourable outcome for
the [appellant] had he given honest evidence
and fully discharged his duty of
disclosure, that is a situation of his own making.
if I am wrong in that conclusion, the evidence clearly supports findings that if
he does not still retain property and financial
resources of significance, the
[appellant] has had access to the funds referred to earlier in these reasons and
has dissipated them.
The evidence also clearly supports findings that he took
steps to place property related to the business interests out of the reach
the [respondent], as noted at the relevant time by his then accountant who
recorded that the “aim of the changes ... was
to isolate [the appellant]
as much as possible from his business structure.” Those findings would, in
my judgment, lead to
the same conclusion as to what is a just and equitable
outcome in this case.
a result, the primary judge concluded:
am comfortably satisfied that it is just and equitable to make the orders sought
by the [respondent] – that is, to make a
superannuation splitting order
whereby the whole of the [appellant’s] interest in the Super Fund will be
allocated to her,
she will retain her own interest in that fund, and the parties
will otherwise each retain their own individual property and responsibility
their own liabilities. As conceded by counsel for the [respondent], in those
circumstances the [respondent] should indemnify
the [appellant] in relation to
any proper liabilities of the Super Fund.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant set out six grounds of appeal in his Notice of Appeal. Despite his
failure to file a Summary of Argument, the appellant
attended the appeal hearing
to make oral submissions, and he was heard.
Grounds 1 and 6
1. 1. Denial of Procedural Fairness:
The Appellant was denied a genuine opportunity to present and defend his case.
Despite being present at trial, the Court refused
to accept the Appellant's
affidavit or permit him to cross-examine witnesses. The Appellant was unaware of
his procedural rights
and confused about the nature of the trial due to his
cognitive condition. The Court failed to adequately explain what was happening
or ensure his informed participation.
6. Reliance on Untested Evidence:
The Court relied heavily on affidavit evidence of the Respondent who was
unavailable for cross-examination. The Appellant, due to
confusion and lack of
legal knowledge, did not understand his right to object or demand testing of
that evidence. This reliance on
untested material in a contested case
contributed to a miscarriage of justice.
appellant had failed to comply with directions for the filing of affidavit
material ultimately leading to his response being struck
out on 12 September
2022 (at [1] and see
Richa & Jaymes & Ors
[2022] FCWA 193).
primary judge refused to allow the appellant to rely upon an affidavit he sought
to provide on the day of the hearing. The primary
judge explained to the
appellant at the time of the hearing that he had “had ample opportunity to
file affidavit material”
(Transcript 27 May 2025, p.15 lines
appellant has not shown that the primary judge was in error in refusing to allow
him to rely upon an affidavit first produced
on the day of the final hearing in
circumstances where his previous failures to comply with directions for the
preparation of the
matter had led to his response being struck out.
the final hearing the appellant was given an opportunity to make submissions and
when it was apparent that he sought to have the
primary judge recuse himself,
the primary judge alerted him to the need to make an application to that effect.
The appellant then
made the application orally, which the primary judge
appellant had given no notice that he required any of the witnesses for
cross-examination (as required by r 243 of the
Family Court Rules
(WA)), nor did he seek leave to cross-examine any of the
respondent’s witnesses, despite this being drawn to his attention
primary judge who noted that the witnesses were present at court ([32] and
Transcript 27 May 2025, p.14 lines 17–30).
He could not have
cross-examined the respondent as she had suffered permanent brain damage. He was
aware of this well before the
trial as the respondent’s brother had been
appointed her litigation guardian as a result of her injuries. Her affidavit was
admissible as it fell within the exception to the hearsay rule in
Evidence Act 1906
(WA). It remained open to the appellant to make
submissions as to the weight that the primary judge ought to have placed on the
evidence: see generally
Evidence Act
primary judge took into account that the affidavit evidence was not tested by
cross-examination (at [61]).
appellant provided no evidence on the appeal that he was unaware of his
procedural rights nor as to his “cognitive condition”.
has had a long history of interlocutory applications, as set out in the primary
judge’s reasons for judgment, which
incorporated the following earlier
Richa & Jaymes & Ors
[2022] FCWA 193
Jaymes & Ors
[2022] FCWA 83
Richa & Jaymes & Ors
Richa & Jaymes & Ors
[2021] FCWA 186.
appellant has not identified any failure by the primary judge to afford him
procedural fairness in the conduct of the hearing,
nor that the primary judge
erred by considering the respondent’s affidavit in the circumstances of
allegations in these grounds are not made out.
2. Apprehended Bias:
The Appellant's application for recusal was summarily dismissed. The Judge
displayed a predisposed tone, placed excessive weight
on the Appellant's prior
procedural behaviour, and dismissed the Appellant's concerns without full
engagement, giving rise to a reasonable
apprehension of bias.
primary judge heard the application by the appellant for his Honour to recuse
himself, after first identifying that this was what
the appellant sought to do
and advising him of the need to make the application. The basis for the
application was an earlier judgment
by the primary judge where his Honour
identified that the respondent had a “prima facie” case for
obtaining orders that
she retain all of the superannuation.
assessment of a prima facie case is not a statement as to the likely or intended
outcome of the proceedings, but merely an assessment
of the case on the basis of
the evidence of a party if that evidence is taken at its highest. That is,
whether there was evidence
before the court that could, not would, support the
case being put. The assessment of whether there was a prima facie case could
be the basis for a finding of apprehended bias.
the hearing of the appeal the appellant sought to impugn the judgment on the
basis that the primary judge had described him as
a “sovereign
citizen”, arguing that this was not an apt description and led the primary
judge to view him unfavourably.
The primary judge did not describe the appellant
as a “sovereign citizen” but explained that:
problematic nature of the [appellant’s] engagement with the proceedings is
set out in an earlier judgment and does not
require detailed explanation for
present purposes. It is sufficient to note that the [appellant] has engaged with
the Court and with
the proceedings in a manner not infrequently adopted by
persons who style themselves as “sovereign citizens”. Among other
things, the [appellant] served “notices” directed to the Court and
to me personally, expressing his intention to render
bills requiring payment by
me at the rate of $10,000 per order made and “$5 per minute that they take
to complete”, and
requested that I provide a personal billing address for
that purpose.
(Footnotes omitted)
conduct of the appellant was relevant to the decision of the primary judge to
refuse him leave to rely upon an unfiled affidavit
on the day of the hearing, in
the context of his previous failure to comply with directions which resulted in
his response having
been dismissed. In any event, it is not open to a litigant
to complain of apprehended bias in circumstances where it is their own
directed to the judge hearing the matter, that gives rise to their
is no merit in this ground.
3. Failure to Accommodate Disability:
The Appellant suffers from a medically diagnosed brain tumour that affects
memory and cognition. Despite being self-represented,
the Court made no
procedural accommodations–such as case guardianship, adjournments, or
simplifying procedure. This failure
breached the Appellant's rights under the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) and the
Disability Discrimination Act
is no medical evidence of the appellant suffering a disability nor the
“procedural accommodations” that would be
reasonably required to
address any particular needs caused by his alleged disability. At no point has
he sought orders to appoint
a litigation guardian to manage the litigation on
his behalf.
appellant appeared at the hearing and made oral submissions. He also
demonstrated an ability to articulate complicated (although
entirely meritless)
pseudo law arguments in his notice to the primary judge.
ground is without merit and must be dismissed.
4. Unjust and Disproportionate Orders:
The Court awarded 100% of the Appellant's superannuation–his sole
remaining asset–to the Respondent, despite the Appellant
being bankrupt
and having no other means of support. The Court inferred undisclosed assets
without concrete evidence, creating a
punitive and unjust outcome.
primary judge set out detailed reasons with respect to the property of the
parties (at [75]-[106]) after making findings about
the appellant’s
inadequate disclosure (at [68]–[74]). Whilst the appellant says he is
bankrupt, the primary judge noted
that he had been discharged from bankruptcy in
August 2023 (at [22]). The evidence showed that the appellant had attempted to
one of his businesses through a charitable foundation (that he established
after separation) although evidence showed that significant
transferred from that foundation to the appellant. He also established a company
in Country B, which he said was unsuccessful,
but he had placed an
“advertisement seeking a caretaker for a ‘property in [Suburb
C]’, which was said to be owned
by the company” (at [97]).
was ample evidence, discussed in detail in the reasons for judgment, to support
the findings of the primary judge. In the circumstances
of this case, it could
not be said that the primary judge’s discretion was legally unreasonable
in the sense discussed in
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
Accordingly, this ground is without merit.
5. Error of Law – Capital Gains Tax Order:
The Court ordered the Appellant to indemnify the Respondent for capital gains
tax arising from the post-separation sale of a property
solely owned by the
Respondent. This order was made without legal justification, evidence, or
submissions and represents a miscarriage
of discretion.
respondent’s liability for capital gains tax was estimated by her to be
around $33,000. This liability arose from the sale
of one of the two properties
the parties had when together. The evidence as to this liability was limited.
The respondent said in
her affidavit filed on 23 August 2019:
August 2018, I sold my property at [Property D] for $420,000 as per an agreement
that [the appellant] and I came to in November
2016 to sell both this property
and "the family home". As expected, the bank took the money to payout the
existing mortgage and arrears
on "[ Property D]", but also took the remaining
proceeds of $170,000 to maintain the 80% LVR required on our joint loan facility
now secured only by "the family home", as [the appellant] had not paid off his
loan for his "[Property E]" when he sold it in October
2014 but had released
"[Property E]" as security from our joint loan facility. This has left me with
an estimated Capital Gains Tax
debt this financial year of about $33.000 and no
money to pay it from.
severely impacts on my ability to function on a day-to-day basis and I often
find myself overwhelmed and distressed by this
condition. I am also extremely
distressed, depressed and anxious by the financial pressures I currently face
since separation and
specifically the Capital Gain Tax I now owe the ATO from
the sale of my "[ Property D] ", estimated at about $33,000, and with this
case and the processes involved.
respondent’s financial statement filed on 23 August 2019 sets out, at item
53, “Other personal liabilities”
of “E $33,000”
described as “Estimated ATO Capital Gains Tax due from the sale of
[Property D] in August 2018”.
in the respondent’s chronology in the “Papers for the Judicial
Officer” filed on 8 October 2024 for the
final hearing, she set out that
the capital gains tax “was waived by the ATO”.
primary judge noted that the respondent sought orders that the appellant
indemnify her for any capital gains tax incurred as a
result of her sale of the
[Property D], but that “No submissions were directed to that proposal at
trial and it was not actively
pursued” (at [28]). The primary judge does
not discuss this debt thereafter in the judgment, nor was it referred to in the
summary of the orders to be made at the conclusion of the judgment at [122]
(quoted above at [
appears that the primary judge overlooked the inclusion of this Order in the
draft Minute of Order sought by the respondent, which
his Honour used when
giving judgment. We are satisfied that his Honour did not intend to make this
particular Order and that it ought
to have been corrected under the slip rule.
As was said in
Adler & Parrow
[2024] FedCFamC1A 192:
It is necessary for an appellant to exhaust his or her other remedies before
seeking appellate intervention: see
Kingsley & Secretary, Department of
[2021] FamCAFC 10
Zan & Wen (No
(2023) FLC 94-513 at [69]; and
Wall Street Developments Pty Ltd v
[2010] QDC 44.
Where it is clear that the complaint relates only to
a drafting slip rather than an appealable error, the ground of appeal should
court has power to amend orders pursuant to the slip rule: see r 10.13 of
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Daily & Daily (No 2)
(2023) FLC 94-151 and
Adler & Parrow
prevent the parties from being put to further expense, it is directed that the
orders of the primary judge be amended under the
slip rule so as to delete this
obviously unintended order, (a course to which the appellant and respondent both
ground must therefore be dismissed.
the reasons set out above the orders of the primary judge should be amended
pursuant to the slip rule, and the appeal dismissed.
The respondent did not seek
a costs order.
I certify that the preceding thirty-seven (37)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Austin, Sutherland and
Riethmuller
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (396 KB)
Signed PDF/A format