Logan v Otis Elevator Company Pty Limited [2001] IRCA 1 (4 April 2001)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
Logan v Otis Elevator Company Pty Limited
[2001] IRCA
INDUSTRIAL LAW
Payment for overtime and call-backs – method of calculation – where
it is not possible to determine the exact
number of hours worked – whether
base hours to be determined by reference to the award or the contract between
the parties
– whether the overtime was authorised
– Costs – whether application for amounts due under an
award instituted vexatiously or without reasonable cause –
interest up to
judgement – whether good cause demonstrated against the award of
Industrial Relations Act
(Cth) ss 170EA,
National Metal and Engineering On-Site Construction Award
Workplace Relations and Other Legislation Amendment Act
(Cth) Sch 16
Australian Guarantee Corporation Ltd v Border
Printing Services (
Federal Court of Australia
April 1989 unreported) cited
Girard v Lundie
(1940) 59 NSWIG 202
Holland Stolte Pty Ltd v Bergamin
(Southwell J, Supreme Court of
Victoria, 9 July 1991, unreported) cited
Imogen Pty Ltd v Anthony
(Full Court, Industrial Relations Court of Australia, 20 December
1996, unreported) cited
Keft v Kameruka Estates Pty Ltd
[1992] NSWIRC
Lamont v Stein
(1936) 35 AR 143
Logan v Otis
Elevator Company Pty Limited
[1997] IRCA 200
referred to
Logan v Otis
Elevator Company Pty Limited
(1999) 94 IR 218
referred to
Hilton Nursing Home Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWIRComm152 cited
Police Officers
(Interpretation of Award) Case
(1971) 38 SAIR 51
Commissioner of Taxation
Ruby v Marsh
[1975] HCA 32
Shackley v Australian Croatian Club Ltd
(1996) 141 ALR
Thompson v Hodder
[1989] FCA 493
(1990) 21 FCR 467
Dairyvale Co-operative Ltd
(1972) 39 SAIR 327
[1995] NSWIRC 3 cited
White v Mrs Murphy’s Country
Fried Chicken Pty Ltd
(1984) AR 794
PETER ANTON CHARLES
LOGAN v OTIS ELEVATOR COMPANY PTY LIMITED
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
NEW SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
NI 1279 OF 1995
PETER ANTON CHARLES LOGAN
OTIS ELEVATOR COMPANY PTY LIMITED
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
The matter be adjourned until 24 April 2001
2. The parties to bring in short
minutes of order to give effect to these reasons for
Note: Settlement
and entry of orders is dealt with in Order 36 of the Industrial Relations Court
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
NEW SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
NI 1279 OF 1995
PETER ANTON CHARLES
OTIS ELEVATOR COMPANY PTY
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
1 This matter now has a long history. The early history was set out at the
commencement of reasons for judgment (these reasons have
to be read in
conjunction with the earlier reasons) I published on 20 June 1997:
[1997] IRCA
“On 16 February 1995 Mr Peter Logan filed an application under
s 170EA of what was then entitled the
Industrial Relations Act
(“the Act”). Mr Logan alleged that his employment with Otis Elevator
Company Pty Ltd (“Otis”) had been terminated
on 8 February 1995 in
contravention of provisions of the Act.
That application was ultimately heard and determined by a Judicial Registrar
who concluded, in reasons for judgment published on
30 October 1995, that the
termination of Mr Logan’s employment was not for a valid reason of the
of the Act, and went on to express the view that,
had it been necessary for him to determine the matter, the termination was also
in contravention of s 170DE(2). This last provision is not a valid law of the
Commonwealth and need not be considered further: see
Commonwealth
(1996) 138 ALR 129. The Judicial Registrar did not order
reinstatement but awarded compensation of $20,000.
By notice of motion filed on 17 November 1995, Otis sought a review under s
377 of the Act of the determination of the Judicial Registrar.
That application
apparently gave rise to further claims by Mr Logan not based on the provisions
of Division 3 of
of the Act. In January 1996, a statement of claim was
filed on behalf of Mr Logan which, in its final amended form, alleged a failure
to pay him amounts due under of one of two awards and alleged a breach of the
contract of employment concerning overtime and notice.
Sums aggregating more
than $830,000 were particularised in the statement of claim as amounts due to Mr
Logan. The amounts said to
be due under the award were for overtime worked by Mr
Logan and amounts payable to an employee who is liable to be called back to
and/or who is standing by. While it was, for a period, a contentious issue at
the trial, it was ultimately determined that judgment
should be given on all
issues except the quantum of Otis’s liability for breaches of any award,
if liability is established.”
2 In that judgment I determined a number of issues which were
reflected in formal orders made on 11 March 1999. Those orders were
accompanied
by reasons which recanvassed and updated the history. At the commencement of
those reasons I said:
“In June 1997 I published reasons for judgment effectively disposing of
a number of issues in proceedings between Mr Logan and
Otis Elevator Company Pty
Ltd (“Otis”). In those reasons I canvassed, in detail, the relevant
evidence and the legal
issues raised in the proceedings. What I was required to
deal with in that judgment had been determined by a consent order I had
8 March 1996 (prior to trial) that had been proposed by the parties. The
proceedings before me were initially an application
for the review of a decision
of a judicial registrar. Such an application could be made, as of right, by a
party aggrieved by the
decision of a judicial registrar. That application was
brought by Otis who had unsuccessfully defended before a judicial registrar
application by Mr Logan who established that the termination of his employment
with Otis had been in contravention of Division
Relations Act
. The judicial registrar had awarded compensation
in the sum of $20,000.
It appears the initiation of the review led Mr Logan, no doubt on advice, to
commence proceedings in the Court’s accrued jurisdiction
alleging breach
of his employment contract with Otis and invoking the Court’s statutory
of an award. This was done by way of
statement of claim. As to the award contravention it was contended by Mr Logan
that his employment
with Otis was regulated by one of two awards made under
Industrial Relations Act
or legislation it had
repealed and that certain entitlements he had under one or other of those awards
had not been provided or provided
fully by Otis.
The order I earlier referred to which was made on 8 March 1996 resulted in
the question of the quantum of any liability either under
an award or under the
contract being determined separately from and following the resolution of other
issues. While this course
was later questioned by counsel for Otis during the
trial I decided to adhere to the course that the parties had, by agreement,
chartered for themselves. Given what has transpired since I doubt the
wisdom of that course.
At the conclusion of my reasons of 20 June 1997 I indicated that the
applicant should bring in short minutes of orders to give effect
reasons. A little under a year later those representing the applicant saw fit
to do so. In the result a position was reached
in February this year where
orders could be made giving effect to my reasons for judgment. Those orders are
reflected in the orders
I make today. While there was not entire agreement
between the parties as to what form the orders should take and what matters
be the subject of orders there was general agreement about much of what
the applicant proposed.”
3 The orders I made on 11 March 1999 were as follows:
1. The termination of employment of the applicant was in contravention of
s 170DE of the
Industrial Relations Act
2 The respondent pay the applicant $20,000 within 28 days.
3. That part of the claim of the applicant pleaded in paragraphs 10, 11 and
12 and Schedule 1 of the Further Amended Statement of
Claim filed 18 October
1996 is dismissed.
4. That part of the claim of the applicant pleaded in paragraphs 21, 22, 23
and 24 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim filed
on 18 October 1996 is
5. In the period 1988 until the termination of his employment the work
undertaken by the applicant was work comprehended by the classification
electrician special class within the meaning of clause 3(e) of the National
Metal and Engineering On-Site Construction Industry
6. Costs reserved.
7. The matter be listed for directions on 25 March 1999 at 9.30 am.
4 Mr Logan ("the applicant") successfully appealed against
certain of these orders. The Full Court of the Industrial Relations Court
Australia gave judgment on 22 June 1999:
(1999) 94 IR 218
, and made the
following orders:
1. Leave to appeal be granted.
2. The appeal be upheld in part.
3. The orders made by Moore J on 11 March 1999 be varied by:
(i) deleting order 4; and
(ii) adding to the said orders the following additional
8. The claim of the applicant, Peter Anton Charles Logan, be assessed on the
bases that:
(a) the respondent, Otis Elevator Company Pty Limited, was bound to give to
the said applicant three months’ notice of termination
of employment or to
pay three months’ salary in lieu of notice; and
(b) the said respondent is not entitled to set-off against its liability to
make payments in respect of overtime and call-backs,
pursuant to clause 14(a)
and (d) of the
National Metal and Engineering On-Site Construction Award
1989, the difference between the salary paid by the said respondent to the said
applicant and the amount payable to him under the
said award for ordinary
5 Following the judgment of the Full Court, Otis Elevator
Company Pty Ltd ("Otis") sought special leave to appeal to the High Court
against the judgment of the Full Court. Special leave was refused on 10 March
2000. The matter was listed before me on 31 March
2000 for directions. There
was then a dispute as to what steps the parties had to take (and had taken
before the various appeals
were made) to prepare the matter for hearing.
Nonetheless, a timetable was settled so that the matter could be heard on 26 and
June 2000. The hearing proceeded on those dates and evidence was led. At
the conclusion of the hearing on 27 June 2000 there was
a residual issue of
limited scope concerning the tender of documents. It became, however, a more
significant issue which delayed
the proceedings by several months. The matter
was adjourned to 4 August 2000 for the purpose of hearing submissions from the
On 4 August 2000 several documents were tendered by counsel for the
applicant. Their tender resulted in an application by counsel
for Otis for the
proceedings to be adjourned. They were adjourned to 6 September 2000 and then
to 23 November 2000 when further
evidence was led. Final submissions were made
on 24 November 2000.
6 Against this background, it is necessary to determine the residual issues
flowing from the procedural order I made on 8 March 1996
and the orders I made
on 11 March 1999 as varied by the Full Court on 22 June 1999. Several of the
findings made in the earlier judgment
are presently relevant. The first two are
reflected in the orders and they are that the
National Metal and Engineering
On-Site Construction Award
1989 ("the Award") applied to the applicant's
employment, and that the classification the applicant worked under was an
electrician
special class. Another finding of relevance which was not reflected
in the orders earlier made, was that the applicant regularly
worked in excess of
38 hours per week.
7 The issues that now arise are whether the applicant was involved in call
backs for which he is entitled to payment under the Award
and if so, the number
of hours involved. Another issue is whether the applicant worked overtime for
which he is entitled to payment
under the Award and if so, the number of hours
involved. Two matters should be mentioned at this stage. The first is that Otis
not dispute that there may have been some call backs for which an
entitlement might have arisen and Otis also did not dispute that
there could
have been work done outside ordinary hours which might be characterised as
overtime. The second matter is that it appeared
to be common ground that any
entitlement of the applicant to overtime payments could be determined by
reference to any hours he worked
in excess of 38 hours (or on Otis's primary
submission, 40 hours) on a weekly basis. It will be necessary to return to this
The relevant terms of the Award
8 It is convenient to set out, at this point, the relevant provisions of the
Award concerning overtime and call backs. They are:
“11 - HOURS OF WORK
Day workers
(a) Subject to clause 11A - Implementation of 38 hour weeks and subject to
the exceptions hereinafter provided, the ordinary hours
of work shall be an
average of 38 per week to be worked on one of the following bases:
(i) 38 hours within a work cycle not exceeding seven consecutive days;
(ii) 76 hours within a work cycle not exceeding fourteen consecutive days;
(iii) 114 hours within a work cycle not exceeding 21 consecutive days;
(iv) 152 hours within a work cycle not exceeding 28 consecutive days.
(v) For the purposes of subclause 11A(i) any other work cycle during which a
weekly average of 38 ordinary hours are worked as may
be agreed in accordance
with subclause 11A(i).
(b) The ordinary hours of work prescribed herein may be worked on any day or
all of the days of the week, Monday to Friday.
(c) The ordinary hours of work prescribed herein shall be worked
continuously, except for meal breaks, at the discretion of the employer
6.30 am. and 6.00p.m. Provided that the spread of hours may be altered by mutual
agreement between an employer and the majority
of employees on the site or
section or sections concerned.
Provided further that work done prior to the spread of hours fixed in
accordance with this subclause for which overtime rates are
payable shall be
deemed for the purposes of this subclause to be part of the ordinary hours of
(d) The ordinary hours of work prescribed herein shall not exceed ten hours
on any day. Provided that in any arrangement of ordinary
working hours where the
ordinary working hours are to exceed eight on any day, the arrangement of hours
shall be subject to the agreement
of the employer and the majority of employees
on the site or section or sections concerned.
14 - OVERTIME
Payment for working overtime (other than shift work)
(a) For all work done outside ordinary hours the rates of pay shall be time
and a half for the first two hours and double time thereafter,
such double time
to continue until the completion of the overtime work.
Except as provided in this subclause or subclause (c) hereof in computing
overtime each day’s work shall stand alone.
For the purposes of this clause ordinary hours shall mean the hours worked
fixed in accordance with clause 11 of this award.
The hourly rate, when computing overtime, shall be determined by dividing
the appropriate weekly rate by 38, even in cases when an
employee worked more
than 38 ordinary hours in a week.
Requirement to work reasonable overtime
(b) An employer may require any employee to work reasonable overtime at
overtime rates and such employee shall work overtime in accordance
requirement.
The assignment of overtime by an employer to an employee shall be based on
specific work requirements and the practice of “one
in, all in”
overtime shall not apply.
Rest period after overtime
(d) An employee recalled to work overtime after leaving the site (whether
notified before or after leaving the site) shall be paid
for a minimum of four
hours work or where the employee has been paid for standing by in accordance
with subclause (g) hereof shall
be paid for a minimum of three hours work at the
appropriate rate for each time he is so recalled; provided that, except in the
of unforeseen circumstances arising the employee shall not be required to
work the full three or four hours as the case may be if
the job he was recalled
to perform is completed within a shorter period. This subclause shall not apply
in cases where it is customary
for an employee to return to his employer’s
site to perform a specific job outside his ordinary working hours, or where the
overtime is continuous (subject to a reasonable meal break) with the completion
or commencement of ordinary working time.
Overtime worked in the circumstances specified in this subclause shall not
be regarded as overtime for the purpose of subclause (c)
hereof when the actual
time worked is less than three hours on such recall or on each of such
(e) When an employee is required to work overtime (cribtime shall be
Meal allowance
(f) An employee required to work overtime for at least one and a half hours
after working ordinary hours shall be paid (a meal allowance)
Standing by
(g) Subject to any custom now prevailing under which an employee is required
regularly to hold himself in readiness for a call-back,
an employee required to
hold himself in readiness to work after ordinary hours shall until released be
paid standing-by time at ordinary
rates from the time which he is so to hold
himself in readiness.
Transport of employees
(h) When an employee, after having worked overtime and/or shift for which he
has not been regularly rostered, finishes work at a time
when reasonable means
of transport are not available the employer shall provide him with conveyance to
his home or the nearest public
transport.”
I set out these clauses in my reasons for judgment of 20 June 1997 and
noted the following matters. The first was that I had not
cl 11A which concerns the implementation of a 38 hour week. It is
sufficient to say that cl 11A contemplates various methods
of working a 38
hour week that depend on either agreement at a site level or agreement
otherwise. The second was that there was no
evidence of any agreement concerning
the manner in which Mr Logan would work the 38 hour week. Thus the hours of work
by cl 11 are an average of 38 per week that may be worked in a
number of ways. They are to be worked Monday to Friday between the
6:30am and 6:00pm unless otherwise agreed.
9 I also noted in the earlier reasons for judgment that the entitlement to
overtime in cl 14 is expressed in terms of a payment
“for all work
done outside ordinary hours
”. Having regard to cl 11, work might
be done outside ordinary hours in a number of ways. It might be worked on days
week other than Monday to Friday: see cl 11(b). It might be worked
at times outside the spread of hours between 6:30am and 6:00pm,
assuming there
was no agreement to vary those spread of hours: see cl 11(c). It may, in
relation to one day, be hours worked in excess
of 10 hours: see cl 11(d).
It also may be hours exceeding an average of 38 hours per week worked in one of
the ways identified in
cl 11A. As to this last matter, there is plainly a
difficulty in identifying what hours might be worked in excess of an average
of hours in circumstances where cl 14(a) directs that in computing
overtime each day’s work should stand alone. However, for
purposes, the manner in which cl 14(a) would operate in relation to Mr
Logan’s employment is a matter that need not
be addressed given the
agreement that any entitlement to overtime could be calculated on a weekly
The issues and the onus of proof
10 It can be seen from cl 14(a) of the Award set out above, that overtime (in
the sense of work attracting a penalty rate) is work
done outside ordinary hours
and that each day's work is to stand alone. Obviously there are formidable
problems for the applicant
if I am being called upon to apply this clause
literally. Firstly there were no fixed hours of work (in the sense that there
no fixed starting or finishing time) and there is patently no way of
ascertaining what hours the applicant worked on any particular
day (nor has it
been suggested there is). These problems led to several exchanges during the
hearing of the matter in June and November
2000. It is convenient to set out
what counsel said. I do so to illustrate the agreement between the applicant
and Otis about the
issues and the means of resolving them.
11 When the hearing commenced on 26 June 2000, both counsel made various
submissions about what had already been decided (either by
me or the Full Court)
and what remained for determination. It is to be recalled that on 8 March 1996
I made an order leaving for
later determination the quantum of Otis's liability
for breaches of any award. The Court's task and the manner in which it could
approached was addressed by counsel for Otis. He said:
“MR DE MEYRICK: In determining quantum, there are no records available
to the actual times worked, so that
the present exercise must be to ascertain
in some general and global way, as best the court can do so on the evidence, the
of the overtime expressed as some average amount of time worked.
There are some records which are not very precise, nor are they records which
can be relied upon, but other than that, there’s
really only the oral
evidence of time worked by Mr Logan and the contra-evidence that can be brought
by the respondent as to the
testing of that evidence.
So, we’re in the situation of looking at averages rather than
precise times
, except, of course, that there were schedules in
several exhibits setting out the amount of time that was allocated to certain
which gives us a guide to what the work was and the time that should be
taken. That exercise is made more difficult -–and
I think your Honour, in
your judgment, has drawn attention to the fact that if we ever got to quantum
there was going to be these
difficulties by the factors already revealed by the
evidence. Firstly, the applicant worked alone and was a self-starter. It was
subject only to a maintenance schedule for regular visits to the various units
in his area, which schedule the applicant had arranged
based on one he had
inherited from his predecessor, Mr Sarchfield.”
12 A little later on, counsel for Otis submitted:
“MR DE MEYRICK: ...the present exercise requires firstly, that the
claim be proved by the applicant. That hasn’t been
done yet. Secondly,
any overtime that’s established must then be quantified in accordance with
the award as best as may be
done in the circumstances and on the facts.
That’s going to be a very difficult task. One might add there that if
a case in some other jurisdiction, it would be such an impossible task
that the court may well say it’s too difficult to start
trying to put some
quantum on it, it’s just impossible and it should fail.”
Shortly after these submissions were made, I asked counsel for
the applicant:
“HIS HONOUR:.... At the end of the day will you be saying that the
overtime is to be calculated on a weekly basis or a daily
MR ALKADAMANI
We accept that it’s weekly, average per
HIS HONOUR: So, I don’t have to bother myself about starting times and
finishing times, do I?
MR ALKADAMANI: What we’re putting to your Honour is the manner that is
less favourable to us in terms of when the double time
kicks in, or what have
you, your Honour, because the evidence is adduced in a weekly averages manner.
Your Honour, there will be
evidence of the approximate travelling element and
your Honour can draw some inferences as to what rate is attracted by what
HIS HONOUR: Just going back to the thing I’ve raised with you, your
case is that I can approach it on the basis that I find
as a matter of fact what
hours, if any – perhaps I can’t say if any, in view of the earlier
finding – but what
hours in excess of 38 hours were worked per week. If
the answer to that is 55 or if its 50 or whatever, then the difference between
that amount worked per week and 38 is time that can be characterised as
overtime, is that right?
MR ALKADAMANI: Yes.
HIS HONOUR: And to the extent that it may then be relevant that I look at
the extent to which that overtime was worked as opposed
to utilised travelling,
I can desegregate it that way for the purposes of working out whether penalty
rates are attracted or payments
to be at ordinary time?
MR ALKADAMANI: Your Honour is correct, that is how it has to be done. What
we don’t yet accept is that travelling time doesn’t
penalty rate. It may well do, but that’s something we’re yet to be
convinced of. But that is the approach
that we would commend to your Honour.
My friend is quite right in saying it’s a matter that has to be approached
But if a court is satisfied that overtime was regularly worked, then
one just does the best they can with the evidence, your Honour.
where overtime is claimed do not rely on actual records. In fact, it’s
the reason that most of them arise in litigation.
The normal method of proving
it is, unfortunately, the difficulty that one has, where they have to make
estimates and averages because
of the imperfections of human
recollection.”
13 Counsel for Otis then addressed this matter (after dealing with an issue
concerning transcript references):
“MR DE MEYRICK: While I’m on my feet, my learned friend says to
you he agrees the matter ought to be approached globally,
and he says on a
weekly basis. I think he ought to clarify whether that means he’s looking
at an amount of overtime applied
weekly, or whether that amount of overtime will
then be divided up to be applied under the award on a daily basis. Does that
sense? For example, if he’s claiming 15 hours per week, 15 hours per
week applied under the way in which the award is couched
would be applied on a
weekly amount with a certain payment for the first number of hours and so much
for all the rest. But if you
divide that 15 hours by five working days, then
you apply it as five lots of three hours.
HIS HONOUR: Is that because there’s a differentiation in the penalty
rates? An hour and a half for the first X hours and double
thereafter?
MR DE MEYRICK: Yes. So, from a calculation point of view, assuming that
there was only five hours per week, there would be only
one hour per day. If it
was applied on a weekly basis, there would be a loaded penalty for the first two
or three hours.
HIS HONOUR: The effect of that is if you’re doing it on a daily basis
more of the time would be attracting a penalty rate of
time and a half?
MR DE MEYRICK: Yes, the award says ...
MR ALKADAMANI: It’s weekly divided by five. It’s the least
preferable method from the applicant’s point of view.
HIS HONOUR: I understand. You’re inviting me to make a finding as to
how much was worked a week, assume that it was averaged
over the five days, and
then if it’s three hours, and assuming the award says this, the first two
hours are at a time and a
half and the third hour is at double time?
MR ALKADAMANI: It will only be time and a half for each of the elements of
MR DE MEYRICK: That’s a finding per day, not a finding per week.
It’s a finding per week divided by five and applied
HIS HONOUR:
But you take exception to that suggestion?
MR DE MEYRICK:
No, I don’t
, but I think it’s important
that we clarify it, because in the schedule attached to the application
that’s applied in
that way, and it refers to the first three hours being
at time and a half with all in excess at double time. The award says the
two hours time and a half.”
(Emphasis added)
14 By this point two matters were clear. The first was that Otis reserved
the right to submit that the applicant had failed to discharge
the onus of
proving, by credible evidence, that he worked hours that would warrant the
payment of overtime. However it was also
clear that Otis accepted the approach
put on behalf of the applicant. That was that if the applicant did prove the
hours he worked,
his entitlement to overtime could be determined on the basis of
first, finding the average number of hours per week he worked in
excess of the
ordinary hours (there was a dispute about whether this was 38 or 40 hours),
secondly, dividing the number of hours
by five and thirdly, treating the outcome
as the number of hours (or parts of hours) worked on each day. A qualification
agreed approach was already evident in written submissions handed out by
counsel for Otis on 26 June 2000. The qualification was
that a distinction had
to be drawn, for the purposes of determining time worked as overtime attracting
penalty rates, between work
on functions comprehended by the Award
classification, and work on other functions arising from the applicant's
employment contract.
15 I returned to this general question of what had been agreed at a later
hearing in November 2000. I said to counsel for Otis:
“HIS HONOUR: And am I wrong in thinking, and I won’t take up any
more time after I’ve raised this issue today,
but am I wrong in thinking
that there was agreement about – whether it’
doesn’t matter for the moment, but in looking at overtime, I can simply
consider whether hours in excess of either
38 or 40 were worked; if so, what
they were, and if they were, they can be treated as overtime?
MR DE MEYRICK: No, I don’t think it’s as simple as that. Our
primary submission is of course that the whole claim is
so woolly and
un-properly particularised as special damages that there shouldn’t be
anything but if your Honour were to find
that there is a need to look at
something, we say it’s s not as simple as saying it’
You’ve got a mixture of non-award functions and award functions which are
dealt with at some length in my submissions, and
the award fixes the rate for
award functions only.
16 Otis's counsel was reserving his client’s position in relation to
onus, what were the applicable hours and whether a distinction
should be drawn
between award and non award functions. He was not putting issue, however, what
had earlier been agreed about the
general approach to the matter. I returned to
this question the following day when counsel for Otis was making his
submissions.
I interrupted him and addressed a question to the applicant's
“HIS HONOUR: Do you remember we discussed yesterday this question of
hours, in aggregate, worked and 38 and whether your client
worked, as a matter
of fact, in excess of 38 and that your entitlement is to – if the answer
to that question is that he did
work for more than 38, then he’s entitled
to overtime for those extra hours. I’m just wondering how that approach
with the award. Now, there may be agreement about that approach and
I’m happy to give effect to that agreement. But in the
agreement I have to go to the award and ask the questions that the provision
raises, don’t I, that is, what his
ordinary hours were, what starting
time, finishing times were, on any given occasion that he worked in excess of
those hours per
Neither counsel indicated,
after I made this observation, that the earlier agreed approach should be
abandoned. I returned to this
question at the conclusion of the hearing on 24
November 2000:
“HIS HONOUR: Thank you. The other thing I raised with you was the
question of whether overtime and or should be computed on
at a daily basis,
either I have a misunderstanding of the way the award is crafted or
there’s an agreement that renders it
unnecessary for me to look at it, it
really doesn’t matter which, and I think there’s an agreement.
It’s something
you needn’t respond to.
MR ALKADAMANI: Your Honour, my understanding, and I speak for our part, is
that there is an agreement that one averages it out over
HIS HONOUR: It’s apparent to me from what I asked Mr de Meyrick about
that that is not in issue. I will now adjourn. Reserve
I approach the determination of quantum (to use the expression
of the parties) on the basis that emerged from these exchanges. The
point is whether the applicant has demonstrated that he worked hours per week
that exceeded either 38 or 40 hours.
Findings in the earlier judgment concerning hours worked by the
17 In my reasons for judgment of 20 June 1997 I made certain findings about
the time the applicant worked. I said:
In my opinion, the failure of Otis to call the local representative who took
over from Mr Logan plainly brings into play the principles
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298.
A comparatively recent discussion of them is
found in the judgment of Wilcox J in
Lek v Minister for Immigration
[1993] FCA 297
(1993) 43 FCR 100
at 123-124. While, as I discussed earlier, Mr Logan may have
exaggerated the hours he spent on administrative tasks in the period
late as early 1994, I am not satisfied that I should reject his evidence
generally about the hours he worked. Mr Logan’s
evidence about the time it
took to perform his duties as a local representative could, if wrong, readily
have been contradicted by
evidence from the local representative who followed
him. The failure to call that person permits me to more readily accept the
of Mr Logan as to the time it took him to perform his work
Jones v Dunkel
(supra) per Menzies J at 312.
Even from the Otisline records, it emerges that Mr Logan was, from time to
time, required to do a call-back well after the time he
ceased working. I am
also satisfied that Mr Logan regularly worked for periods in excess of 38 hours
18 Notwithstanding these findings, considerable
additional evidence has been called with a view to establishing (or
disapproving)
what hours were actually worked as overtime or undertaking
call-outs. It is now necessary to refer to this evidence. Before doing
should refer to one other observation I made in the earlier judgment after
discussing the award provisions concerning overtime.
However the manner in which cl 14(a)
[the clause obliging an employer to
pay penalty rates for overtime worked]
would operate in relation to Mr
Logan’s employment is a matter that was not addressed in submissions in
any detail. As the
only finding I have made is that Mr Logan regularly worked in
excess of 38 hours per week it will be necessary to address the operation
14(a) when detailed evidence is called, if it ever is called, dealing with the
quantum of Otis’ liability.
The recent evidence concerning time worked
19 The direct evidence concerning the hours the applicant worked (additional
to evidence given at an earlier stage in the proceedings)
was given by the
applicant and supported by various documents tendered on his behalf. However
evidence was also led by Otis about
the time taken to perform the same or
similar work by the applicant’s immediate successor in the position of
local representative
in the Orange region, Mr Bowman (this evidence appears to
have been in response to the observation I made in the earlier reasons
judgment concerning
Jones v Dunkel
and the applicant did not oppose the
evidence being called). Evidence was also called by Otis from Mr Algie (who had
given evidence
at an earlier stage in these proceedings) who was the Sydney
Service Manager for Otis. His evidence was principally directed to explaining
certain records which related to the work of both the applicant and
Evidence was also given on behalf of Otis by Mr Durrant, who was
a supervisor based at the Newcastle regional office of Otis, concerning
extent to which the applicant had been involved in installation work.
20 An obvious starting point in considering the evidence concerning the hours
worked by the applicant is the evidence he gave. In
an affidavit sworn 5
February 1996, the applicant said, effectively, that between July 1985 and
February 1995 he spent a minimum
of 32 hours per week, and often 40 hours per
week, maintaining, servicing, installing and/or assembling lifts and elevators.
the same period he said he spent at least 15 hours per week travelling.
Sometimes it was 25 hours. Between January 1992 and February
1995 he said he
spent 10 hours per week on administrative tasks. It had been 3 hours per week
for the period July 1985 to January
1992. In that affidavit he referred to
call-outs which, in a later affidavit (dated 15 February 1996), were
particularised for the
period December 1993 to February 1995.
21 The question of hours worked was again addressed by the applicant in an
affidavit of 10 May 1999. He said he worked about 55 hours
per week. He said
that he worked the hours identified in a route schedule (exhibit AH) doing
routine servicing and maintenance,
which have been interpreted (together with
another route schedule) as meaning he worked on those tasks a total of 34.16,
31.05 hours per week. He also said he worked an extra hour per week on
call-outs during regular hours for which a further hour was
taken travelling.
As to call-outs outside regular hours, the applicant said he spent "at least
on such work. He said that in addition to
the hours recorded on the route schedules for servicing and maintenance, he
spent at least
an additional hour per week, on average, performing rope and
repair work. He also spent at least another hour per week, on average,
performing T-sales. He also spent, during the period January 1988 to February
1995, an hour per week on installation work. He repeated
his earlier evidence
that from the time Mr Gardiner became his superior (December 1991-January 1992)
he spent 10 hours a week on
administrative work though he said that he had spent
8 hours per week on administrative tasks prior to that.
22 This evidence was supplemented by further oral and documentary evidence
led by the applicant and challenged by other oral and documentary
evidence led
by Otis. Two basic questions emerge from this evidence. The first is whether
the applicant's evidence is to be accepted
(without qualification) and secondly,
if it is accepted what does it establish for present purposes, namely the hours
he worked in
the context of his claim for payment for overtime and call-backs.
Conversely if it is not to be accepted (at least without qualification)
does it and the remainder of the evidence establish. One point that has to be
made about the applicant's evidence at the outset
is that in cross-examination
in June 2000, the applicant accepted a proposition that his claim was that he
worked an average of 55
hours per week. He accepted that on occasions he worked
as many as 80 hours per week and on other occasions as few as 20 or 25 hours
week. (He actually said "it could vary to, say, 20,30, 25, something like
that."). He went on to say, however, that week after
week he was doing the same
things and it was the odd week where he worked long hours or short hours.
23 It is convenient to say something at this stage about the route schedules
which referred to hours. They became, on one analysis
of the evidence
undertaken by counsel for the applicant, a basal number of hours (identifying
the hours taken to do routine servicing,
maintenance and repair) to which could
be added hours taken up doing other work. I do not accept this. The route
schedules were
documents which were created for planning purposes. That is,
they provided a means of identifying work that had to be done, a routine
order in which it could be done and the allocation of hours to various aspects
of the work for these purposes. Some of the evidence
of the applicant was to
the effect that he worked the hours identified in the route schedules. However
I do not view this evidence
as particularly persuasive. It really involved an
ex post facto reconstruction, in a most generalised way, of hours performed on
particular tasks which was a convenient course for the applicant to adopt for
the purposes of these proceedings. While the hours
referred to in the route
schedules probably broadly approximated the hours that might be taken to do the
work referred to in them,
the schedules were nonetheless, at best, a rough guide
of how much time the work would take and, more importantly, actually did take.
I accept that various of Otis's witnesses in management positions relied on the
route schedules to support the proposition that
the applicant's work could be
done in the time identified in the schedule (and to rebut the claim of the
applicant that his work,
overall, took longer). Also Algie said, speaking
generally, that the route schedules were carefully monitored though this
was given in the context of saying that the time allocated in them
included travelling time. There was no cogent evidence of regular
monitoring of
the route schedules which were relevant to the Orange area. The present task of
the Court is to determine what were
the number of hours in excess of the
ordinary hours (whether 38 or 40) that the applicant worked. In that context
the route schedules
do not, in my opinion, provide sufficiently reliable
evidence of the hours actually worked to perform the tasks identified in the
24 Moreover the import of the evidence of the applicant in cross examination
was that the route schedule he was given by his predecessor
in the position in
1985 was not accurate and by January 1990 (this is the date the respondent
contends the limitation period in
began) the one he had prepared
in 1986 (as a revision of the one he had been given) was not accurate either.
While the applicant
had, according to his evidence, updated the route schedules
yearly, they were never tendered (the applicant suggested they may have
misplaced or lost during the process of discovery) other than a route schedule
dated 1 December 1991. However the 1991 route
schedule does not allocate hours
of work to particular tasks (indeed it makes no reference to hours at all) and
simply identifies
locations to be visited and the days on which the visits were
to occur and their frequency. I am not satisfied that the two route
in evidence which refer to hours of work (produced in 1985 and 1986) provide any
real guide as to the hours worked by the
applicant in the six year period to
which the present claim relates commencing in either 1989 or 1990.
25 Given that the route schedules do not, in my opinion, provide sufficiently
reliable evidence to create the foundation onto which
may be added additional
hours for additional work, it is unnecessary to descend into great detail about
the evidence concerning the
hours worked on other tasks which counsel for the
applicant sought to add to the basal hours reflected in the route schedule.
I should make some reference to that evidence. It was submitted by
counsel for the applicant that Otis records in evidence (records
from Otisline)
revealed that in the period 1 December 1993 to 28 February 1995 a total of, on
average, 1.95 hours per week were spent
on call-outs (work done in response to
calls from customers about equipment which was not operating or not operating
properly and
requiring attention (this facility or service whereby calls could
be made by customers to Otis was called Otisline)) during and outside
hours for Monday to Friday (regular hours were assumed to be 7:30am to 4:30pm
though there was some imprecision about what
were actually regular hours). This
appears to be generally correct. It was submitted that from these records, it
could be extrapolated
what were the hours worked on call-outs before 1 December
1993. However as counsel for Otis pointed out, it cannot be assumed that
that was done or commenced within the assumed regular hours added to the
applicant's working day at least in the sense of adding
them to a notional
weekly figure of 32 hours. It was submitted by counsel for Otis that it is
apparent from these records (and it
appears to be correct) that there were only,
on average, 13.62 minutes per week worked on call-outs which were not performed
period described by Otis's counsel as "contiguous with ordinary hours".
26 Counsel for the applicant also relied on a schedule to the affidavit of
the applicant of 15 February 1996 as illustrating that
over a 57 week period
(December 1993 to February 1995) the applicant worked an average of 2.35 per
week where some or all of the
work was performed outside regular hours. Counsel
submitted, by reference to some records kept by the applicant, that the Otisline
records were incomplete. This appears to have been accepted by Otis’s
witnesses (and a perusal of the applicant's records
and the Otisline records
suggest some minor discrepancies) though there was, fairly obviously, no
agreement about the extent to which
they were incomplete. It must also be
accepted that there were discrepancies between versions of what purported to be
complete Otisline
27 It was also submitted by counsel for the applicant that for these
call-outs, it could be assumed or estimated that an hour of travelling
could be added. The only evidence referred to by counsel directly supporting
this submission was evidence of the applicant,
in his affidavit of 10 May 1999,
estimating he spent one hour travelling for call-outs during regular hours but
travelling in one
direction only (though reference was made to evidence from
Bowman that many of his trips from Orange were for more than one hour
4 hours). The applicant qualified this estimate by saying that most individual
journeys in his area were more than one
hour one way.
28 Counsel for the applicant then referred to evidence which was said to
illustrate that further time was spent on T-work (one hour
per day), rope and
repair work (one hour per week) installation work (one hour per week) and
additional administrative work from
1992 onwards (2 hours extra per week).
There can be no doubt that the applicant did this work. There is his own
evidence and documentary
evidence which indicates he did and, in any event, it
was not in issue. I accept that there is some evidence supportive of each
these contentions as to the amount of time the applicant spent on these tasks
(though there was one specific factual dispute about
which Durrant gave
evidence, namely whether and for what periods the applicant worked on three
specific sites doing installation
work). However, as mentioned earlier, the
critical question is whether one can take this evidence as to time spent (which
respects is nothing more than a generalised estimate though there is
documentary evidence concerning the time spent on major rope
and repair work
disclosing an average of 53.7 hours per year) and add it to the basal amount of
32 hours for routine servicing, maintenance
and repair reflected in the route
schedules. As indicated earlier, that, in my opinion, should not be done.
29 It is necessary to refer to two additional pieces of evidence concerning
the hours the applicant might have worked. The first
was evidence given by the
applicant’s supervisor, Gardiner, in the proceedings before the Judicial
Registrar and evidence he
later gave correcting his earlier evidence. Before
the Judicial Registrar Gardiner agreed with a proposition that travelling time
was separate from productive hours (this is, speaking somewhat loosely, a
reference to "hands on" work), the applicant was required
to do 32 productive
hours and was required to do 8 hours administrative work. Gardiner then agreed
that the applicant was to do
40 hours a week "at the coal-face" and also
appeared to agree that to this could be added "all the travelling time that he
his area required". A little later Gardiner agreed that it would be a
reasonable assumption that another 15 hours travelling could
be spent in
addition to the 40 hours (constituted by the 32 productive hours and 8 hours of
administration). Quite apart from the
explanation later given by Gardiner, what
the cross examination was directed to were hours the applicant was required to
is, what Gardiner's expectations were about the time the applicant
would spend on various aspects of the work he had to do. I accept
explanation given by Gardiner of his evidence before the Judicial Registrar,
when giving evidence in October 1996 in the
review, is not an entirely
satisfactory one. However that later evidence clearly perpetuated the idea that
Gardiner was talking
view of Gardiner's evidence, it goes very little way, if any, towards
establishing what hours the applicant actually worked.
30 The second piece of evidence is that of Bowman. He gave an account of the
time he took to do the work in the Orange area when
he assumed responsibility
for the area after the applicant was dismissed. Bowman gave evidence in an
affidavit sworn 21 June 1999
that he took up the position of the Orange area
local representative in early February 1995. For the first three months he was
trial and was paid as a wages employee. That is, he was paid under the Award
and paid for overtime and call-backs. He said that
during that period he took
some time to get used to the routine and also that there was a lot of work catch
up on. He did quite
a lot of overtime in the first three months, which averaged
3 to 4 hours per week. He said that after this period he was able to
through the routine maintenance schedule and his office routine work within his
ordinary 40 hours per week without the need for
overtime. He later said that
within the 40 hours he could do the necessary travelling as well. He indicated
that he worked overtime
on the rare occasions when something unusual came up
though he said this did not add to his over all workload. As to call-backs,
said that he was able to organise them to be done in the 40 hours and they
usually did not add to his overall workload because
when he attended a call-back
he would do the general maintenance as well and treat it as a routine visit. He
did say that infrequently
he had to attend to a "real call-back", namely an
emergency situation that required attention without delay (he later said in oral
evidence that this occurred three to four times a year in five years he had been
working at Orange). In relation to some urgent
call-backs as well as some
non-urgent call-backs, he had them attended to by local contractor.
31 For the first 11 months of working in the Orange area local representative
Bowman kept a record of the work he did in that period.
Later computerised
records have been lost. The figures are corroborative of the evidence
summarised above. Bowman swore a further
affidavit dated 25 August 2000. He
descended into considerably more detail about work done at various locations
(and referred to
documents annexed to the affidavit) to demonstrate, amongst
other things, how call-back work could be done in a way that resulted
maintenance work being completed when attending to the call-back. Bowman's
cross examination did not suggest his evidence
should be rejected. I accept it.
However it was clear that he had an attitude of not working when he was not
being paid (I infer
his salary was payable for 40 hours work) which appears to
have motivated him to do the work in the time he deposed to. It appears
no major rope and repair work.
32 Bowman's evidence clearly does not to support the applicant's contention
that the work of servicing the Orange area as local representative
average, 55 hours per week. Plainly enough, it is possible that Bowman worked
more quickly, organised his work more efficiently,
delegated tasks to others
more readily and/or did not do the work as thoroughly (though this was not put
in issue by the applicant).
Nonetheless his evidence renders it difficult to be
satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the applicant worked the hours
he claimed even assuming the applicant's evidence was in a form that permitted
findings to be made with sufficient particularity
week to week.
33 It is to be recalled that in my judgment of 20 June 1997 I made a finding
that the applicant regularly worked for periods in excess
of 38 hours per week.
However both parties have led additional evidence and, in those circumstances, I
should reconsider that finding.
Of the further evidence led, Bowman's evidence
is by far the most significant. It tends to establish two things. The first is
that the work of the area representative in the Orange area can be performed in
40 hours per week for many weeks in succession. Nonetheless
it demonstrates that
the work takes more than 38 hours per week. Thus the evidence of Bowman is
supportive of the finding I made
earlier. The question that then arises is
whether the evidence of the applicant and other evidence led on his behalf
establishes,
on the balance of probabilities, that the applicant worked more
than 40 hours per week and worked the average of 55 hours the applicant
34 It is difficult to reconcile the applicant's evidence with the evidence of
Bowman. The applicant's evidence is vague and is not
supported by documentary
evidence other than (and in this context there is detailed documentary evidence)
the documents relied on
to add additional hours to the basal hours contained in
the route schedules. For reasons already given, the addition of hours in
way does not demonstrate, to my satisfaction, the total number of hours the
applicant worked. It is not uncommon in proceedings
such as these for an
applicant to have to prove hours worked (often over many months or even years)
in circumstances where no records
are kept of time worked. Courts are alive to
these difficulties. The difficulty an applicant confronts in circumstances of
Maciver v Hilton Nursing Home Pty
[1999] NSWIRComm 152.
35 In the context of a claim for overtime (which bears similarities to the
present case) the problem was adverted to by Cantor J in
Lamont v Stein
(1936) 35 AR 143
in reviewing the decision of a magistrate who made a finding
that overtime had been worked but was unable to quantify the amount
of overtime.
The problem also arose in
Girard v Lundie
(1940) 59 NSWIG 202 where, on
appeal, De Baun J found that "at least 20 hours' overtime had been worked" in
circumstances where, by
reference to the same evidence, a magistrate had
dismissed a claim for overtime (though his Worship had indicated he had no doubt
that some overtime had been worked). Consistent with these authorities, it is
not appropriate that the evidence be reviewed with
an unduly critical eye.
Nonetheless, I am not satisfied, in this matter, that the applicant's evidence
that he worked on average
55 hours per week should be accepted in the face of
the evidence of Bowman. That is so even accepting, as I earlier noted, that they
may have approached their work differently.
36 I find that the applicant worked no less than 40 hours per week. With one
qualification, I am unable to make an affirmative finding
that the applicant
worked hours in addition to 40 hours. The qualification concerns major rope and
repair work. Bowman did not
do any of this work. The applicant did. His
evidence and documentary evidence based on the records of Otis, indicate that
work took, on average, one hour per week. Thus I am satisfied that the
applicant worked an average of 41 hours per week. This leads
to a consideration
of whether the base number of hours for the purposes of calculating overtime is
38 hours, as prescribed in the
award, or 40 hours per week being the contractual
The applicability of the Award provisions
37 Counsel for the applicant submitted that the base hours were the 38 hours
prescribed in the Award. If so, the applicant worked
approximately 3 hours
overtime per week which is to be treated as 36 minutes overtime per day (in
accord with the agreement between
the parties earlier referred to). Counsel for
Otis submitted that the base hours were 40 per week. The resolution of this
which is essentially a legal issue, becomes somewhat artificial given
that the parties have agreed I can approach the question of
overtime other than
by reference to the Award provisions (by looking at weekly rather than daily
overtime hours worked). However
as a matter of principle, the issue should be
resolved by reference to the Award. That is, the hours by reference to which
one determines
whether time has been worked as overtime attracting penalty
rates, are the hours prescribed by the Award, namely 38 hours.
38 A related question raised by counsel for Otis is whether time taken to
perform tasks which are said to be work of an area representative
and not of an
electrician special class, is to be treated as time worked as overtime. It is a
novel submission. The traditional
approach to this type of issue is to first
ascertain whether work undertaken by an employee can properly be characterised
covered by an award. This will often involve considering whether work
of a particular award classification has been undertaken by
the employee. If it
has, but other work has been done by the employee as well, it is often necessary
to consider what the major
and substantial part of the work was for the purposes
of determining whether the award applied. I addressed this issue in my judgment
of 20 June 1997. Again, as a matter of principle, I see no basis for
approaching the present matter on the footing that if the applicant
was employed
as an electrician special class under the Award (a finding I earlier made
reflected in a declaratory order which was
not put in issue in the earlier
appeal), some of the work he did should be remunerated by reference to the Award
but some of it should
39 In my opinion, it is self-evident that if an employee performs work which
can, overall, be characterised as work to which an award
applies, then the work
(and all of it) is remunerated according to the award. I should acknowledge
that the Full Court, in the appeal
in this matter, said (at par 30):
“The whole of the excess was paid and received as an amount appropriate
to reflect the difference between the position of a
local representative, with
all that entails, and an ordinary electrician special class. It is not open to
Otis now to change that
situation by asking the Court to make a retrospective
designation between the various elements that differentiate the situation of
local representative and an ordinary electrician special class. Without such a
designation, none of the excess can be reasonably
identified as a payment on
account of overtime and call-backs and, accordingly, set-off against the
overtime and call-back payments
due to Mr Logan under the 1989
However it is not apparent to me why I should, as a matter of
principle, and how I can, as a matter of practice, dissect the work
done by the
applicant into work of electrician special class (to which the Award applies)
and work he did as a local area representative
(to which the Award does not
apply). The better view, in my opinion, is that the applicant is entitled to
the benefit of the Award
for all work he did.
Was the overtime authorised?
40 Another issue raised by counsel for Otis, was whether the overtime worked
by the applicant (3 hours) was authorised. It is at
least implicit in cl 14 (b)
that time worked which would attract the payment of penalty rates as overtime,
has to be expressly or
impliedly authorised. As noted by Macken J in
Mrs Murphy's Country Fried Chicken Pty Ltd
(1984) AR 794
“No employee is entitled to the payment of overtime or penalty rates
unless such overtime is authorised by an employer and self-authorisation
overtime by employees trusted to work alone or in responsible managerial
positions has never been recognised by tribunals. Overtime
circumstances is allowed only where it is expressly or impliedly authorised and
it may be authorised by implication where
the circumstances permit of no
alternative.”
41 These observations have been referred to with approval in at
least three later authorities:
Maciver v Hilton Nursing Home Pty Ltd
Wheatley v Armstrong
[1995] NSWIRC 3 (Marks J) and
Kameruka Estates Pty Ltd
[1992] NSWIRC 16 (Bauer J). In
Dairyvale Co-operative Ltd
(1972) 39 SAIR 327
, Olsson J referred (at 359) to
a similar principle deriving from a Western Australian decision,
(1964) 44 WAIG 236.
As to the position of employees who
effectively authorise their own recall to work see
Police Officers
(Interpretation of Award) Case
(1971) 38 SAIR 51.
42 In the present case, it is necessary to answer the question of whether the
overtime (the 3 hrs) was expressly or impliedly authorised.
It is, in a sense,
a peculiar question given that when the applicant took up the position of area
representative neither he nor
the senior managers he was dealing with believed
the Award was to apply to his employment. In my judgment of 20 June 1997 I
“Mr Logan denied being told by either Mr White or Mr Bull that overtime
was built into his remuneration. However at one point
in his cross examination
Mr Logan agreed that at the time of his appointment he knew there was no payment
for overtime and no payments
for callouts. Having made that concession he then
sought to resile from it. However while I am not affirmatively satisfied that he
was specifically told those matters by Mr White or Mr Bull, given that the
conversations took place over a decade before evidence
was given about them, I
am satisfied that at the time Mr Logan accepted the appointment as local
representative he was aware that
the salary included an amount intended to
compensate for all overtime including callouts. I am also satisfied that those
he discussed his appointment and who appointed him had a similar
understanding. At one point in his evidence Mr Logan said he did
not know, at
the time of his appointment, the salary he would be getting though he knew it
was more than he had been getting, and
$3,000 - $4,000 more. I find it difficult
to accept, and inherently unplausible, that he was not aware of what his actual
was to be. It is probable he was told, and thus knew, what his salary was
going to be.”
43 There was plainly no express authorisation for the applicant
to work overtime and, having regard to the findings in the above passage,
also difficult to infer that there was implied authorisation to work overtime.
However it is relatively clear that, at the
time the applicant commenced working
as area representative, there was an expectation that the applicant would work
at least up to
authorising overtime it did, impliedly, constitute an authorisation
applicant to work up to about 40 hours. Even if the parties did not at that
time view these hours as including time which
would attract penalty rates as
overtime, the applicant had implied approval to work them. While it is only
after the event that
the legal implications of authorising the working of those
hours has become apparent, this approval to work those hours carries with
my opinion, the obligation to pay any penalty rates arising from the hours being
worked. This is not a case where the implied
obligation to pay overtime was
said to arise under the contract: see
Holland Stolte Pty Ltd v Bergamin
(Southwell J, Supreme Court of Victoria, 9 July 1991, Unreported).
44 There was an issue as to whether the amount due was to be calculated by
reference to the award rate or the rate embodied in the
salary agreed to be paid
to the applicant and, in fact, paid. Often entitlements under an award are
calculated by reference not
only to the award minimum rate of pay but also any
over award payment made to an employee. However in the present case, cl 14(a)
directs that, for the purposes calculating overtime entitlements, the hourly
rate is to be determined by dividing the "appropriate
weekly rate" by 38. What
then is meant by the expression the "appropriate weekly rate" in cl 14(a)? It
is ultimately a question
of construction: see
Re The Vehicle Industry
(Repair, Services and Retail) Award 1976
[1979] FCA 8
(1979) 38 FLR 267
and see also
Kucks v CSR Ltd
(1996) 66 IR 182.
45 Clause 7 of the Award prescribes rates of pay. It is entitled "WEEKLY
WAGE RATES". Paragraph (a) of that clause prescribes rates
for various
classifications. Other provisions in the clause provide for additional
payments. Paragraph (f) declares that "the amounts
prescribed in this clause
shall be paid for all purposes of this award". As a matter of construction, in
my opinion, the reference
to "appropriate weekly rate" in cl 14 (a) is a
reference to the weekly rate prescribed by clause 7, that is, the award rate of
That is not to say, however, that an employee and an employer might have a
contractual arrangement, express or implied, to different
effect. That is, the
employee was to be paid over award payments and those payments were the basis of
calculating any entitlement
to penalty rates for time worked as overtime.
However there is no such agreement in the present case. In my opinion, the
payable to the applicant for the overtime he worked are to be calculated
by reference to the award rate.
46 Accordingly, Otis is liable to pay the applicant at least an additional
amount of 1.5 times the hourly rate for the 3 hours worked
in excess of 38 hours
per week. I did not gain any real understanding from the submissions made by
the parties what their respective
positions were about how any overtime payment
should be calculated. On one approach, the applicant was paid for the 41 hours
worked because of the salary he was paid. That salary could be treated as a
notional payment at ordinary rates of pay and, accordingly,
the applicant is
entitled only the additional penalty rate of an extra half-time (because the
applicant is to be treated as notionally
having worked less than 2 hours
overtime per day). Another approach would be to treat the salary as paid for 38
hours only with
a result that the applicant would be entitled to payment at time
and half the award rate for each of the overtime hours worked per
another is simply to ignore the salary paid. However having regard to the
findings and declaration the Full Court made,
there should be no set off between
the salary actually paid and the liability for overtime penalty rates under the
award. I apprehend
that this would mean the applicant is entitled to an
additional 3 hours pay at the penalty rates prescribed by cl 14(a). That is,
the applicant is entitled to be paid a further sum of 1.5 times the hourly award
rate for each working week in the period to which
the claim relates (I discuss
this shortly).
The claim for call-backs
47 It is now necessary to consider the applicant's claim for payment for
call-backs. In my judgment of 20 June 1997 I said:
“Insofar as Mr Logan was called back after he had ceased his
day’s work or at weekends, I am satisfied he is entitled
to payment under
cl 14(d) of the 1989 Award.....The purpose of cl 14(d) is to compensate an
employee who is required to return to
work after leaving it and returning home.
By parity of reasoning a lift mechanic who is required to return to work, albeit
that he or she may not have been working on that day, after ceasing
work is entitled to payment under cl 14(d). Mr Logan is entitled
payments. If, however, he was called to an emergency breakdown during his
working day and consequently worked excess hours
then those excess hours, would
simply attract an overtime payment and not the minimum of four hours arising
under cl 14(d).”
48 There has been much detailed
evidence about the occasions on which the applicant was called back both during
working hours and
after hours and at weekends. There are eight instances
illustrated in an aide-memoire summarising exhibit A8 where the applicant
was called back to work at weekends or was called out to commence a job after
what was probably a time at which he had concluded
his normal days work. A call
back of this latter type would not necessarily be one commencing after 3:45pm or
4:15pm which were
the times the applicant said, as a generalisation, he
concluded work (the first time was only during his early period at Orange).
evidence presently reveals his working day was less regular than that.
49 I would treat as a call-back any instance where the applicant was called
to work at weekends or during the week at a time where
it is probable the
applicant would have returned home before starting the call back. One could
reasonably conclude that any call
back commencing after 6pm was in this latter
category. I so find. I also consider that it is appropriate to treat the
period covered
by exhibit A8 as representative of the entire six year period to
which the claim relates even though it must be acknowledged that
discrepancies between the Otisline records on which A8 was based and records
maintained by the applicant. Thus it can
be inferred, in my opinion, that the
applicant was called back during the six-year period commencing 16 February 1989
(as to which
see later) on proportionally the same number of occasions and for
the same periods of time as is evident in A8 (for the period 1
December 1993 to
28 February 1995). I will be inviting the parties to prepare short minutes
quantifying the overtime payments and
I also invite short minutes reflecting the
number of call backs and the amount due for them bearing in mind that the
applicant is
entitled to a minimum of 4 hours payment under cl 14(d).
The commencement of the six-year period
50 I turn to consider the period for which the liability of Otis under the
Award (to pay for overtime and for call-backs) may be enforced
in proceedings
such as these. While the issue was raised by the submissions of the parties,
little was put as to how the issue might
be resolved.
Section 179
employee to sue for an amount an employer is required by an award to pay the
employee. Such a suit must be commenced
no later than six years after the
employer was required to make the payment. This effectively means that an
employee can recover
amounts due under an award during the six years preceding
the commencement of the proceedings. The complicating factor in this matter
that the application (under what was then s 170EA of the
Relations Act
(Cth) alleging unlawful termination (initially heard by a
Judicial Register)) was lodged in February 1995 but the claim under
was not lodged until January 1996 in the review that had been initiated by Otis.
The nature of the relationship between a hearing
before a Judicial Registrar and
a hearing before a Judge in a review has been a vexed question of law: see
Shackley v Australian Croatian Club Ltd
(1996) 141 ALR 736.
Wilcox CJ pointed out in that case, there is only one matter in a case analogous
to the present, namely the claim by
a person that the termination of their
employment was unlawful even if, for various purposes, several proceedings can
arise in that
51 It was without controversy (in the sense that no ruling was required to be
made), as I recall, that the applicant added the claim
for moneys due under the
Award to the claim of unlawful termination. He did so first by filing a
statement of claim on 24 January
1996 in the same proceedings as the original
application under s 170EA at least in the sense that it was given the same
matter number.
He later filed, on 1 March 1996, an application stated to be
Again this application was in the same proceedings as
the original application under s 170EA in the sense that it was given the
same matter number. No question of joinder or consolidation arose and the two
applications were dealt with as if they were part
of the one proceedings, namely
the proceedings commenced by the original application under s 170EA . No
issue has been raised about
whether the two applications can be said to
constitute the one justiciable controversy arising from the same substratum of
Nonetheless the award claim, which is really a statutory cause of
action: see:
Re Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance; ex parte Arnel
[1994] HCA 1
(1994) 179 CLR 84
at 92, has been added to the statutory cause of action under
s 170EA. Given that the addition has occurred and consistent with what
understand to be applicable legal principle, the additional statutory cause of
action is probably to be treated (though the question
is not, in my opinion,
free from doubt) as having been made at the commencement of the proceedings in
which it was added. The principle
arises from the decision in
Weldon v Neal
(1887) 19 QBD 394.
Rodgers v Commissioner of Taxation
the Full Court explained that decision as follows:
Weldon v Neal
(1887) 19 QBD 394
, the plaintiff commenced an
action for slander. After expiry of the Statute of Limitations, he sought to
amend his Statement of Claim
so as to add claims in respect of other causes of
action. The Court of appeal acted on what it described as ‘the settled
of practice’, that amendments are not permissible that would
prejudice the rights of the opposite party existing at the date
of the proposed
amendment. The court held that, if the proposed amendments were allowed, they
would “relate back” to
the date of the writ, at which date the
proposed new causes of action were not barred; so their effect would be to take
defendant a defence available to him under the Statute of Limitations;
that would unjustly prejudice the defendant.”
The Full Court went on to explain that “(t)he
‘relation-back principle’ is that an amendment takes effect from the
date of the document it amends, not the date when it is made: see
[1976] 2 NSWLR 415
Warner v Sampson
[1959] 1 QB
52 Accordingly, the applicant is entitled to recover amounts due under the
Award for the six year period commencing 16 February 1989.
53 The applicant claims interest on the $20,000 compensation ordered to be
paid by the Judicial Registrar on 30 October 1995. While
the submission does
not say so, I understand the claim to be for interest up to judgment as the
submission referred to s 482 of the
Industrial Relations Act
(Cth). Again this was not addressed in the submissions, but that appears to be
the relevant source of power having regard to item
69 of schedule 16 of the
Workplace Relations and Other Legislation Amendment Act
Interest on judgment is payable by operation of s 483. I assume that any
interest payable on the amount ordered to be paid
by the Judicial register would
subsume any interest payable on the equivalent amount ordered to be paid by me
on 11 March 1999.
Indeed the ventilation of this issue points to what may have
been an oversight, namely whether any order should have been made on
1999 about the earlier order of the Judicial Registrar. I do not recall it
being suggested any order should be made though
I am aware that in some reviews
the order that has been made, in appropriate circumstances, was simply an order
affirming the order
of the Judicial Registrar. The applicant also seeks
interest on any amounts due under the Award. That is dealt with by s 179A
is in broadly the same terms as s 482.
54 Both sections direct that ordinarily interest be awarded (subject to the
qualifications in paras (a) and (b) of subs (1) of each
section) "unless good
cause is shown to the contrary". To similar effect is
Federal Court of Australia Act
Australian Guarantee
Corporation Ltd v Border Printing Services (Full Court,
Federal Court of
21 April 1989 unreported) a Full Court considered the purpose
and application of
After concluding that the purpose of the section
was to “compensate a successful party from being kept out of his
the Court held that the effect of
was to mandate the
award of interest up to judgement except where good cause can be shown. The Full
Court declined to identify, at
least in any exhaustive way, circumstances which
would constitute ‘good cause’ and instead held (at 8) that
case must be considered by reference to its own
circumstances”.
The Full Court went on to affirm the trial
Judge’s decision that good cause had been demonstrated against the award
of interest
in that case. It was held (at 8 – 9):
“In the present case his Honour has, in exercising his discretion,
considered matters arising between the parties in having
regard, in particular,
to the obscurity of the language of the lease and the difficulty caused to the
respondents in knowing what
their obligations were as at the date of
repudiation, those obligations being different from those to be found in the
void clause
8. These were in our opinion relevant matters for his Honour to take
into account in the exercise of his discretion. What weight
should be given to
them was a matter for his Honour.”
55 One of the authorities the Full Court referred to in
considering the purpose of
Ruby v Marsh
[1975] HCA 32
(1975) 132 CLR
In that case, the High Court was concerned with the Victorian equivalent to
Barwick CJ commented on statutory provisions which allow for the
award of interest as follows:
“The purpose of giving courts the power to award interest on damages is
to my mind twofold, and neither aspect of the purpose
should be lost sight of.
In the first place, the successful plaintiff, who by the verdict has been turned
into an investor by the
award of a capital sum, and whose claim in the writ has
been justified to the extent of the verdict returned, ought in justice to
placed in the position in which he would have been had the amount of the verdict
been paid to him at the date of the commencement
of the action. In the second
place, the power to award interest on the verdict from the date of the writ is
to provide a discouragement
to defendants, who in the greater number of actions
for damages for personal injuries are insured, from delaying settlement of the
claim or an early conclusion of proceedings so as to have over a longer period
of time the profitable use of the money which ultimately
the defendant agrees or
is called upon by judgment to pay.”
56 Dealing first with interest on the amounts payable under the
Award for overtime and call backs, I am satisfied good cause is shown
interest should not be payable. It was probably not until I published reasons
for judgment on 20 June 1997 that Otis would
have appreciated, particularly
having regard to the earlier arrangements it had had in place and at least
acquiesced in by the applicant,
that it might be liable to pay the applicant
sums under the Award. The extent of its liability was quite unclear and is only
by the findings made in these reasons.
57 The position is different in relation to the compensation for the unlawful
termination. I am not satisfied that good cause has
been shown for not awarding
interest on the $20,000 compensation. The applicant has been deprived of these
funds and Otis has had
the benefit of them. They are intended to compensate the
applicant for the unlawful termination of his employment on 8 February
the circumstances it is appropriate, in my opinion, to award a lump sum
reflecting interest. I do so having regard to
the rates set out in Schedule J
to the Rules of the Supreme Court of New South Wales which have been
approximately 9 to 12 percent
from March 1995 to date: as to the manner of
determining an appropriate rate, see
White Industries (Qld) Pty Ltd v Flower
(2000) 177 ALR 564
(para 40 and following). I propose to order
that the applicant be paid a sum of $8,000 interest for the period 16 February
to 11 March 1999.
58 Otis applied for an order that the applicant pay its costs. It was
accepted that s 347 circumscribes the Court's power to award
settled meaning and effect of that section is that costs can only be ordered
against an applicant and then only if the
proceedings were instituted
vexatiously or without reasonable cause. Otis's submission assumes that the
applicant's claim in contract
and/or the claim under s 179 can be treated
as a proceeding that the applicant instituted for the purposes of s 347.
Applying for
a review of a decision of a Judicial Registrar is the institution
of a proceeding for the purposes of that section: see
Shackley v Australian
Croatian Club Ltd
(1996) 141 ALR 736.
In this case the review was sought by
Otis. The difficult issue of the status of the application under s 179 has
already been adverted
to in considering the period to which the claim may
relate. However I am prepared to assume that, for the purposes of s 347
application alleging breach of contract and seeking amounts due under an
award lodged by the applicant in January 1996 was a proceeding.
59 The question that then arises is whether that proceeding was instituted
vexatiously or without reasonable cause. The word "instituted"
in s 347 directs
attention to the time at which the application for review was lodged: see
Kanan v Australian Postal and Telecommunications Union
[1992] FCA 539
(1992) 43 IR 257
264. The word “vexatious” would rarely, if ever, be an apt
description of an application where there was a genuine
contest on issues of law
and fact, or fact alone, particularly where the applicant has succeeded albeit
on a far more limited basis
(at least as to quantum) than originally propounded.
The proceedings embodying the applicant's claims under contract and under the
Award were not instituted vexatiously. Were they instituted without reasonable
60 The applicable principles concerning whether a proceeding was instituted
without reasonable cause was discussed by Wilcox CJ in
Imogen Pty Ltd v
Anthony Sangwin
(Full Court, Industrial Relations Court of Australia, 20
December 1996, unreported):
“Only minor modifications of that test are necessary to cover the
situation of an appeal. The question would be whether, having
regard to the
arguments available to the appellant at the time of instituting the appeal,
there was no substantial prospect of success.
The prospect must be evaluated in
the light of the facts of the case, the judgment appealed from and the points
taken in the notice
of appeal. If, having regard to those matters, there was a
not insubstantial prospect of the appeal achieving some success, albeit
necessarily complete success, then it seems to me it cannot fairly be described
as having been instituted “without reasonable
cause”. This is so
even if, in the result, the appeal proved
unsuccessful.”
61 To similar effect was what was said in
Thompson v Hodder
[1989] FCA 493
at 469-70 by a unanimous Full Court of the Federal Court:
“Section 347 replaced the now repealed provision in s 197A of
Conciliation and Arbitration Act
1904(Cth). That provision was
considered in a number of cases. In
R v Moore; Ex parte Federated
Miscellaneous Workers’ Union of Australia
[1978] HCA 51
(1978) 140 CLR 470
Gibbs J said:
In my opinion a party cannot be said to have commenced a
proceeding “without reasonable cause”, within the meaning of
section, simply because his argument proves unsuccessful. In the present case
the argument presented on behalf of the prosecutor
was not unworthy of
consideration and it found some support in the two decisions of this Court to
which I have referred. The fact
that those decisions have been distinguished,
and that the argument has failed, is no justification for ordering costs in the
of the prohibition contained in s 197A.’
Heidt v Chrysler Australia Ltd
at 272, Northrop J said:
‘The policy of s 197A of the Act is clear. It is designed to free
parties from the risk of having to pay the costs of an opposing
party. At the
same time the section provides a protection to parties defending proceedings
which have been instituted vexatiously
or without reasonable cause. This
protection is in the form of conferring a power in the court to order costs
against a party who,
in substance, institutes proceedings which in other
It is apparent from these authorities that an applicant who has the
benefit of the protection of s 347 will only rarely be ordered
costs of a proceeding in exceptional circumstances.”
62 In my opinion, the proceeding embodying the applicant's claim under
contract and under the Award was not instituted without reasonable
Though his original claim under the Award was for many hundreds of thousands of
dollars, his failure to establish an entitlement
of that magnitude resulted in
substantial part from his failure on a question of law and his failure to prove,
as matter of fact,
that he worked an average of 55 hours per week. The question
of law (what the ‘standing by’ provisions in the Award
meant) was an
arguable one. Having regard to the totality of the evidence I do not consider
that the applicant, when he commenced
the proceeding presently under
consideration, should have expected that his evidence about the hours he worked
would not be accepted.
I am not satisfied that the proceeding was instituted
without reasonable cause. There are many aspects of this litigation that,
my perspective, have been unsatisfactory. However the only question that
presently arises is whether the applicant instituted
the proceeding embodying
the claim under contract and under the Award vexatiously or without reasonable
cause. The applicant did
not. No costs can be ordered.
63 The only formal order I propose to make is to adjourn the matter until 24
April 2001 to enable the parties to bring in short minutes
to give effect to
these reasons.
I certify that the preceding sixty three (63)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment herein of the
Justice Moore.
Dated: 4 April 2001
Counsel for the Applicant:
R Alkadamani
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Haywards Solicitors
Counsel for the Respondent:
J de Meyrick
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Barker Gosling
Date of Hearing:
26-27 June, 4 August, 23-24 November 2000
Date of Judgment:
RTF format (175 KB)
Signed PDF/A format