D v Charitable Organisation [2011] PrivCmrA 4 (3 May 2011)
Case Citation:
D v Charitable Organisation
[2011] PrivCmrA 4
Subject Heading:
Access to personal information
National Privacy Principle 6.1, 6.3 and 6.7 of the
(Cth) (the Act).
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner
under the Act were conferred on the Australian Information Commissioner.
The complainant had mistakenly attempted to access their personal information
held by the charitable organisation by submitting a
freedom of information (FOI)
request. The organisation stated that as a not-for-profit organisation, it was
not subject to FOI legislation.
The organisation also stated it would destroy
all the complainant's records, except for any health information that was
to be kept by law.
After unsuccessfully attempting to gain access to their personal information,
the complainant complained to the Commissioner.
NPP 6 provides that an organisation that holds personal information about an
individual must provide the individual with access to
that information unless
one or more of certain exceptions apply.
NPP 6.3 requires that an organisation must consider using an intermediary to
allow limited access to information that would otherwise
be denied to an
individual by one of the exceptions under NPP 6.1.
NPP 6.7 requires an organisation to give an individual its reasons for
denying access or refusing to correct personal information.
The Commissioner conducted preliminary inquiries into the complaint under
of the Act and informed the charitable organisation of its NPP 6
obligations. In response, the organisation stated it needed to
deny access
as providing access would pose a threat to the life and health of the
complainant and other individuals, and would pose
an unreasonably impact on the
The Commissioner decided to open an investigation into the matter. The
Commissioner explained to the organisation that if it wished
to deny access on
the exemptions it had cited, it would need to provide evidence as to how access
to the material would pose a threat
to the life and health of the complainant.
The organisation was also asked to consider whether the use of an
intermediary to provide
access to the information requested was an option.
Subsequently, the organisation requested that the complainant nominate a
health practitioner to act as an intermediary for the access
request. The
practitioner assessed any possible threats to the life and health of the
complainant from the personal information contained
within their records, before
access was granted to them. However, when the complainant reviewed the records
with the practitioner,
the complainant noted that it was missing certain
The complainant outlined the specific documents they believed were missing,
which included summaries of the complainant's interactions
organisation's staff. The organisation determined that the missing documents
formed part of staff files, as opposed to the
complainant's personal file, and
the documents also included interactions between staff and other individuals.
The organisation located
the relevant staff files, redacted parts of the files
to protect the privacy of the other individuals, and provided access to the
complainant.
The complainant identified further documents that they claimed were not
included. However as the organisation had searched extensively
appropriate documents, contacted an overseas office regarding the documents,
performed searches at significant cost, and
offered to conduct further searches
at the complainant's expense, the Commissioner found that the organisation had
taken reasonable
steps to provide access to the complainant's personal
information.
The Commissioner closed the complaint under
section 41(1)(a)
of the Act on
the grounds that the charitable organisation had complied with its NPP 6
obligations.
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (38.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format