URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/cth/AUSStaCSDLM/2025/49.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:28:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Competition and Consumer (Notification of Acquisitions) Determination 2025 - Ongoing Matters [2025] AUSStaCSDLM 49 (4 September 2025)
Chapter 1 :
New and ongoing matters
New matters
Ongoing matters
Competition and Consumer (Notification of Acquisitions) Determination 20251
Compliance with authorising legislation;4 exemption from disallowance;5 parliamentary oversight6
Assistant Minister’s response9
Committee view
New and ongoing matters
1.1 This Chapter details the committee's
significant new and ongoing scrutiny concerns in legislative instruments
relating to the
committee's technical legislative scrutiny principles in Senate
standing order 23(3).
1.2 The committee has resolved not to raise
significant technical scrutiny concerns in relation to any instruments
registered in this
1.3 The committee requests further information
from relevant ministers about its significant technical scrutiny concerns in
to the instruments listed below.
Competition and Consumer
(Notification of Acquisitions) Determination
F2025L00753
The purpose of the instrument is to support the new merger control system
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
by determining: the
circumstances where acquisitions of shares or assets require notification,
exceptions to the general circumstances,
the classes of acquisitions requiring
notification, notification of proposed acquisition forms and the public benefit
application
form, the information and documents required to accompany such
forms, the requirements for applications to the Australian Competition
and certain fees payable under the new system.
Authorising legislation
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Disallowance
15 sitting days after tabling (tabled in the Senate on 22 July 2025).
Notice of motion to disallow must be given by 27 October
1.4 The Competition and Consumer (Notification of Acquisitions)
Determination 2025 (the instrument) is made under the
Competition
and Consumer Act 2010
(the CCA). The new merger control system was
introduced into the CCA by the
Treasury Laws Amendment (Mergers and
Acquisitions Reform) Act 2024
and requires that certain acquisitions of
shares or assets must be notified to the Australian Competition and Consumer
for assessment prior to completion.
1.5 The stated purpose of the instrument is to support this new merger
control system, including by determining the circumstances
where acquisitions
require notification, determining certain aspects of the acquisitions register,
determining the notification and
public benefits application forms and the
information and documents required to accompany such forms.
instrument contains determinations setting out the content and format of
notification forms and the public benefit application
form, prescribed under the
1.6 The committee’s secretariat, on behalf of the committee, sought
advice from the Department of the Treasury on 25 July 2025
received a response on 7 August 2025. As the committee retained
concerns, it raised these with the Assistant Minister for Productivity,
Competition, Charities and Treasury (the assistant minister)
on 27 August 2025, in
Delegated Legislation Monitor 5
(Monitor 5).
Following this correspondence with the Assistant Minister, the committee still
retains concerns which it has resolved to raise with
the assistant minister, as
outlined below.
Compliance with authorising
legislation;
exemption from disallowance;
parliamentary oversight
1.7 Senate standing order 23(3)(a) requires the committee to scrutinise
each instrument as to whether it is in accordance with its
enabling Act and
otherwise complies with all legislative requirements. This includes whether the
instrument is within the powers
conferred by its enabling Act, so that it is
legally authorised. Further, under Senate standing order 23(4A), the
committee may scrutinise
instruments that are not subject to disallowance,
including whether it is appropriate for them to be exempt from disallowance.
Additionally,
Senate standing order 23(3)(m) requires the committee to
scrutinise each instrument as to whether it complies with any other ground
relating to the technical scrutiny of delegated legislation that the committee
considers appropriate. This scrutiny principle includes
consideration of whether
an instrument limits parliamentary oversight and is underpinned by the
committee’s concern to ensure
adequate parliamentary oversight and protect
and promote fundamental rule of law principles.
of the instrument is made pursuant to paragraphs 51ABY(5)(a)
and 51ABZQ(5)(a) of the CCA and determines the content and format of
notification of proposed acquisition forms under section 51ABY of the
and the content and format of
the public benefit application form prescribed under section 51ABZQ of the
The explanatory statement
to the instrument provides that, as sections 51ABY and 51ABZQ specify that any
determination made pursuant
to these sections is exempt from disallowance,
of the instrument is exempt. However, the remainder of the instrument appears
to be disallowable.
1.9 In Monitor 5, the committee requested the assistant minister’s
advice as to the legal basis for exempting only
of the instrument,
rather than the instrument as a whole, from disallowance.
Assistant Minister’s
1.10 In his response, the assistant minister advised that the inclusion of
within a ‘consolidated Determination’ complies with
legal requirements. Specifically, while the wording of the two authorising
provisions in the CCA refers to ‘
determination’ and
instrument’, the assistant minister indicated that this
does not require instruments made under those powers to be a stand-alone
instrument for the reasons outlined in his correspondence.
1.11 In this regard, the assistant minister advised that section 12 of
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Acts Interpretation Act)
provides that every section of an Act shall have effect as a substantive
enactment without introductory words. Further, he stated
that the principles in
that Act apply to legislative, notifiable and other instruments, as set out in
subsection 46(1) of the Acts
Interpretation Act and
subsection 13(1)
Legislation Act 2003
(Legislation Act). Accordingly, the
assistant minister advised that this principle means that each section of an
instrument can be
considered independently, such that certain sections of the
instrument but not others may be subject to disallowance.
1.12 The assistant minister also advised that section 23 of the Acts
Interpretation Act provides that words in the singular include
the plural, and
vice versa. The assistant minister indicated that this means that the use of the
singular ‘a determination’
and ‘the instrument’ could
mean both one or multiple instruments.
1.13 The assistant minister further noted that
Legislation Act
specifies that ‘an instrument, or a provision of an
instrument’ may not be subject to disallowance where an Act declares
to be the case. He indicated that section 44 clearly accommodates
circumstances where an Act declares that to be the case. The
assistant minister
added that section 44 clearly accommodates cases such as this, where part
of the instrument is not subject to
disallowance, but also allowing ordinary
scrutiny arrangements to be maintained in respect of the rest of the instrument.
1.14 In addition, the assistant minister stated in his response that the
decision to include the requirements in Part 6 within the
consolidated
instrument was intended to support the law being easy to access and to navigate
for those affected by it, through setting
out in one consolidated legislative
instrument when notification is required and the relevant forms and information
requirements.
1.15 The assistant minister also indicated that where an authorising Act or
regulations contain multiple authorising powers for legislative
instruments, he
would continue to consider carefully the most appropriate form and manner for
such instruments made under these powers.
This included balancing
‘procedural considerations’, such as any exemptions from
disallowance and sunsetting, with the
purpose of the instrument and the
principle of making the law easy to access and understand by those affected by
Committee view
1.16 The committee thanks the assistant minister for his prompt response and
engagement on this instrument. However, as the committee
retains scrutiny
concerns, particularly under principle (a), the committee has resolved to seek
further advice from the assistant
minister as outlined below.
1.17 The committee notes that section 12 of the Acts Interpretation Act does
provide that every section of an Act shall have effect
as a substantive
enactment without introductory words. The committee also acknowledges that by
subsection 13(1)
Legislation Act
, the Acts Interpretation Act
applies to legislative instruments and notifiable instruments (as well as other
instruments under subsection
46(1) of the Acts Interpretation Act), unless the
contrary intention appears. However, the committee’s understanding of
12 is that it enables each section of an instrument to be considered
independently without being separately
committee’s view, this principle does not establish that ‘certain
sections but not others may be subject to disallowance’
as set out in the
minister’s response and it does not carry relevance to the question of on
what basis Part 6 of the instrument
is exempt from disallowance.
1.18 Further, while the committee understands that section 23 of the Acts
Interpretation Act provides that words in the singular include
the plural, and
words in the plural include the singular, it is unclear to the committee how
this supports the assistant minister’s
contention that Part 6 of the
instrument may be exempt from disallowance under the terms of the CCA.
1.19 The committee acknowledges that
Legislation Act
contemplate that a Part of an instrument may be exempt from disallowance as
subsection 44(2)
states that
Legislation Act
does not apply in
relation to ‘a legislative instrument, or a provision of a legislative
instrument’ if an Act declares
that section 42 does not apply ‘in
relation to the instrument or provision’. The reference to both
‘a legislative
instrument’ and ‘a provision of a
legislative instrument’ in section 44 suggests to the committee that there
two distinct instances when section 42 may not apply. In this regard,
subsections 51ABY(7) and 51ABZQ(6) of the CCA specifically
states that a
determination made under the relevant provision is a legislative instrument, but
that section 42 (disallowance) does
not apply to ‘the instrument’.
This does not appear to be a case where an Act specifically provides for the
of a provision of an instrument from disallowance, rather only an
instrument is to be exempt. It therefore remains unclear to the
whether the CCA authorises the exemption of only Part 6 of the instrument
from disallowance and whether doing so is contrary
to the intention of
subsections 51ABY(7) and 51ABZQ(6) of the CCA.
1.20 The committee appreciates the assistant minister’s advice that the
intention of including the requirements in Part 6 in
‘consolidated’ instrument was to support the law being easy to
access and navigate for those affected by it, in addition
to avoiding the need
for stakeholders to access multiple instruments to comply with their
obligations. However, in the committee’s
view, this intention should not
displace the requirement to comply with an instrument’s enabling
legislation. Further, there
are other drafting tools available, such as notes
that point to relevant laws, which could also support accessibility of the law
were the requirements in Part 6 of the instrument to be included in a separate
determination.
1.21 The committee welcomes the assistant minister’s statement that, in
future, he will consider the most appropriate form and
manner for legislative
instruments made where there are multiple authorising powers, including
balancing procedural considerations,
such as exemptions from disallowance and
sunsetting, with the purpose of the instrument and making the law easy to access
and understand.
In this regard, the committee wishes to note that disallowance
and sunsetting play an important role in providing the Parliament
with adequate
oversight of executive-made law and facilitate consideration of whether the law
remains fit-for-purpose.
1.22 Further, the committee notes that on 16 June 2021, the Senate resolved
that delegated legislation should be subject to disallowance
appropriate parliamentary scrutiny and oversight unless there are exceptional
circumstances that justify an exemption from
disallowance. To assess whether an
instrument is appropriately exempt from disallowance, the committee expects that
at a minimum,
the explanatory statement will contain a statement that provides
the source of, and the exceptional circumstances that justify, the
from disallowance. The committee has generally accepted that instruments exempt
from disallowance by their enabling legislation
meet the committee’s
expectations in this regard. However, in relation to this instrument, the
committee is concerned that
by including determinations made under sections
51ABY and 51ABZQ of the CCA in a single ‘consolidated’ legislative
which is otherwise disallowable, there is a risk that the entirety of
the instrument may inadvertently be exempt from disallowance.
This would appear
to be contrary to the intention of the assistant minister and the department.
The committee is therefore concerned
on parliamentary oversight of the provisions of the instrument that are intended
subject to disallowance.
1.23 In light of the above, the committee requests the assistant
minister’s further advice as to the legal basis for exempting
only Part 6
of the instrument from disallowance.
1.24 In addition, as the committee awaits the assistant minister’s
response to the matters outlined above, the committee has
resolved to place a
protective notice of motion to disallow the instrument on 27 October 2025, to
provide it with additional time
to engage with the assistant minister on this
instrument.
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation, Competition
and Consumer (Notification
of Acquisitions) Determination 2025,
Legislation Monitor 6 of 2025
; [2025] AUSStaCSDLM 195.
In the event of any change
to Senate sitting days, the last day on which a notice of motion to disallow
must be given would also
change accordingly.
Senate Standing Committee for
the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation,
Legislation Monitor 5 of 2025
(27 August 2025), pp. 4-6.
Senate standing order
Senate standing order
Senate standing order
Section 6-1 of the Competition
and Consumer (Notification of Acquisition) Determination 2025.
Section 6-2 of the Competition
and Consumer (Notification of Acquisition) Determination 2025.
This correspondence was tabled
with this monitor and is accessible via the
Legislation Monitors
page on the committee’s website.
Section 12 of the Acts
Interpretation Act originates from section 2 of the UK’s
Interpretation
to eliminate the cumbersome practice of including introductory
words (e.g., ‘And be it further enacted’) to each section
of Parliament. There is limited judicial consideration of section 12: see
Smalley v Motor Authority of New South Wales
[2013] NSWCA 318.
the consideration of section 12 was not determinative to that case and does not
appear to be relevant to the committee’s
consideration of this
instrument.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (122 KB)
PDF format (114 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter