Mr Rage Yassir v Purvi Brahmbhatt, Woolworths Group Limited [2025] FWCFB 235 (21 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 235
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Mr Rage Yassir
Brahmbhatt, Woolworths Group Limited
(C2025/8972)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SLEVIN
COMMISSIONER CRAWFORD
COMMISSIONER SLOAN
SYDNEY, 21 OCTOBER 2025
Appeal against decision [
] of Commissioner Hunt at Brisbane on 12 September 2025 in matter
numbers AB2025/688 & C2025/8555
Introduction
Rage Yassir (the Appellant) has lodged an appeal under s 604
Fair Work Act 2009
(the Act) against a decision of
Commissioner Hunt issued on 12 September 2025 (
) in which the Commissioner declined to accede to the
Appellant’s application that she recuse herself from further dealing with
the Appellant’s two matters. The first was an application under s. 739FC
for an order to stop bullying, the other was an application
under s. 372
alleging contraventions of Part 3-1 of the Act.
The proceedings were allocated to Commissioner Hunt. The Commissioner
informed the parties that she held a small parcel of shares
in the Respondent
company Woolworths Group Limited. Mr Yassir asked that the Commissioner recuse
The parties consented to the Full Bench determining the matter
without holding a hearing. We are satisfied that it can be adequately
without the parties making oral submissions (see s 607(1) of the Act).
For the reasons set out below we are not satisfied that the Appellant
has demonstrated any error in the Commissioner’s decision
and refuse to
grant permission to appeal (s 604(2)).
In deciding whether to grant permission to appeal, it is unnecessary
and inappropriate to conduct a detailed examination of the appeal
Trustee for the MTGI Trust v Johnston
[2016] FCAFC 140
However, it is necessary to engage with the appeal grounds to consider
whether they raise an arguable case of appealable
error. An appellant must
ordinarily demonstrate that there is such a case in order to be granted
permission to appeal, as an appeal
cannot succeed in the absence of error
Coal & Allied Operations Pty Ltd v AIRC
(2000) 203 CLR 194
However, the fact that a member at first instance may have made an error is not
necessarily a sufficient basis to grant
permission to appeal
The grounds of appeal assert that as the Commissioner had a vested
financial interest in the Woolworths Group Limited she must be
disqualified from
dealing with the matters.
Upon allocation of the Appellant’s matters to her Chambers the
Commissioner, with the initial directions made a disclosure in
the following
The Commissioner notes that she owns less than 200
Woolworths’ shares. At this time,
she does not consider that is any basis to require her to recuse herself from
carriage of this matter. If any party objects to the Commissioner having
carriage of this
matter, they are kindly asked to advise as such.
The Appellant made an objection and sought the Commissioner’s
recusal. The Commissioner made directions and listed the recusal
application for
hearing. Extensive and discursive submissions were received and a hearing
conducted on 11 September 2025.
On 12 September 2025 the Commissioner issued the Decision from which
permission to appeal is sought.
Consideration
Neither the grounds in the notice of appeal nor the material filed
in support of the appeal engage meaningfully or otherwise with
Commissioner’s Decision. Whilst they express disagreement, they do not
disclose any appealable error.
The Decision, in our view, is an orthodox and soundly reasoned
application of the rule in
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy; Clenau Py
Ltd v ANZ Banking
the High Court reiterated the requirement that
in cases of pecuniary interest the moving party must establish: ‘logical
between the matter and the feared deviation from the course of
deciding the case on its merits ... Only then can the reasonableness
asserted apprehension of bias be
The Appellant did not establish such a connection below and has not
done so here. The Commissioner’s shareholding is trivial.
It would not
lead a fair minded lay-observer to reasonably conclude that the Commissioner
would bring a biased mind to the proceedings.
We note with agreement the
Commissioner’s observation at [25] that:
I own less than 200 shares against a reported 1.22 billion
Woolworths shares and
reported 372,000 shareholders. I do not consider that a fair-minded lay
observer would have a reasonable apprehension that I would
not bring an
impartial and unprejudiced mind to the determination of the applications before
The grounds of appeal disclose no appealable error, nor do they
enliven the public interest.
Permission to appeal is refused.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 176 ALR
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (527 KB)
Signed PDF/A format