Branson & Fuller [2021] FCCA 1999 (30 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Branson & Fuller
[2021] FCCA
File number(s):
DUC 172 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE OBRADOVIC
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– interim parenting
– assessment of risks – family violence – illicit substance
use – best interest
of the children
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Goode v Goode
[2006] FamCA
Keats & Keats
[2016] FamCAFC 156
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
28 July 2021 and 24 August 2021
Appearing for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Paul Johnson Solicitor
Appearing for the Respondent:
Mr Pigott and the Respondent in person
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Legal Aid Dubbo
Appearing for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Ms McKay and Ms Osborne
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Osborne Legal
DUC 172 of 2020
JUDGE OBRADOVIC
DATE OF ORDER:
PENDING FURTHER ORDER, THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. All prior parenting Orders be suspended.
2. The children X born in 2009, Y born in 2010 and Z born in 2013 (“the
children”) shall live with the father.
3. For the purposes of order 2 above, the mother shall deliver the children
to the father at the Town B Police Station at 10am on
31 August 2021.
4. The father will do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to
enrol the children in school in Town C to commence classes
on Monday 6 September
5. The children shall spend time with the mother as follows:-
(a) Commencing 10 September 2021, continuing on each
alternate Friday during school terms, from 6pm Friday until 6pm Sunday; and
(b) For half of each school holiday period, being the first half in even
numbered years and the second half in odd numbered
6. Changeover shall occur at McDonald’s on J Street in Town B at the
commencement of each time period and at the Town C Police
Station in Town C at
the conclusion of each time period.
7. In addition to the time that the children will spend time with each of the
parties as set out in Orders 2 & 5, on the following
occasions of special
significance the child shall spend time with the parties as follows:
(a) The mother and the father will each be entitled to
spend 4 hours with the children on their own birthday(s) at a time to be agreed
between the parties, but failing agreement from 3:00pm until 7:00pm;
(b) The parent with whom the children are not ordinarily spending time with on
each child’s birthday shall spend time with
the children from 3:00pm to
7:00pm unless otherwise agreed;
(c) The children will spend time with the father on the Father’s Day
weekend on the same times as set out at Order 5a) and
if this was not the
father’s usual weekend with the children, it will be spent in lieu of the
following weekend;
(d) The children will spend time with the mother on the Mother’s Day
weekend and if this was not the mother’s usual weekend
with the children,
it will be spent in lieu of the following weekend;
(e) The parties will both be entitled to attend all events, involving the
children including but not limited to: -
(i) Sporting fixtures;
(ii) Extracurricular activities that allow for parental attendance;
(iii) School functions and events that allow for parental attendance including
but not limited to concerts, school assemblies, sports
days, parent and teacher
interviews, canteen duties and social
8. The parties will ensure that each parent is listed on the children’s
school enrolment form as a parent and emergency contact.
9. These Orders are sufficient authority for each parent to be provided with
copies of all school reports, school photograph order
forms, notices and advices
concerning the children and any activities involving the children.
10. Each parent notify the other in writing of any changes to
11. Each parent notify the other if any of the children receive medical
attention or is seriously injured or requires hospitalisation
or in the event of
an emergency, as soon as is practicably possible after such event.
12. For the purpose of communication of information between the parties, the
mother and father shall:
(i) communicate by telephone in an emergency
(ii) communicate by text message or email about day to day matters including
arrangements for each party to spend time with the children
or all other matters
relating to the parenting of the
13. These Orders are sufficient authority for each parent to contact and
speak to each child’s treating health care professionals
medical information, reports and the like regarding the children.
14. The parents are to use their best endeavours to ensure that the children
attend school on each day of required attendance, unless
their absence is
explained by a medical certificate from their general practitioner.
15. Each of the mother and the father are restrained from the following
(a) Denigrating either parent, his/her partner or
members of his/her family to the children or in the presence of the children or
at all or encourage others to do so;
(b) Discussing these proceedings with the children or within their hearing;
(c) Permitting or allowing the children to see any documentation produced in
relation to these proceedings;
(d) Consuming alcohol during any period that the children are in their care or
within 12 hours of the children coming into their
(e) Using illicit drugs during any period that the children are in their care or
within 12 hours of the children coming into their
16. Mr Branson is, pursuant to
Family Law Act
(Cth), for the personal protection of Ms Fuller, injuncted and restrained
(a) Entering or remaining in the place of residence of
Ms Fuller; and
(b) Stalking, threatening, harassing, assaulting or denigrating Ms
17. Within 14 days of a request from the Independent Children’s Lawyer
each of the mother and the father shall each submit to
a hair follicle illicit
test to detect the presence of illicit substances through the Drug Detection
Agency and the results are to
be forwarded to the other party and the
Independent Children’s Lawyer upon receipt and provided further that such
drug testing
shall not be requested more frequently than 3 monthly.
18. The mother and the father are each restrained from cutting their hair
shorter than 3 centimetres in length whilst any drug testing
19. Within 7 days of receiving a request from the Independent
Children’s Lawyer to provide a further CDT test, the mother and/or
father shall submit to further CDT testing and shall provide a copy of the
results to the Independent Children’s Lawyer
upon receipt and provided
further that such screening shall not be requested more frequently than
20. The father shall attend a complete the Manning Up course run by D Group
and shall provide evidence of his enrolment in such course
within 28 days from
the date of these Orders.
21. The first half of a school holiday period shall commence at 6pm on the
last day of required attendance and shall end at 12noon
on the day closest to
the midpoint having regard to the total number of nights (“the
midpoint”) and the second half shall
commence at 12noon on the day closest
to the midpoint and shall conclude at 6pm on the day prior to the first day of
required attendance
in the new school term.
22. In the event that a school holiday period has an uneven number of nights,
the additional night will be with the mother.
23. The parties and the Independent Children’s Lawyer are granted
liberty to have the matter restored to the list on 24 hours’
Section 121
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to
publish proceedings that identify persons, associated persons,
or witnesses
involved in family law proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment under the pseudonym
Branson & Fuller
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
JUDGE OBRADOVIC:
1 These are short form reasons pursuant to
Family Law Act
2 Before the Court is an interim application filed by the father on 6 April
2021 seeking an order that the children live with him.
In his supporting
affidavit the father alleges that the mother poses as an unacceptable risk to
the children due to her consumption
of illicit substances and lifestyle
3 The father has maintained these concerns since the commencement of these
proceedings.
4 The substantive proceedings were commenced by the father on 2 May 2020
seeking orders that he have sole parental responsibility
of X born in 2009, Y
born in 2021 and Z born in 2013 (“the children”), that the children
live with him and that the children
spend time with the mother from 10am to 4pm
on each alternate Saturday, with such time to be conditional on the mother
drug and alcohol counselling.
5 In her response filed 16 September 2020 the mother seeks orders that the
she have sole parental responsibility, that the children
live with her and that
the father spends supervised time with the children for two hours each
6 The matter was listed for Interim Hearing on 28 January 2021 before Judge
Dunkley. The mother did not appear on that occasion and
orders were made by
consent between the Independent Children’s Lawyer and the father, on an
undefended basis against the mother.
The orders provided that the children live
with the mother and that the father spend time with the children on alternate
initially during the day and then progressing to overnight time.
7 An application in a case was filed on 6 April 2021, and listed for hearing
on 28 July 2021. The matter was adjourned part-heard
to enable the mother to
undergo drug testing and provide the results to the Court. At the commencement
of the second day of hearing,
the mother’s solicitor sought and was
granted leave to withdraw. The mother thereafter represented herself.
Relevant Legal Principles
8 The principles in respect of interim hearings are
well known, including that the legislative pathway must at all times be followed
Goode v Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346).
Interim hearings are curtailed by the
absence of cross-examination and testing of evidence in general, and the Court
is often in
a position where it is unable to make findings of fact. Even in such
constrained circumstances, the Court is still required to determine
applications before it.
9 In terms of a risk assessment, the Court is to determine that issue by
weighing the probabilities of competing claims and the likely
impact on the
child in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected
Keats & Keats
[2016] FamCAFC 156).
Uncontested Facts
10 There are a few agreed and/or uncontested facts
between the parties, as far as relevant they are as follows:
parties commenced a relationship in 2001.
mother gave birth to the parties’ first child, Mr E, in 2002. Mr E is 19
years old and not the subject to these proceedings.
was born in 2009.
born in 2010.
born in 2013.
2016 the parties and their children moved from the Region F to Town C.
parties married in 2017.
July 2018 the parties separated after the father assaulted the mother, including
choking her. The father was arrested and then
granted bail to attend residential
rehabilitation at G Centre. The father received a 12 month custodial sentence
and an apprehended
domestic violence order was in place until January 2021. The
father has not come to the attention of the police for any adverse reason
his release from custody in December 2019.
the assault, the mother and the children spent time with the maternal
grandparents in Suburb H before moving to Town B.
August 2018 the mother had no offences recorded on her criminal history. In
August 2018 the mother was charged with a mid-range
drink driving offence and in
October 2019 the mother was charged with a high-range drink driving offence. The
mother has also been
convicted of 2 counts of malicious damage, 1 count of
stalk/intimidate and 1 count of common assault since separation in July 2018.
There have been no further offences of the mother after September 2019.
2019 the Department of Communities and Justice (“DCJ”) inspected the
mother’s household. There was no intervention
as a result of the
inspection.
2021 following further reports of drug use and inadequate care, the DCJ and the
police inspected the mother’s household.
Neither the DCJ nor the police
raised safety concerns for the children.
Children have spent block periods with their father since April 2021. Such time
was not in accordance with the Orders made by
the Court but rather via some
arrangement between the parents.
Determination
11 Some of the very concerning features of this
case, are the significant violence which the father had perpetrated upon the
and in general his violent and antisocial behaviour, as well as past
alcohol and drug use. The other very concerning features are
the mother’s
drug and alcohol use, and her antisocial behaviour. The children are at
significant risks in both households and
it is the unfortunate task of this
Court to have to determine the least-worst option for them.
12 The children have until early 2021, spent very little time with the father
and the mother has been their primary carer. There is
a suggestion in the
father’s care that the children were living with their grandparents for
significant periods of time and
that the mother was not their primary carer,
particularly in the past two years. Between July 2018 and April 2021, the
children had
not lived in the same household as the father. Since April 2021,
the children have lived between the parents and there has been some
between the parents as to where the children will be staying.
13 On 1 April 2021, the father provided a hair follicle drug test result
clear of all illicit substances. On 29 June 2021, the father
provided a carbon
deficit transferrin (“CDT”) test result with a reading of 1.2. These
test results indicate that at
the relevant time the tests were conducted, drug
and alcohol consumption were not an issue for the father.
14 In her material, the mother made concession as to drug use. At the time
that the interim hearing commenced in July 2021, the mother
had not yet
undertaken hair follicle drug testing or CDT testing. During the adjourned
period, the mother did undertake both hair
follicle drug testing and CDT
testing. She had also undertaken urine drug testing in June 2021.
15 The result of the drug tests were tendered by the Independent
Children’s Lawyer and marked as exhibits 1-3. While no drug
Creatinine was detected in the urine analysis test, the mother’s hair
follicle test results show positive readings
for Amphetamines and
Methamphetamines. The CDT test result showed a reading of 1.6 (which is the
acceptable range).
16 On 24 August 2021, at the interim hearing, the mother informed the Court
that she did not expect for the drug test to come back
positive, and but for the
positive test, she would not have disclosed her most recent drug taking to the
Court. The mother further
submitted that she had used drugs on the one occasion
during the mid-year school holidays, and essentially that it was a one-off
and that she does not use drugs regularly.
17 The children have had a number of changes to their schooling, and more
concerningly there have been many absent days in 2020 and
in 2021. These days
have been missed for various reasons, including because the children were
staying with the father at his home
which is too distant from the
children’s school to make daily attendance practical.
18 If the children reside with the father, they will be returning to a school
they had previously attended. Both parents however,
appear on the evidence, to
have limited capacity to ensure that the children meet their educational needs.
19 As noted earlier, one of the major risks to the children arises out of the
father’s violent behaviour towards the mother.
In July 2018, the father
assaulted the mother, including choking her, and as a result received a
custodial sentence. An apprehended
domestic violence order was in place until
January 2021. There is a significant risk to the children arising out of the
to family violence and the impact this might have on their long term
development.
20 The father has provided evidence of completing the EQUIPS program and he
has complied with drug testing orders. He has not come
to the attention of the
police for any adverse reasons since his release from custody in December 2019.
The mother has agreed to
the children spending significant block periods of time
with the father in 2021, and as such, it is inferred that she does not consider
the children to be at an unacceptable risk of harm if spending time with the
father, such inference is relevant as to the mother’s
capacity to foster a
relationship between the children and the father, to protect the children from
harm and meet their needs. The
mother says that she is frightened of the father.
The mother also says that the father is undermining of her parenting with the
21 The Independent Children’s Lawyer (“ICL”) supports
orders for the children to live with the father and spend
alternate weekends and
half school holidays with the mother. The ICL submits that there are risks in
both households, but that the
father has to date, provided more independent
evidence that the risk factors have been or are being addressed. The Court
the submission of the ICL based on the evidence before the Court.
22 In all of the circumstances, it is presently in the children’s best
interest that they live with the father and spend time
with the mother each
alternate weekend and for half the school holidays. While such an arrangement
will still see them exposed to
risks in both households, there will be a number
of protective orders put in place, the least of which is an order requiring the
children to attend school every day unless such an absence is due to a medical
condition, supported by a medical certificate. Attendance
by these children at
school will be a significant protective factor for them, as will a requirement
for the parents to continue to
be subjected to random drug and alcohol testing
on an ongoing basis.
23 For all of those reasons, orders as set out at the forefront of these
Reasons for Judgment will be made.
I certify that the preceding twenty-three (23)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 30 August 2021
RTF format (350 KB)
Signed PDF/A format