Ryan Gibbons v H.E. Heather & Co Pty Ltd [2025] FWC 3411 (13 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3411
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
DECISION AND ORDER
Fair Work Act 2009
—Unfair dismissal
Ryan Gibbons
Heather & Co Pty Ltd
(U2025/10254)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT EASTON
SYDNEY, 13 NOVEMBER 2025
Application for an unfair dismissal remedy – minimum employment
period – dismissal under
s.587(1)(c)
at the Commission’s initiative
- application has no reasonable prospects of success.
19 June 2025, Mr Ryan Gibbons made an unfair dismissal application to the Fair
Work Commission under
Fair Work Act 2009
the following reasons I am satisfied that Mr Gibbons’ application has no
reasonable prospects of success and should be dismissed.
his Form F2 Unfair Dismissal Application Mr Gibbons indicated that he commenced
employment with H.E. Heather & Co Pty Ltd on
16 December 2024 and that his
dismissal took effect on 30 May 2025. On the information provided by Mr Gibbons,
he was employed for
5 months and 2 weeks.
provide that a person is only eligible to make an
unfair dismissal application if they have completed a minimum period of
before their dismissal.
Section 383
defines the minimum employment
period to be either 6 months or 12 months, depending on whether the respondent
was a small business
employer at the time of the dismissal. On the information
provided by Mr Gibbons the period of employment was less than 6
staff attempted to contact Mr Gibbons on 16 October, 17 October and 20 October
2025 by telephone, SMS and email regarding
the Minimum Employment
Gibbons responded on 17 October 2025, and confirmed that he is “
” but did not provide any additional relevant information
regarding whether he had served the minimum employment period.
Gibbons has been on notice of the likely consequences if he does not provide
further information that supports his eligibility
to make the
application.
date Mr Gibbons has not provided any further information that supports his
eligibility to make the application.
Section 587
General Principles
allows the Commission to dismiss an application on the Commission’s
own initiative in the early stages of the proceedings.
Protracted proceedings
can be avoided when there is no reasonable prospect of an outcome other than the
dismissal of the application.
power under
should be used with caution, particularly if the matter
involves complex questions of fact or law (see generally
Bond v Carbridge Pty
Ltd T/A Carbridge
)). An application should not be dismissed
unless it is very clear that there are
prospects of success. As such the power under
is not available if there
are disputed facts that could affect the outcome of the
proceedings.
Importantly,
applicants must be given a fair opportunity to show that their application does
in fact have some reasonable prospects
of success.
Gibbons’ application have any reasonable prospects of success?
Commission cannot consider the fairness of Mr Gibbons’ dismissal until it
is clear that he is eligible to make an unfair
dismissal claim.
information provided by Mr Gibbons on his Form F2 application strongly indicates
that he is not eligible to make an unfair dismissal
application because he does
not appear to have served the minimum employment period.
Gibbons had the opportunity to provide information that could show that he had
in fact completed the minimum employment period.
However Mr Gibbons has not
provided any information that is consistent with him having done so. Mr Gibbons
has also had the opportunity
to put his case for consideration on all matters
material to the decision to dismiss the application under
at [15]-[16]).
satisfied that Mr Gibbons’ claim has no reasonable prospect of success
within the meaning of
s.587(1)(c)
, and that it is appropriate in the
circumstances to dismiss his application on the Commission’s own
initiative using the facility
available in
s.587(3)(a).
I make the following
application under
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) made by Mr Ryan
Gibbons on 19 June 2025 is dismissed
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Printed by authority of the
Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (739 KB)
Signed PDF/A format