FNPQ v Secretary, Department of Social Services [2025] FCAFC 159 (12 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
FNPQ v Secretary, Department of Social
[2025] FCAFC 159
Appeal from:
Secretary, Department of Social Services v FNPQ
File number:
VID 236 of 2025
Judgment of:
CHARLESWORTH, KYROU and MCDONALD JJ
Date of judgment:
Date of publication of reasons:
Catchwords:
SOCIAL SECURITY
– where two
appellants made a claim for age pension as a married couple – where, prior
to the date of the claim, the
first appellant received lump sums in the nature
of employment income referable to past periods of employment – where
of the lump sums had the effect of reducing age pension payments
previously received by the appellants to nil, resulting in cancellation
pensions – whether, for the purposes of a new claim for age pensions,
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) applied so as to
require the lump sums to be taken into account when assessing the
appellants’ ordinary income
– where respondent to
an appeal concedes the judgment appealed from was in error – where
conceded error relates to the
construction of a statute – whether
concession properly made – appeal allowed with costs
Legislation:
Social Security Act 1991
-A2, 1064-E1, 1072, 1073A
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Cases cited:
Secretary, Department of Social Services v
[2024] FCA 1428
General Division
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellants:
Ms KA O’Gorman SC with Mr BC Overend
Solicitor for the Appellants:
Monash Law Clinics
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr MB Costello KC with Mr SN Rajanayagam
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Clayton Utz
VID 236 of 2025
Second Appellant
SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL
CHARLESWORTH, KYROU AND MCDONALD JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal is allowed.
2 of the orders of the Federal Court made on 13 December 2024 and the orders
made on 20 January 2025 are set aside.
Respondent’s appeal of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal decision dated
24 January 2023 is dismissed.
Respondent pay the Appellants’ costs of this appeal as agreed or
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
this appeal, the appellants (a married couple) allege that the primary judge
erred in overturning a decision of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal (AAT)
relating to their respective entitlements to an age pension under the
Security Act 1991
(Cth) (SS Act).
before the hearing, the respondent (
, Department of Social
Services) conceded that the primary judge erred in the manner alleged by the
appellants. The Court was satisfied
that the Secretary’s concession was
based on a correct understanding of the law. At the hearing, orders were
pronounced allowing
the appeal, setting aside the judgment and orders of the
primary judge and awarding costs to the appellants.
foreshadowed to the parties, we consider it appropriate to publish these reasons
for judgment to explain the proper construction
of the SS Act as it applied
to the appellants’ personal circumstances.
2021, the first appellant received
back-payments
totalling $184,909.71
from her former employer after an audit revealed that she had been underpaid.
The payments took the form of
three lump sums relating to seven past periods of
employment.
appellants’ ordinary income was assessed having regard to the
back-payments. As a result of that assessment, the age pensions
the appellants
were then receiving were reduced to nil. After 12 weeks of nil payment, on
16 June 2021 the Secretary cancelled the
appellants’ pensions under
Social Security (Administration)
(Cth) (Administration Act).
days later, the appellants each made a new claim for the age pension under
s 11 of the Administration Act. It is the new claims
that form the subject
matter of this appeal.
new claim by each appellant was originally rejected, then granted on review by
the Social Services and Child Support Division
of the AAT. The decision to
grant each of the appellants the age pension was affirmed on further review by
the General Division
of the AAT (AAT Decision).
the Secretary’s appeal from the AAT Decision, the primary judge
concluded that the back-payments precluded the appellants
from receiving the age
pension and that the AAT erred in law in finding
Secretary, Department of Social Services v FNPQ
[2024] FCA 1428.
His Honour made orders setting aside the AAT Decision and
remitting the matter to the newly-formed Administrative Review Tribunal
The cancellation of the appellants’ earlier age
explain the single issue that arose on this appeal, it is convenient to explain
how the back-payments had the consequence that
the appellants’ earlier age
pensions were reduced to nil and then cancelled.
s 11 of the Administration Act, a person who wants to be granted a social
security payment must make a claim for the payment
in accordance with Div 1
of Pt 3 of the Administration Act. The Secretary has an obligation to
determine the claim, by granting
or rejecting it: Administration Act,
s 36. A claim for the age pension is to be granted if a person is
“qualified”
for the payment and if the payment is
“payable”: Administration Act, s 37.
be qualified, the claimant must fulfil the criteria in s 43 of the
SS Act, relating to age and residency in Australia. The age
pension is not
payable to a person if the person’s age pension rate would be
nil: SS Act, s 44(1).
accordance with s 43 of the Administration Act, the appellants’ age
pensions were paid in arrears, and by instalments relating
“instalment periods”, as determined by the Secretary.
s 66A of the Administration Act, a person who has claimed or is receiving a
social security payment must notify the
of Social Services of
any change in circumstances that might affect their eligibility for payment (or
the rate of payment they have
applied for or are receiving), including changes
the time that the first appellant received the back-payments, she and her
husband were both receiving the age pension as members
of a couple, with their
payments administered through Centrelink. For the purposes of the income and
asset tests in the SS Act,
their income and assets were pooled and
attributed to them on a 50/50 basis: SS Act,
appellants promptly notified the Department of the receipt of the
back-payments.
rate of a person’s age pension is governed by the provisions in Ch 3
of the SS Act, specifically “Pension Rate Calculator
at the end of s 1064. The overall calculation process is described in
Module A and comprises 11 steps, cross-referencing
other modules. The
overall method involves calculating the maximum payment, and then reducing the
maximum by reference to asset
and income tests. The resulting annual payment
amount is then divided by 364 to determine the claimant’s daily payment
SS Act, s 1064‑A1.
within Module A requires the “ordinary income test” in Module E
to be applied in working out any reduction referable
to a person’s sources
is found in s 1064-E1. Within that module, Step 1 is to work out the
amount of the person’s ordinary income “on
of the SS Act is headed “General provisions relating to the ordinary
income test”. It commences with the following
definitional
1072 General meaning of ordinary income
A reference in this Act to a person’s ordinary income for a period is a
reference to the person’s gross ordinary income
from all sources for the
period calculated without any reduction, other than a reduction under
Division 1A.
Section 1073A
is contained in Div 1AA of Pt 3.10 of the SS Act. It
1073A Attribution of employment
income paid in respect of a particular period or periods
(1) This section applies if:
(a) a person is receiving a social security pension or a social security
benefit; and
(b) the person’s rate of payment of the pension or benefit is worked out
with regard to the income test module of a rate calculator
in this Chapter;
(c) one or more amounts of employment income, each of which is in respect of a
particular period or periods (each period is an
), are paid in an instalment period of the person to or for the
benefit of the person by the same employer.
Note 1: If the person has multiple employers, this section applies separately in
relation to each employer.
Note 2: If a person is receiving a social security pension and is paid
employment income monthly, section 1073B may apply to that
income instead of
this section.
Note 3: Section 1073BA deals with the payment of employment income that is not
in respect of a particular period.
(2) The person is taken to have received the employment income over a period
assessment period
) that consists of the number of days that
is equal to the sum of the number of days in each employment period, where the
period begins on the first day of the instalment period in which the
amounts of employment income are paid.
Example: On 3 June a person is paid $756 employment income for work the person
performed in the period beginning on 9 May and ending
at the end of 29 May. The
number of days in the employment period is 21.
instalment period begins on 1 June. The person is taken to have received the
$756 over the period beginning on 1 June
and ending at the end of 21 June (a
period of 21
(3) Subject to subsection (4), for each day in the assessment period, the person
is taken to have received an amount of employment
income worked out by dividing
the total amount of the employment income covered by paragraph (1)(c) by the
number of days in the
assessment period.
Example: To continue the example in subsection (2), the person is taken to have
received $36 ($756/21) on each of the days in the
period beginning on 1 June and
ending at the end of 21 June.
(4) If the person is taken, under subsection (3), to have received employment
income (the
attributed employment income
) during a part, but not
the whole, of a particular instalment period, the person is taken to receive on
each day in that instalment
period an amount of employment income worked out by
dividing the total amount of the attributed employment income by the number of
days in the instalment period.
Example: To continue the example in subsection (2), for the instalment period
beginning on 15 June and ending at the end of 28 June
the person is taken, under
subsection (3), to have received employment income during a part of that
instalment period (15 June to
21 June). The person is taken to have received
$252 ($36 x 7).
Under subsection
(4), the person is taken to receive on each day in that instalment period an
amount of employment income of $18
Interpretation
(5) This section applies in relation to an amount of employment income paid on a
day in an instalment period, whether or not the
amount is received on that
(6) In applying subsection (2) in relation to one or more amounts of employment
income paid by a particular employer in an instalment
period, in working out the
sum of the number of days in each employment period, if a day in an employment
period overlaps with a
day in another employment period, that day must only be
counted once.
the purposes of s 1073A, the first appellant’s back-payments were in
the nature of remuneration and so met the description
of “employment
income”: SS Act, s 8(1) and (2). Applied to her case, the
back-payments were attributed as
Instalment Periods
Employment period to which the payments
Calculated Assessment Period (employment
added together)
Calculated Daily Income
10 February
February 2021
(inclusive)
1 July 2018 – 30
304 days – from 10
February 2021 to
December 2021
divided by 304
to 6 April 2021 (inclusive)
1 July 2017 – 30 June
1096 days – from 24
March 2021 to 24
$106,191.10
divided by 1096 = $96.89
1 July 2016 – 30 June
1 July 2015 – 30 June
to 4 May 2021 (inclusive)
1 July 2014 – 30 June
785 days – from 20
April 2021 to 13
divided by 785
1 July 2013 – 30 June
May 2013 – 30 June
parties acknowledged that there may have been an arithmetical error in the
AAT’s calculation, but nothing turns on that
for present purposes.
taken into account in Step 5 of Module A, the resulting daily income
figures reduced each of the appellants’ age pension
daily rate to nil.
That state of affairs continued for 90 days, after which the Secretary exercised
a power under s 80 of the Administration
Act to cancel each of the age
pensions. There is no dispute that the decision to cancel the appellants’
age pensions was correctly
The new age pension claims
Secretary rejected each appellants’ new claim for the age pension made on
18 June 2021. Reduced to its essence, the Secretary’s
(maintained before the AAT and at first instance and in written submissions on
this appeal) was that the attribution periods
calculated under s 1073A (at
a time when the appellants were last in receipt of the age pension) continued to
run for the purposes
of assessing their ordinary income on the new claim. The
consequence, it was submitted, was that the amount of age pension calculated
under Pension Rate Calculator A would be nil and therefore no age pension was
“payable” within the meaning of the SS
AAT rejected those submissions. It concluded that the back-payments were not
receipts that should be taken into account in assessing
the appellants’
ordinary income for the purposes of each new claim. Among other things, it
concluded that the conditions in
s 1073A(1) for applying the deemed
attribution in s 1073A(2) of the SS Act were not satisfied in relation
to each new claim.
The Secretary’s concession on the appeal
single issue on this appeal was whether the primary judge erred in determining
that the AAT made an error of law in concluding
that, in assessing each new
claim for the age pension, s 1073A of the SS Act did not operate so as
to include the back-payments in
the assessments of the appellants’
ordinary income for the purposes of the income test component of Pension Rate
days before the hearing of this appeal, the Secretary conceded error in the
reasoning of the primary judge, being the same reasoning
that underpinned the
original rejection of each new claim. Accepting the Secretary’s
submissions, the primary judge reasoned
as follows:
purpose that underlies s 1073A of the SS Act is similarly apparent.
It serves, in certain circumstances, to deem the times at
(or the periods over)
which employment income is taken to have been received. Its obvious purpose is
to ensure that the receipt
of employment income is brought to bear upon the
amounts to which recipients of a social security pension or a social security
are entitled; and that that occurs regardless of how far it is beyond
the period in respect of which they are payable that the amounts
are, in fact,
accept that the construction of s 1073A of the SS Act that the
Secretary advances is correct. It is consistent with the terms in
provision is framed and their context within the broader scheme of the
SS Act. The deeming function (or process of ‘attribution’,
the respondents were careful to describe it) to which the section is directed is
a function of s 1073A(2). It deems employment
income that is received by
certain pension recipients to be referrable to periods other than those in
respect of which they were
actually paid. It operates with that effect if the
conditions listed in s 1073A(1) are satisfied; in other words, from the
that a person who is receiving (relevantly) an age pension receives
employment income. Employment income so received is deemed to
received in the way that sub-s (2) provides. The section does not identify any
point or points in time to which that artificial
deeming process is limited.
as concerns a pension application that is made later in time (that is to say,
employment income is received in the circumstances that
s 1073A(1) of the SS Act contemplates), there is no reason to read
as ceasing to apply or applying with modified effect. That is
not what s 1073A says; and nor is it consistent with the apparent
the provision or its place within the broader statutory context. To construe
the provision as the AAT construed it is
to permit—precisely as has
occurred here—the all-but-immediate circumvention of the very consequences
that the provision
is plainly intended to accommodate (including, as in this
case, the processes pursuant to which the respondents’ prior age
entitlement was reduced to nil and, ultimately, cancelled). Such a construction
would mean (as it has in this matter so
far) that a cancellation brought about
by reason of a recipient’s deemed receipt of employment income could be
immediately
set at naught simply by the making of a fresh pension
application.
is an absurd outcome that the legislature cannot reasonably be presumed to have
is further reason to reject it. Before me, it was accepted that s 1073A
the cancellation of—or, by its application, lead to
a circumstance in which there was no option other than to cancel—the
respondents’ existing age pension entitlement. An alternative option was,
I was told, for the Secretary to suspend it pursuant
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
(Cth). Had that occurred,
there could be no suggestion that the suspension did not properly foreclose upon
the respondents’
receiving their age pension for the full 12-month
‘assessment period’ that s 1073A of the SS Act established
of the Back-pay Amounts. That would be so because (as I should hope
is already apparent) there was no question that those amounts
were sufficient to
take the respondents beyond the income threshold at which age pension
entitlements are reduced to nil.
is the case, as the respondents were at pains to point out, that, had they not
been in receipt of the age pension at the point
that the Back-pay Amounts were
received, there would be no question that their Age Pension Application should
proceed as the AAT
has determined. In that universe, s 1073A would have no
application, there would be no deeming as to when the Back-pay Amounts were
received and those amounts would not qualify as employment income upon which the
outcome of the application might turn. Thus, a
couple that had received the
same Back-pay Amounts at the same time as the respondents (or the first
respondent)—and that applied
at the same time as they did for the same
pension entitlement in circumstances that were otherwise identical—would,
nonetheless,
be treated to a different outcome.
that hypothetical proposition, it remains clear all the same, from the
provision’s text and context, that that is
what was intended.
Section 1073A(2) applies so as to deem the time or times at which
employment income is received if the conditions
outlined in s 1073A(1) are
met. There is no question, presently, that those criteria were met.
in the text of s 1073A or the broader statutory context within which it
appears suggests that s 1073A(2) is temporally limited
such that a
‘person is taken to have received the employment income over a
period’ only insofar as concerns an ongoing
entitlement to an existing
pension and not insofar as concerns a fresh application made at some later time.
The section contemplates
simply that a person will be ‘taken’ to
have received certain income as identified. It does not identify any time or
limitations as to when the person will be so taken.
construed the relevant provisions of the SS Act differently, it follows
that the AAT Decision was a product of legal error.
That decision should (and
will) be set aside and the Review Application should be remitted for
redetermination upon the correct
statutory interpretation. The Secretary does
not seek an order for his costs in this appeal and, accordingly, none shall be
(original emphasis)
Concession properly made
concession on this appeal is in relation to a question of law. It reflects this
Court’s view as to the proper construction
of s 1073A of the
SS Act. On that construction, the income attribution assessment that led
to the cancellation of the age pensions
was not to be taken into account in the
assessment of the appellants’ ordinary income when deciding whether to
grant or reject
each new claim. In short, that is because:
(1) The appellants’ new age pension claims were to be determined based on
facts existing at the date of the claims (18 June
2021) or within the 13
weeks following that date: Administration Act, Sch 2,
(2) Section 1073A(1) of the SS Act sets out three cumulative preconditions
to the application of the attribution provisions in s
1073A. Those
preconditions are to be construed in accordance with their ordinary meaning. In
the case of the precondition in s 1073A(1)(a),
the use of the present tense
in the phrase “a person is receiving a social security pension or a social
security benefit”
is of significance in the present case.
(3) At the time of their new claims, the appellants were not receiving a social
security pension or a social security benefit for
the purposes of
s 1073A(1)(a). Accordingly, one of the preconditions to the application of
the attribution provisions in s 1073A
was not satisfied and therefore those
provisions had no application to the new claims.
to the Secretary’s earlier submission, that construction does not result
in an absurdity. Nor did the making of the
new age pension claims involve any
side-stepping of the intended effect of the SS Act. As the appellants
correctly submitted, on
the new claims, the amounts constituting the
back-payments will be treated as assets for the purposes of other provisions of
statutory regime.
setting aside of the orders of the primary judge has the effect that the AAT
Decision is restored. The orders of the AAT required
the new claims to be
remitted to the Secretary for determination on the basis that s 1073A did
not apply. The Secretary has confirmed
that any prior disadvantageous
miscalculation by the AAT of the appropriate age pension rate will not affect
the consideration of
the new claims.
new claims (made more than four years ago) may now be determined according to
I certify that the preceding thirty one (31)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Charlesworth, Kyrou and
Dated: 12 November 2025
RTF format (456 KB)
Signed PDF/A format