Westall & Varlia [2013] FMCAfam 353 (11 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2013] FMCAfam 353
FAMILY LAW – Orders sought for a declaration
in relation to the issuing of subpoenas by the Independent Children’s
– consideration of ‘a person who has been granted legal
aid’ – consideration of the role of the Independent
Lawyer – consideration of the Court’s access to the best
Family Law Act 1975
s.116(C)(5)
Family Law (Fees) Regulations 2012,
regs.2.03, 2.04,
2.04(1)(a), 2.11(3)
Croft & Croft
[2013] FMCAfam
[1994] FamCA 21
(1994) FLC 92-461
Redden & Mayes & Anor
[2013] FMCAfam 272
Respondent:
File Number:
MLC 5106 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
No appearance by or on behalf of the Applicant
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Aaron Eidelson
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Richard Calley Family Lawyers Pty
Counsel for the Independent Children’s Lawyer
Ms Jenkinson
Solicitors for the Independent Children’s Lawyer
Kenna Teasdale Lawyers
THE COURT DECLARES:
(1) That for the purposes of regulation 2.04(1)(a) of the
Family Law (Fees)
Regulations 2012
the Independent Children’s Lawyer is a person who has
been granted legal aid under a legal aid scheme or service, and it is
that the Registrar of this Court waive the fee associated with filing a subpoena
in so far as it relates to the Independent
THE COURT ORDERS:
(2) That in the event that a waiver of fees is not granted, pursuant to
regulation 2.11(3) of the
Family Law (Fees) Regulations 2012
any subpoena
requested to be filed by the Independent Children’s Lawyer be allowed to
be filed, notwithstanding that the filing
fee has not been
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under
the pseudonym
Westall & Varlia
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
MLC 5106 of
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
is an application for parenting and property orders filed by MR WESTALL
(“the Husband”) on 7 July 2012. There are
two children of the
marriage X, born (omitted) 2007 and Y, born (omitted) 2009 (“the
children”).
in response filed by MS VARLIA (“the Wife”) raised issues of
extensive family violence – an Intervention
Order naming the children was
made on 20 April 2012 – as well as drug and alcohol abuse by the Husband,
and referred to him
having numerous criminal convictions. The Wife deposed to
the older child suffering from an attention deficit disorder and the younger
child being diagnosed with autism.
3 July 2012, an Order was made that the children be independently represented
and on 9 July 2012, the Court was advised that Ms
LESLIE (“Ms
Leslie”) of the firm Kenna Teasdale had been appointed as the Independent
Children’s Lawyer.
Orders made on 10 August 2012, provided for the Husband to have supervised time
with the children at a Contact Centre and
for a psychiatric assessment and
report on the Husband to be conducted by a psychiatrist nominated by the
Independent Children’s
10 April 2013, the parties sought orders for a Family Report and for the matter
to be listed for trial. The Independent Children’s
Lawyer also sought that
the Court make certain orders with respect to the issuing of subpoenas by the
Independent Children’s
JENKINSON of Counsel (“Ms Jenkinson”) who appeared for the
Independent Children’s Lawyer addressed the orders
sought and referred the
Court to the judgments of Burchardt FM in
Croft & Croft
FMCAfam 182
Croft & Croft
”) and Lindsay FM in
& Mayes & Anor
[2013] FMCAfam 272
). At the conclusion of Ms Jenkinson’s submissions, I
granted the orders sought and indicated that I would issue my reasons
judgment in due course.
have given consideration in this matter to the decisions of Burchardt FM in
Croft & Croft
and Lindsay FM in
Redden & Mayes
paragraphs [13] to [23] of his judgment, Lindsay FM sets out the relevant
statutory and regulatory provisions which provide for
the imposition of a fee
for the issuing of a subpoena under the provisions of the
Family Law (Fees)
Regulations 2012
(“the Regulations”). Of particular relevance to
the matter before me is reg.2.04 of the Regulations which
2.04 Persons
exempt from paying fee—general
(1)A person
is exempt from paying a fee mentioned in Schedule 1 (other than the fee
mentioned in item 1 or 2 of Schedule 1) if, at
the time the fee is payable, one
or more of the following apply:
person has been granted legal aid under a legal aid scheme or
(i) established
under a law of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory; or
(ii) approved
by the Attorney-General;
proceeding for which the fee would otherwise be payable;
person is the holder of any of the following cards issued by the
Commonwealth:
health care card;
pensioner concession card;
Commonwealth seniors health card;
other card that certifies the holder’s entitlement to Commonwealth health
concessions;
person is serving a sentence of imprisonment or is otherwise detained in a
public institution;
person is younger than 18;
person is receiving youth allowance or Austudy payments under the
Security Act 1991
or benefits under the ASTUDY Scheme.
paragraph (1) (b), the holder of a card does not include a dependant of the
person who is issued the
issue which has arisen in this case is whether the Independent Children’s
Lawyer in these proceedings is
“a person who has been granted legal aid
under a legal aid scheme or
as defined in reg.2.04(1)(a) of the Regulations. Unlike the proceedings
before Lindsay FM, there has been no determination by the
Registrar or other
‘authorised officer’ that the Independent Children’s Lawyer is
not entitled to the exemption
of paying the fee.
the Independent Children’s Lawyer seeks in this matter are the following
DECLARES THAT for the purposes of Rule 2.04(1)(a) of the Family Law (Fees)
Regulations 2012 the ICL is a person who has
been granted legal aid under a
legal aid scheme or service, and IT IS REQUESTED that the Registrar of this
Honourable Court waive
the fee associated with filing a subpoena insofar as it
relates to the ICL.
event that a waiver of fees is not granted, IT IS ORDERED that pursuant to Rule
2.11(3) of the Family Law (Fees) Regulations
2012 any subpoena requested to be
filed by the ICL be allowed to be filed, notwithstanding that the filing fee has
paragraphs [30] to [38] of his judgment in
Redden & Mayes
, Lindsay FM
deals with the issue of the terminology used in reg.2.03 of the Regulations, in
particular the use of the terms ‘person’
and ‘party’ and
also deals with the capacity of the Court to appoint an Independent
Children’s Lawyer and the issue
of whether an Independent Children’s
Lawyer is a ‘party’ to the proceedings.
concur with his Honour’s conclusions that the issue of whether the
Independent Children’s Lawyer is a party to the proceedings
need not be
determined as the Independent Children’s Lawyer is clearly a person who
can request a subpoena to be issued. In
particular, I concur with his
Honour’s conclusion at paragraph [34] of
Redden & Mayes
(or the child himself or herself for that matter) can be taken to be a
“person” (and it is difficult to discern
how they would not fit that
description) they would be entitled to the exemption from paying fees at the
time of filing the subpoena
but only provided that they have been granted legal
aid under the legal aid scheme or service referred to in s.2.04(1)(a) of the
Regulation.
the matter before Lindsay FM, the relevant authority was the Legal Services
Commissioner of South Australia. In this case, it is
Victoria Legal Aid
(“VLA”). There is no doubt however that VLA is a ‘relevant
authority’ for the purposes
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”).
accept that a body such as VLA is a
“legal aid scheme or
for the purposes of reg.2.04 of the Regulations.
with the views of Lindsay FM in
Redden & Mayes
and Burchardt FM in
Crofts & Croft
, I am satisfied that an Independent Children’s
Lawyer is a person who
“has been granted legal aid under a legal aid
scheme or service”
within the meaning of reg.2.04(1)(a) of the
Regulations.
Independent Children’s Lawyer in this matter is not asking the Court to
waive the fees and I accept that the Regulations
do not empower the Court to do
so. Neither is the Independent Children’s Lawyer asking the Court to
review a decision by the
Registrar not to waive the fees. So far as I am aware,
no such request has been made of the Registrar or other authorised officer.
Further, the Independent Children’s Lawyer is not asking the Court to
direct the Registrar to act in any particular way.
Independent Children’s Lawyer is asking the Court to make a declaration
which requires the Court to interpret the meaning
of the regulation. This, I am
satisfied, the Court has the power to do.
there is a power under reg.2.11(3) of the Regulations to allow a document to be
filed even if the fee is not paid.
Reg.2.11(3)
of the Regulations provides:
(3) However,
the relevant court for the proceeding, or a Judge, Federal Magistrate or
Registrar of that court, may allow the document
to be filed or the service to be
provided despite the fee, or part of the fee, not being paid.
the Registrar not waive the fee associated with the filing of subpoenas in this
matter, I order that such subpoenas may be
filed despite the fee not being
Court, in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a
child, must regard the best interests of the
child as the paramount
consideration. In making such decisions, the Court should act on the best
evidence available.
are well-established principles for the appointment of an Independent
In most, if
not all cases where an Independent Children’s Lawyer is appointed, there
will be a need for subpoenas to be issued.
provisions of reg.2.04 of the Regulations exempt persons who have been granted
legal aid from paying certain fees. This is consistent
with the Regulations
supporting the policy that the Court should not be denied access to the best
evidence because of the cost of
producing such evidence.
these reasons I make the orders as sought by the Independent Children’s
I certify that the preceding twenty-four (24) paragraphs
are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Whelan FM
Date: 11 April 2013
(Fees) Regulations
headed “Minute of Orders sought by
[1994] FamCA 21
(1994) FLC 92-461.
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format