Reference by APRA AMCOS (Set Aside Application) [2023] ACopyT 4 (5 December 2023)
Reference by APRA AMCOS (Set Aside
Application)
[2023] ACopyT 4
File number:
CT 1 of 2021
The Tribunal:
(PRESIDENT)
Date of decision:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– application
to set aside summonses – where summonses were agreed between the parties
– whether material change
of circumstances since summonses issued
Cases cited:
Brimaud v Honeysett Instant Print Pty Ltd
(1988) 217 ALR 44
Reference by APRA AMCOS (Summons)
[2023] ACopyT 3
Reference by APRA AMCOS (Summonses)
[2022] ACopyT 4
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicants:
Mr M Hall SC, Ms R De Stoop and Ms M Evetts
Solicitor for the Applicants:
Banki Haddock Fiora
Counsel for Stan Entertainment Pty Ltd:
Ms A Campbell
Solicitor for Stan Entertainment Pty Ltd:
MinterEllison
Counsel for Netflix, Inc:
Mr B Cameron
Solicitor for Netflix, Inc:
Simpsons Solicitors
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 1 of 2021
REFERENCE BY:
AUSTRALASIAN PERFORMING RIGHT ASSOCIATION
LIMITED ABN 42 000 016 099
AUSTRALASIAN MECHANICAL COPYRIGHT
OWNERS’ SOCIETY LIMITED ABN 78 001 678 851
PERRAM J (PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
application to set aside categories 1 and 3 of the summons to APRA AMCOS dated
22 June 2023 and category 1 of the summons to APRA
AMCOS dated 8 August 2023 be
return date of the two summonses referred to in order 1 be varied to 15 February
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
(REVISED FROM TRANSCRIPT)
PERRAM J (PRESIDENT):
is an application to set aside certain agreed categories in two summonses
previously issued by the Tribunal. I accept that the
Tribunal has the power to
set aside agreed categories in the way which is sought. The relevant principles
to be applied to the application
of that power are those set out in the decision
of McLelland J in
Brimaud v Honeysett Instant Print Pty Ltd
’) at 46. They include, relevantly, that
there should be a material change of circumstances since the original order was
I am not persuaded that there has been a material change in this case.
Hall SC, who appeared with Ms De Stoop and Ms Evetts for APRA AMCOS, put the
material change submission on two bases. First, he
contended that the process
of complying with the categories had turned out to be more burdensome and
expensive than had been anticipated
at the time that the categories were agreed.
Secondly, he submitted that the Tribunal’s decision in
Reference by
APRA AMCOS (Summons)
[2023] ACopyT 3
, given on 7 September 2023, had been a
relevant change of circumstances as well. I do not accept that these are
relevantly material
to the unanticipated increase in the expense and burden of the categories,
litigants are often confronted with the consequences
of having made forensic
choices. That assumed states of affairs do not come to pass in litigation is an
everyday occurrence and
I do not think they can be described as a material
change in circumstances. Secondly, I do not accept that the Tribunal’s
earlier decision involved any departure from the principles which had been
applied by the Tribunal to that date. As I indicated
in [1] of the reasons, I
just applied the principles I had set out in an earlier decision of the
Reference by APRA AMCOS (Summonses)
[2022] ACopyT 4
. Mr Hall drew particular attention to passages in the Tribunal’s
decision, which he submitted demonstrated perhaps a change
in the position of
the Tribunal. This was at [7], where I said this:
I do not think that the materials sought by Stan and Netflix are of sufficient
relevance to the function to be performed by the Tribunal
to justify the
corresponding burden that would be imposed on APRA AMCOS, particularly given the
way the categories are currently
I was discussing the position of the internal ruminations of APRA AMCOS in
relation to comparable bargains. The categories
which are sought on the present
application do not bear that character. Consequently, I do not accept the
submission made that there
has been a material change for the purposes of
. Even if I had concluded that there had been a material change
in circumstances, I would not have concluded, at the requisite standard
determining whether to set aside a summons category, that the categories sought
were irrelevant such that in light of the burden
caused by them they should be
reason for rejecting the application, if the power had arisen, would have been
the fact that the present circumstance arises
from a consent order. There is an
interest, both for the parties and for the public, in ensuring, within
reasonable limits, that
agreements which are registered in the course of the
interlocutory steps which lead to an eventual reference are honoured. For those
reasons I dismiss the application.
I certify that the preceding five (5) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination of the Tribunal
constituted
by the Honourable Justice Perram
(President)
Dated: 13 December 2023
RTF format (278 KB)
Signed PDF/A format