Harrold v Exactech Australia Pty Ltd (No 2) [2025] FCA 1412 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Harrold v Exactech Australia Pty Ltd (No
[2025] FCA 1412
File number(s):
NSD 1224 of 2024
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
REPRESENTATIVE PROCEEDINGS
application for approval of settlement pursuant to
Federal Court
of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) – where proceedings brought for damages in
negligence and for contraventions of
Australian Consumer Law
defective joint-replacement devices – whether settlement deed fair and
reasonable and in interests of group members –
where all group members who
appeared and counsel’s opinion supported the proposed settlement –
proposed settlement approved
Legislation:
Australian Consumer Law
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Trade Practices Act 1974
Cases cited:
Harrold v Exactech Australia Pty Limited
[2025] FCA 1058
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
Regulator and Consumer Protection
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr D Graham SC with Mr M Robinson
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Gerard Malouf & Partners
Counsel for the Respondents:
Ms C Gleeson SC
Solicitors for the Respondents:
Wotton Kearney
NSD 1224 of 2024
EXACTECH AUSTRALIA PTY LTD ACN 146 150
First Respondent
EXACTECH INC
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
sections 33ZB
Federal Court of Australia Act
), the Court declares that the persons affected and bound by these orders
are the Applicant, the Respondents and all the Class Members
other than those
who have opted out of the proceeding.
section 33ZF
of the Act, the Court authorises the Applicant,
, to enter into and give effect to the deed of settlement executed by
the parties and dated 29 May 2025 on behalf of the Class Members,
transactions thereby contemplated for and on behalf of the Class Members
Deed of Settlement
section 33V(1)
of the Act, the Court approves the settlement expressed in the
Deed of Settlement.
section 33V(2)
of the Act, the Court approves of the following:
(a) the terms of the Amended Settlement Distribution Scheme which is Exhibit A
in these proceedings (
Settlement Distribution Scheme
(b) the appointment of GMP Law, as the administrator of the Settlement
Distribution Scheme (
Administrator
section 33V(2)
of the Act, the Court approves the following distributions to
be made from the fund constituted by and under the Deed of Settlement
Aggregate Settlement Sum
(a) the Applicant’s reasonable legal costs and expenses in the sum of
$2,185,491.25.
(b) $100,000.00 compensating the Applicant for the time he expended in
propounding this proceeding on behalf of the Class Members.
(c) The costs of the Administrator to administer the Settlement Distribution
Scheme in the fixed sum of $800,000.00.
(d) the balance of the Aggregate Settlement Sum ($5,614,508.35), together with
any accrued interest, to the Administrator for the
benefit of the participating
and eligible Class Members in accordance with the Settlement Distribution
section 37AF(1)(b)
section 37AG
of the Act, and until further order, on
the ground that this order is necessary to prevent prejudice to the proper
administration
of justice, access to and disclosure (by publication or
otherwise) of Exhibit NKB-5 to the Third Affidavit of Narinder Kaur Bhullar
dated 28 October 2025 is to be restricted to the following:
(a) the Parties, and the Parties’ Legal Representatives; and
(b) the Court and necessary Court staff.
section 37AF(1)(b)
section 37AG
of the Act, and until further order, on
the ground that this order is necessary to prevent prejudice to the proper
administration
of justice, access to and disclosure (by publication or
otherwise) of the documents immediately below is to be restricted to the
Applicant, the Applicant’s Legal Representatives, the Court and necessary
Court staff:
(a) Exhibit DJC-2 referred to in the First Affidavit of David John Cossalter
dated 27 October 2025.
(b) The Second Affidavit of David John Cossalter dated 30 October 2025 and:
(i) Exhibit DCJ-3 (Opinion of Dr Duncan Graham SC and Llewellyn Judd on
(ii) Exhibit DCJ-4 (Opinion of Duncan Graham, Llewellyn Judd and Matthew
Robinson concerning the proposed Settlement and Settlement
Distribution Scheme).
parties (including the Administrator) have liberty to relist the proceeding for
the purpose of seeking orders consequential to
the Deed of Settlement and/or the
Settlement Distribution Scheme.
proceedings otherwise be dismissed against the Respondents, with no order as to
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR
, Revised from transcript
application dated 29 May 2025, pursuant to
Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976
(Cth), the applicant seeks approval of a settlement of
these proceedings in the aggregate sum of $8.7 million. The proposed settlement
is funded by a combination of insurance proceeds in US dollars, a contribution
from the first respondent, a funding amount sourced
from consenting lenders, and
a foreign exchange top-up if required (capped at $400,000).
the sum of $8.7 million, the following deductions are proposed:
(a) $1,350,183 in professional costs and disbursements, representing more than a
50% reduction in the professional costs and disbursements
otherwise incurred;
(b) $620,708.76, in professional fees paid to counsel or otherwise anticipated
to be invoiced by counsel;
(c) $214,599.49 in disbursements;
(d) $800,000 for costs of administration of the settlement distribution scheme;
(e) $100,000 for payment to the applicant.
The evidence satisfies me that each of those amounts is appropriate.
a result, the sum of $5,614,508.75 is anticipated to be available for
distribution to group members through the proposed settlement
distribution
scheme. This sum is subject only to third-party recoveries and currency exchange
movements, noting that a shortfall
would arise in respect of the latter only if
there was a substantial adverse shift in foreign exchange rates. The total for
and disbursements up to the settlement approval is $2,185,491.25 which
represents about 25% of the total settlement sum.
note that the solicitors for the applicant have, commendably, excluded from the
professional costs and disbursements which they
seek any professional costs
after 20 February 2025 concerning its negotiations and dispute over the claim
for expenses relating to
the subpoena which I dealt with in
Exactech Australia Pty Limited
[2025] FCA 1058.
is a representative proceeding brought by the applicant for damages in
negligence and for contraventions of the
Australian Consumer Law
) and, to the extent applicable, the
Trade Practices Act 1974
). It concerns the design, manufacture, packaging, distribution
and supply of joint-replacement devices (
Joint Devices
) for knees, hips
and shoulders which included polyethylene liners (the
are two respondents:
(a) Exactech Australia Pty Limited (
Exactech Australia
), the Australian
subsidiary responsible for importing, advertising, distributing and sponsoring
the Affected Devices in Australia;
(b) Exactech Incorporated (
Exactech US
), the US parent company
responsible for the design, manufacture, and packaging of the Affected Devices
and their export to Australia.
applicant brings the proceedings on his own behalf and on behalf of group
members who, in Australia during the relevant period
(1 January 2003 to the
filing date), were implanted with one or more Joint Devices containing an
Affected Device.
claim is that the Affected Devices were defective, carried an abnormal and/or
superadded risk of premature degradation and revision
surgery, and caused
personal injuries and other losses to the applicant and group members. The
defects relied on are:
(a) a production defect, arising from the alleged use of moderately cross-linked
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (MXPLE)
and the absence of vitamin E
dosing or post-production thermal processes, causing accelerated oxidation and
(b) a packaging defect, arising from the alleged widespread use of
out-of-specification vacuum bags which exposed some of the liners
thereby increasing the risk of oxidative degradation prior to implementation.
consequences of these defects allegedly include adverse biological responses
(such as particle-debris-related tissue necrosis,
pseudotumour formation and
granulomas), premature device failure, pain, loss of function, the need for
revision surgery, and psychological
and economic harm.
is alleged that:
(a) Exactech US was negligent in the design, manufacture, evaluation and
packaging of the Affected Devices, and Exactech Australia
was negligent in their
evaluation, distribution and sponsorship;
(b) both respondents supplied goods in contravention of the consumer guarantees
of acceptable quality
of the ACL) and fitness for purpose
ACL), and their equivalents under the TPA;
(c) both respondents are liable for safety defects under
of the ACL, and
of the TPA; and
(d) Exactech Australia engaged in misleading or deceptive conduct and false
representations as to quality, safety and durability
contrary to
of the ACL.
applicant and group members seek damages and compensation for personal injury,
economic loss, non-economic loss, loss of value
of the Affected Devices, and
other reasonably foreseeable losses arising from the respondent’s
contraventions and negligence.
proceeding is at an early stage. It was commenced by originating application and
statement of claim on 5 September 2024. Apart
from pleadings and limited
interlocutory steps, no lay or expert evidence has been filed. On 23 December
2024, the proceeding was
stayed as against the second respondent following
recognition of the Chapter 11 process as a foreign proceeding, further
constraining
progression on the merits.
light of emerging insolvency risks and uncertainty regarding the availability of
responsive insurance, the parties agreed to attempt
mediation before the service
of evidence. The matter was mediated by a highly experienced and able mediator,
the Honourable Patricia
Bergin AO SC, on 20 December 2024, and again on 3 March
the parties mediated in the absence of each other’s expert evidence, it
had by then become clear (from the Chapter
11 filings, the Model Law recognition
application, and the respondents’ correspondence of 27 November and 18
December 2024
concerning insurance exhaustion) that only limited funds were
likely to be available. From the applicant’s perspective, the
was to avoid incurring the significant and effectively unrecoverable cost of
expert evidence in circumstances where recoverability
appeared to be the
dominant consideration.
parties reached agreement in principle on about 26 May 2025 on the terms now
reflected in the Australian Settlement Deed, which
is subject to approval
Settlement Deed
15 September 2025, crystallising the parties’ obligations under the
proposed settlement, the United States Bankruptcy Court
for the District of
Delaware made the Bankruptcy Court Order authorising the second respondent to
give effect to the Settlement Deed,
for use of insurance proceeds as
contemplated by the deed, and the funding arrangement.
applicant estimates at this stage that there are about 5,000 group members, of
(a) by the end of 2025, it is projected that 610 will have undergone revision
(b) 439 are assumed to have suffered personal injury, but will not by that date
undergo revision surgery; and
(c) the balance (of about 4,000) are assumed to be physically uninjured and
claim damages only for loss of value and distress and
disappointment.
have had the very considerable benefit of reading a confidential opinion by
counsel for the applicant as to the reasonableness of
the settlement. While the
opinion addresses risks relating to the merits of the applicant’s claims,
it is clear that the primary
constraint on the value of the proceedings is the
difficulty of recovering more from the respondents than is offered in the
settlement.
The second respondent, as I have said, is subject to Chapter 11
proceedings in the United States. The first respondent has limited
limited insurance. The proposed settlement provides a fixed sum which appears to
be at least as favourable as the applicant
could realistically achieve through
litigation against the respondents (and probably more so), and does so in a
relatively quick
and cheap manner. There are thus compelling grounds in favour
of the settlement which has been agreed.
have also had the benefit of hearing from Mr Harrold and sixteen group members
today, who have all supported the proposed settlement
and who have spoken
eloquently of their difficult personal circumstances as well as their
well-justified desire for a quick resolution.
to the key components of the Settlement Deed and proposed Settlement
Distribution Scheme, the Assessed Compensation Amounts
payable to Personal
Injury Participating Group Members are limited to non-economic loss only, in the
interests of simplifying assessment
and minimising exposure to third-party
repayment obligations. The releases are designed to preserve any claims by group
members against
surgeons (where surgery was performed privately) or public
hospitals. Group members must register by the claim deadline (being a
period from the settlement scheme’s commencement).
source of risk in the orderly distribution of compensation under the settlement
scheme arises from the prospect of third-party
recoveries, particularly by
Medicare and private health insurers. It is anticipated that, whether
individually or in bulk, all required
Medicare repayments will be resolved
before distribution. As to private health insurers, the applicant’s
solicitors intend
to engage in negotiations with the insurers, but as a
fallback, a Participating Group Member may elect to be reassessed as a
Non-Personal
Injury Participating Group Member claiming only for damages for
distress and disappointment with a view to avoiding any obligation
to reimburse
private health insurers.
settlement scheme includes a review mechanism for group members who wish to
challenge their eligibility or characterisation. The
payment of compensation
will not occur until the Assessed Compensation Amounts have been determined for
all Participating Group Members
(including after review) and after all
Third-Party Required Repayments have been determined and paid. If there is a
shortfall or
surplus in the settlement fund at the end of the process, there is
a provision for a pro rata adjustment to the Assessed Compensation
each group member.
damages assessment protocol annexed to the settlement scheme sets out how each
Participating Group Member’s Assessed Compensation
Amount is to be
calculated. Claims are categorised in five ways by reference to the number and
nature of revision surgeries undergone,
with fixed amounts assigned to each
category, on an ascending scale according to the severity of injury, as measured
by whether there
have been revision surgeries and to what extent there have been
such revision surgeries.
I have said, I am satisfied that the amounts to be deducted for legal fees and
disbursements, administration of the settlement
distribution scheme and payment
to the lead applicant are all fair and reasonable.
my view, the proposed settlement is fair and reasonable and in the interests of
group members as a whole, and should be approved.
The relatively modest outcome
for the applicant and group members reflects the very real difficulty which they
face in terms of recoverability
of damages in the event that their claims are
successful.
congratulate the parties on reaching this compromise, and I thank counsel and
solicitors for their helpful submissions and the efficient
way in which the
matter, overall, has been conducted.
I certify that the preceding twenty-six (26)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 14 November 2025
RTF format (367 KB)
Signed PDF/A format