Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation [2024] FWCD 1058 (27 November 2024)
[2024] FWCD 1058
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
—Alteration of other rules of organisation
Nursing and Midwifery Federation
(R2024/126)
CHRIS ENRIGHT
MELBOURNE, 27 NOVEMBER 2024
Alteration of other rules of organisation.
On 30 August 2024 the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation
(ANMF) lodged with the Fair Work Commission (the Commission) a notice
declaration setting out particulars of alterations to its rules.
The ANMF seeks certification of the alterations under
section 159
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
The particulars:
insert a new
rule 75A – Workplace Delegates;
insert a new
subrule 75.6; and
alter subrules
28.2.3, 49.2.3, 52.4, 70.5, 75.5, and 76.13.
On the information contained in the notice and declaration, I am
satisfied the alterations have been made under the rules of the organisation.
Minor alterations
The effect of the proposed alterations is varied. The alterations to
subrules 49.2.3, 52.4, 70.5 and 76.13 are minor, they amend typographical
and change the phrasing of “Branch Councillors” to “members of
Branch Council”.
The alterations to subrule 28.2.3 insert the word
“Tasmania” after “Northern Territory”. This reflects the
changes made in my previous
alterations were made for the Tasmanian Branch to hold a Biennial Conference
instead of an Annual Conference.
The insertion of a new subrule 75.6 and alterations to subrule 75.5
relate to Job Representatives. The alterations provide that a
Job Representative
may be removed as a Job Representative in accordance with procedures to be
determined by the Branch Council from
time to time. I note that the position of
Job Representative is not an office for the purposes of the
The remaining alteration, the insertion of new rule 75A, relates to
Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Act 2023
(Closing Loopholes Act) which amends provisions of
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (FW Act). Among other things, these amendments include rights and
protections for workplace delegates.
Workplace Delegates
The amendments to the FW Act introduce section 350C, which afford
workplace delegates with specific protections. Section 350C was
further amended
with effect from 26 August 2024 to extend those protections to regulated
workers. Subsection (1) currently provides
workplace delegate
is a person appointed or
elected, in accordance with the rules of an employee organisation, to be a
delegate or representative (however
described) for either or both of the
(a) members of the organisation who work in a particular enterprise;
(b) members of the organisation who perform work for, or that has been arranged
or facilitated by, a particular regulated business.”
Subsection 350C(3) of the FW Act provides that workplace delegates
are entitled to certain rights, such as representation, communication
members and other persons entitled to be members, and access to workplace
facilities.
I have considered rules regarding workplace delegates and the
Closing Loopholes Act in a previous
decision, I determined that:
• a workplace delegate must be interpreted as a person who works in the
enterprise or regulated
• rules regarding workplace delegates must not undermine the statutory
scheme regarding workplace delegates set out in the
• rules must not purport to extend workplace delegate rights or
obligations to persons who would not be so entitled under the
Considering the factors listed above, I am required to consider
whether the alterations comply with and are not contrary to the Act,
the FW Act,
modern awards and enterprise agreements, and are not otherwise contrary to
While keeping
these provisions in mind, I turn to the proposed alterations.
Proposed alteration Rule 75A – Workplace
Proposed subrule 75A.1 provides that:
...a member may be appointed or elected to be a Workplace
Delegate for the purpose of the
Fair Work Act 2009
for members who work in a
particular enterprise, in accordance with procedures to be determined by the
Branch Council from time to
It is clear from the proposed alteration that a person appointed as
a workplace delegate would be a person who works in the enterprise
or regulated
business, and therefore is in alignment with the statutory scheme regarding
workplace delegates as set out in the FW
The following proposed subrule, subrule 75A.2, however, raises a
question regarding whether the rule purports to extend workplace
delegate rights
or obligations to persons who would not be so entitled under the FW Act.
Proposed subrule 75A.2 – does it extend to employees
whose employment is not covered by the FW Act?
Proposed subrule 75A.2 inserts a table and states that:
A member in a Branch set out in Column B appointed or elected,
in accordance with the rules of the state registered union set out
immediately
opposite in Column A, to be a delegate or representative (however described) for
members of the state registered union
who work in a particular enterprise is
appointed to be a Workplace Delegate for the purpose of the
Fair Work Act 2009
for members in the Branch who work in that enterprise:
Column A – State Registered Union
Column B - Branch
Queensland Nurses and Midwives’ Union of Employees
The Australian Nursing Federation, Industrial Union of
Western Australia
Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation (SA Branch)
South Australia
New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association
New South Wales
On the face of the rule, it appears that the subrule could be
capable of extending to ANMF public sector members directly employed
Government Departments in State public hospitals, among other things. It is my
understanding that these employees would
not be covered by the FW Act. If the
rule were to extend the rights and obligations of workplace delegates to a
person who would
not be entitled to the protections under the FW Act, this would
be contrary to law and could not be certified. The ANMF were invited
submissions regarding this issue.
In their submissions, the ANMF stated that:
“The purpose of sub-rule 75A.2 is to ensure that a member
who works in the private sector in branches such as QNMU Branch can
recognised as a Workplace Delegate under the ANMF Rules. It does not extend
beyond employees whose employment is covered
by the FW Act. It does not cover
workers under the various state IR
I accept these submissions. If it is possible that the rule could be
interpreted to capture employees not covered by the FW Act, the
rule would need
to be read down to apply only to National system employees or employees whose
employment is covered by the various
State referral legislation, as the rule
could only apply to employees who are provided these rights and protections by
satisfied that proposed subrule 75A.2 does not undermine the statutory
scheme relating to workplace delegates as it does not extend
the rights and
obligations of workplace delegates to persons outside the scope of section 350C
of the FW Act.
Proposed subrule 75.A.3 – does it impose oppressive,
unreasonable or unjust conditions on members?
Proposed subrule 75A.3 states:
Subrule 75A.2 will not apply if:
75A.3.1 Branch Council decides otherwise;
75A.3.2 The member has notified the Branch in writing before the appointment
that they do not accept the appointment; or
75A.3.3 The state registered union does not notify the Branch in writing of
the name and enterprise of a delegate or representative
(however described)
within 28 days of their appointment or election in accordance with the rules of
the state registered union.
The general requirements for rules of an organisation are listed in
section 142 of the Act. Subsection 142(1)(c) specifies that rules
impose conditions, obligations or restrictions that, having regard to, among
other things, Parliament’s intentions
and the objects of the Act, are
oppressive, unreasonable or
Subrule 75A.2, as highlighted above, provides for an appointment
system for workplace delegates. Two potential issues arise with proposed
subrules 75A.3.1 and 75A.3.3. First, the proposed alteration does not seem to
include a method of informing state-based appointees
if they are workplace
delegates. If certified it may give rise to unintended consequences for the
member who is acting under a misapprehension
that they have the protections
afforded to workplace delegates by the FW Act. Secondly, the lack of clarity
regarding notification
to a workplace delegate in subrules 75A.3.1 and 75A.3.3
might lead to a conclusion that the proposed rule is so vague or uncertain
impose oppressive, unreasonable or unjust conditions on members.
The ANMF provided submissions addressing these concerns. The ANMF
stated that:
“The Rules concerning state-based appointees will only be
relevant to QNMU Branch (and its counterpart Queensland Nurses and
Midwives’ Union of Employees [QNMU]) and the South Australia Branch of the
ANMF (and its counterpart Australian Nursing and
Midwifery Federation SA Branch
[ANMFSA]). Victoria, Northern Territory, Australian Capital Territory and
Tasmania branches do not
have state-based equivalents. Western Australia and New
South Wales do not have workplace representatives in their rules. It is in
interests of branches to have processes in place to ensure that potential
Workplace Delegates have the protections of s350C of
The ANMF submitted the following case law regarding the legal
context of what is oppressive, unreasonable or unjust conditions:
Brown v Health Services Union
[2012] FCA 644
, Flick J noted:
In respect to the former s 140(1)(c) in
Municipal Officers’
Association of Australia v Lancaster
[1981] FCA 151
(1981) 54 FLR 129
at 164-165 Deane J
concluded that the phrase “
oppressive, unreasonable or
” was used objectively and that no mandate was conferred upon a
Court to simply rewrite rules by reference to what it perceived
preferable, desirable or ideal
”. His Honour there
The constraints and restrictions imposed, by positive and negative
requirements of the Act and regulations, upon the freedom of the
members of an
organisation to select, for themselves, the rules which they consider
appropriate for their particular organisation,
are real and significant.
cannot, however, be too strongly stressed that, subject to those constraints and
restrictions, the content of the rules of a registered
organisation is primarily
a matter for the members
Those three words [oppressive, unreasonable or unjust] are used objectively
in the clause and each of them is to be given its ordinary
strong meaning.
Plainly, their meanings overlap and definition is liable to adulterate the
strength which the words possess. Nonetheless,
it seems desirable that I
indicate the meanings which I ascribe to them.
To be oppressive, a condition,
obligation or restriction must be burdensome, harsh and wrongful. To be
unreasonable it must be immoderate
and inappropriate. To be unjust it must be
contrary to right and justice and to ordinary standards of fair play
(Emphasis added)
These observations were approved in
Moffitt v Vehicle Builders
Employees’ Federation of Australia
(1985) 11 IR 174
at 175. Similar
words were employed in
Workplace Relations Act
(Cth) and were similarly construed:
Woolgar v O’Neill
[2001] FCA 1149
, 108 IR 58 at 64 per Sackville J;
Sutton (No 3)
[2001] FCA 1117
per Goldberg J.
Butler v CEPU
[2012] FCA 790
The question of oppression, unreasonableness or unjustness must involve a
practical consideration of the substantive effect of the
rule, not merely in
isolation but
in the context of the rules as a whole
. Moreover, it would
be surprising if the substantive questions were to be answered by reference to
the form of the rule as opposed
to its substance. (Emphasis added)
Independent Education Union of Australia
), Delegate Enright recently stated (quoting
authorities such as above):
... My considerations are limited to whether the alterations
comply with and are not contrary to the Act, the FW Act, modern awards
enterprise agreements, are not otherwise contrary to law and were made under the
rules of the organisation. I agree with the
Branch that the potential
unintentional consequences of an alteration, or whether an organisation could
enact a more preferable,
desirable or ideal rule are not relevant considerations
under section
The ANMF further submitted that:
“Concerning sub-rule 75A.3.1, this rule means that Branch
Councils can decide to pass a motion to not use the process in sub-rule
all. A Branch may wish to not avail itself of the process available. It is not
applied on a member-by-member basis.
Concerning sub-rule 75A.3.3, the ANMF respectfully submits that this rule is
not vague or uncertain. It stipulates a process to be
used to ensure that ANMF
members will have protection under the FW Act. ANMF branches will need to put in
place procedures to ensure
that their members are notified, because a member
purporting to exercise powers under s350 of the FW Act will be assisted by their
ANMF branch. Potential unintentional consequences of an alteration, or whether
ANMF could enact a more preferable, desirable or ideal
rule are not relevant
considerations under section 159 of the RO Act, as stated in
A rule may not be oppressive, unreasonable or unjust, however, by its
application it can become oppressive, unreasonable or unjust
). If there is an application, or proposed application in which the
rule would be used oppressively, unreasonably or in an unjust
manner, then
members have recourse under section 164A of the RO Act.
Sub-rule 75A.3.3 must be read in the context of the of the rules as a whole,
. The Objects of the ANMF include improving “...the
industrial and statutory rights and benefits of members” and representing
“...members in industrial disputes and in relation to industrial
matters.” (rule 3) Branches will fulfill those obligations
by ensuring
that members are advised of their status concerning whether they are a Workplace
Representative under rule 75A of the
ANMF Rules or
I accept these submissions. My considerations are limited to whether
the alterations comply with and are not contrary to the Act,
the FW Act, modern
awards and enterprise agreements, are not otherwise contrary to law and were
made under the rules of the organisation.
I agree with the ANMF that whether an
organisation could enact a more preferable, desirable or ideal rule is not a
relevant consideration
under section 159.
Furthermore, the submissions made by the ANMF confirm that the
Branches will ensure that members are properly advised of their status
rule 75A, which will address any uncertainty regarding the rules. In these
circumstances it may be considered unlikely that
the event would arise where a
member would not be properly informed of their status under rule 75A. I am
satisfied that proposed
subrule 75A.3 does not impose conditions, obligations or
restrictions that, having regard to Parliament’s intentions and the
objects of the Act, are oppressive, unreasonable or unjust.
Proposed subrules 75A.4 and 75A.5
Subrule 75A.4 states that:
All Workplace Delegates shall be and shall remain at all times
subject to the control and direction of the Branch Council and the
Secretary. A Workplace Delegate may be removed as a Workplace Delegate in
accordance with procedures to be determined by the
Branch Council from time to
Lastly, subrule 75A.5 provides that:
Branch Council may make, vary and repeal by-laws for the
regulation of Workplace Delegates. All Workplace Delegates shall exercise
rights under the
Fair Work Act 2009
(including any rights under a fair work
instrument) in accordance with those by-laws.
These provisions appear to be designed to regulate the relationship
between the ANMF and the workplace delegate. These seem to be
acceptable and are
not controversial.
In my opinion, the alterations comply with and are not contrary to
the Act, the FW Act, modern awards and enterprise agreements, are
not otherwise
contrary to law and were made under the rules of the organisation. I certify
accordingly under subsection 159(1) of
DELEGATE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
Re Australian
Nursing and Midwifery Federation
Submissions from
the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation, 13 November 2024.
Re Independent
Education Union of Australia
Independent Education Union of Australia
Re Independent
Education Union of Australia
Subsection 159(1)
of the Act provides that:
(1) An alteration of the rules (other than the eligibility rules) of an
organisation does not take effect unless particulars of the
alteration have been
lodged with the FWC and the General Manager has certified that, in his or her
opinion, the alteration:
(a) complies with, and is not contrary to, this Act, the
Fair Work Act
modern awards and enterprise agreements; and
(b) is not otherwise contrary to law; and
(c) has been made under the rules of the organisation.
Submissions from
the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation, 13 November 2024.
of the Act provides that rules:
...must not impose on applicants for membership, or members, of the
organisation, conditions, obligations or restrictions that,
having regard to
Parliament’s intention in enacting this Act (see
objects of this Act and the
Fair Work Act
, are oppressive, unreasonable or
Submissions
from the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation, 13 November 2024.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (583 KB)
Signed PDF/A format