McCleave v Chief of Navy [2019] ADFDAT 1 (21 February 2019)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
McCleave v Chief of Navy
[2019] ADFDAT
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 1 of 201
LOGAN (PRESIDENT), Hiley (MEMBER) AND GARDE
(MEMBER) JJ
Date of decision:
Catchwords:
DEFENCE AND WAR –
appeal from a
decision of a Defence Force Magistrate – abuse of process – where
appellant admitted to offences under
Defence Force
Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) – where admissions were made after the
appellant received representations within his chain of command that he would not
be prosecuted – whether representations made constituted an undertaking
not to prosecute – representations not made by
Director of Military
Prosecutions (DMP) – no bad faith – role of the DMP – whether
representations relied on by
the appellant – effect of concurrent
administrative and disciplinary action – no abuse of process –
appeal dismissed.
Legislation:
Constitution
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Criminal Law Act 1967
(UK) s 4(1)
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
ss 23(1)(d)
(1)(c)(ii),
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
ss 23(1)(b)
Evidence Act 1995
Judiciary Act 1903
Police Administration Act 1978
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
Prosecution of Offences Act 1985
(UK) s 3(2)(b)
Cases cited:
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2001] HCA 25
(2001) 205 CLR
Baker v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2017] VSCA 58
Barton v The Queen
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
Batistatos v Roads and Traffic Authority
(2006) 222 CLR
Burdett v Abbot
[1812] EngR 191
(1812) 4 Taunt 401
Carr v Western Australia
[2007] HCA 47
(2007) 232 CLR 138
[2016] VSCA 96
Connelly v. Director of Public Prosecutions
[1964] A.C. 1254
Groves v Commonwealth of Australia
(1982) 150 CLR 113
Hunter v. Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police
[1981] UKHL 13
[1982] A.C.
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Nicholls
(2011) 244 CLR
Lamb v Moss
[1983] FCA 254
(1983) 76 FLR 296
Lee v New South Wales Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR 196
Lee v NSW Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 39
[2014] HCA 20
PNJ v The Queen
(2009) 83 ALJR 384
Re Colonel Aird; Ex parte Alpert
(2004) 220 CLR 308
R v Croyden Justices; ex parte Dean
[1993] QB 769
R v Georgiadis
[1984] VicRp 82
[1984] VR 1030
[2007] NSWSC 231
R v McDonald
[1983] NZLR 252
R v Milnes and Green
(1983) 33 SASR 211
[2000] SASC 384
R v Slattery
[2002] NSWCCA 367
(1992) 109 FLR 155
Roti v The Queen
[2011] HCA 50
(2011) 245 CLR 456
RPS v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
(2000) 199 CLR 620
Sankey v. Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 C.L.R. 1
Strickland (a pseudonym) v Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 93 ALJR 1
Strickland v Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
White v Director of Military Prosecutions
[2007] HCA 29
(2007) 231 CLR 570
Williamson v Trainor
[1992] 2 Qd R 572
X7 v Australian Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 29
[2013] 248 CLR 92
Date of hearing:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr A Moses SC with Mr R Pearce
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Salerno Law
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr R Cawte with Mr W Nazzari
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 1 of 2018
JUSTIN PETER McCLEAVE
CHIEF OF NAVY
LOGAN (PRESIDENT), HILEY (MEMBER) AND GARDE (MEMBER)
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
period within which the appeal must be lodged be extended to the date on which
it was lodged.
appeal be dismissed.
REASONS FOR
Burdett v Abbot
[1812] EngR 191
[1812] 128 ER 384
4 Taunt 401
, at p 403, pp 449-450
Burdett v Abbot
), Lord Mansfield CJ stated:
I will correct a strange mistaken notion which has got
abroad, that because men are soldiers they cease to be citizens; a soldier
gifted with all the rights of other citizens ... It is therefore highly
important that the mistake should he corrected which supposed
Englishman, by taking upon him the additional character of a soldier, puts off
any of the right and duties of an Englishman.
Referring to
Burdett v Abbot
and to constitutional developments in the
aftermath of, successively, the English Civil War, the experience of the
Cromwellian Protectorate
backed by the New Model Army, the Restoration and the
Glorious Revolution, Mr C M Clode, Legal Adviser at the War Office, in his
enduringly authoritative work,
The Military Forces of the Crown: Their
Administration and Government,
1869, Vol 1, p 144, makes the point that
the political class in what became the United Kingdom were then and have
remained astute
to ensure that the military never developed as a separate caste,
isolated from the people. This astuteness was at once protective
from the threat of military dictatorship of the kind into which the republican
ideal of the Protectorate descended but
also premised on the principle that
members of the military remained in the first instance members of the society
they served, giving
up no more of the rights of an ordinary citizen than was
necessary in order to render that service.
is elementary that this same understanding is applicable to members of the
Australian Defence Force (
). Reflecting this understanding, Lord
Mansfield’s statement in
Burdett v Abbot
was expressly approved by
Stephen, Mason, Aickin and Wilson JJ in their joint judgement in
v Commonwealth of Australia
(1982) 150 CLR 113
). The emphatic rejection in
of a contention
by the Commonwealth that it was immune from suit for damages in respect of a
tortious wrong inflicted on a member
of the ADF merely because that had occurred
in the course of military service is a manifestation of this understanding.
of the ADF enjoy both the protection of the common law and are subject
to responsibilities at common law in the same way as are others
in Australia,
subject only to those which, by statute or by necessary implication from
particular circumstances of service, are removed.
High Court authority,
Strickland (a pseudonym) v Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 93 ALJR 1
), serves to
remind that especially important common law rights are found in what is
compendiously termed the “right to silence”.
serves to remind that, in certain circumstances, the continuance of a
prosecution where an accused has been denied a right to
silence can amount to an
abuse of the criminal justice process such that further proceedings against that
accused should be stayed.
appellant, Justin Peter McCleave, holds the rank of Lieutenant (
) in the Royal Australian Navy. He is also a legal practitioner.
He holds an appointment as a legal officer in the Royal Australian
Navy Reserve
McCleave contends that on the basis of a representation made to him, via his
legal representative, within his chain of command,
by the Executive Officer of
the commissioned shore establishment, HMAS Cerberus, that administrative action,
rather than proceedings
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
), would be taken against him, he acknowledged in writing a wrongful
claim by him for RANR training pay. He claims that DFDA proceedings
Defence Force Magistrate (
) subsequently commenced against him by the
Director of Military Prosecutions (
) were an abuse of process. An
application by him to the DFM permanently to stay the proceedings failed.
Thereafter, LEUT McCleave
pleaded guilty to and was convicted of the
service offence of recklessly making a false or misleading statement in relation
application for a benefit contrary to
of the DFDA. In
respect of this offence, the DFM sentenced LEUT McCleave to be severely
reprimanded.
McCleave’s further contention is that his being called upon to enter a
plea, his conviction consequential upon his entry
of his plea of guilty and his
sentence were each features of proceedings which were an abuse of process. For
these reasons, he seeks
an order that his conviction be quashed and that there
be no order for a new trial.
some respects (taking of fingerprints and identification photographs,
participation in identification parades), the DFDA modifies
or abrogates the
privilege against self-incrimination. That privilege forms part of the
“right to silence”:
Lee v New South Wales Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR 196
) per Gageler and
Keane JJ. No such abrogation or modification is applicable in the present
case. Therefore, the effect of
Burdett v Abbot
LEUT McCleave did not, by his membership of the ADF, lose his common law
“right to silence”.
McCleave filed his notice of appeal to the Tribunal outside the time prescribed
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
). In essence, that was because, not unreasonably, he was awaiting the
result of the review of conviction for which the DFDA provides.
necessary further to detail the reasons for the delay in the filing of his
notice of appeal. That is because, very fairly,
the respondent Chief of Navy
expressly refrained from opposing the granting of an extension at the hearing
before the Tribunal.
Accordingly, LEUT McCleave should be granted an extension
of time to the date on which he filed his notice of appeal.
their reasons, Hiley and Garde JJ set out more comprehensively the relevant
facts as briefly summarised above. I gratefully adopt
their account.
critical facts are found in the exchange of emails on 1 December 2016
between CMDR Verho (on behalf of the Commanding Officer
of HMAS Cerberus)
and CMDR Welbourne (on behalf of LEUT McCleave), viewed in the wider context in
which they occurred. The culmination
of the exchange was the statement made by
CMDR Verho to CMDR Welbourne, “No I will not be taking DFDA action.”
I am quite unable to regard the latter statement as indicating only
that CMDR Verho personally or even only that the naval officer
commanding HMAS
Cerberus and each of that officer’s subordinates would not take action
under the DFDA against LEUT McCleave,
leaving open the prospect that the DMP may
later choose to take such action. The statement was made and received and
intended to
be made and received on the basis that LEUT McCleave could be
assured that no action under the DFDA would be taken against him.
the strength of the representation made to CMDR Welbourne, LEUT McCleave waived
the right to silence to which his legal representative
had referred in the
exchange of emails. He made comprehensive admissions in respect of his conduct
in his response to the notice
to show cause. He was then dealt with
administratively accordingly.
the heart of LEUT McCleave’s submissions was the proposition that, in
terms of principle and outcome, the present appeal
should be regarded as a
replication, in the context of the Australian military justice system, of
circumstances which moved a Divisional
R v Croyden Justices, Ex
[1993] QB 769
Croyden Justices Case
) to quash an
order made by justices committing an accused for trial. It will be necessary to
consider that case and authorities
to which reference is made in it in greater
detail shortly. Suffice it to say, notwithstanding representations made by
police officers
to a person who had been assisting them with their
investigations that he would not be prosecuted, on the strength of which he had
made a self-incriminating statement, the Crown Prosecution Service later
instituted criminal proceedings against him which resulted
in the making of the
committal order challenged. That order was quashed on the basis that the
committal proceedings were, in the
circumstances, an abuse of process. The
resemblance with the present case is indeed striking. That resemblance is
heightened by
the fact that the submissions made by the Crown Prosecution
Service in that case in relation to the independent prosecutorial discretion
vested in that service bore an uncanny similarity to the submissions of the DMP
as to the independent role which she undertook under
turning to the
Croyden Justices Case
in greater detail, it is desirable
to make some observations in relation to the course of action adopted by LEUT
McCleave after the
DFM ruled against his application for a stay of the
proceedings. That ruling having been made, LEUT McCleave chose to enter a plea
of guilty. Before so doing, it would have been open to him to seek an
adjournment so as to institute a proceeding in the original
High Court of Australia under
Constitution
claiming the
constitutional writs of prohibition and certiorari, naming the Chief of Navy,
DFM and perhaps also the DMP as respondents.
Alternatively, he could, under
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth), have sought like relief in
the original jurisdiction of the Federal Court of Australia. It would not have
been possible for
him alternatively to seek relief under the
Administrative
Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth), because the effect of
(definition of “decision to which this Act applies”) and
para (o) of Sch 1 to that Act is to exclude its application
decisions under the DFDA.
end to which such judicial review proceedings in the High Court or the Federal
Court might have been directed was the quashing
of the DFM’s ruling and
the prohibition of the continuance of the DFDA proceedings on the basis that
they were an abuse of
process. As against that course of challenge and by
analogy with observations made in
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
25-26 per Gibbs ACJ and at 80 per Stephen J (with whom Aickin J agreed) and
Lamb v Moss
[1983] FCA 254
(1983) 76 FLR 296
at 308, concerning interference with the
ordinary course of civilian criminal justice proceedings, it might have been put
in exceptional circumstances would a superior court interfere with the
ordinary course of military justice proceedings. Yet the
Croyden Justices
itself offers an example of such interference in the civilian criminal
justice system, notwithstanding an acknowledgement that such
a course was
exceptional. Further, though in outcome it was ultimately unsuccessful,
Colonel Aird; Ex parte Alpert
(2004) 220 CLR 308
offers an example of a
willingness on the part of the High Court to grant an order nisi for prohibition
which had the effect of interrupting
the ordinary course of a court martial
proceeding.
possible, public law courses of action acknowledged, that LEUT McCleave chose to
plead guilty so as to generate the conviction
which is a condition precedent to
his exercising a right of appeal to the Tribunal (and to spare the public purse
the cost of a trial)
does not, in my view, render the point he has taken
academic. That is because if, truly, the proceedings were an abuse of process,
that abuse necessarily included his being requested by the DFM to enter a plea
to the charges. Prior to so doing, LEUT McCleave
had taken objection to the
continuance of the proceedings and sought a ruling. In my view, that means that
he did not waive his
right of seeking the quashing of his conviction on the
basis that the proceedings were an abuse of process.
detailed reference should now be made to the
Croyden Justices Case
the authorities referred to therein. The headnote is a convenient and accurate
source for a detailing of the facts. The applicant,
Dean, who was then aged 17,
was arrested and interviewed by the police in the course of a murder
investigation. During the interview
he effectively admitted that he had
assisted in the destruction of a car with intent to impede the apprehension or
prosecution of
others knowing or believing that they were guilty of an
arrestable offence. He was released without charge on the basis that he
be a prosecution witness. The applicant duly made a prosecution witness
statement and continued to assist the police voluntarily
for a period of over
five weeks. The police continued to refer to him as a prosecution witness and
he alleged that they made specific
assurances that he would not be prosecuted in
connection with the murder. Thereafter the Crown Prosecution Service decided
the applicant should be charged with doing acts with intent to impede the
apprehension of another, contrary to s 4(1) of the
Criminal Law Act
(UK). The applicant was interviewed on two subsequent occasions, but
no mention was made of that decision, nor was he offered legal
cautioned. The applicant was later charged. At committal proceedings the
applicant submitted that the justices should
not proceed as examining justices
to inquire into the alleged offence on the ground that the trial would be an
abuse of the process
of the court. The justices rejected that submission,
refused to adjourn the proceedings pending an application to the High Court
a stay, and committed the applicant for trial.
Materially,
s 3(2)(b) of the
Prosecution of Offences Act 1985
(UK) provided, in
relation to the Director of Public Prosecutions, the official in charge of the
Crown Prosecutions Service:
(2) It shall be the duty of the Director- ...
(b) to institute and have the conduct of
criminal proceedings in any case where it appears to him
(i) the importance or difficulty
of the case makes it appropriate that proceedings should be instituted by him ;
(ii) it is otherwise appropriate for proceedings to be instituted by him
At the time when the
Croyden Justices Case
was decided, constables in the
United Kingdom also possessed the power at common law to arrest without warrant
and charge a person
suspected of committing a felony and enjoyed a somewhat
broader power of arrest without warrant under the
Police and Criminal
Evidence Act 1984
was no suggestion in the
Croyden Justices Case
that, either in making the
representation to Dean that no prosecution would be instituted or in later
instituting such proceedings
respectively, the police or the Crown Prosecutions
Service had acted in bad faith.
leading judgement in the
Croyden Justices Case
was that of
Staughton LJ, with whom Buckley J agreed. His Lordship (at 777)
derived from statements in
Hunter v Chief Constable of the West Midlands
[1981] UKHL 13
[1982] AC 529
Hunter v Chief Constable
Connelly v Director of Public Prosecutions
[1964] AC 1254
v Director of Public Prosecutions
) the principle that a court in the
United Kingdom possessed a broad inherent power to stay criminal proceedings as
an abuse of process.
Hunter v Chief Constable
, Lord Diplock (at 536)
referred to:
[The] inherent power which any court of justice must
possess to prevent misuse of its procedure in a way which, although not
inconsistent
with the literal application of its procedural rules, would
nevertheless be manifestly unfair to a party to litigation before it,
otherwise bring the administration of justice into disrepute among
right-thinking people. The circumstances in which abuse
of process can arise are
very varied; ...
Connelly v Director of Public Prosecutions
Lord Devlin said:
Are the courts to rely on the executive to protect their
process from abuse? Have they not themselves an inescapable duty to secure
treatment for those who come or are brought before them? To questions of this
sort there is only one possible answer.
referred to these statements, Staughton LJ (at 778) surveyed a number of
Commonwealth authorities, including Australian authorities,
in which a like
judicial disposition was evident:
Other Commonwealth cases have considered whether there
should be a stay when the defendant has been promised immunity or something
that sort. In
Reg. v. Milnes and Green
(1983) 33 S.A.S.R. 211
the Supreme
Court of South Australia held that a stay would not be granted, because an
implied condition of the promise of a pardon,
that the defendant would give
truthful information, had been broken. But Cox J., whose judgment was approved
on appeal, accepted,
at pp. 225–226, that there should be a stay when the
grounds for one were clearly made out. In the Supreme Court of Victoria,
Ormiston J. was apparently disposed to grant a stay in
Reg. v. Georgiadis
[1984] VicRp 82
[1984] V.R. 1030.
Reg. v. Betesh
(1975) 30 C.C.C. (2d) 233
granted by a county court judge in Ontario. In
Reg. v. Crneck, Bradley and
(1980) 116 D.L.R. (3d) 675
, Krever J. granted a stay to one
defendant, but refused a stay to another. Most significant, to my mind, is
Chu Piu-wing v. Attorney-General
[1984] H.K.L.R. 411.
There the Hong
Kong Court of Appeal set aside a subpoena to a witness, as an abuse of process,
and the consequent conviction of
the witness for contempt of court. The ground
was that the witness had been assured by the Independent Commission Against
that he would not be required to give evidence, although the subpoena
was in the event obtained by the police. Both were held to
be “arms of the
executive in its investigative function.” McMullin V.-P. said, at pp.
“there is a clear public interest to
be observed in holding officials of the state to promises made by them in full
understanding
of what is entailed by the
Lordship then stated (at 778), “In my judgment the prosecution of a person
who has received a promise, undertaking or representation
from the police that
he will not be prosecuted is capable of being an abuse of process”.
is noteworthy that Staughton LJ did not qualify the principle which he
derived by reference to the youth of the person to whom
the representation was
made or hold that it was rendered inapplicable because he had made certain
admissions prior to the making
of the representations. Nor did his Lordship
regard the statutory power vested in the Director and members of the Crown
Prosecutions
Service to institute proceedings as inhibiting the court’s
ability to determine that the committal proceedings were an abuse
of process and
to quash the resultant committal order.
then, LEUT McCleave submitted, should the position be any different in his
circumstances?
starting point of answering this question should be s 87 of the DFDA, which
materially provides:
Summons and order in the nature of summons
(1) Where an authorized member of the Defence Force believes, on reasonable
grounds, that a person has committed a service offence,
the authorized member
(a) if the person is a defence member:
(i) charge the defence member
with the service offence;
(6) In this section:
authorized member of the Defence
(a) the Director of Military Prosecutions; or
(b) a member of the Defence Force, or a member of the Defence Force included in
a class of members of the Defence Force, authorized,
in writing, by a commanding
officer for the purposes of this section.
89 of the DFDA provides for the alternative of proceedings under the DFDA to be
instituted by the arrest of a specified defence
member or defence civilian by
particular defence members in certain circumstances. It is not necessary for
present purposes to consider
this alternative.
188GA of the DFDA materially provides:
Functions of the Director of Military Prosecutions
(1) The Director of Military Prosecutions has the following functions:
(a) to carry on prosecutions for service
offences in proceedings before a court martial or a Defence Force magistrate,
not instituted by the Director of Military
Prosecutions;
DFDA also expressly confers on the DMP a power to give undertakings to a person
on particular terms that a statement if given
will not be used in evidence or
that a person will not be prosecuted for a service offence, s 188GD
188 GD Undertakings by the Director of Military
Prosecutions
(1) The Director of Military Prosecutions may, if he or she considers it
appropriate to do so, give to a person an undertaking that:
(a) an answer that is given, or a statement
or disclosure that is made, by the person in the course of giving evidence in
proceedings
for a service offence; or
(b) the fact that the person discloses or produces a document or other thing in
proceedings for a service offence; or
(c) any information, document or other thing that is obtained as a direct or
indirect consequence of an answer that is given, a statement
or disclosure that
is made, or a document or other thing that is disclosed or produced in
proceedings for a service offence;
will not be used in evidence against the person in any other proceedings for a
service offence.
(2) If the Director of Military Prosecutions gives an
undertaking under subsection (1):
(a) an answer that is given, or a statement
or disclosure that is made, by the person in the course of giving evidence in
the proceedings;
(b) the fact that the person discloses or produces a document or other thing in
the proceedings; or
(c) any information, document or other thing that is obtained as mentioned in
paragraph (1)(c);
as the case may be, is not admissible in evidence against the person in any
other proceedings for a service offence, other than proceedings
in respect of
the falsity of evidence given by the person.
(3) The Director of Military Prosecutions may, if he or
she considers it appropriate to do so, give to a person an undertaking that
person will not be prosecuted:
(a) for a specified service offence; or
(b) in respect of specified acts or omissions that constitute, or may
constitute, a service offence.
(4) If the Director of Military Prosecutions gives an
undertaking to a person under subsection (3), no prosecution may be instituted
against the person in respect of the specified service offence or a service
offence in respect of the specified acts or omissions.
(5) An undertaking under subsection (3) may be subject to any conditions that
the Director of Military Prosecutions considers
appropriate.
under the DFDA, the DMP shares with particular defence members the power to
institute proceedings in respect of a service offence.
Irrespective of who
institutes such a proceeding, the DMP is expressly empowered to carry on its
prosecution. There is, therefore,
no material distinction to be drawn between
the position of the DMP and that of the Crown Prosecution Service considered in
Croyden Justices Case
. In that case, the police did not possess any
exclusive power to institute criminal proceedings yet that was not regarded as
the effect of vitiating a representation by them that no prosecution
would be instituted. Neither, contrary to the submission which
was made on
their behalf, was the express statutory authority possessed by the Director and
the Crown Prosecution Service to institute
proceedings regarded as having that
Croyden Justices Case
, there is no suggestion of bad faith in
the conduct of the Executive Officer who made the representation or on the part
in instituting the proceedings before the DFM. Each of these
officers was doing his or her duty as he or she understood it.
following observations made by Staughton LJ in the
Croydon Justices Case
(at 776-777) are applicable in the present case by analogy:
It is submitted on behalf of the Crown Prosecution
Service that they alone are entitled, and bound, to decide who shall be
prosecuted,
at any rate in this category of case; and that the police had no
authority and no right to tell the applicant that he would not be
prosecuted for
any offence in connection with the murder: see section 3(2) of the
Prosecution of Offences Act 1985
. I can readily accept that. I also
accept that the point is one of constitutional importance. But I cannot accept
the submission
of Mr. Collins that, in consequence, no such conduct by the
police can ever give rise to an abuse of process. The effect on the
or for that matter on his father, of an undertaking or promise or representation
by the police was likely to have been
the same in this case whether it was or
was not authorised by the Crown Prosecution Service. It is true that they might
their solicitor whether an undertaking, promise or representation by
the police was binding and he might have asked the Crown Prosecution
whether it was made with their authority. But it seems unreasonable to expect
that in this case. If the Crown Prosecution
Service find that their powers are
being usurped by the police, the remedy must surely be a greater degree of
liaison at an early
[Mr Collins appeared on behalf of the DPP]
paraphrase, I readily accept that the DFDA confers an independent discretion to
institute proceedings on the DMP. That Act also
expressly (s 188GD)
confers on the DMP a power to give undertakings. But I cannot accept that, in
consequence, no conduct within
a defence member’s (here, LEUT
McCleave’s) chain of command can ever give rise to an abuse of process by
the later institution
of proceedings under the DFDA for a service offence. The
effect on both LEUT McCleave and, for that matter, his legal advisers of
undertaking by the Executive Officer of his unit, given apparently on the basis
of legal advice to that officer, was likely to
have been the same whether an
undertaking, promise or representation by the Executive Officer was binding and
he might have asked
the DMP whether it was made with her authority. Especially
given the imperatives which attended the making of a response by LEUT
to the notice to show cause, it seems unreasonable to expect that in this case.
If the DMP finds that her powers are being
usurped in respect of particular
defence members by officers within that member’s chain of command, the
remedy must surely
be a greater degree of liaison at an early stage. It may be
that this case highlights a high level failure of command within the
bring home to all officers the independent role assigned by Parliament to the
DMP. With its revelation of the initiation
of administrative discipline-related
proceedings (the notice to show cause) prior to the making of a definitive
decision by the DMP
as to whether to institute service offence proceedings, it
may also be that the case highlights a systemic disjunct between administrative
and prosecutorial disciplinary process within the ADF. This, disjunct, too, may
be indicative of a high level failure of command
within the ADF. Neither of
these is a reason to treat the representation made to LEUT McCleave as anything
less than a bargain.
less than in the civilian criminal justice system, it is a fundamental feature
of proceedings in respect of a service offence before
either a court martial or
a DFM under the DFDA entail “an accusatorial process in which the
prosecution bears the onus of proving
the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable
, at [318] per Gageler and Keane JJ;
[2000] HCA 3
(2000) 199 CLR 620
Azzopardi v The
[2001] HCA 25
(2001) 205 CLR 50
Carr v Western Australia
[2007] HCA 47
232 CLR 138
. The comprehensive admissions made by LEUT
McCleave following the representation made to him conferred on any prosecuting
a considerable and enduring forensic advantage in the event that any
such proceedings were instituted.
their joint judgement in
, at [99]-[100], Kiefel CJ, Bell and
Nettle JJ stated:
As the majority of this Court stated in
Moti v The Queen
, decided cases
should not be read as attempting to chart the boundaries of abuse of process.
Nor should they be read as attempting
to define exhaustively the circumstances
that warrant exercise of the power to stay criminal proceedings or as providing
some “exhaustive
dictionary of words” by one or more of which
executive action must be capable of description before proceedings may be
As Kirby J aptly summarised the position in
Truong v The
“relief is not confined to cases of
deliberate and knowing misconduct, although that may be sufficient to enliven
the jurisdiction.
It extends to serious cases where, whatever the initial
motivation or purpose of the offending party, and whether deliberate, reckless
or seriously negligent, the result is one which the courts, exercising the
judicial power, cannot tolerate or be part
doubt, society and therefore the law ordinarily looks more askance on instances
of deliberate or advertent reckless disregard of
a duty or obligation than upon
the accidents of incompetence. As a rule, the former are conceived of as
entailing greater moral
culpability and for that reason their condonation is
conceived of as more likely to bring the administration of justice into
But ultimately it is a question of degree which substantially
depends upon the nature of the duty or obligation. If a duty or obligation
of no more than peripheral significance, condonation of its breach, even of an
intentional breach, may appear justified in the
interests of relatively more
pressing considerations of justice. The power to stay proceedings is not
available to cure venial irregularities.
But if, as here, the duty or
obligation is of a kind that goes to the very root of the administration of
justice, condonation of
its breach will bring the administration of justice into
disrepute regardless of the culprit’s mentality. Ultimately, these
appeals turn on that distinction.
In my respectful view, no difference in principle is disclosed in this passage
in relation to the power to stay a proceeding as an
abuse of process from that
derived by Staughton LJ in the
Croydon Justices Case
their joint judgement in
White v Director of Military Prosecutions
[2007] HCA 29
231 CLR 570
, at [70] – [72] (
White v DMP
) Gummow, Hayne and
Crennan JJ stated:
many instances, service as a defence member involves additional responsibilities
whose enforcement calls for more than the application
of the general law by
civilian courts. ...
more adequate starting point for analysis is apparent in the following passage
in the title “Royal Forces” in the first
edition of Halsbury’s
Laws of England. The passage is as follows:
“It is one of the cardinal
features of the law of England that a soldier does not by enlisting in the
regular forces thereby
cease to be a citizen, so as to deprive him of any of his
rights or to exempt him from any of his liabilities under the ordinary
the land. He does, however, in his capacity as a soldier, incur additional
responsibilities, for he becomes subject at all
times and in all circumstances
to a code of military law contained in the Army Act, the King’s
Regulations and Orders for the
Army, and Army
matter was taken up by Windeyer J in the following passage in
Marks v The
Commonwealth
“The relationship of
members of the armed Services to the Crown differs essentially from that of
civil servants whose service
is governed by the regulations of the Public
Service. The members of the Forces are under a discipline that the others are
have duties and obligations more stern than theirs: and rights and
privileges that they cannot
[Footnote references
service tribunal system the constitutional validity of which was emphatically
vindicated in
White v DMP
exists to buttress the discipline of the
members of the ADF, to ensure that they adhere to a code of military law found
in the DFDA.
Discipline ensures conformity with a chain of command at the very
pinnacle of which is not a serving military officer but rather,
by virtue of
Constitution
, the Governor-General, as the Queen’s
representative. In turn, the Governor-General exercises that command on the
the Federal Executive Council (usually via the Minister for Defence),
comprised of Ministers responsible to Parliament. Once this
is understood,
nothing could be more subversive of a military justice system than to
countenance its use to try a member of the ADF
who has been assured within his
chain of command that no proceedings under the DFDA will be taken against him
and, on the strength
of that, has waived a right to silence and made admissions.
The proceedings instituted and continued against LEUT McCleave were,
reason, an abuse of the service tribunal process. That they constitute an abuse
of process is in complete conformity with
the understanding of what, in the
civilian criminal justice system may, as explained in the
Croydon Justices
, amount to an abuse of process. The DFM’s
failure to appreciate this constituted an error of law.
appeal and the application before the DFM proceeded on the footing that the DFM
possessed power to stay the proceeding as an abuse
of process.
confirms that a service tribunal such as a DFM does not exercise the
judicial power of the Commonwealth under Chapter III of the
Constitution
does nonetheless exercise a form of judicial power adapted to the end of trying
cases in respect of alleged service offences
under the military justice system.
The jurisdiction of a DFM is wholly statutory. Relevantly, it is found in the
obligation created
by s 135(1) of the DFDA to “try a charge”.
As a DFM does not constitute a superior court of record, it would not, in
view, be appropriate to source the power to stay a proceeding in inherent power.
Rather, the power to try a charge must, by necessary
implication, carry with it
a power to prevent a trial which is an abuse of process. Thus, I discern no
error in the position adopted
by the parties.
Appeals Act by s 23(1), confers upon the Tribunal a power to quash a
conviction, where it appears to the Tribunal materially:
(b) that, as a result of a wrong decision on a question
of law, or of mixed law and fact, the conviction or the prescribed acquittal
wrong in law and that a substantial miscarriage of justice has occurred;
(c) that there was a material irregularity in the course of the proceedings
before the court martial or the Defence Force magistrate
and that a substantial
miscarriage of justice has occurred;
Each is apt to cover the present case. The DFM’s error of law led to the
continuance of a proceeding which was an abuse of
process. The calling on LEUT
McCleave to plead was a material irregularity, because it occurred in a
proceeding which should have
been halted as an abuse of process. For each
reason, a substantial miscarriage of justice occurred.
McCleave’s conviction should therefore be quashed. Given that the
proceeding was an abuse of process, the interests of
justice are such that the
Tribunal should not exercise its power under s 24 of the Appeals Act to
order a new trial. At least initially,
LEUT McCleave also sought an order that
there be a permanent stay of proceedings under the DFDA against him. The
Tribunal is not
a court but rather a body established by the Appeals Act to
serve the ends of the military justice system. That being so, the absence
any express power in the Appeals Act to order a stay of proceedings tells
against the Tribunal having any power to make such an
order. As I understood
it, this was accepted in the end by those representing LEUT McCleave. The
absence of any such power is not,
in my view of any moment for LEUT McCleave.
That is because the Tribunal’s decision will bind not just the Chief of
derivatively each of those who might institute a proceeding for a
service offence. The basis upon which his conviction has been
quashed and no
new trial ordered is such that it is axiomatic that the institution of any
further proceeding would be an unlawful
abuse of process.
would make orders accordingly.
I certify that the preceding thirty-nine (39)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment herein of the
Justice Logan
(President)
Dated: 21 February 2019
HILEY AND GARDE JJ:
INTRODUCTION
appeal concerns the dismissal by a Defence Force Magistrate (
December 2017 of an application by LEUT McCleave for a permanent stay under
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
) of disciplinary proceedings commenced against him by the Director
of Military Prosecutions (
McCleave was charged with “knowingly making a false or misleading
statement in relation to application for a benefit”
contrary to
of the DFDA, alternatively “recklessly making a false or
misleading statement in relation to application for a benefit”
contrary to
of the DFDA. The offending was said to have occurred on or about
24 June 2015 when LEUT McCleave completed an application and signed
declaration claiming an allowance for performing reserve service that he had not
in fact done.
the dismissal of the application for a stay, LEUT McCleave entered a plea of
guilty to the alternative charge of recklessly
making a false or misleading
statement and was convicted and sentenced. If his appeal against the dismissal
of his stay application
is to succeed, it is common ground that the conviction
and sentence should be set aside.
their outline of submissions, counsel for LEUT McCleave said:
In broad terms, the basis of the application to stay the
disciplinary proceedings was that the continuation of those proceedings would
constitute an abuse of process in circumstances where the Appellant had,
expressly on the faith of an assurance given by the Executive
, that no disciplinary proceedings would be brought against him,
provided full and candid disclosure of his conduct, motivation and
personal and
family circumstances. The Appellant had subsequently been issued with a formal
warning in relation to his conduct. Notwithstanding
these matters, several
months later, disciplinary proceedings were brought against the Appellant by the
A consequence of the refusal to grant a permanent stay of the disciplinary
proceedings in these circumstances is that the ultimate
conviction of the
Appellant was wrong in law and a substantial miscarriage of justice occurred.
note, as conceded by counsel at the hearing that, LEUT McCleave was never in
fact issued with a formal warning. However nothing
turns on this. The main
issue concerns the assurance given by the Executive Officer (
extent of any reliance upon that assurance by LEUT McCleave.
Offending – June 2015
10 June 2015, LEUT McCleave was authorised by LCDR Joseph Lindsay, the Command
Legal Officer HMAS Cerberus, to perform reserve
service from 21 to 23 June 2015,
inclusive by completing three training courses at Defence Plaza, Melbourne
Defence Plaza
) entitled:
(a) Objective training;
(b) Defence WHS refresher, asbestos and responsible record keeping training;
(c) Inquiry course training.
McCleave did not perform reserve service, attend Defence Plaza, or log in to the
Defence Restricted Network over this period.
He did not inform anyone at HMAS
Cerberus of his failure to complete the training.
24 June 2015 LEUT McCleave sent an email to LCDR Lindsay attaching a Reserve
Attendance Diary (
) certifying that he had performed the reserve
service and was entitled to allowances for the dates shown in the RAD. The email
the following:
I attach my RAD for some online training I did this week
at defence Plaza.
The mandatory training I did was the annual WHS training, asbestos and
responsible book record keeping training.
The Inquiry officer training is a precondition to undertake the Inquiry Officer
Course I’m doing in July at the MLC.
I have 24 training days available to use to apply to this RAD.
I certify that I have performed the attendances and am entitled to the
allowances as claimed on the dates shown in the attached RAD.
Could you please forward it to payroll for processing.
Cerberus paralegal, LS Lisa Blake, noticed that the training listed in the RAD
did not appear on PMKeyS (the Australian Defence
Force’s information
system for personnel management). She informed LCDR Lindsay. LCDR Lindsay
directed LEUT McCleave to complete
the three days of reserve service as a matter
of priority, and that he be counselled about his conduct in submitting the RAD.
McCleave was counselled by CMDR Welbourne. CMDR Welbourne is a very
experienced former Director Navy Legal Services, and former
permanent Navy Legal
Officer and acted as Legal Officer mentor and supervisor of LEUT McCleave.
3 August 2015, LS Blake observed that PMKeyS still contained no confirmation
that LEUT McCleave had completed the courses. LS
Blake sent an email to
LEUT McCleave querying his completion of the courses. On 4 August 2015, LEUT
McCleave sent a text message
to LCDR Lindsay, attaching a screenshot detailing
courses he completed on the ADF online application, ‘CAMPUS’. The
screenshot confirmed the completion online of ‘Objective User
Training’ and ‘Defence Asbestos Awareness’
on 3 August 2015,
and ‘Defence WHS Awareness – Refresher’ and ‘Living Navy
Behaviours –
’ on 4 August 2015. It is common ground that
LEUT McCleave performed the three days of reserve service in August
ADFIS investigation
investigation into this incident was conducted by the Australian Defence Force
Investigative Service (
). LCDR Panayi, a legal officer, was
appointed to provide legal advice and assistance to LEUT McCleave. LEUT
McCleave declined to
participate in the formal interview, not wishing to
incriminate himself.
22 February 2016 LCDR Panayi sent a submission on behalf of LEUT McCleave to the
investigating officer, CPL Daniel Rubio (
Panayi submission
submission contained 31 paragraphs and attached a number of other
the submission LCDR Panayi contended that:
(a) the issue relates to the timing of LEUT
McCleave’s claim for remuneration;
(b) LEUT McCleave’s chain of command has already dealt with the matter
administratively and he has completed the training;
(c) accordingly, the investigation should be formally
Panayi submission included statements to the effect that:
(a) LEUT McCleave intended to complete the
training but was unable to do so by the end of the financial year;
(b) LEUT McCleave submitted his claim in order to meet the cut off for the
financial year as he was of the belief that this was permissible
and appropriate
given a number of circumstances existing at the time in his workplace;
(c) There was no pecuniary loss to the Commonwealth because LEUT McCleave did
complete the training in question (albeit in the next
financial year);
(d) LEUT McCleave had no intention to defraud or to gain a monetary benefit to
which he was not entitled. He was required to undertake
the training and he
received the correct remuneration for the work he completed;
(e) LEUT McCleave discussed his failure to complete the training in a timely
manner with his immediate supervisor, apologised for
the incident and explained
other work and family issues he had at the time. These included the fact that
his wife was seriously
ill and that he was involved in a number of highly
sensitive investigations as part of his civilian employment;
(f) LCDR Lindsay had acknowledged these personal and work pressures and
counselled LEUT McCleave as to the need to fully complete
the online training
before submitting claims for remuneration;
(g) CMDR Welbourne prepared LEUT McCleave’s Naval Officer Performance
Appraisal Report for 2015 (
). He counselled LEUT McCleave on
his handling of competing work demands, and on the correct process for
remuneration claims. He
advised LEUT McCleave that the counselling would be
formally recorded in his 2015 NOPAR. “As such, this completed the
administrative
sanction as determined by his immediate superiors in his Chain of
Command”; and
(h) LEUT McCleave recognised his error in making the claim prior to fully
completing the online training and has been counselled
24 August 2016 ADFIS provided a brief of evidence to the Commanding Officer
), HMAS Cerberus. The brief of evidence was provided to the XO of
HMAS Cerberus, CMDR Verho. CMDR Verho considered the brief of evidence,
legal advice, and decided to proceed with administrative action, as opposed to
disciplinary action.
The NTSC process
21 November 2016 a Notice to Show Cause (
) signed by CMDR Verho was
given to LEUT McCleave requiring him to show cause as to why he should not be
formally censured for his
(a) stated that it had been brought to the
author’s attention that:
while you were performing your
duties as a Reserve Legal Officer your conduct may have been unacceptable for a
person in your position
as a Legal Officer of the Royal Australian
(b) invited LEUT McCleave to show
(i) why the Imposing Authority
should not be satisfied that the facts and circumstances, as alleged, occurred;
(ii) why the Imposing Authority should not impose a Censure upon
(c) stated that the author was informed
Jun 15 you emailed LCDR J Lindsay, RAN, Form AE 126-1 Reserve Attendance Diary
where you certified that you had completed annual
WHS training, asbestos,
responsible book record keeping, and Inquiry Officer training courses at Defence
Plaza, Melbourne, over the
period 21-23 Jun 15. ...
review of the Defence Electronic Access Control System indicated that you did
not access Defence Plaza, Melbourne, over the period
21-23 Jun 15.
review of the Defence Information Communication Technology Cell indicated that
you did not access the Defence Restricted Network
over the period 21-13 Jun 15.
(d) identified the evidence in support of
each of the above allegations by reference to documents attached to the
(e) stated:
Subject to any response you may
wish to submit, I may recommend to the Imposing Authority a Censure be imposed
upon you. The details
of my possible recommendation are as
performance as a Legal Officer in the ADF was below that expected of an Officer
of your training, profession, rank and experience
inability to demonstrate professionalism as an Officer has resulted in a loss of
confidence towards you by your supervisors and
Command team
have failed to demonstrate adherence to Navy Values and Signature Behaviours
d. and as a result of a Censure
should be imposed on you.
(f) stated:
You have 14 days from receipt of
this Notice within which to provide a Statement of Reasons. Any Statement of
Reasons is to be in
writing and any relevant evidence, compelling circumstances
or information you wish to be considered is to be attached to your response.
your response you may address the facts, the conclusions drawn from them and
what action, if any, should be taken.
If you do not provide a Statement of Reasons within the specified period, I will
refer the matter to the Imposing Authority for consideration
recommendation that a Censure be imposed on you.
You may consult a legal officer if there is one reasonably available, or you may
have another person assist you in preparing a Statement
of Reasons. If you wish
to apply for an extension of time for submitting a response, you are to apply to
After receiving any Statement of Reason you submit, I may decide to refer the
matter to the Imposing Authority and make a recommendation
to impose a Censure
or a lesser administrative sanction, such as a Formal Warning for a period of 12
months or less, or Formal Counselling.
I will rely on the issues and evidence
raised at paragraphs 2 and 3 above to substantiate the imposition of an
alternative adverse
administrative sanction against you.
(g) identified as possible consequences of
will be recorded as not individually ready in the employment section of your
Individual Readiness record for a period of 12 months
from the date of
imposition in the case of a Censure, or the period of the Formal Warning. This
may affect your employability and
eligibility to receive certain allowances that
require individual readiness.
should not expect to be promoted or selected for certain postings or training
courses for a period of 12 months ...
Censure or Formal Warning will remain permanently on your personal record, and
will remain in force for the duration of your career
for a Censure, and the
duration of the Formal Warning for a Formal Warning. Both may be considered in
future reporting and career
decisions, including consideration for promotion and
selective positions.
Censure, Formal Warning or Formal Counselling will be reported on in your
Performance Appraisal Reports for five, two or one annual
reporting periods
respectively ...
the Imposing Authority is not
compelled to impose a Censure if your Statement of Reasons provide a sufficient
basis for them to consider
and impose a less severe administrative action
against you ... The Imposing Authority may also decide that no action should be
(i) advised that the Imposing Authority
would consider a wide range of material including “your Statement of
Reasons (if any)
and additional material you wish to submit;” and
(j) required LEUT McCleave to sign an acknowledgement that he had read and
understood the NTSC.
1 December 2016, CMDR Verho and CMDR Welbourne had the following email
(a) at 10:58am, an email from CMDR Welbourne
to CMDR Verho:
I have been appointed ... to
represent LEUT McCleave in relation to the Notice to Show Cause (NTSC) issued by
you to him. ...
You may or may not be aware that he is being represented by LCDR Paul Panayi in
relation to an ongoing ADFIS investigation concerning
the very same issue raised
in the NTSC.
It is presumed that the issuance of the NTSC follows the completion of those
investigations, however, neither LEUT McCleave or his
legal representative have
been advised.
As a matter of procedural fairness, it is requested that you confirm that the
ADFIS investigation has been discontinued
DFDA charges will
not be brought
. This is necessary to permit LEUT McCleave to respond to the
NTSC. Naturally, he is very willing to do so and wishes to be in a
position to
respond. However, for legal reasons, this is not possible should the ADFIS
investigation remain afoot.
You will be aware of
the legal principle of the right to silence
concerning investigations by police and ADFIS. LEUT McCleave
exercised his
right to silence
concerning the request from ADFIS to interview him.
As such, he is unable to openly respond to the administrative matters raised in
the NTSC unless formally advised of the discontinuance
of the ADFIS
investigation. This is because he
would effectively lose his right to
and the contents of his response could be made available to ADFIS.
You may be aware that in addition to Defence policy there is
also legal guidance
on this situation, which has been issued by Defence Legal. There is also legal
precedent for intervention in
the Federal Court on such matters and there are
Federal Court rulings on the such matters.
Accordingly, it is respectfully requested that you confirm in writing that the
ADFIS investigation has been discontinued and that
DFDA charges will not be
brought now
that the administrative process has now commenced, in lieu,
through the issuance of the NTSC by you. This will enable a speedy response
your consideration.
(Emphasis added)
(b) at 1:31pm, an email from CMDR Verho to
CMDR Welbourne:
Good afternoon Tony,
I can confirm that ADFIS has concluded their investigation and passed the BOE to
Cerberus Command for DFDA and/or Administrative
I have determined that Administrative action is the most appropriate action to
take hence the issue of the NTSC.
Cerberus does not intend taking any DFDA action.
(Emphasis added)
(c) at 1:51pm, an email from CMDR Welbourne
to CMDR Verho:
Thank you Mel for your quick
Sorry to bother you about semantics, though, can you also please confirm that no
DFDA charges will be brought, noting that you have
determined that
administrative action is the most appropriate course of action.
(d) at 2.24pm, an email from CMDR Verho to
CMDR Welbourne:
No I will not be taking DFDA
9 January 2017, LEUT McCleave responded to the NTSC (
NTSC submission
The NTSC submission was signed by LEUT McCleave and contained 78 paragraphs. It
annexed 14 documents including five character
references.
NTSC submission requested CMDR Verho to take into account the fact that LEUT
McCleave had already been administratively dealt
with, and had been counselled
in relation to the incident. The NTSC submission noted that a record of his
counselling was included
in his 2015 NOPAR and that at that time the matter was
considered to be closed with no further action required.
NTSC submission then stated:
I willingly provide this statement on the basis of the
written advice provided by CMDR Verho, to my Legal Adviser, CMDR Welbourne,
December 2016 namely that:
ADFIS investigation of the issues described in the Notice has concluded and that
the matter was referred to Cerberus Command for
determination of
Defence Force
Discipline Act
or administrative action (sic);
Executive Officer of HMAS Cerberus, CMDR Verho, determined to initiate
administrative action against me (as opposed to DFDA action)
and that this is
evidenced by the issue of the Notice and her email correspondence ...
DFDA action will be taken against me regarding the issues described in the
Notice; and
this Response to the Notice will not be used against me in any DFDA or criminal
prosecution of the matters described in the Notice.
the NTSC submission, LEUT McCleave proceeded to:
(a) admit the facts stated in paragraph [2]
of the NTSC;
(b) admit that he had certified that he completed various training activities,
whereas he had not completed them. Rather, he had
commenced some components of
the training and fully intended to (and did) complete the training soon
thereafter;
(c) apologise for what he had done and acknowledge that he had made an error of
judgement which was out of character, exceptional,
and would not happen again;
(d) repeat and expand upon much of what had been said in the Panayi submission,
particularly in relation to the history of the matter,
issues within the Naval
Reserve in relation to training and payment, his family and work pressures at
the relevant time and administrative
action already taken;
(e) give details of his good character and extensive references; and
(f) stress that he had no intention to defraud
NTSC submission was tendered at the Tribunal hearing. It was not provided to the
DMP prior to this time. However some parts of
it, in particular the passage
quoted in [60] above, were read out by the defending officer during the hearing
of the stay application
by the DFM.
receipt of the NTSC submission, the XO of HMAS Cerberus (by then CMDR Hoffman)
determined that a formal warning would be
issued to LEUT McCleave. That
determination was endorsed by the CO of HMAS Cerberus. However no instrument
was signed, no entry
was made on the PMKeys system, and there was no
notification to the Director General Navy People Career Management Agency.
or about 5 March 2017, the DMP sought and was given access to the ADFIS brief of
evidence. On 2 June 2017, the DMP signed a charge
sheet. The Registrar of
Military Justice referred the charge sheet to the DFM under
ss 87(1)(c)(ii)
(1) of the DFDA.
20 July 2017 the CO HMAS Cerberus wrote to LEUT McCleave and stated:
I have recently been informed that you have been charged
by the Director of Military Prosecutions in relation to the matters that
the basis for [the NTSC submission].
Stay application
McCleave applied to the DFM for a permanent stay of the disciplinary proceedings
on the basis that the continuation of those
proceedings would constitute an
abuse of process. That application was heard by the DFM on various days in
November and December
2017, and dismissed on 15 December 2017.
a subsequent directions hearing, LEUT McCleave made it plain that he intended to
challenge the DFM’s dismissal of his stay
application. Discussion ensued
as to whether he should do that by bringing proceedings in the Federal Court or
by entering a guilty
plea before the DFM that would result in a conviction that
could then be challenged by way of appeal to this Tribunal. He adopted
latter course. On 21 March 2018, he pleaded guilty to the alternative charge,
namely “recklessly making a false or misleading
statement in relation to
application for a benefit” contrary to
of the DFDA. He was
convicted and given a severe reprimand.
Rescission of NTSC and appeal
9 May 2018, Commanding Officer HMAS Cerberus advised LEUT McCleave that he had
been dealt with and punished by a DFM under the
DFDA, the NTSC would be
McCleave was informed of the result of a
review of his conviction and
punishment and the result of a
report on 31 May 2018. His solicitors
filed a notice of appeal on 21 June 2018.
THE NATURE AND LEGAL EFFECT OF THE ASSURANCE GIVEN TO LEUT
MCDR Verho’s assurance
Appellant’s contentions
main contentions of the appellant are based upon the two important propositions
stated in the Appellant's Outline of Submissions.
They are that LEUT
(a) had been assured (by the XO Cerberus),
in writing, that no disciplinary proceedings or charges would be brought against
the representation was unconditional; and
(b) made complete and candid disclosure of his conduct, motivation and personal
and family circumstances in reliance of that
The evidence
representation given by CMDR Verho is contained in the email exchange of
1 December 2016 with CMDR Welbourne.
Welbourne was clearly seeking confirmation from CMDR Verho that the ADFIS
investigation had been discontinued and that charges
would not be brought under
the DFDA. CMDR Welbourne also expressed the concern that without those
assurances LEUT McCleave’s
right to silence would be lost. Although
confirming that ADFIS had concluded its investigation, CMDR Verho did not
confirm that
charges would not be brought under the DFDA. Her response was
qualified and confined to her own command and authority at HMAS Cerberus.
did not purport to speak for the Chief of Navy or for any person exercising
higher authority than her own. She did not express
a view on behalf of the
independent DMP, and was not authorised to do so.
are satisfied that CMDR Welbourne was well aware of CMDR Verho’s inability
to give an assurance in the wide form he sought
and her refusal to do so. Quite
apart from his own considerable military legal knowledge and understanding of
the role of the DMP,
this is plain from the exchange of emails following CMDR
Verho’s email of 1.31pm that “Cerberus does not intend taking
DFDA action.” In his email of 1.51pm CMDR Welbourne restated that he was
seeking confirmation from CMDR Verho that “no
DFDA charges will be
brought”. CMDR Verho’s response was clear: “No I will not be
taking DFDA action.” (set
out at [57] above).
exchange of emails is evidence that CMDR Verho spoke only for herself and for
HMAS Cerberus. She was the XO who reported to the
CO HMAS Cerberus. She did
not speak for anyone else who had authority to prosecute and was not taken as
Accordingly
LEUT McCleave’s assertion in para 4(c) of his response to the NTSC -
that CMDR Verho had provided written advice
to his legal advisor, CMDR
Welbourne, that “no DFDA action will be taken against [him] regarding the
issues described in the
Notice” - was incorrect. CMDR Verho had not given
any advice of this character – rather she had expressly refrained
summary, the assurance given by CMDR Verho was that she and HMAS Cerberus would
not be taking any action under the DFDA.
reject the submission made on behalf of the appellant to the effect that CMDR
Verho assured LEUT McCleave that no disciplinary
proceedings would be brought
against him. The submission misstates what CMDR Verho actually said and is not
supported by the email
exchange between CMDR Welbourne and CMDR Verho on 1
December 2016.
we do not agree that LEUT McCleave relied on an assurance to the effect that no
disciplinary charges would be taken against
him by any authority when he
provided the response to the NTSC.
from his assertion in para 4(c) of the NTSC submission, there is no direct
evidence of reliance by LEUT McCleave. Had he given
evidence that he understood
the assurance given by CMDR Verho to apply to all authorities capable of taking
proceedings against him,
he would have been cross-examined as to why this was so
having regard to the email exchange of 1 December 2016. In the absence of
evidence from him, or any other evidence called on his behalf, it is not open
for us to surmise that he did in fact rely upon an
assurance of the type he
alleged was made by CMDR Verho.
he and CMDR Welbourne were military legal officers and were well aware of the
existence of the office of the DMP and the authority
of the DMP to bring charges
under the DFDA. CMDR Welbourne had held a very senior naval legal appointment.
While the DMP might be
favourably influenced by a decision at unit level not to
take administrative action, both were well aware of the statutory authority
independent discretion of the DMP to decide whether or not to prosecute under
failed to obtain the desired assurance from CMDR Verho that charges would not be
brought under the DFDA by any authority, LEUT
McCleave, advised by CMDR
Welbourne, might have approached the DMP and sought an undertaking under
of the DFDA that LEUT McCleave would not be prosecuted.
However, such an approach might have had the reverse effect to that intended,
and triggered a decision by the DMP to proceed to prosecute. In any event, LEUT
McCleave did not do this.
McCleave was asked to respond to the NTSC, and did so. The NTSC made it plain
that CMDR Verho considered there was a strong
basis for the imposition of a
censure and was likely to refer the matter to the Imposing Authority with a
recommendation that a censure
be imposed on LEUT McCleave. Moreover, the basic
facts, set out in para 2 of the NTSC, were not in dispute and were admitted
the Panayi submission.
of the evidence suggests that LEUT McCleave responded to the NTSC because he
wished to avoid the imposition of a censure. There
is no evidence that he
relied on any assurance other than that actually given by CMDR Verho.
apart from what we have said above, there was no change of position or reliance
on an assurance by CMDR Verho of the type contended
for by LEUT McCleave.
we have said, the charges preferred against LEUT McCleave are similar in that
each alleged that LEUT McCleave had made a false
or misleading statement in
relation to an application for a benefit. They differed only as to the mental
element – the primary
charge, under
of the DFDA, required
that the statement be made ‘knowingly’ while the alternative charge,
, required only that the statement be made
‘recklessly’.
we have also said, there was never any issue or doubt as to the underlying
circumstances of the alleged offences, viz that LEUT
McCleave had not completed
the training for which he claimed payment. There was no dispute that he made a
false or misleading statement
regarding the completion of his training.
only issue relating to the charges as to which there was any doubt was the
mental element. In the Panayi submission, LEUT McCleave,
while declining to be
interviewed by ADFIS, admitted the underlying circumstances of the offences
contending that he had no intention
to defraud or to gain any monetary benefit
to which he was not entitled. As we have noted, he said that he was of the
belief that
it was permissible and appropriate for him to do what he did, and
that he had made an error of judgment which had been dealt with
counselling.
the NTSC submission, LEUT McCleave again admitted the underlying facts relating
to his actions as alleged in the NTSC. Again he
stated that he had no intention
to defraud or to gain a monetary benefit to which he was not entitled. Again he
said that he believed
that what he did was permissible and appropriate referring
to the circumstances existing at the time.
was no change of position by LEUT McCleave, either as to the underlying facts or
the mental element of the charges between the
Panayi submission and the NTSC
submission. To the contrary, the evidence shows a high level of continuity in
the position of LEUT
McCleave before and after the exchange of emails on 1
December 2016. There was no new disclosure or revelation made by LEUT McCleave
after 1 December 2016 concerning the underlying circumstances of the charges.
His position as to the facts and intent relating to
his conduct was unchanged.
Accordingly,
we reject the submission that LEUT McCleave acted in reliance on an assurance by
CMDR Verho to the effect that there
would be no disciplinary proceedings brought
against him.
Concurrent administrative and disciplinary action
The intertwined nature of administrative and disciplinary
the ideal world, disciplinary action under the DFDA would precede, and inform
subsequent administrative action. However, as counsel
for the respondent
submitted, the real world is very different. The respondent’s submission
to the Tribunal highlighted that
a member of the ADF facing charges often
experiences concurrent administrative processes and consequences. There is
usually a requirement
for a response by an accused member to a notice to show
cause well before disciplinary investigations are complete, charges laid
hearings completed. As the facts of this case show, courts martial, defence
force magistrates and legal advisers may frequently
have to consider the legal
effect and consequences of administrative actions when disciplinary charges are
preferred or heard.
is no simple solution to the difficulties that may arise because of the
concurrent conduct of disciplinary and administrative
action. One consequence
is that the need to respond to administrative action may well affect the right
of an accused to silence.
for the respondent referred to the situation of personnel accused of serious
offences on deployment who may need to be returned
to Australia, resulting in
financial disadvantage, professional and personal embarrassment and adverse
career impact. Procedural
fairness requires personnel who are to be suspended
of the DFDA to be issued a NTSC as to why they should not be
suspended. Those facing charges who are appointed to command must be
procedural fairness before removal from office. In most circumstances where an
NTSC is given to an ADF member, it will
be necessary for the ADF member to
respond to the NTSC, and deal with circumstances that may later be the subject
of DFDA action.
Existing guidance to commanders and legal
is well recognised within the ADF that certain conduct is likely to result in
both administrative and disciplinary action. Included
in the Appeal book is an
instruction entitled “Concurrent Administrative and Disciplinary /
Criminal Action – Guidance
for Commanders”. Annex A to that
document is another document entitled “Additional Guidance to Service
Legal Officers.”
references recognise that administrative action might be appropriate and taken
even though disciplinary proceedings are ongoing
or contemplated. Some of the
points made are:
(a) “Except in unusual cases,
concurrent administrative action
be taken if it will prejudice
ongoing disciplinary or criminal proceedings.”
(b) “Evidence obtained using compulsory powers can, as a general rule, be
used only for the principal purpose for which it
was originally obtained. ...
[A] statement obtained from a member by an inquiry officer under the authority
of the Defence (Inquiry)
Regulations 1985 that compel a person to answer the
inquiry officer’s questions cannot be used against that person in DFDA
proceedings (other than for giving false evidence to the enquiry
(c) “There is the potential to prejudice the right to a fair trial simply
by sharing information gathered under administrative
processes with
investigators or prosecutors, even where that information is not subsequently
used at trial. The concern is giving
prosecutors a tactical advantage contrary
to the usual adversarial (common law) trial process.” –
(d) “If a member has been charged with an offence, or is reasonably
suspected of having committed an offence, information which
they have previously
provided to an administrative inquiry conducted under the Defence (Inquiry)
Regulations should not be provided
to investigators or prosecutors to preserve
the fairness of any subsequent trial of that member. The legal issue is not
admissibility
of evidence, but also providing the
prosecution with an
unfair forensic advantage
X7 v Australian
Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 29
[2013] 248 CLR 92
Lee v NSW Crime
[2013] HCA 39
[2014] HCA 20)
(emphasis added).
(e) “Provided appropriate care is taken, in most instances it will be an
option to initiate administrative action before the
conclusion of disciplinary
or criminal proceedings, especially interim administrative action.”
(f) “... administrative inquiries should not be used for the purpose of
obtaining evidence for use in disciplinary or criminal
proceedings ...”
(g) “Where an administrative inquiry was conducted for a legitimate
purpose, there are still legal issues associated with providing
the inquiry
report and its enclosures to investigators or
prosecutors.”
possibility of a member being issued with a NTSC is referred to in Annex A.
Relevant matters in advising on the risks of concurrent
administrative and
disciplinary or criminal action include:
the impact on the accused member ... of
having to prepare for and respond to both sets of proceedings. For example, a
decline to respond to a notice to show cause ... on the grounds that
any response may be admissible against them in a later trial.
If this is the
case, the commander should not draw an adverse inference against the member
based on the lack of response ... However,
in not responding a member may give
up the opportunity to provide additional evidence in their own favour with the
consequence that
the sanction is imposed. This should be weighed against the
seriousness of the misconduct and the extent to which it is supported
evidence available to the administrative decision maker.
note that while the references do refer to the need for early consultation
between commanders and legal officers with investigative
or prosecution
authorities, they do not highlight the desirability of consultation with and
clearance by the DMP before decisions
are made by commanders to pursue
administrative action rather than disciplinary action under the DFDA.
The NTSC process
right of ADF members to procedural fairness governs the NTSC process. An ADF
member who receives a NTSC is given the time and
opportunity to provide a
considered response to the subject matter of the notice. The member can elect
to address the matters raised
in the notice in whole or in part, or not at all;
to provide additional material which might cast a different light on the matters
raised in the notice; or provide evidence of past exemplary conduct. The member
has the opportunity to obtain the assistance of
legal counsel, or advisers, and
to exercise a degree of choice and selectivity as to what is said, or not said,
in the response.
The ACC Act process
there is a risk that a NTSC response, even a response voluntarily submitted with
legal assistance, may cause prejudice to an
accused member who desires to rely
on the right to silence, the risk is very much less than that experienced by an
accused person
under the compulsory
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
processes open to the Australian Crime Commission under the ACC Act and
considered by the High Court in
Strickland v Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2018] HCA 53
starkly different, and exist for the very different reasons of collecting
criminal information and intelligence, and investigating
criminal activity (see
ACC Act s 7A).
the ACC Act process, a person may be summonsed to give evidence and produce
documents before an examiner. The examination may
be on oath or affirmation.
It is an indictable offence, punishable by up to 5 years imprisonment for
the person appearing as a witness
at an examination to refuse or fail to answer
a question that the examiner requires the person to answer. If objection is
to answering a question on the ground that the answer might tend to
incriminate the person or make the person liable to a penalty,
the answer must
nonetheless be given, but the answer is not admissible in evidence against the
person in a criminal proceeding or
proceeding for a penalty, except for
confiscation proceedings, or proceedings in respect of the falsity of an answer.
A witness may
be examined or cross-examined on any matter that the examiner
considers relevant by counsel assisting the examiner, or any person
to appear, as well as a legal representative of the person at the examination
(ACC Act ss 28, 30;
at [9]–[13] per Kiefel CJ,
Bell and Nettle JJ).
person subjected to the ACC process has no notice of, and may have very little
control over, the subject matter and substance of
a compulsory interrogation.
Prevention of unfairness
Remedies to prevent unfairness or prejudice to an accused
is a wide range of remedies available to a person whose right to a fair trial
might be prejudiced in circumstances where admissions
or other evidence have
been obtained by unfair or unlawful means, or where an accused person has been
required or felt obliged to
waive his or her “right to
a person is required under statute to answer questions notwithstanding his or
her common law “right to silence”
there will often be statutory
provisions prohibiting the use of such evidence in other proceedings (see for
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) and s 30 of the
ACC Act). An example can be found in legislation that confers a power upon a
Commissioner of Police to compel
a member of the police force to answer
questions or provide information in relation to an alleged or suspected breach
of discipline
notwithstanding that such answers or information might incriminate
the member or make the member liable to a penalty (see for example
Police Administration Act 1978
so-called “right to silence” is not a “constitutional or legal
principle of immutable content” (
at [39] per French CJ and
Crennan J, quoting Gleeson CJ in
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2001] HCA 25
). Rather it is an expression used to refer to a variety of
immunities. One of these is the immunity of a person suspected of a
being compelled to answer questions put by the police or other persons in
authority, namely the privilege against self-incrimination.
Another is the
immunity of an accused person at trial from being compelled to give evidence or
to answer questions. This immunity
reflects not only the privilege against
self-incrimination but also the broader consideration that the prosecution bears
of proving the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt and the
presumption of innocence (
at [41]–[51]).
courts have extensive discretions, and in some cases obligations, to reject
evidence that has been obtained unlawfully, or
in contravention of an Australian
law, or in consequence of an impropriety (
Evidence Act 1995
, to reject admissions made by a defendant in the presence of an
investigating official, or as a result of an act of another person
defendant reasonably believes is capable of influencing a decision as to whether
the defendant should be prosecuted
, or where it would be unfair to a
defendant to use evidence of an admission having regard to the circumstances in
which the admission
These are in addition to the more
common provisions regarding the admission of evidence where its probative value
is outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant
possibility of the prosecutor even having such evidence, whether for the purpose
of using it at trial or for some other purpose,
is regulated in some cases by
statutory provisions such as s 25A of the ACC Act.
trial judge also has other powers to prevent unfairness to an accused person.
These include the ability to make orders regarding
access to materials and to
give directions to a jury. In certain circumstances the court also has the power
stay a proceeding.
we have already noted, the Minute entitled “Concurrent Administrative and
Disciplinary / Criminal Action – Guidance
for Commanders” contains
provisions designed to have similar effect. The fact that the DMP never had a
copy of the NTSC submission
suggests that those provisions were adhered to in
the present matter.
Grant of a permanent stay of proceedings
principles regarding the permanent stay of proceedings were restated recently by
the High Court in
. In that matter the primary judge had
permanently stayed the proceedings which were tainted by the fact that the
Australian Federal
Police invalidly relied on the powers of the Australian Crime
Commission to examine the defendants and thereby obtained evidence
unlawfully, which was passed on to the prosecutors. Their Honours stressed the
rarity of the circumstances in which it
would be appropriate to permanently stay
a proceeding.
Bell and Nettle JJ said at [106]:
Certainly, as this Court has stated repeatedly, a
permanent stay of a criminal prosecution is an extraordinary step which will
rarely be justified. There is a powerful social imperative for those who
are charged with criminal offences to be brought to trial
and, for that reason,
it has been said that a permanent stay of prosecution should only ever be
granted where there is such a fundamental
defect in the process leading to trial
that nothing by way of reconstitution of the prosecutorial team or trial
directions or other
such arrangements can sufficiently relieve against the
consequences of the defect as to afford those charged with a fair trial.
as this Court has also stated (citing
Jago v District Court (NSW)
[1989] HCA 46
per Mason CJ, at [75] per Gaudron J (
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
at 605 per Mason CJ and Toohey J
Truong v The Queen
[2004] HCA 10
(2004) 223 CLR 122
per Kirby J (
Dupas v The Queen
[2010] HCA 20
Moti v The Queen
[2011] HCA 50
per French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ),
there is, too, a fundamental social concern to ensure that the
criminal prosecution does not justify the adoption of any and every
for securing a conviction and, therefore, a recognition that in rare and
exceptional cases where a defect in process is so profound
as to offend the
integrity and functions of the court as such, it is necessary that proceedings
be stayed in order to prevent the
administration of justice falling into
J said that at [169]:
... the decision by the primary judge to take the
extraordinary step of staying the prosecutions of the appellants was warranted
the extraordinary circumstances of that case.
J (dissenting) said at [203]–[204]:
There is, of course, a “substantial public
interest” in having persons charged with criminal offences brought to
at 251 [37] and
at 598). To grant a
permanent stay of a criminal proceeding is “tantamount to a continuing
immunity from prosecution”.
It is a drastic remedy. Often there are
less drastic steps available to courts which are capable of preserving the
fairness of
a trial (citing
Dietrich v R
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
And there is no defined list of such steps.
The question raised by these appeals is whether, in all the circumstances, each
appellant would receive a fair trial or whether,
in any event, there should be a
permanent stay of the prosecution of the charges against the appellants to
the court's processes being used in a manner inconsistent with
the recognised purposes of the administration of justice. The ACC’s
conduct may be condemned. But if a fair trial can be had, or if it is not
possible to say now that a fair trial cannot be had, why
administration of justice be brought into disrepute?
J said at [248]:
A permanent stay of proceedings for an abuse of process
is a measure of last resort. It will be ordered where there is no other way
prevent an unfair trial. It will also be ordered where there is no other way to
protect the integrity of the system of justice
administered by the court. The
latter category, which can be conveniently described as protecting the
“integrity of the court”,
is the concern of these
CJ, Bell and Nettle JJ said at [97]:
It is true that, in previous decisions regarding
unlawful ACC examinations, the only circumstances in which it has been held
permanently to stay a prosecution to prevent the administration of
justice falling into disrepute have been where there has been
deliberately
unlawful conduct on the part of investigative or prosecutorial authorities or at
least advertent reckless disregard
of lawful requirements.
The power to stay proceedings is not available to cure venial irregularities
R v Horseferry Road Magistrates’ Court; Ex parte Bennett
[1993] UKHL 10
[1994] 1 AC 42
at 77 per Lord Lowry;
at 172 [136] per Kirby J).
But if, as here, the duty or obligation is of a kind that goes to the very root
of the administration
of justice (see and compare
Williams v Spautz
[1992] HCA 34
(1992) 174 CLR
at 518–520 per Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey and McHugh JJ;
Lee v The Queen
[2014] HCA 20
(2014) 253 CLR 455
at 472–473 [50]), condonation of
its breach will bring the administration of justice into disrepute regardless of
the culprit's
Primary contentions of the appellant
Appellant’s submissions
their written submissions counsel for the appellant said that the DFM correctly
identified the principles governing the determination
of an application for a
permanent stay by reference to
[2016] VSCA 96
). In that decision the Victorian Court of
Appeal held that:
The power to order a permanent stay derives from the
inherent (or, in some cases, implied) power of a court, including the County
Court, to protect the integrity of its processes where the administration of
justice so requires. It is a remedy that is invoked
in order to prevent an abuse
of process.
The concept of abuse of process extends to the use of the court’s
processes in a way that is inconsistent with two fundamental
requirements
arising in criminal proceedings. These are, first, that the court protect its
ability to function as a court of law
by ensuring that its processes are used
fairly by State and citizen alike. The second is that unless the court protects
its ability
to function in that way, its failure will lead to an erosion of
public confidence. The court’s processes will be seen as lending
themselves to oppression and injustice.
The continuation of proceedings that are unjustifiably and unfairly oppressive
will, of itself, amount to an abuse of process. Moreover,
as is well understood,
a prosecution can be stayed if it has been instituted and maintained for an
improper purpose.
In a criminal context, the term ‘abuse of process’ encompasses not
only circumstances within the narrowest conception
of that term (such as
bringing a prosecution for an improper purpose, or maintaining one that is
clearly foredoomed to fail), but
also pursuing a criminal proceeding in a manner
that is unfair, and gives rise to oppression.
It is only in an extreme case that a permanent stay of proceedings will be
ordered. Necessarily, such cases will be rare. It follows
that an applicant for
a permanent stay must discharge a heavy onus if a court is to be persuaded to
grant that remedy.
In determining whether a permanent stay should be granted, a court must have
regard to the substantial public interest in having
those charged with serious
criminal offences brought to trial. A stay of that kind is tantamount to an
immunity from prosecution,
and is not therefore lightly to be granted.
There is more to a court’s decision as to whether a trial should proceed
than fairness to the accused. An applicant for a stay
must establish that the
continuation of the proceedings would, not merely could, involve unacceptable
injustice or unfairness. It
must be shown that the continuation of the
proceedings would be so unfairly and unjustifiably oppressive as to itself
an abuse of process.
contended in submissions:
The basis for the appellant’s application to the
DFM for a permanent stay was that the continuation of the disciplinary
proceedings
would be oppressive and constitute an abuse of process,
the disciplinary proceedings and the adverse administrative action were based on
the same conduct;
appellant had exercised, and expressed an intention to continue to exercise, his
right to silence in any disciplinary proceedings
(see Commander
Welbourne’s email of 1 December 2016, 10:58am);
response to specific inquiries made by the appellant, he had been assured in
writing there would be no disciplinary proceedings
brought against him;
assurance was proffered by the Executive Officer, HMAS Cerberus, who was
empowered to make such representation;
on the assurance, the appellant then provided disclosure in response to the
NTSC. In the response, the appellant conveyed
to the Executive Officer, a
comprehensive explanation of his conduct and the motivation for that conduct, as
well as a forthright
disclosure of his personal and family circumstances;
appellant stipulated that the disclosure was made on the basis of the
representation from the Executive Officer, and his consequent
understanding,
that there would be no disciplinary proceedings brought against him;
there is no legislative prohibition to the use in the disciplinary proceedings
of the information disclosed in response to
the NTSC, such information could be
used to the appellant’s detriment in the disciplinary proceedings (and
even if there was
such a prohibition, it may not necessarily cure the
prejudice); and
information disclosed by the appellant in response to the NTSC was also acted on
by Command, in that a formal warning had issued.
pause here to note that, as explained elsewhere in these reasons, we do not
agree with the contentions in subparagraphs (c), (d)
or (e). While the
stipulation referred to in subparagraph (f) was contained in [4] of the
NTSC submission, no such representation
was made by the XO. Further, as counsel
acknowledged during the hearing of appeal, subparagraph (h) is incorrect.
A formal warning
was not issued.
Appellant’s contentions concerning the DFM’s
The DFM’s ruling
DFM gave written reasons for his refusal of a permanent stay of proceedings.
After referring to the prosecution case, the DFM
summarised the relevant
principles relating to applications for permanent stays referring to relevant
authorities. The DFM then
referred to and quoted from authority as to the onus,
fairness, the need to identify the prejudice at trial, and the availability
other remedies (referring to
[2007] NSWSC 231
at 57 per Deane J;
[2002] NSWCCA 367
Barton v The Queen
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
111 per Wilson J).
, Howie J observed that it was for the accused to prove that
the trial would be so unfair as to require a stay and that such an onus
easily satisfied given the exceptional nature of the remedy. In
[17], the Victorian Court of Appeal acknowledged that it is only in an extreme
case that a permanent stay will be ordered, and
that such cases are rare.
DFM’s statement of the principles relating to applications for a permanent
stay and reference to authority was not challenged
by the appellant.
Categories of abuse of process
the categories of abuse of process are not closed, the usual categories of abuse
of process are well-established:
(1) the court’s procedures are involved for an
illegitimate purpose;
(2) the use of the court’s procedures was unjustifiably oppressive to one
of the parties; or
(3) the use of the court’s procedures would bring the administration of
justice into disrepute (cited in
Batistatos v Roads and Traffic Authority
(2006) 222 CLR 256
at 267 [15];
PNJ v The Queen
(2009) 83 ALJR 384
at 386 [3];
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Nicholls
(2011) 244 CLR
427 at 452 [89];
Roti v The Queen
[2011] HCA 50
(2011) 245 CLR 456
at 82 [256]–[259]).
The DFM’s approach
considering cases outlining the principles to be applied to an application for a
permanent stay, the DFM gave consideration
to what he described as the numerous
cases referred to and handed up by counsel for LEUT McCleave. He considered
that the cases
could be readily split into two groups. They were where a stay
was granted principally on the basis that:
(a) the mere fact of future proceeding would
be an abuse of process; and
(b) particular facts such that the accused would be unable to receive a fair
trial in the circumstances.
then considered whether a permanent stay should be granted on the basis of
abuse of process, first by reason of the prosecution
of charges at all, and then
secondly because there were in the circumstances particular facts that would
preclude the accused from
receiving a fair trial. The second issue concerned
whether there was unfairness in the circumstances of the case due to the NTSC
submission by LEUT McCleave.
note that the dichotomy adopted by the DFM in considering abuse of process viz
in pursuing a criminal proceeding in a manner which
is unfair and gives rise to
oppression, or in continuing a proceeding that is unfairly and unjustifiably
oppressive so as to constitute
an abuse of process is similar to that adopted by
the Victorian Court of Appeal in
at [15]–[19].
Abuse of process by proceeding to prosecute at
to whether there was abuse of process by prosecuting at all, the DFM noted that
Parliament had amended the DFDA in 2006 to establish
the Office of the Director
Military Prosecutions with power to prefer charges and decide whether they would
be referred to trial
by court martial or DFM.
DFM said that it was significant in his mind that the 2006 changes were a major
and deliberate structural reform of the discipline
system by Parliament. This
significant change to the operation of the discipline system was “a factor
of some weight”.
While it was not “a determinative factor” in
either the granting or dismissing of the current application, the DFM considered
that it would be a retrograde step to grant a permanent stay based merely on a
representation from command that there would be no
DFDA action. It would be
defeating the clear legislative intent expressed in ss 143 and 144(4)(b) to
grant a permanent stay “on
the basis that there would be no DFDA
charges”. The DFM was not satisfied that the bringing of the proceeding
by the DMP was
an abuse of process.
was not disputed that an application for a permanent stay is not the occasion
for an administrative law challenge seeking judicial
review of the exercise of a
decision to prosecute. It was not suggested by the appellant before the DFM or
the Tribunal that there
was any impropriety on the part of the DMP in deciding
to prosecute. To the contrary, the appellant disavowed any suggestion of
impropriety by the DMP. Nor was it suggested that there was a lack of statutory
power or any excess of power by the DMP in bringing
the charges.
Mason CJ said in
The question is not whether the prosecution should have
been brought, but whether the court, whose function is to dispense justice
impartiality and fairness both to the parties and to the community which it
serves, should permit its processes to be employed
in a manner which gives rise
to unfairness. Such a question arises when proceedings have been set in train
by the bringing of charges.
It is a question for the judicial arm of government
to address and, as such, mere silence on the part of the legislature cannot
taken as a command to the courts as to how it should be
Baker v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2017] VSCA 58
Tate JA said :
... when a court is entertaining an application for a
permanent stay of a criminal prosecution, the focus is upon whether the
continuation
of a proceeding within the court would be an abuse of process; it
is not a review of a prosecutorial decision. The source of the
grant a stay is inherent to a court in order for it to protect the integrity of
its processes where the administration
of justice so
circumstances where there is no suggestion of lack or excess of power on the
part of the prosecuting authority, or of improper
purpose in bringing the
charges, we see no basis on which it can be contended that there is any abuse of
process by reason of the
fact that the DMP decided to prosecute.
Abuse of process by continuation of the
appellant challenged the DFM’s ruling that there was no abuse of process
by continuation of the proceeding and made four
submissions. They
(a) the DFM wrongly identified as an issue,
and misdirected himself by focusing attention on the fact that there was no
impropriety
in the part of the DMP; the DFM misconceived the true effect of a
permanent stay;
(b) the DFM misconceived the true effect of a permanent stay;
(c) the DFM failed to appreciate properly the nature of the prejudice that LEUT
McCleave would suffer as a result of the disclosure
of information in response
to the NTSC; and
(d) the DFM failed to appreciate that it is the combination of the relevant
circumstances that produces the relevant unfairness,
or oppression rather than
each circumstance considered in
to the first submission, while the DFM describes the DMP as acting independently
of command, and not solely or necessarily in the
interest of command, we do not
consider that the DFM was excessively or inappropriately concerned with any
absence of impropriety
on the part of the DMP. This was a relevant matter and a
material fact in considering whether the decision of the DMP to proceed
prosecution was an abuse of process. The consideration was not given any
significant weight (if any at all) when the DFM came
to consider whether the
continuation of the proceeding in the circumstances of the case was an abuse of
to the second submission, we do not consider that the DFM misconceived the
nature or effect of an application for a permanent stay.
He said that he
accepted the submission that the application was not aimed at the DMP’s
decision to prefer the charges, but
rather it was a matter for the court as to
whether the trial should proceed. He remarked that the granting of a stay was
“nonetheless
tantamount to an immunity” from prosecution, and that
“it would be an unusual case indeed in which a representation from
itself warrant such an outcome”. We do not consider that the remarks
demonstrate or indicate that the DFM did not
understand the nature or effect of
a permanent stay or the circumstances in which a permanent stay should be
considered. Nor do
the remarks show that the DFM did not understand the
difference between a permanent stay and the grant of immunity. It is plain
the DFM’s ruling that he understood the nature of and general principles
relating to an application for permanent stay.
We also note that the
DFM’s observation that the granting of a stay was tantamount to an
immunity from prosecution appears
to be taken from the decision of the Victorian
Court of Appeal in
, and is, we expect, adopted from that paragraph
which was quoted earlier in the DFM’s ruling.
to the third submission, we consider that there were inadequacies in the way the
DFM considered the application for a permanent
stay on the ground of unfairness.
We will describe the inadequacies shortly. Nonetheless we are of the view that
in the end result
there was no substantial miscarriage of justice.
fourth submission is incorrect. The DFM stated that he had considered the
appellant’s grounds both individually and collectively
and was not
satisfied that the grounds when viewed in combination would be so unfair or
unjustifiably oppressive as to constitute
an abuse of process.
at 57, Deane J said:
The general notion of fairness which has inspired much
of the traditional criminal law of this country defies analytical definition.
Nor is it possible to catalogue in the abstract the occurrences outside or
within the actual trial which will or may affect the
overall trial to an extent
that it can no longer properly be regarded as a fair one. Putting to one side
cases of actual or ostensible
bias, the identification of what does and what
does not remove the quality of fairness from an overall trial must proceed on a
by case basis and involve an undesirably, but unavoidably, large content of
essentially intuitive judgment.
considering the issues of fairness, consideration must be given to forensic
advantages that may be sustained by the prosecution
or disadvantages suffered by
the defendant. In
, the court noted the forensic advantage that may be
sustained by a defendant who could no longer decide the course that he should
adopt at trial according only as to the strength of the prosecution’s case
as revealed by the material provided by the prosecution
before trial or to the
strength of the evidence led by the prosecution at trial (at 142–3
[75]–[80] per Hayne and Bell
JJ, Kiefel J agreeing).
, Kiefel CJ, Bell and Nettle JJ refer to the forensic
disadvantage to defendants of being locked into a version of events from which
they could not credibly depart (at 23 [75]). The answer that a person of
interest is compelled to give may fundamentally alter the
accusatorial process
for the investigation, prosecution and trial of an offence by compelling the
person to provide the prosecution
with information (at 24 [77]).
The DFM’s consideration of fairness
for LEUT McCleave submitted that a permanent stay should have been given on the
basis of the assurance given by CMDR Verho
and the matters set out in the NTSC
submission.
to the email exchange between CMDR Verho and CMDR Welbourne, the DFM noted, as
we have done, that the XO had replied that ‘Cerberus
does not intend
taking DFDA action’ and that when asked again she replied ‘No. I
would not be taking DFDA action.’
The DFM observed that it was not
suggested that the XO was being anything other than frank and forthright. It was
not suggested
that she was being cute in her reply or playing word games.
have already set out the evidence before the DFM relating to the email exchange
between CMDR Verho and CMDR Welbourne (see above
[57]). In our view, the
appellant has not shown that the DFM erred in the assessment and findings that
he made concerning the assurance
given by CMDR Verho. Contrary to the
appellant’s submission, the assurance given by CMDR Verho related, and was
as relating, only to HMAS Cerberus and not to the DMP as an
independent prosecution authority.
now turn to the consideration by the DFM of the effect on the hearing and
determination of the charges arising from the NTSC submission,
and in particular
whether any unfairness or forensic disadvantage was suffered by LEUT McCleave as
a consequence of the making of
the NTSC submission.
DFM was not provided with a copy of the NTSC submission, as the Tribunal has
been. In our view, careful review of the NTSC submission
was essential to
determine whether there was any forensic advantage to the prosecution or any
unfairness, or forensic disadvantage
to the accused as a result of its content.
The DFM identified some of the difficulties he experienced in ruling on the
unfairness without the benefit of the NTSC submission. He described
himself as “not privy to the full details of the response
submitted by the
accused” although he had some material in an exhibit.
a result, the DFM was “prepared to assume for current purposes that his
disclosures to command were broader than those made
by his counsel (LCDR Panayi)
during the ADFIS investigation”.
our view, the DFM’s ruling on unfairness should not have been based on
assumptions as to the extent of the accused’s
disclosures in the NTSC
submission even if seen as favourable to the accused. The NTSC submission
should have been tendered in evidence
before the DFM and made the subject of
submissions by counsel. There should have been a proper evidentiary foundation
on which the
DFM’s ruling could be made.
DFM observed that he had no evidence as to whether the accused was minded to
contest the charges, or contest the prosecution evidence
in a manner contrary to
the NTSC submission or merely put the prosecution to its proof. Again, these
difficulties arose because
the NTSC submission was not produced to the DFM, and
no evidence was led as to the course intended to be followed or the real nature
of the unfairness or prejudice said to be suffered by the accused.
he had no evidence, the DFM said that he was faced with the prospect of
reconvening the pre-trial hearing and seeking further evidence.
Rather than
reconvening the pre-trial hearing, and obtaining the missing information, the
DFM elected to proceed on what he described
as “the most favourable basis
to the accused”. In the absence of the NTSC submission, and in the
absence of evidence
relating to the stay application or as to reliance, the DFM
had little to go on in determining the stay application.
Nevertheless,
the DFM concluded that “there was no legal impediment to the accused
contesting the charges to the fullest”,
and that the prosecution had not
been put in a more advantageous position than they otherwise should be in an
accusatorial system.
LEUT McCleave was still able to have a fair trial.
DFM held that he was not persuaded that the potential for practical
embarrassment was sufficiently grave when compared with the
public interest in
having the charges tried.
Determination of the appeal by the Tribunal
agree with Logan P that the appeal can, and should be finally determined by the
Tribunal. The Tribunal has been provided with
a copy of the NTSC submission,
and is familiar with the evidence before the DFM. The Tribunal is able to
determine whether there
was a substantial miscarriage of justice without the
need to remit the proceeding back to the DFM for further hearing.
Was there a substantial miscarriage of justice?
ss 23(1)(b)
and (c) of the
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
’), the Tribunal is required to consider
whether a substantial miscarriage of justice has occurred. Under
s 23(1)(d) of the
DFDA Act, the Tribunal must also consider whether in all
the circumstances of the case, the conviction is unsafe or unsatisfactory.
the inadequacies in the determination of the stay application by the DFM, we are
not satisfied that a substantial miscarriage
of justice has occurred, or that
the conviction of LEUT McCleave is unsafe or unsatisfactory.
we have said, review of the NTSC submission by LEUT McCleave shows that he made
no concession beyond those earlier made by him
in the Panayi submission. While
the NTSC submission is a comprehensive and persuasive submission which includes
an apology, an explanation
of LEUT McCleave’s conduct, work and personal
issues, it makes no greater concession as to the underlying circumstances of
charges than had previously been made. Both the Panayi submission and the NTSC
submission deal with personal issues such as
work stress, and family medical
issues, the NTSC submission doing so more extensively.
for the circumstances underlying the charges, and the mental intent of LEUT
McCleave, the NTSC submission simply reiterates the
position already put in the
Panayi submission prior to the service of the NTSC.
we have said, both the Panayi submission and the NTSC submission admit the
underlying factual circumstances relating to the charges
and contend that LEUT
McCleave had no intention to defraud or gain a monetary benefit to which he was
not entitled. Both documents
contend that LEUT McCleave believed his conduct
was permissible and appropriate in the circumstances.
short, while admitting that false certification of entitlement for payment was
made by LEUT McCleave in relation to training that
had not been completed, both
documents seek to submit that the contravention did not occur intentionally or
material provided in the NTSC submission is supportive of LEUT McCleave’s
position and good character, describes his work
stresses, and refers to delays
and failures in service pay administration. A similar case was mounted on LEUT
McCleave’s behalf
in the Panayi submission.
Ultimately,
the prosecution accepted LEUT McCleave’s case that his contravention was
not made ‘knowingly’. LEUT
McCleave elected to plead guilty to the
alternative charge which alleged reckless conduct on his part. We note that his
guilty to that charge is entirely consistent with his case as presented
in the Panayi submission and the NTSC submission.
compared the Panayi submission and the NTSC submission, and having regard to the
earlier admissions, we are not satisfied that
there was any material forensic
advantage obtained by the prosecution from the making of the NTSC submission
(which in any event
the prosecution had not seen). Nor are we satisfied that
LEUT McCleave suffered any material unfairness or forensic disadvantage
making of the NTSC submission. He was no more locked into a position as a
result of the NTSC submission than he was following
the Panayi submission. In
substance his forensic position remained the same.
is not a case where the accused could not receive a fair trial as a result of
what had been done, or where the continuation of
the prosecution would bring the
administration of military justice into disrepute. Rather it is a case where
the public interest
required the charges brought by the DMP to be heard and
determined. It is not one of those rare cases where a permanent stay of
proceedings should be granted.
all of the circumstances, we are not satisfied that the appellant has satisfied
the ‘heavy onus’ that needs to be shown
if a permanent stay is to be
granted. We are not satisfied that there was any substantial miscarriage of
justice, or any reason
to conclude that his conviction after his plea of guilty
to the alternative charge was unsafe or unsatisfactory.
Authorities referred to by appellant regarding a stay following
a particular representation
identified a number of cases in which courts have specifically considered
whether there should be a permanent stay of criminal
proceedings where a
representation, promise or undertaking was made or given to the accused to the
effect that they would not be
subject to criminal prosecution. In response to
the submissions of counsel, we should comment on these cases.
R v Milnes and Green
(1983) 33 SASR 211
, an accused charged with murder
sought at trial a permanent stay of proceedings in the Supreme Court of South
Australia. Soon after
the murder was committed, police received anonymous calls
from a man who said he had information about the crime. Investigators
public statements to the effect that, if the man
with the information
came forward, he would not be prosecuted provided that he was not implicated in
the death of the victim in any
way. The accused came forward and made
statements to police.
trial judge said that the Crown’s promise came with conditions that were
not met, and that it was not unjust or oppressive
to continue the trial.
However he excluded from evidence the conversations with police officers in
which negotiations were conducted
and confessions made. On appeal, Wells J
(with whom White J agreed) agreed with the trial judge, noting that the
trial had been conducted
in a way so as to minimise any prejudice that may have
arisen. The appeal was dismissed.
for the appellant sought to distinguish this case by contending that the
representation made by CMDR Verho to the appellant
was unconditional. We
disagree. CMDR Verho did not represent that the appellant would not be
prosecuted.
next case referred to by counsel was
R v Georgiadis
[1984] VicRp 82
The accused was prosecuted even though he had previously been
given a written undertaking of indemnity signed by the Attorney-General
Victoria that amount to an undertaking not to prosecute him. He had been given
that indemnity in order to induce him to give
evidence against others in a trial
for conspiracy to import heroin, and in the course of cross examination in that
trial he had made
admissions that were the basis of the subsequent charges
against him.
trial judge, Ormiston J, cited with approval the Privy Council’s
observation in
R v McDonald
[1983] NZLR 252 at 255 that, “it is
quite unthinkable that such an undertaking [an immunity from prosecution] would
not be honoured”,
and found that the indemnity in the case before him was
an undertaking not to prosecute. Both the Privy Council and Ormiston J
the practical effect of the undertaking in inducing the accused to
give evidence that he would not otherwise have given and the practical
allowing the Crown to go back on such agreements. Sources such as the accused
would no longer give vital evidence, or
would be wary about the evidence they
gave. This was contrary to the public interest in bringing criminals to
for the appellant relied upon that authority too, contending that the appellant
was induced to respond to the NTSC by the
representation that would be no
disciplinary action. Again, we disagree with that contention. There was no
such representation.
next referred to matter of
Williamson v Trainor
[1992] 2 Qd R 572
The accused was charged with assault occasioning bodily harm. On the first
day of the trial in the Magistrates Court the prosecution
requested an
adjournment, which was refused. The accused opposed the adjournment because his
primary witness was about to leave
the State. The matter was stood down, and in
the course of the break the accused, at the prosecutor’s request, signed
an agreement
that he would not seek costs and “the Crown ... agreed not to
proceed further with the ... charge” (at 576). The prosecutor
informed the magistrate that no evidence would be presented and the accused was
discharged. No costs order was sought. A few
months later the accused was
charged, tried and convicted of the same offence. The accused’s witness
was not available at
the second trial.
Court of Appeal allowed the appeal, overturned the conviction and stayed the
proceeding for abuse of process. Ambrose J (with
whom Derrington J
agreed) said it would be unconscionable to bring the second proceeding after
representing that the Crown would
not proceed with the charge. His Honour found
that public confidence in judicial processes would be eroded if those processes
“used in an unconscionable manner designed to or having the effect of
placing difficulties in the way of an accused person
defending himself”
(at 582). Emphasis was placed on the fact that the accused’s inability to
call his witness was caused
by the prosecution’s conduct in bringing about
the delay. This prejudiced the accused’s ability to procure a fair trial,
which was enough to render the proceedings an abuse of process. Dowsett J
commented that “[n]othing is more likely to bring
the judicial process
into disrepute than to permit either the Crown or the police force to resile
from such an agreement” (at
that case is readily distinguishable from the present.
next referred to
(1992) 109 FLR 155
accused had admitted to engaging in sexual intercourse with a child on two
occasions. Following consultation between the accused
and the family of the
child a deliberate decision was taken by responsible members of the Australian
Federal Police Sexual Assault
Unit not to institute proceedings against him for
those criminal offences. Two years later a member of the Australian Federal
presented an information charging the accused with those offences. The
accused sought to have the proceedings stayed as an abuse
of process. The trial
judge, Gallop J, found that there was an agreement reached with the accused
and his family that no criminal
proceedings would be instituted unless the
safety of the girl from further sexual attack by the accused could not be
ensured. In
particular, his Honour held that there was an oral agreement to that
effect, and that by the institution of the proceedings by the
police and their
continuation by the Director of Public Prosecutions, the authorities had not
kept faith with the accused. His Honour
said at 166:
Nothing is more likely to bring the judicial process
into disrepute than to permit the Crown or the police force to resile from such
an agreement without proper reason. The institution of the committal
proceedings and their continuation in this Court by the Director
Prosecutions, in my opinion, constitute an abuse of
that matter is readily distinguishable from the present matter. There has been
no representation that criminal proceedings
would not be instituted.
for the appellant relied heavily upon
R v Croydon Justices, Ex parte Dean
[1993] QB 769.
The applicant, aged 17, and two other persons were arrested
on suspicion of murdering the victim. During his interview by police
applicant made significant self-incriminating admissions to conduct in the
nature of assisting the other persons to destroy incriminating
evidence. He was
released without charge on the basis that he was to be a prosecution witness.
He continued to assist the police
voluntarily for a period of over five weeks on
his understanding that he would be a prosecution witness and because he was told
police that he would not be prosecuted for any offence in connection with the
L.J., with whom Buckley J agreed, said at 776:
It is submitted on behalf of the Crown Prosecution
Service that they alone are entitled, and bound, to decide who shall be
prosecuted,
at any rate in this category of case; and that the police had no
authority and no right to tell the applicant that he would not be
prosecuted for
any offence in connection with the murder: see section 3(2) of the Prosecution
of Offences Act 1985. I can readily
accept that. I also accept that the point
is one of constitutional importance. But I cannot accept the submission of
Mr. Collins
that, in consequence, no such conduct by the police can ever
give rise to an abuse of process. The effect on the applicant or for
matter on his father, of an undertaking or promise or representation by the
police was likely to have been the same in this
case whether it was or was not
authorised by the Crown Prosecution Service. It is true that they might have
asked their solicitor
whether an undertaking, promise or representation by the
police was binding and he might have asked the Crown Prosecution Service
it was made with their authority. But it seems unreasonable to expect that in
this case. If the Crown Prosecution Service
find that their powers are being
usurped by the police, the remedy must surely be a greater degree of liaison at
an early stage.
Lordship concluded his consideration of this point with the following at
In my judgment the prosecution of a person who has
received a promise, undertaking or representation from the police that he will
not be prosecuted is capable of being an abuse of process. Mr. Collins was
eventually disposed to concede as much, provided (i)
that the promisor had power
to decide, and (ii) that the case was one of bad faith or something akin to
that. I do not accept either
of those requirements as
for the appellant referred to this case as authority for the proposition that
there could be an abuse of process notwithstanding
that CMDR Verho did not have
authority to make a representation that purported to bind the DMP. Counsel
contended that if the DMP
finds her powers being usurped by commanders
“the remedy must surely be a greater degree of liaison at an early
with the other cases already discussed,
distinguishable from the present matter because CMDR Verho did not represent
that the appellant would not be prosecuted.
Moreover, unlike the ordinary man
in the street such as the 17-year-old involved in the murder investigation in
, as we have already noted, the appellant and CMDR Welbourne had
considerable military legal experience, were well aware of the independent
of the DMP and of the limited authority of CMDR Verho as XO of HMAS Cerberus.
They were well aware of the fact that the DMP
had authority to commence
disciplinary proceedings notwithstanding the existence of administrative
other decision referred to by counsel for the appellant was that of Martin J in
[2000] SASC 384
The accused was treated as a witness in
the course of a murder investigation. He gave two detailed statements (without a
in which he admitted to assisting two suspected murders by, among other
things, washing away the victim’s blood. Police and
prosecutors
repeatedly confirmed that the accused would be a witness and would not be
charged. However he was ultimately charged
with assisting, and was brought to
trial with the two offenders. The trial came more than a year after the accused
gave his initial
statement. In the course of the trial the accused sought a
permanent stay of the proceedings against him. The trial judge, Martin
stayed the proceedings insofar as they concerned the accused. Martin J
identified relevant considerations as including the length
of time during which
the accused was treated as a witness, the nature of the statements (not being
made under caution), the repeated
confirmations that he would be a witness and
would not be charged, and the reliance on his statements at the preliminary
that case is readily distinguishable from the present matter, where there was no
representation that LEUT McCleave would not
be charged and there was no reliance
upon such a representation.
as counsel for the respondent pointed out, most if not all of those cases
involved the police or some other prosecution authority
offering or at least
appearing to offer an indemnity to induce the witness to provide information and
give evidence, a scheme envisaged
under s 188GD of the DFDA. In the
present case, it was CMDR Welbourne who initiated the request for advice as to
whether the investigation
had been completed and whether disciplinary
proceedings would occur, not any prosecutorial authority. CMDR Welbourne and
LEUT McCleave
did not receive the unequivocal answer to their enquiries that
they were hoping for.
General conclusion
we have already pointed out the assurance asserted by LEUT McCleave to have been
given by CMDR Verho was not made. LEUT McCleave
was not entitled to and did not
rely upon such an assurance when he responded to the NTSC in the way that he
did. He had already
set out his position in the Panayi submission.
our opinion the circumstances, particularly those revealed in the email exchange
of 1 December 2016, were not such as to render
it an abuse of process for
the appellant to be prosecuted under the DFDA. There was no unfairness,
injustice or prejudice to LEUT
McCleave as should result in the grant of a
permanent stay. It also follows that leave should not be given for the
appellant to
withdraw his guilty plea.
Accordingly
we would dismiss the appeal.
we would add some brief comments. It is regrettable that despite the early
action taken by LEUT McCleave to perform the service,
apologise for his conduct,
receive counselling from his superiors, and provide a detailed explanation for
his conduct in the Panayi
submission, all within nine months of his offending in
June 2015, proceedings were not commenced against him until June 2017. By
he had received and responded to the NTSC. He was assured in December 2016 that
the ADFIS investigation had been concluded
and that disciplinary action would
not be taken by HMAS Cerberus. There is a need to harmonise the advice to be
given to an ADF
member where, at unit or equivalent level, a commander is of the
view that administrative action is appropriate and sufficient, with
DMP’s independent power to proceed with disciplinary action under the
DFDA. These are matters for the ADF to resolve and
for the DMP to take into
consideration when deciding whether proceedings should be instituted. They were
also matters for the DFM
to take into account when sentencing the
I certify that the preceding one hundred and forty-seven (147) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision herein
of the Honourable
Justices Hiley (Member) and Garde (Member).
Dated: 21 February 2019
RTF format (709 KB)
Signed PDF/A format