'AYQ' and the Attorney-General (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 172 (25 September 2025)
‘AYQ’ and the Attorney-General (Freedom of information)
[2025] AICmr 172
(25 September 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of
Freedom of Information
Commissioner, Toni Pirani
Attorney-General
Decision date
Freedom of Information — Whether information irrelevant –
Whether reasonable steps taken to find documents — Cabinet
exemption — (CTH)
Freedom of Information Act 1982
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(‘FOI Act’), I
affirm the decision of 12 December 2024 made by
authorised officer of the Attorney-General.
Information Commissioner review (‘IC review’) decision considers the
application of ss 22(1)(a)(ii) (Irrelevant matter
deleted), 24A (Reasonable
steps taken to find documents) and s 34(3) (Cabinet documents exemption) of the
FOI Act and relevant FOI
Guidelines to the applicant’s request for
documents referencing them, including information concerning their
‘suitability
to be appointed as a Member of the Administrative Review
Tribunal’ (‘ART’) and related matters. It finds that documents
concerning the appointment process for ART members are covered by the Cabinet
documents exemption in the FOI Act.
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
14 October 2024, the applicant applied to the Attorney-General (‘the
respondent’) under the FOI Act for access to documents
relating to or
which reference the applicant, including information concerning their
suitability to be appointed as a Member of the
ART. The applicant further
explained in their request that they were seeking access to documents that were
generated in 2023 and/or
authorised officer of the respondent identified documents within the scope of
the access request, being one email and one attachment,
dated 25 April 2024, and
two emails dated 8 September 2024 (‘the documents at issue’). The
authorised officer decided
on 12 December 2024 to refuse access to all of the
documents at issue after deleting irrelevant material under s 22(1)(a)(ii),
exemptions to the balance of the material under ss 34(2), 34(3) and
47E(d) (‘the decision’).
2 January 2025, the applicant applied for an IC review of the decision,
contending that relevant material may be missing (either
deleted or not located)
and that the claimed exemptions were not correctly applied.
the course of the IC review, in further submissions on 11 April 2025 (‘the
respondent’s further submissions’),
the respondent claimed an
additional exemption in relation to the documents at issue under s 47C of
the FOI Act.
issues I have decided in this IC review are:
whether the
respondent has taken all reasonable steps to identify documents within the scope
of the request and that documents cannot
be found or do not exist (s 24A),
whether the
material that the respondent maintains is irrelevant under s 22 is
irrelevant, and
whether the
documents at issue are exempt under ss 34(2), 34(3) of the FOI
an IC review of an access refusal decision, the respondent bears the onus of
establishing that its decision is justified or that
I should give a decision
adverse to the applicant.
making my decision, I have had regard to the following:
the decision of
12 December 2024 and reasons for the decision
the documents at
the Guidelines
issued by the Australian Information Commissioner under s 93A of the FOI Act to
which agencies must have regard in
performing a function or exercising a power
under the FOI Act (‘FOI
Guidelines’)
parties’ submissions.
Whether reasonable steps taken to find documents (s
set out in Annexure A, s 24A requires that an agency take ‘all reasonable
steps’ to find a document before refusing
access to it on the basis that
it cannot be found or does not exist. Whether ‘all reasonable steps’
have been taken is
a question of fact to be decided having regard to matters
such as the terms of an applicant’s request, the document creation
retention practices in an agency, and the steps taken by the agency to identify
and locate documents requested by the applicant.
note the applicant’s submissions of 1 May 2025, that:
it unusual that if the Attorney General chose not to accept the recommendation
of the Department regarding my appointment to
ART that there is no file note or
memoranda of the deliberative process engaged in to reach this conclusion or any
recording of this
decision, save presumably for an email communication of the
decision to the Department on 8 September
this regard, the respondent’s further submissions set out the searches
that were undertaken, including the locations (both
electronic and physical)
that were the subject of the search. The respondent additionally advances the
reason for the relatively
limited number of documents located, as
... the Attorney-General’s Office was not involved in
administrative matters or day-today affairs in relation to the recruitment
ART members and as such does not have in its possession any documents within
scope of the request. In practical terms, documents
relating to appointments are
typically prepared and managed by the department, provided in hard copy or via
the Parliamentary Document
Management System (PDMS), and then returned to the
department for further action and storage.
regard to the evidence of searches, submissions and matters put forward by the
respondent set out at paragraph [12] above,
I am satisfied that all reasonable
steps have been taken to locate documents relevant to the scope of the
applicant’s access
request and no other documents could be found within
the respondent’s possession.
Whether material is irrelevant to the request (s
set out in Annexure A, s 22 of the FOI Act authorises an agency to prepare and
to give an applicant access to an edited copy of
a document in certain
circumstances.
regard to the material deleted by the respondent as irrelevant, on my review of
the documents at issue in unedited form and in
consideration of the reasons set
out in the decision, I am satisfied that the deleted material refers to matters
that do not relate
or refer to the applicant.
Accordingly,
the material that the respondent maintains is irrelevant under s 22 is not
within the scope of the access request.
Cabinet documents exemption (s 34)
set out in Annexure A, s 34(3) exempts a document to the extent that its
disclosure would reveal any deliberation or decision of
Cabinet. Where the
existence of the deliberation or decision has already been officially disclosed,
s 34(3) does not apply.
way of background, appointments to the ART are made in accordance with the
requirements in the
Administrative Review Tribunal Act
The ART Act requires that appointments be made by the Governor-General on
recommendation of the Attorney-General after
Cabinet approval, taking into
account the advice of the President of the ART.
decision states that the documents at issue ‘contain an extract of or
reference to material that was provided to Cabinet
for its consideration
regarding appointment of members to the [ART]’. The respondent
additionally asserts that ‘based
on [their] direct knowledge of the
preparation of material subject to Cabinet deliberations in relation to
appointments of non-judicial
members of the
, disclosure of the
documents at issue would reveal a Cabinet deliberation or decision within the
meaning of s 34(3).
applicant submits:
... a reference to a Cabinet submission or
decision in a document which does not contain a copy or a part of, or an extract
Cabinet submission or decision is not exempt under s34(3) and if the OAIC
finds that some passages in the documents are exempt from
disclosure because
they contain information the disclosure of which would reveal a Cabinet
deliberation or decision which has not
been officially disclosed, the remaining
sections of those documents should be
applicant further submits:
I note that the Attorney-General has not
disclosed the identity of either the author or the intended recipients of each
of these emails.
In my view the disclosure of this information is not covered by
the exemptions in s34(2) and (3) of the FOI Act because the names
and roles of
these persons does not disclose a copy or part of or contain an extract of a
Cabinet submission. Nor do the names and
roles of the authors and intended
recipients of these emails contain information the disclosure of which would
reveal a Cabinet deliberation
regard to the applicant’s submission, I am of the view that the
application of the exemption under s 34(3) does not require
that the documents
at issue contain a copy or part of, or extract from, a Cabinet submission or
decision. Additionally, I note that
Re Toomer and Department of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and Ors
[2003] AATA 1301
), Deputy President Forgie found that a broad
meaning must be given to the term ‘deliberation’ in s
into account the matters I have set out at paragraphs [19] to [22] above and on
my review of the documents at issue in unedited
form, I am satisfied that
disclosure of the documents at issue would reveal a Cabinet decision or
deliberation.
found that disclosure of the documents at issue would reveal a Cabinet decision
or deliberation, I must decide whether the
documents at issue have been
officially disclosed in the context of the publication of the names of
appointees to the ART. I note
in this regard that the respondent’s
submissions assert the following:
The publicly available information on the appointment decisions of the
Government, as disclosed by confirmation to individual applicants,
announcement of appointments by the Attorney-General and through the register of
members on the ART website,
disclose the deliberations
undertaken to finalise Cabinet appointments to the ART. (emphasis in original)
the context of the official publication of the appointees to the ART, whilst not
raised by the parties, I note the Full Federal
Court’s decision in
Warren v Chief Executive Officer, Services Australia
[2024] FCAFC 73
), which held
that s 34(3) of the FOI Act cannot apply in circumstances where the existence of
the deliberation or decision has already
been officially disclosed. In
particular,
explained that the exception does not require
disclosure of the substance or detail of the deliberation or decision to operate
that the exception applies if the ‘existence’ of the decision
has been officially disclosed.
regard to the present circumstances, I am not persuaded that
applies. In my view the official disclosure of appointees to the ART does not,
by that publication of itself, disclose the existence
of any deliberation or
decision of the Cabinet in relation to the matters referred to by the applicant
in their request. I find
accordingly that no distinct information about the
latter has been revealed, either directly or indirectly, by the official
of the ART appointees.
the reasons set out above, I find that the documents at issue are exempt under
s 34(3) of the FOI Act.
I have decided that the documents are exempt under s 34(3), it is unnecessary
for me to decide whether the documents are also exempt
under ss 34(2), 47C
and/or 47E(d).
Toni Pirani
Freedom of Information
Commissioner
Relevant provisions of the FOI Act, FOI Guidelines, and
11A(4) of the FOI Act states the agency or Minister is not required by this Act
to give the person access to the document
at a particular time if, at that time,
the document is an exempt document.
Irrelevant material (s 22)
Section 22 of the FOI Act
authorises an agency to prepare and to give an applicant access to an edited
copy of a document if:
an agency or
Minister decides:
refuse to give access to an exempt document (s 22(1)(a)(i)), or
give access to a document would disclose information that would reasonably be
regarded as irrelevant to the request for access,
it is possible
for the agency or Minister to prepare an edited copy of the document (s
22(1)(b)), and
it is reasonably
practicable to prepare an edited copy, having regard to the nature and extent of
the modification required, and the
resources available to modify the document (s
22(1)(c)), and
apparent, from an applicant’s request or consultation with the applicant,
that the applicant would decline access
to the edited copy (s
The FOI Guidelines state:
A request should be interpreted as extending to any document that might
reasonably be taken to be included within the description
the applicant has
Whether reasonable steps taken to find documents (s 24A)
Section 24A of the FOI Act requires that an agency take ‘all reasonable
steps’ to find a requested document before refusing
access to it on the
basis that it cannot be found or does not exist.
The FOI Guidelines state:
The Act is silent on what constitutes ‘all reasonable steps’. The
meaning of ‘reasonable’ in the context of
s 24A(1)(a) has been
construed as not going beyond the limit assigned by reason, not extravagant or
excessive, moderate and of such
an amount, size or number as is judged to be
appropriate or suitable to the circumstances or purpose.
Agencies and ministers should undertake a reasonable search on a flexible and
common-sense interpretation of the terms of the request.
What constitutes a
reasonable search will depend on the circumstances of each request and will be
influenced by the normal business
practices in the agency’s operating
environment or the minister’s office. At a minimum, an agency or minister
take comprehensive steps to locate documents, having regard to:
the subject
matter of the documents
the current and
past file management systems and the practice of destruction or removal of
documents, and
management systems in place
the individuals
within an agency or minister’s office who may be able to assist with the
location of documents, and
the age of the
Cabinet documents exemption (s 34)
discussed in the FOI Guidelines
and IC review decisions
document to be exempt under s 34(1) of the FOI Act, it must have been:
(i) either submitted, or proposed by a Minister to be submitted, to the
Cabinet for its consideration, and
(ii) brought into existence for the dominant purpose of being submitted for
consideration by the Cabinet.
The FOI Guidelines explain:
Whether a document has been prepared for the dominant purpose of submission
to Cabinet is a question of fact. The relevant time for
determining the purpose
is the time the document was created. [footnotes
Secretary, Department of Prime
Minister and Cabinet and Secretary, Department of Infrastructure and Regional
Development and Sanderson
(Party joined)
[2015] AATA 361
Sanderson’)
‘dominant purpose’ is taken to mean ‘the ruling, prevailing,
or most influential
In that case,
Deputy President Forgie considered the ‘dominant purpose’ test as it
applied to legal professional privilege
and explained that the principles in
that context could be applied equally to the dominant purpose requirement in s
34(1)(a)(ii).
President Forgie referred to the decision in
Commissioner of Taxation
(Cth) v Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd
[2005] FCA 1247
’), where Kenny J identified a number of principles to be
considered when determining the dominant purpose for which a document
brought into existence.
The principles relevant to the application of s
34(1)(a)(ii) can be summarised as follows:
dominant purpose for which a document is brought into existence is a question of
fact and must be determined objectively, having
regard to the evidence, the
nature of the documents and the parties’ submissions
purpose will ordinarily be that of the maker of the document, except where it
was commissioned by another individual
of the intention of the document’s maker, or of the person who authorised
or procured it, is not conclusive of purpose
dominant purpose for the creation of a document is to be determined at the time
of its production
dominant purpose may be described as the ruling, prevailing, paramount or most
influential purpose, and is not the same as a ‘primary’
‘substantial’ purpose
two purposes are of equal weight, neither will be considered dominant in the
relevant sense.
Deputy President Forgie further
explained in
... That section requires that the document for which exemption is claimed
have been brought into existence for the dominant purpose
of submission for
consideration by Cabinet. That is to say, the document itself has been brought
into existence for that dominant
purpose. It is not enough that the document be
brought into existence so that its contents or conclusions might be included in
document that was brought into existence for the dominant purpose of
submission to Cabinet...
Sections 34(2) and 34(3) of the FOI Act exempt a
document, respectively, to the extent that it is a copy or part of, or contains
extract from, a document to which subsection (1) applies and/or to the extent
that disclosure would reveal any deliberation or decision
of Cabinet. However,
where the existence of the deliberation or decision has already been officially
disclosed, s 34(3) does not
The term ‘deliberation’ has been interpreted as an active debate
in Cabinet, or its weighing up of alternatives, with
a view to reaching a
decision on a matter, but not necessarily arriving at
Summers and Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Freedom of
information)
[2022] AICmr 59
exemption in s 34(3) is taken to require a consideration of the contents of the
document, and to apply only in circumstances
where the contents of the document
themselves disclose a Cabinet deliberation or decision, and disclosure of the
document (or relevant
part of the document) would reveal the actual deliberation
which occurred or decision that was
The meaning of the term ‘deliberation’ was considered
Re Porter and
Department of Community Services and Health
(1988) 14 ALD 403
’), where Deputy President Todd explained:
‘Deliberation’ of Cabinet seems to me
to connote what was actively discussed in Cabinet. It is not the agenda for a
of Cabinet, nor is it what Cabinet formally decided. What the words
‘deliberation or decision’ of Cabinet cover is debate
(deliberation), and formal decisions made in Cabinet. It is not to be concluded
there was a deliberation in respect of
matter contained in a document merely
because a document was before Cabinet at a meeting
Similarly, in
Re Toomer and Department of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and Ors
[2003] AATA 1301
Deputy President Forgie said the term ‘deliberation’ means:
... information that is in documentary form and that discloses that Cabinet
has considered or discussed a matter, exchanged information
discussed strategies. In short, its deliberations are its thinking processes be
they directed to gathering information,
analysing information or discussing
strategies. They remain its deliberations whether or not a decision is reached.
Its decisions
are its conclusions as to the courses of action that it adopts be
they conclusions as to its final strategy on a matter or its conclusions
the manner in which a matter is to
Deputy President Forgie further explained in
A “deliberation” is also defined to
mean, among others, “... careful thought. 2 (deliberations) formal and
thought and discussion. ...”. It seems to me that s 34(3) has
used the word “deliberation” to signify any careful
thought and
discussion that has actually taken place in Cabinet. By way of contrast, s
34(1)(a)(i) is referring to the purpose for
which a document has been submitted.
It has been submitted for its consideration but there is no requirement that the
consideration
has been undertaken or that it be undertaken in a particular form.
[footnotes omitted]
As discussed in the FOI
, ‘officially
disclosed’ in s 34(3) can refer to disclosure orally as well as by a
written statement The disclosure may
be a general public disclosure and must be
‘official’.
Section 34(6) provides that, in a document to which ss 34(1), 34(2) or 34(3)
applies, information is not exempt if it is purely factual
material unless:
(a) the disclosure of the information would reveal a deliberation or decision
the Cabinet and
(b) the existence of that deliberation or decision has not been officially
The FOI Guidelines explain that:
Purely factual material includes material such as statistical data, surveys
and factual studies. A conclusion involving opinion or
judgement is not purely
factual. For example, a projection or prediction of a future event would not
usually be considered purely
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
FOI Act s 55D(1).
In particular ss 22, 24A and
See, Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner
, Guidelines issued by the Australian Information
Commissioner under
Information Act 1982
(‘FOI Guidelines’).
Applicant’s further
submissions of 1 May 2025.
Statement by authorised officer
of the respondent in respondent’s further submissions.
Applicant’s submissions
of 1 May 2025.
Applicant’s further
submissions of 2 May 2025.
at [88]. See also
FOI Guidelines at [5.89].
FOI Guidelines at [3.54]
Re Gould and Department of Health
[1985] AATA 63
FOI Guidelines at [3.88]
– [3.89] (footnotes omitted). For further information, see FOI Guidelines
at [3.85] – [3.94];
‘RD’ and Comcare (Freedom of
information)
‘PK’ and Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet (Freedom of information)
[2018] AICmr 65
‘PI’ and Department
of Human Services (Freedom of information)
[2018] AICmr 62
‘PF’ and Department
of Human Services (Freedom of information)
[2018] AICmr 59
Department of Home Affairs (Freedom of information)
[2018] AICmr 43
Josh Taylor and Prime Minister of
Australia (Freedom of information)
[2018] AICmr 42
At [5.63] to [5.82].
‘AAV’ and Department of Home Affairs (Freedom of
information)
[2022] AICmr 1
Rex Patrick and Services Australia
(Freedom of information)
[2021] AICmr 32
Rex Patrick and Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet (No. 2) (Freedom of information)
[2022] AICmr 66
(14 October 2022);
Dan Conifer and
Department of the Treasury (Freedom of information)
[2017] AICmr 133
Philip Morris Ltd and IP
[2014] AICmr 28
Greenpeace Australia
Pacific and Department of Industry
[2014] AICmr 140.
Pratt Holdings
FOI Guidelines at
FOI Guidelines at
FOI Guidelines at [5.93]
footnotes omitted.
RTF format (22.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format