Heath & Heath [2025] FedCFamC2F 1144 (22 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Heath & Heath
[2025] FedCFamC2F 1144
File number(s):
MLC 5168 of 2025
Judgment of:
JUDGE JENKINS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PARENTING –
interim hearing – parenting arrangements following short form report
– prior to testing of
evidence – weight to be given to wishes of
children – one child with special needs and mental health issues –
for consistency and stability for children – lack of communication
between parties – increased time – issue of
shared care to be
determined at final hearing
– PROPERTY –
interim spousal maintenance – lack of evidence about parties’
financials – applicant did
not establish a need for maintenance –
application for spousal maintenance dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules
(Cth) rr. 6.05, 6.06
Cases cited:
Hall v Hall
[2016] HCA 23
(2016) 257 CLR 490
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Ms Finemore
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Geelong Family Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Duane Portway Family Law
MLC 5168 of 2025
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
JUDGE JENKINS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
previous parenting orders be and hereby discharged.
Living Arrangements
children of the marriage – X born in 2009 (“X”), Y born in
2011 (“Y”) and Z born in 2014 (“Z”),
together referred
to as (“the children”) – live with the Mother.
further Order, the Father spend time with the children as follows:-
(a) during school terms each alternate week from after school Friday (or 3:15
p.m.) to before school Wednesday (or 9:00 a.m.);
(b) for one half of the school term holidays, with the father to have the first
half if the children were not in his care the week
before and the second half,
if they had been in his care, with changeover at 5.00 p.m. on the middle
(c) during the 2025 / 2026 Christmas Holidays, on a week-about basis during that
period, with the Father’s time to commence
in the first week if he did not
have the children the week before and the second week if he did have the care of
the children the
week before, with the children to be returned to the Mother at
least 2 days prior to the commencement of the new school term in 2026.
children otherwise spend time with the parents on special occasions as
Fathers and Mother’s Day
(a) on the Father’s Day weekend with the father from 5:00 p.m. on the day
preceding Father’s Day until 8:00 p.m. on Father’s
Day and on the
Mother’s Day weekend with the mother from 5.00 p.m. on the day preceding
Mother’s Day until 8:00 p.m.
on Mother’s Day;
(b) on the children’s birthdays, the children spend time with the parent
with whom they would not otherwise be spending time,
and in the absence of
agreement:-
(i) if on a school day, from after school to 6:30 p.m.; and
(ii) if on a non-school day, from 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.,
with all three children to be made available for the time;
(c) for the parent birthdays, as agreed between the parents in writing and in
the absence of agreement, the children spend time with
the parent with whom they
are not otherwise spending time:
(i) if on a school day, from after school to 8:00 p.m.; and
(ii) if on a non-school day, from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the actual birthday
Christmas holidays
(d) for Christmas in 2025 as agreed and in the absence of agreement, with the
father from 5:00 p.m. Christmas Eve to 2:00 p.m. Christmas
Day, and with the
mother from 2.00 p.m. Christmas Day until 5:00 p.m. Boxing Day. ;
(e) at such other times as agreed between the parents in writing.
Changeovers
changeover does not occur at the children’s school, it will occur at the
mothers residence at the commencement of the
children’s time and at the
father’s residence at the conclusion of the children’s time, with
the parents to remain
in their respective homes and vehicles at all changeovers
and the children to move between the parties.
either parent runs out of medication for X, there will be a split pack of the
medication available for their collection at Suburb
C Pharmacy and for the
purpose of same:
(a) the Mother will be responsible for taking the scripts to the Chemist;
(b) both parents will text the other once they collect their pack of
medication;
(c) in the event that the Father’s supply of medication for X becomes
depleted, he will notify the Mother promptly in order
to co-ordinate collection
of same from the Pharmacy.
parents will each have their own compound melatonin supply from D Pharmacy,
parents will ensure they have their own stock of prescribed medication for the
children and that the children take their medication
as prescribed under parent
supervision.
further Order, the Mother will continue to make all medical and allied health
appointments for the children as directed and
recommended by the treating
professionals and for the purpose of same:-
(a) if an appointment is scheduled during the Father’s time, he will be
consulted about this in writing prior to the appointment
being made;
(b) all appointments will be recorded in the shared calendar and the parent with
whom the child/ren is / are living at the time of
such appointment will take the
child/ren to that appointment;
(c) both parents are at liberty to attend those appointments irrespective as to
with whom they are living at the time of the appointment;
(d) when the environmental scans are undertaken at the parties’
residences, only the parent living in the home will attend
that appointment;
(e) if an appointment falls during a period when the child/ren is/are in their
care, it is that parent’s responsibility to
cancel / manage the
appointment if the child cannot attend and to provide as much advance notice of
this as possible to the other
parents are authorised to obtain all information relating to the
children’s health and welfare directly from the treatment
the event that the child/ren is/are hospitalised, both parents are authorised to
visit the child/ren in the Hospital irrespective
as to with whom they are living
at the time of such hospitalisation.
parents be authorised to provide a copy of these Orders to all Medical and
Allied Health professionals engaged with the
Educational Orders
parent shall be at liberty to attend school events including, but not limited,
to school concerts, parent-teacher interviews,
sporting competitions and like
occasions ordinarily attended by parents.
parent shall be at liberty to request the principal of any schools attended by
the child/ren to provide to each of them (at their
own expense if necessary)
copies of all school reports, notices, newsletters, application forms for school
photographs and other
such notices generally received by parents.
parents be authorised to provide a copy of these Orders to any school at which
the children attend.
Extra-Curricular Events
parents are at liberty to attend the extra-curricular events for the children
irrespective as to with whom they are living at
the time of such
admitting the necessity for this Order, both parents be restrained by
themselves, their servants and agents from:
(a) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other
parent or the other parent's family members or friends
to the children or in the
sight or hearing of the children;
(b) discussing any aspect of the family law proceedings with the children, or in
the sight or hearing of the children;
(c) involving the children in the adult issues or the parenting dispute;
(d) knowingly allowing any third party to engage in conduct which is otherwise
prohibited in accordance with this paragraph;
(e) arranging contact through the children.
Communication
parents will communicate in writing via the AppClose Parenting App regarding the
children and will utilise the shared calendar
which will set out the contact
arrangements for the children, medical and other allied health appointments for
the children and the
extra-curricular commitments of the children.
an emergency concerning the children, the parents will communicate by text
message or telephone.
parents will exchange a message via the Parenting App each Friday summarising
the key information regarding the children including
their schooling,
activities, medical and psychological appointments, behaviour, sleep and
children are at liberty to contact the parents at any other reasonable times
pursuant to their express wishes.
Father enrol in and complete the Tuning into Teens Parenting Program and provide
to the other a copy of the Completion Certificate
once available.
section 68Q
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) if these Orders are
inconsistent with the existing Intervention Order, then this Order shall prevail
to the extent of the inconsistency
light of the child X’s special needs, in order to ensure routine and rules
are consistent across both homes:-
(a) the parties will arrange for the NDIS funded Occupational Therapist to
attend at their homes before the end of each School Term
to conduct the
environmental scan; and
(b) the parties will meet with the NDIS Care Team annually in order to prepare
the parties for Term 1.
parents engage in family therapy with B Service to improve parental
communication, explore how to best work together and ensure
consistency for the children as they live between the two households and
(a) The parties equally share the cost of the family therapist.
(b) The parties be at liberty to provide a copy of the Child Impact Report by Ms
E dated 23 July 2025 and a copy of these Orders
to the family therapist.
Section 13C(1)(b)
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), the parties and
their legal representatives (if any) shall attend
of the confidential Court-based
Family Dispute Resolution (FDR)
with a Registrar (as Family Dispute Resolution Practitioner) on a
date to be fixed (
no earlier than
), with each
party to attend separately at times to be advised; and
of the confidential Court-based FDR Conference on a date and at a
time to be fixed but not later than seven (7) days after the date
referred to in
order 26(a).
matter shall be referred to the Executive Director – National Registrar
Operations and Practice for allocation and listing
of the FDR Conference dates.
Father provide to the Mother’s Lawyers:
(a) a copy of his Work Roster from 1 July 2025 to the 31 December 2025;
(b) a letter from his employer which confirms his current work roster and
commitments and that this will continue into the future;
(c) a copy of his Employment Contract, if such a contract exists.
matter remains otherwise listed for a
Conciliation Conference
relation to property only) with Judicial Registrar McGee at
matter be otherwise adjourned to the
Judicial Registrars List (Second
before Judicial Registrar Dorian at
September 2025
PROPERTY ORDERS
the parties agree on the value of the property situated at G Street, Suburb C
(“G Street”) within 14 days from
the date of these Orders, the
parties will jointly engage F Company at their joint expense to value G
H Street, Suburb C
real property situated at H Street, Suburb C (“H Street”) remain
listed for sale with J Company.
list price of H Street be such amount as is agreed between the parties in
consultation with the real estate agent.
sale price of H Street shall be as agreed in writing and failing agreement, any
offer that is within 10% of the list price shall
be accepted by the
parties are to cooperate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to
the marketing of the property.
otherwise by agreement between the parties and the prospective purchaser, the
contract of sale for the real property provide
for completion within 30- days
after the date of contract of sale; and
agreement being reached for sale of the property, the parties shall execute the
contract of sale and all other documents necessary
to complete the sale of H
Street, including all transfer documentation forthwith upon its submission to
them by the agent or their
the date of settlement, or as soon as practicable thereafter, the proceeds of
sale of H Street be disbursed as follows:
(a) First, to pay all costs, commissions & expenses of the sale;
(b) Second, to discharge the mortgage and any other encumbrance secured over the
matrimonial land;
(c) Thirdly to pay the Capital Gains Tax on the property (if any)
(d) Fourthly, the balance then remaining to be held in the father’s
solicitors trust account pending written agreement or further
Court Order.
UNTIL FURTHER ORDER:
the H Street property is tenanted, the rental income will be paid straight onto
the H Street Mortgage;
Respondent will remain solely liable for and indemnify the Applicant absolutely
with respect to the Mortgage instalments owing
on the H Street property;
G Street Mortgage will be paid by the Applicant.
Respondent will be solely liable for and indemnify the Applicant absolutely with
respect to all household bills and amenities
for the H Street including
insurance and Land Rates;
Respondent will be solely liable for and indemnify the Applicant absolutely with
respect to all household bills and amenities
associated with the H Street
property including insurance;
Applicant will be solely liable for and indemnify the Respondent absolutely with
respect to the land rates and water rates for
the G Street property;
parties hold their respective interests in the G Street and H Street properties
upon trust for the other;
and except for the sole purpose of complying with these Orders, neither party
shall further encumber the H Street and G Street
properties without the consent
in writing of the other party or draw on any funds in the redraw
family dog, noise sleep machine, and the children’s bags will be exchanged
between the parties:
school terms:
(i) at 6:00 p.m. on Friday when the Father’s time with the children
commences; and
(ii) at 6:00 p.m. on Wednesday following the conclusion of the Father’s
time with the children.
the school Holidays, at the commencement and conclusion of the Father’s
time with the children.
4 (a) to (c), 27 to 31, 40, 43 and 45 to 46 were made by consent.
Executive Direction – National Registrar Operations and Practice will
notify all parties and legal practitioners on the
record of the date and times
fixed for all parts of the FDR Conference.
FDR Conference is an opportunity for the parties to make a genuine effort to
resolve their parenting dispute in a confidential,
child focussed setting. The
parties are to be resolution focussed and respectful during negotiations, and to
be mindful of the financial
and emotional costs associated with prolonged
litigation.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE JENKINS:
matter came before me as an interim defended hearing relating to both parenting
and property matters.
applicant mother is Ms Heath (“the mother”) and the father is Mr
Heath (“the father”). Although the matter
also includes property
proceedings for ease of reference they shall be referred to in these terms.
parties are in dispute over the interim living arrangements for their children,
and in relation to spousal maintenance for the
BRIEF BACKGROUND
parties commenced living together in about 2002 and separated under the one roof
in March 2024. The father left the former matrimonial
(“the G Street property”) in June 2024.
parties have three children together, X aged 16 years old, Y aged 14 years old
and Z aged 11 years old (“the children”).
parties are in dispute about who was the primary carer of the children during
the relationship. However, it is not in dispute
that the children have remained
living with the mother since their physical separation, and that the father
initially spent time
with the children at the G Street property until he found
suitable accommodation in November 2024. Thereafter the father spent alternate
weekends and midweek time with the children, as well as holiday time. In March
2025 the children began spending time with the father
from Tuesday to Thursday
each week, although, the parties are in dispute about how this came about. This
changed again in school
term 2 of 2025 when the children began spending time
with the father on alternate weekends from Friday until sometime the following
week. It seems the mother proposed four nights, whilst the father wanted shared
care. There was no actual agreement, resulting in
the father making arrangements
through the children.
mother subsequently initiated proceedings in this court on 1 May 2025.
July 2025 the parties attended upon Ms E (“Ms E”) for a short form
family report which was released on 23 July 2025
(“the short form
report”) and filed in this court on 1 August 2025.
father now seeks a progressive increase in time building to equal shared care.
The father submits this proposal is in line with
the recommendations in the
short form report, albeit somewhat slower than recommended.
mother agrees with a slight increase in time for the father and the children but
opposes the transition to shared care prior to
a final testing of the evidence
regard to the interim property application, the mother seeks a payment of $500
per week by way of spousal maintenance. The father
says he cannot afford to make
such a payment to the mother, and that in any event, the mother has a greater
earning capacity and
has inflated her expenses.
CONDUCT OF THE HEARING
matter ran by way of submissions in a busy Geelong circuit which lead to a
decision not being provided on the day or indeed in
the remainder of that week.
Being an interim hearing, I will give my reasons in short form.
parties each filed an outline of case which set out the documents they relied
upon. I have read each of those documents. Just
because I do not refer to a
specific aspect of the evidence does not mean I have not taken it into
consideration.
the evidence is untested, I have endeavoured to place greater weight on agreed
facts and less controversial evidence, such as that
contained in the short form
parties also prepared a joint minute setting out the specific orders they seek
and where they are in dispute. Following various
amendments throughout the
hearing this became a joint exhibit in the matter (“the proposed
mother says that shared care is not in the children’s best interests. She
says the father has continuously proposed an equal
shared care arrangement,
despite failing to make himself available to spend time with the children on a
consistent basis.
father says there is no reason the children ought not spend time on an equal
basis and that mother is unreasonably controlling
and limiting his relationship
with the children.
assessment of the evidence is that difficulties have arisen primarily due to the
parties being in very different emotional places
at separation. It seems the
father had decided the separation was final, whereas the mother still held out
hope that the parties
may reconcile. It appears that they attended counselling
at cross purposes. The situation was then made worse when the father
re-partnered
shortly after separation and introduced his new partner to the
children. As a result, the mother is likely to be still grieving the
relationship and/or the family unit. It is therefore unsurprising that she
appears to have had some difficulty separating
from the children which led to
her attending at the father’s home, uninvited, and the father’s
subsequent intervention
order (“IVO”) application. It also appears
the mother has involved the children in the dispute. Ms E reported the mother
saying to the children things like “Your dad is not making wise decisions
at the moment”
and X reported
that his father “does not talk about the separation or Mum, compared to
Mum always talking about
father, for his part, has “moved on” and seems to expect the mother
to now do the same. However, this fails to recognise
the reality of the
mother’s emotional situation, and the potential impact this may have on
the children.
Legislative Pathway
terms of the legislative pathway, best interests remain the paramount
consideration when determining parenting matters. Section
60CC of the
(“the Act”) sets out the matters the court
must take into consideration when assessing best interests as follows:
Determining child’s best interests
(1) Subject to subsection (4), in determining what is in the child’s best
interests, the court must:
(a) consider the matters set out in subsection (2); and
(b) if the child is an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander child—also
consider the matters set out in subsection (3).
General considerations
(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(a), the court must consider the
following matters:
(a) what arrangements would promote the safety (including safety from being
subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, abuse,
neglect, or other harm) of:
(i) the child; and
(ii) each person who has care of the child (whether or not a person has parental
responsibility for the
(b) any views expressed by the child;
(c) the developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs of the
(d) the capacity of each person who has or is proposed to have parental
responsibility for the child to provide for the child’s
developmental,
psychological, emotional and cultural needs;
(e) the benefit to the child of being able to have a relationship with the
child’s parents, and other people who are significant
to the child, where
it is safe to do so;
(f) anything else that is relevant to the particular circumstances of the child.
(2A) In considering the matters set out in paragraph (2)(a), the court must
include consideration of:
(a) any history of family violence, abuse or neglect involving the child or a
person caring for the child (whether or not the person
had parental
responsibility for the child); and
(b) any family violence order that applies or has applied to the child or a
member of the child’s family.
have taken each of those matters into consideration although I will not
specifically reference each one.
terms of the safety of the children, the mother makes a number of allegations
against the father in her material, including allegations
of alcohol abuse and
mental health, however these were not seriously pressed at the interim hearing.
Indeed, any such concerns would
be inconsistent with the mother’s own
position that the father’s time progress to five nights per fortnight.
although the father has taken out an IVO against the mother, which resolved by
way of an undertaking to the court, he does
not assert that the children are at
risk in the mother’s care. Indeed, Ms E’s assessment of the parties
is they are both
good parents who have positive relationships with the children.
The issue in this case appears to be the parties’ inability
to communicate
and conflict arising from a power battle over the children’s time.
regard to the children’s views, in the short form report, each child
expresses a desire to live in a shared care arrangement,
although X wanted to
take this slowly. X was quoted as saying, “I agree with mum, let’s
take things slowly. It has been
X, the oldest child,
appears to have been the most affected by the separation reporting a subsequent
decline in his mental health
and suicidal thoughts. This resulted in him being
hospitalised on a number of occasions. X reported in the short form report
“a lot of anger which [he] could not
I note X has a
neurological profile consistent with autism spectrum disorder and
and has been diagnosed with a
tic disorder and anxiety. He has a multidisciplinary team including an
occupational therapist, psychologist,
speech therapist, and a
paediatrician.
of the children are at various stages of maturity, but given their ages,
significant weight should be attached to their views.
Whilst it is evident from
X’s comments that he is aware of his mother’s desire to progress
slowly and that this may have
influenced his thinking, this does not mean his
comments should be ignored. X has indeed had a “rough
I note further that
X’s occupational therapist reports X’s need for consistency and
routine and the importance of his
feelings being
terms of consistency and routine, it is clear on the evidence that the children
have had to adapt to a number of changes since
their parents separation.
Immediately after separation the children experienced living with the parties
under the one roof followed
by several months where the father spent time with
them in the family home. After the father obtained suitable accommodation, the
children started spending alternate weekends and some midweek time with the
father however this changed again in about March this
year when time became
Tuesday to Thursday each week. Thereafter, the parties continued to disagree
children, resulting in the father arranging
matters directly with the children. On my reading of the evidence, the children
not had a stable and consistent arrangement for any length of time.
Furthermore,
despite Ms E’s opinion the parents have similar parenting styles, the
father conceded he has less boundaries than
the mother, and that she is stricter
with the children than he is. This is likely to have made it more difficult for
the children
to transition between the two households.
taken all of the section 60CC factors into consideration, I am of the view that
the time between the father and the children
should increase to five nights, but
not beyond that at this time. Furthermore, whilst Ms E recommends a progression
to equal shared
care, she was only instructed to prepare a short form report,
does not appear to have the benefit of reports from X’s treating
professionals, and her evidence is yet to be tested. I note also that the
parties are yet to commence family therapy which
will hopefully improve their
communication so that they can better facilitate a shared care arrangement, if
one is ordered in the
note that the orders I propose, whilst not equal time, provide for significant
time for the children in each parent’s care.
Whilst each parent seems
focused on the quantity of time, they would do well to listen to the children
themselves who appear to have
identified the real issues at the heart of this
case as follows:
[X]: I hope we can spend time as a family in the future, but they need to
communicate well.
It’s ridiculous they can’t communicate, that is
the simplest thing humans
[Y]: there were a lot of arguments. It was, and still is, annoying.
me feel like we are the parents and they are the
(Emphasis added)
the parties’ attendance at family therapy, one matter on which they do
agree, will assist them to improve their communication
and to better understand
the impact of their ongoing conflict on the children.
School holidays
did not appear to be a substantial dispute about the school holidays, with each
party proposing a version of week about in both
term and long summer holidays.
They also agreed the time should commence with the parent who did not have the
children the week before.
I propose to make changeover in the term holidays on
the middle Saturday, which on my calculation, is in the middle of the term
mother seeks the children be returned to her care two days prior to the new
school year. I propose to make this order given the
mother will remain the
primary carer of the children on an interim basis and this will enable her to
ensure they have everything
in order for the new school year.
Special occasions
parties ultimately agreed to the orders for Father’s Day and
Mother’s Day. The parents appear to agree on time for
their birthdays but
could not agree on the drafting of the orders. I have therefore drafted orders
on their behalf.
regard to Christmas, the father proposed a return of the children at 2.00pm and
the mother proposed a return at 11.00am. There
was no evidence to support either
party’s proposal. The father does however seek to have a lunchtime meal
with the children
which does not appear to be unreasonable if the mother is to
have them for dinner. I note the mother sought an extended Boxing Day
children, but I was not addressed as to why she should have a greater period of
time with the children on that day. Accordingly,
I shall make the orders as
sought by the father for a return at 2.00pm.
was not addressed as to why I should make an order that the children attend
special occasions or family events when they are in
the other parent’s
care. This appears to be inviting further opportunities for conflict between the
parties, and I do not propose
to make such an order.
Notwithstanding
that the father called the police and obtained an IVO due to the mother
attending his property uninvited, the father
sought an order that changeover be
facilitated at each parent’s home, when changeover does not occur at
school. The mother
proposed changeover at a park as there would likely be people
around and because it was a neutral location.
my view, it is in the children’s best interests to changeover at the
parties’ homes, but I will order that the parents
remain in their
respective homes or cars to avoid exposing the children to any further conflict.
The children are old enough to transition
between the houses and the cars
without assistance.
regard to the exchange of the family dog, I do not believe I have the power to
make an order requiring the movement of the family
pet; however, I will include
this as a notation by consent.
Work roster
mother sought an order that the father provide a copy of his work roster for six
months, a letter from his employer confirming
his work arrangements, and a copy
of his work contract. The father resisted this order on the basis that he had
provided a letter
from his employer as part of this interim hearing.
father is no doubt concerned about the mother knowing his exact roster, given
her attendance at his house on an uninvited basis,
however, his failure to
provide the roster has likely fuelled her distrust. On balance, I am of the view
that the father should provide
a copy of the documents sought, in particular his
work roster, to the mother, noting she alleges the documents provided by
Police are not consistent with the information the father previously
gave about his work commitments. If the mother uses this information
the father, then she will be in breach of the undertaking that she has given to
the Magistrates’ Court and consequences
will flow from same.
Overseas travel
mother proposes orders for overseas and interstate travel. I was not addressed
travel, so I assume these
are not pressed. In relation to overseas travel, there is no evidence before the
court about any intended
overseas travel and although the father offered no
reason why such orders should not be made, the mother has no immediate plans to
travel and says she cannot afford it. I consequently do not propose to make such
orders however, I note the mother has family in
the United Kingdom, including
the maternal grandmother who is aged in her 80’s, and the mother may be
required to travel if
she were to become ill. If the mother is forced to bring
an application, and there is no reason to oppose such travel, then cost
consequences are likely to follow.
will otherwise make the remainder of the orders by consent on an interim basis.
SPOUSAL MAINTENANCE
mother sought an order that the father pay to her $500 per week by way of
spousal maintenance. The father resisted the making
of any such order.
Legislative Pathway
to section 74 of the Act the court may make any order with respect to spousal
maintenance that it considers proper.
Hall v Hall
[2016] HCA 23
(2016) 257 CLR 490
, the High Court observed that the
“gateway” requirement for the consideration of a spousal maintenance
application is
set out in section 72(1) of the Act, as follows:
(1) A party to a marriage is liable to maintain the other party, to the extent
that the first-mentioned party is reasonably able
to do so, if, and only if,
that other party is unable to support herself or himself adequately whether:
(a) by reason of having the care and control of a child of the marriage who has
not attained the age of 18 years;
(b) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful
employment; or
(c) for any other adequate reason
having regard to any relevant matter referred to in subsection 75(2).
the Act was amended in June this year, section 75(2) of the Act as amended
continues to contain the matters which the court
must take into account when
making an order for spousal maintenance:
75 Matters to be taken into consideration in relation to spousal
maintenance
(1) In exercising jurisdiction under section 74, the court shall take into
account only the matters referred to in subsection (2).
(2) The matters to be so taken into account are:
(aa) the effect of any family violence to which one party has subjected or
exposed the other party, including on any of the matters
mentioned elsewhere in
this subsection; and
(a) the age and state of health of each of the parties; and
(b) the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties and the
physical and mental capacity of each of them for
appropriate gainful employment;
(c) the extent to which either party has the care of a child of the marriage who
has not attained the age of 18 years, including
the need of either party to
provide appropriate housing for such a child; and
(d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to
(i) himself or herself; and
(ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain; and
(e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person; and
(f) subject to subsection (3), the eligibility of either party for a
pension, allowance or benefit under:
(i) any law of the Commonwealth, of a State or Territory or of another country;
(ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was
established, or operates, within or outside
and the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either
(g) where the parties have separated or divorced, a standard of living that in
all the circumstances is reasonable; and
(h) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose
maintenance is under consideration would increase the earning
capacity of that
party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or
to establish himself or herself in
a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate
income; and
(ha) the effect of any proposed order on the ability of a creditor of a party to
recover the creditor’s debt, so far as that
effect is relevant; and
(j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has
contributed to the income, earning capacity, property
and financial resources of
the other party; and
(k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the
earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under
consideration; and
(l) the need to protect a party who wishes to continue that party’s role
as a parent; and
(m) if either party is cohabiting with another person—the financial
circumstances relating to the cohabitation; and
(n) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 79 in
relation to:
(i) the property of the parties;
(ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a bankrupt party;
(naa) the terms of any order or declaration made, or proposed to be made, under
Part VIIIAB in relation to:
(i) a party to the marriage;
(ii) a person who is a party to a de facto relationship with a
party to the marriage; or
(i) the property of a person covered by subparagraph (i) and of a person
covered by subparagraph (ii), or of either of them; or
(ii) vested bankruptcy property in relation to a person covered by
subparagraph (i) or (ii); and
(na) any child support under the
Child Support (Assessment) Act
that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might
be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage;
(p) the terms of any financial agreement that is binding on the parties to the
marriage; and
(q) the terms of any
Part VIIIAB
financial agreement that is binding on a
party to the marriage; and
(r) any other fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the court, the
justice of the case requires to be taken into account.
(3) In exercising its jurisdiction under
, a court shall
disregard any entitlement of the party whose maintenance is under consideration
to an income tested pension, allowance
or benefit.
(As per original)
is evident from this legislation that the court must take into consideration the
mother’s need for spousal maintenance and
if established the
father’s ability to pay it. The difficulty in this case is that each
party’s financial statements
were inaccurate and/or out of date.
Nonetheless, the mother’s counsel argued the court could rely on their
taxable incomes
for the previous financial year. In this regard it was not in
dispute that in the most recent financial year:
(1) The father had a taxable income of $160,153.26 and paid tax of $43,952 and
child support of $20,245 giving him a net income of
$95,956 or $1,845 per week;
(2) The mother had a taxable income of $68,234 plus child support of $20,245 and
paid tax of $12,218 giving her a net income of $76,261
or $1,466 per week.
for the mother submitted that the court need not be troubled by defective
financial statements or controversial expenses.
Rather the court was urged to
take a broad-brush approach based on the undisputed net incomes for the previous
year and that the
parties were each responsible for equivalent costs in terms of
their rent and mortgage (being about $600 in each case). It was argued
that basis, the mother was left with $859 per week to meet her expenses whilst
the father had $1,204 per week (which I calculate
to be $1,245) being a
differential of $345 (or on my calculations $386). The difficulty with this
analysis is that the father also
has a car payment of $182 per week, which
although the mother says he should never have obtained, is a legal obligation
does not dispute. This would reduce the funds available to pay to the
mother (on my calculations) to $204 per week.
Nonetheless,
the threshold test is whether the mother has a need for spousal maintenance and
if so, how much. The mother bares the
onus of proving this need. Again, the only
evidence of the mother’s day-to-day expenses is contained in Part N of her
statement, however, as already discussed, this could not be relied
However, even if those
expenses were accurate, the mother does not distinguish in Part N of that
document her expenses versus those
of the children. It is therefore impossible
for the court to assess the mother’s need for maintenance separately to
of the children. If the mother has a need, I am unable to quantify it.
addition, the mother has reduced her working hours, in part to care for the
children, but has not explained why that was necessary.
Furthermore, the father
rightly argues that she may now be able to work extra hours, given his greater
care of the children.
all of these reasons the mother’s application for spousal maintenance will
be dismissed.
the mother accepts the mortgage is an expense she has been paying, and she is
living in the G Street property and would otherwise
be paying rent, she should
continue to make the payments on the mortgage. Otherwise, the mother proposes
she pay the land rates and
water rates on the property. Although not indicated
to be by consent, I presume the father would not object to her making these
In relation to H Street, the father has agreed to pay the household
bills and other amenities but excludes the land rates. However,
submissions were made on the matter, I presume he abandoned his resistance to
this order and accordingly I will make that an
order of the court.
DETERMINATION
terms of the future directions of this matter, the parties agreed they should
attend some form of dispute resolution but disagreed
funded. The parties questioned whether it would be possible to attend a
conciliation conference, given the
parties non-superannuation pool was under
$500,000. In the circumstances, I have determined to give them such a
conference.
was not addressed as to why I should make the father’s order for
disclosure in circumstances where the parties have clear
obligations pursuant to
the Act and under the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family
Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) particularly at
therefore propose to make such an order.
will otherwise make orders by consent per the proposed minute.
all the aforementioned reasons I make the orders as set out at the commencement
of this judgment.
I certify that the preceding fifty-six (56)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 22 August 2025
Short form report at [18].
Short form report at [26].
Short form report at [26].
Short form report at [25].
Report of Ms K, contained in
Mother’s affidavit filed 29 July 2025 as annexure MSH-4 at [25].
Short form report at [26].
Report of Ms L, contained in
Mother’s affidavit filed 29 July 2025 as annexure MSH-1 at
Short form report at
Short form report at
These inaccuracies
included the mother’s income, the amount of child support received and the
amount of the mortgage repayment.
RTF format (626 KB)
Signed PDF/A format