Logan v Otis Elevator Company Pty Ltd [1999] IRCA 2 (11 March 1999)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Logan v Otis Elevator Company Pty Ltd
[1999] IRCA 2
PETER LOGAN v OTIS ELEVATOR COMPANY PTY LTD
NI 1279R OF 1995
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
ELEVATOR COMPANY PTY LTD
THE COURT ORDERS AND DECLARES THAT:
1. The termination of employment of the applicant was in contravention of s
170DE of the
Industrial Relations Act
2. The respondent pay the applicant $20,000 within 28 days.
3. That part of the claim of the applicant pleaded in paragraphs 10, 11 and 12
and Schedule 1 of the Further Amended Statement of
Claim filed 18 October 1996
is dismissed.
4. That part of the claim of the applicant pleaded in paragraphs 21, 22, 23 and
24 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim filed
on 18 October 1996 is
5. In the period 1988 until the termination of his employment the work
undertaken by the applicant was work comprehended by the
classification of
electrician special class within the meaning of clause 3(e) of the National
Metal and Engineering On-Site Construction
Industry Award 1989.
6. Costs reserved.
7. The matter be listed for directions on 25 March 1999 at 9.30 am.
Note: Settlement and entry of orders is dealt with in Order 36 of the
Industrial Relations Court of Australia Rules.
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
ELEVATOR COMPANY PTY LTD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
1 In June 1997 I published reasons for judgment effectively disposing of a
number of issues in proceedings between Mr Logan and
Otis Elevator Company Pty
Ltd ("Otis"). In those reasons I canvassed, in detail, the relevant evidence
and the legal issues raised
in the proceedings. What I was required to deal
with in that judgment had been determined by a consent order I had made on 8
1996 (prior to trial) that had been proposed by the parties. The
proceedings before me were initially an application for the review
decision of a judicial registrar. Such an application could be made, as of
right, by a party aggrieved by the decision of a
judicial registrar. That
application was brought by Otis who had unsuccessfully defended before a
judicial registrar an application
by Mr Logan who established that the
termination of his employment with Otis had been in contravention of Division 3
of Part VIA
Industrial Relations Act
. The judicial
registrar had awarded compensation in the sum of $20,000.
2 It appears the initiation of the review led Mr Logan, no doubt on advice, to
commence proceedings in the Court's accrued jurisdiction
alleging breach of his
employment contract with Otis and invoking the Court's statutory jurisdiction
to remedy a contravention of
an award. This was done by way of statement of
claim. As to the award contravention it was contended by Mr Logan that his
with Otis was regulated by one of two awards made under either the
Industrial Relations Act
or legislation it had repealed and
that certain entitlements he had under one or other of those awards had not
been provided or provided
fully by Otis.
3 The order I earlier referred to which was made on 8 March 1996 resulted in
the question of the quantum of any liability either
under an award or under the
contract being determined separately from and following the resolution of other
issues. While this course
was later questioned by counsel for Otis during the
trial I decided to adhere to the course that the parties had, by agreement,
chartered for themselves. Given what has transpired since I doubt the
wisdom of that course.
4 At the conclusion of my reasons of 20 June 1997 I indicated that the
applicant should bring in short minutes of orders to give
effect to those
reasons. A little under a year later those representing the applicant saw fit
to do so. In the result a position
was reached in February this year where
orders could be made giving effect to my reasons for judgment. Those orders
are reflected
in the orders I make today. While there was not entire agreement
between the parties as to what form the orders should take and
what matters
should be the subject of orders there was general agreement about much of what
the applicant proposed. The orders I
make will reflect the following aspects
of the reasons I published on 20 June 1997:
* Mr Logan's success in establishing that his employment was terminated in
contravention of s 170DE of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
* The award of $20,000 compensation to Mr Logan arising from that
contravention.
* Mr Logan establishing that he was employed in a classification found in the
National Metal and Engineering On Site Construction
Industry Award 1989 ("the
Award") which, as has emerged subsequently having regard to findings I made in
my reasons, was the classification
of Electrician Special Class.
* Mr Logan's failure to establish that he was entitled to payment for standby
under the Award.
* Mr Logan's failure to establish that his contract of employment was breached
by a failure to pay him overtime.
* Mr Logan's failure to establish that his contract of employment was breached
by giving him inadequate notice.
5 I turn now to consider the contentious question of costs.
6 Otis seeks its costs in relation to the proceedings in so far as they relate
to the issues agitated by Mr Logan in his statement
of claim. What are the
limits of the powers of the Court in a situation such as this is a difficult
Section 347
of what is now the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
A party to a proceeding (including an appeal) in a matter arising under this
Act (other than an application under s 170CP) shall not
be ordered to pay costs
incurred by any other party in the proceeding unless the first-mentioned party
instituted the proceeding
vexatiously or without reasonable
Grout v Gunnedah Shire Council
129 ALR 372
considered at some length the powers of the Court to award costs in relation to
proceedings brought in the Court's accrued or associated
conjunction with an application brought pursuant to s 170EA of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
. Otis submitted, in effect, that this was
wrongly decided. However the submission proceeded on the false premise that
the Federal
Court of Australia, prior to the establishment of the Industrial
Relations Court of Australia, had no statutory jurisdiction to enforce
and deal with claims of underpayment. It did: see
Industrial Relations Act
when first enacted and the definition of
The application by Otis for a review of the decision of the
judicial registrar is itself a proceeding in respect of which a costs
be made: see
Shackley v Australian Croatian Club Ltd
(1996) 141 ALR
No submission has been made in these proceedings that the application for
review by Otis was made vexatiously or without reasonable
8 However Otis does contend that the application of Mr Logan embodied in the
statement of claim filed in January 1996 as later amended
was brought
vexatiously or without reasonable cause and a costs order can be made in
relation to it. This submission raises several
difficult issues. The first is
whether a claim brought by a respondent to an application for review (who was
the successful applicant
before the judicial registrar) can be said to have
"instituted (a) proceeding" by maintaining additional causes of action in the
review invoking different aspects of the Court's jurisdiction. I use the
expression "respondent to an application for review" not
in any precise legal
sense given that the review is a hearing de novo where, on at least one
approach, the applicant before the judicial
registrar remains the applicant in
the review. In the present case these questions are further complicated
because part of the additional
claim of Mr Logan was based on an alleged breach
of contract which arose in the Court's accrued or associated jurisdiction and
parts of it involved an alleged breach of an award presumably invoking
the Court's statutory jurisdiction conferred by
of what was then the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
. As to that latter aspect of that claim
an applicant seeking the exercise of the Court's statutory jurisdiction is
plainly protected
9 Assuming, for the moment, that the claims embodied in the statement of claim
gave rise to a proceeding on which
operates, the issue would then arise
as to whether the proceedings were brought vexatiously or without reasonable
cause. Each raised
an issue of substance notwithstanding that Mr Logan was
unsuccessful in relation to much of that claim. It must be said, however,
the claim of Mr Logan that he was entitled to payment for standing by
constantly (other than when working) over a period of
years resulting in an
entitlement of many hundreds of thousands of dollars has a clear and obvious
element of unreality about it.
That is not to say, however, that if the Award,
properly construed, created an entitlement and the facts necessary to found it
established, he would not have succeeded. He has, having regard to the
reasons I gave on 20 June 1997, failed to make out the first
limb to found an
entitlement. However he wishes to appeal against that aspect of my reasons
reflected in the orders I make today
and that is plainly a matter for him and
those advising him.
10 I am not satisfied Otis has, at this point, made out a case for an order for
costs. However the question of whether the proceeding
reflected in the
statement of claim (assuming it was a proceeding for the purposes of
was, in whole or in part, instituted reasonably or vexatiously can probably
only properly be assessed at the end of the day. By
that I mean when the
proceedings have concluded in their entirety. Accordingly I propose, as Otis
submitted I should do as a subsidiary
submission, to reserve on the question of
costs. As I indicated at the hearing on 9 February 1999 I will also not deal
question of interest until the matter has finally concluded.
certify that the preceding ten (10) paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons
for Judgment herein of the Honourable Justice Moore.
Dated: 11 March 1999
for the Applicant:
for the Applicant:
for the Respondent:
for the Respondent:
of Hearing:
February 1999
of Judgment:
No downloadable files available