Kelaart Security Services Pty Ltd and Australian Skills Quality Authority (Practice and procedure) [2025] ARTA 2398 (12 November 2025)
Kelaart Security Services Pty Ltd and Australian Skills Quality Authority
(Practice and procedure) [2025] ARTA 2398 (12 November 2025)
Applicant/s: Kelaart Security Services Pty Ltd
Respondent: Australian Skills Quality Authority
Tribunal Number: 2024/9322
Tribunal: General Member R Smith
Place: Adelaide
Date: 12 November 2025
The application for review is dismissed
........................................................................
General Member R Smith
VOCATIONALS EDUCATION AND TRAINING – registered training
organisation – cancellation of registration – failure to
comply with
Tribunal directions – liquidation of applicant company – proceedings
Legislation
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
Statement of Reasons
5 April 2024 a delegate of the Australian Skills Quality Authority (
) decided to cancel the registration of Kelaart Security Services
Kelaart or Applicant
) as an education and training provider
pursuant to
ss 36(2)(f)
National Vocational Education and
Training Regulator Act 2011
). In making the decision,
the delegate was satisfied the Applicant was non-compliant with the
for Registered Training Organisations 2015
(Cth) and the NVR Act. The
decision was to take effect from 13 May 2024.
8 April 2024, the Respondent sent the Notice of Cancellation of Registration and
the statement of reasons to the Applicant. On
2 July 2024, Kelaart applied for
internal review and on 30 October 2024, the Respondent affirmed the cancellation
decision. A copy
of the statement of reasons was provided on 29 November 2025
and the decision was to take effect on 4 December 2024.
4 November 2024, the Applicant filed an application in the Tribunal seeking a
review of the cancellation decision and an application
seeking a stay of the
implementation of the decision.
the application form, the contact person for the Applicant was listed as the
Managing Director, Mr Christopher Ball (
). The application form
also indicated the Applicant was not legally represented.
3 December 2024 the Tribunal made an interim order that the decision under
review be stayed until determination of the Applicant’s
stay application,
subject to the condition that the Kelaart enrol any new students.
stay application was heard on 1 May 2025. The Respondent was represented by
counsel, who was accompanied by a solicitor from
the Australian Government
Solicitor (
). At the conclusion of the hearing, the Tribunal made
directions progressing the substantive review application. The Respondent was
directed to file their Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions (
and evidence by 6 June 2025. The Applicant was given until 24 July 2025 to file
their SFIC and evidence (
May Direction
). The matter was listed for a
directions hearing on 18 August 2025.
13 May 2025, the Tribunal refused Kelaart’s application for a stay and
discharged the interim stay order.
6 June 2025, the Respondent filed their SFIC, a tender bundle of documents and
supplementary tribunal documents.
Applicant did not file a SFIC or evidence by 24 July 2025 in accordance with the
May Direction.
the directions hearing on 18 August 2025, Mr Ball appeared on behalf of the
Applicant. The Tribunal directed the Applicant file
a SFIC and evidence on or
before 15 September 2025 (
August Direction
). The matter was listed for a
further directions hearing on 10 October 2025. The parties were advised the
Tribunal expected to allocate
a hearing date at that time.
Applicant did not file a SFIC or evidence by 15 September 2025 in accordance
with the August Direction.
Registry contacted Mr Ball on 24 September 2025 about the Applicant’s SFIC
and evidence. Mr Ball advised the Registry he
understood the material to be due
in October, but would try and lodge the documents the following day.
25 September 2025, the AGS, on behalf of the Respondent, sent an email to Mr
Ball requesting an update on the Applicant’s
SFIC and evidence. The email
also advised the Applicant that if the documents were not filed by 1 October
2025, the Respondent would
make an application pursuant to
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
proceeding to be dismissed.
Ball replied to the email, copying in the Registry, on 26 September 2025. In the
email, he requested an extension in time to file
the Applicant’s SFIC and
evidence to 28 October 2025.
8 October 2025, the Registry sent the following communication to the parties:
Dear Parties,
We refer to the various emails received in respect of this matter.
We confirm the Applicant has not filed it Statement of Facts, Issues and
Contentions and evidence in accordance with the Tribunal
directions. We also
understand that Mr Ball is away for work and not available until the end of
October 2025.
We take this opportunity to remind the parties that
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
(Cth) provides that decision makers
and their representatives, as well as other parties and their representatives,
are to assist
the Tribunal to achieve the objectives in section 9 of the ART
Act. This includes that applications to the Tribunal are resolved
quickly and
with as little formality and expense as the proper consideration of the matter
before the Tribunal permits.
Paragraphs 4.29 to 4.43 of the Administrative Review Tribunal (Common
Procedures) Practice Direction 2024 (Cth) deal with compliance
with Tribunal
orders and directions. Paragraph 4.29 of the Practice Direction provides
“all parties must comply with orders
and directions made by the
Tribunal.” Paragraph 4.31 sets out the steps to be taken when a party, or
the party’s representative,
form the view they will not be able to comply
with the order or direction. Relevantly, this includes explaining the reasons
Given the unavailability of Mr Ball, the Tribunal has decided to vacate the
directions hearing listed for 10 October 2025. The application
has been relisted
for a non-compliance directions hearing on 28 October 2025 at 11:30am (AEST).
The Applicant’s non-compliance
with the current directions will be
addressed at that time. Should the Applicant fail to attend the hearing, the
application for
review may be dismissed by the Tribunal.
14 October 2025, the Registry received an email from Fauzen Hamdani, a Senior
Analyst with WLP Restructuring (
). Mr Hamdani stated in the email that
Mr Benjamin Ho and Mr Scott Pascoe from WLP (
Liquidators
appointed as joint and several liquidators of the Applicant on 1 September 2025.
The email also stated, ‘
Please accept this as written notice that the
applicant withdraws its application and seek the proceeding be
.’ Attached to the email was a copy of correspondence
exchanged between the Liquidators and AGS in respect of the review, which
repeated the intentions of the Liquidators.
Registry sent the following communication to the parties, including the
Liquidators, on the same day:
Dear Parties,
The Tribunal has been advised the Applicant company was wound up in
insolvency by order of the Supreme Court of New South Wales on
1 September 2025.
Mr Scott Darren Pascoe and Mr Benjamin Ho were appointed joint and several
liquidators (
Liquidators
In accordance with the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), the property, assets and
control of the business of the Applicant company have vested in the
Liquidators.
Section 84 of the Administrative Review Act 2004 (Cth) (
applies if an applicant goes into liquidation and the Tribunal considers the
applicant cannot continue with the substantive application
because of the
liquidation. Certain persons may apply to the Tribunal to continue with the
substantive application, including, but
not limited to, the liquidator or a
person who would have been entitled to apply for a review of the decision at the
time the substantive
application was made.
If an application is made, the Tribunal may give such orders that appear to
be appropriate in the circumstances, either on request
or on its own initiative.
This may be an order that the application should continue, with the person who
has requested continuation
being substituted as the applicant, and any other
orders as are necessary to progress the matter. If the Tribunal considers there
is no relevant person who can continue with the substantive application, or no
application to continue with the substantive application
is made within three
months after the Tribunal becomes aware of the liquidation, then the Tribunal
may dismiss the substantive application.
The proceeding has been listed for a non-compliance directions hearing on
28 October 2025 at 11:30am (AEDT
). The hearing will proceed as
scheduled. The Tribunal will use the opportunity to canvass whether a person
mentioned in s84(2) of
the ART Act can or intends to make an application to
continue with the substantive application. The Tribunal acknowledges the recent
correspondence from the Liquidators in which they confirmed their intention to
withdraw the application for review, from which the
Tribunal infers they will
not make an application to be substituted as the Applicant.
Should Mr Ball decide prior to the next case event that he
intend to apply to the Tribunal to continue with the substantive application, we
request that he advises the Tribunal in writing
at his earliest convenience.
20 October 2025, Mr Ball sent the following communication to the Registry and
Good Afternoon
Information has come to light in regard to the collusion of a state
government regulator and a federal government one in relation
to the above
matter. No matter how times I protest that allegations made by ASQA are not
factual, I do not believe I will be given
a fair hearing.
I therefore withdraw the whole matter in relation to the cancellation of our
RTO. I hope you are satisfied I your small ‘public
All the best
Tribunal declined to process the purported withdrawal of both the Liquidators
and Mr Ball. All parties were advised the hearing
scheduled for 28 October 2025
would proceed.
the commencement of the hearing on 28 October 2025, the Tribunal called Mr Ball
on the mobile provided to the Registry. The call
was not answered. A second call
was placed a short time later which was also unanswered. There was no attendance
on behalf of the
hearing from the Respondent, the Tribunal decided to dismiss the application and
confirmed short written reasons would follow.
These are the reasons.
100 of the ART Act allows the Tribunal to dismiss an application if the
Applicant fails to either proceed with an application
or comply with the Act or
an order of the Tribunal in relation to the proceeding, in a reasonable time.
9 of the ART Act sets out the Tribunal’s objectives which includes that
applications to the Tribunal are resolved as
quickly and with as little
formality and expense and the proper consideration of the matters before the
Tribunal permits. In order
to achieve this objective, it is important for the
Tribunal to actively manage the progress of cases.
56 of the ART Act requires that parties and their representatives conduct
proceedings before the Tribunal in a manner that
supports the Tribunal to
achieve its objectives. This necessarily includes complying with the
Tribunal’s directions.
Tribunal was satisfied the Applicant had failed to proceed with the application
in a reasonable time having regard to:
(i) the failure to attend the non-compliance hearing;
(ii) the failure to comply with the May and August directions;
(iii) the failure to explain the reason for the non-compliance;
(iv) even though the application for review was filed in early November 2024,
the Applicant had failed to file any evidence in support
of the application.
Tribunal was also satisfied there was no prospect the Applicant would proceed
with the matter given the recent liquidation of
the company, and that neither
the Liquidators or Mr Ball wished to pursue the application. An adjournment was
of limited utility
in those circumstances
the alternative, the Tribunal was also satisfied the proceeding could be
dismissed under s 84(4) of the ART Act.
Information
from the Australian Securities & Investment Commission register show the
Applicant went into liquidation on 1 September
2025. The Tribunal became aware
of this information on 14 October 2025. There is no evidence before the Tribunal
that the company
has been returned to the director, Mr Ball since that
Tribunal considers the Applicant cannot continue with the substantive
application because of the
liquidation.
Tribunal invited comments on its preliminary view that the Applicant cannot
continue with the substantive application because
it is in liquidation and
invited the interested parties to apply to the Tribunal to continue with the
substantive application. The
Liquidators did not specifically reply to that
communication. They had, however already advised the Tribunal in writing they
not intend to pursue the review. Mr Ball advised the Tribunal in writing
that he did not intend to pursue the review.
Tribunal considers there is no person mentioned in s 84(2) of the ART Act who
can continue with the substantive application. As
such the review could be
dismissed pursuant to s 84(4)(a) of the ART Act.
Tribunal dismisses the application for review.
Date(s) of hearing:
No attendance
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr M Sherman
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Australian Government Solicitor
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
RTF format (12.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format