Fair Work Ombudsman v Phiyasirikul trading as Thai Square Warners Bay [2021] FCCA 1943 (31 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
FAIR WORK OMBUDSMAN v PHIYASIRIKUL TRADING AS
THAI SQUARE WARNERS BAY
[2021] FCCA 1943
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – Breaches of civil remedy
provisions of the
Fair Work Act 2009
– imposition of pecuniary
penalties – relevant considerations.
Legislation:
Fair Work Act 2009
Crimes Act 1914
Cases cited:
Kelly v Fitzpatrick
[2007] FCA 1080
(2007) 166 IR 14
FAIR WORK OMBUDSMAN
Respondent:
SUPON PHIYASIRIKUL T/A THAI SQUARE WARNERS
File Number:
SYG 3333 of 2019
Judgment of:
Judge Cameron
Hearing date:
Determined on the papers
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Solicitor for the
Ms J Dennis, Office of the Fair Work Ombudsman
The respondent appeared in person
THE COURT DECLARES THAT:
(1) The respondent
contravened
section 716(5)
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) by failing to
comply with the compliance notice served on him on 26 August 2019.
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
(1) The respondent pay a penalty of $3,402 to the
Commonwealth within twenty-eight days.
(2) The respondent take the steps that were required by the compliance notice
served on him on 26 August 2019 (“Compliance Notice”)
within 28 days
of this order, by:
(a) calculating the outstanding entitlements he was required to pay the
employees covered by the Compliance Notice (“Employees”);
(b) calculating the outstanding superannuation contributions he was required
to pay to the Employees’ nominated superannuation
funds in relation to the
entitlements referred to in order 2(a);
(c) paying to the applicant (on behalf of the Employees) the outstanding
entitlements referred to in Order 2(a);
(d) paying to the applicant (on behalf of the Employees) interest on the
amounts referred to in Order 2(a), calculated as follows:
(i) in respect of the period from 1 January to 30 June in any year –
the rate that is 4% above the cash rate last published
by the Reserve Bank of
Australia before that period commenced; and
(ii) in respect of the period from 1 July to 31 December in any year –
the rate that is 4% above the cash rate last published
by the Reserve Bank of
Australia before that period commenced;
(e) paying into the Employees’ nominated superannuation funds the
outstanding superannuation contributions referred to in Order
(f) preparing and producing to the applicant a schedule outlining his
calculation of the amounts referred to in Orders 2(a) and (b)
and providing
proof that the outstanding superannuation contributions were paid as ordered in
Order 2(e).
(3) The applicant distribute to the Employees on a pro rata basis the amounts
paid pursuant to Orders (2)(c) and (d) within 180 days
of the payment being made
or, in the event that any of the Employees cannot be located within that period,
pay those amounts to the
Commonwealth pursuant to
section 559
Work Act 2009
(4) The applicant have liberty to apply within 90 days should the respondent
not comply fully with Order 2.
(5) The parties have liberty to apply in relation to the working out of these
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT
OF AUSTRALIA
SYG 3333 of
FAIR WORK OMBUDSMAN
SUPON PHIYASIRIKUL T/A THAI SQUARE WARNERS
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
1. The respondent operated a restaurant in Warners Bay
and the applicant (“Ombudsman”) has alleged that he contravened
Fair Work Act 2009
(“FW Act”) by failing
to comply with the requirements of a compliance notice served on him on 26
August 2019 (“Compliance
2. These reasons concern the steps that the respondent must take pursuant to and
consequent upon the Compliance Notice and the penalty
to be imposed on him for
his contravention of the FW Act, as agreed and particularised below. The
parties agreed to the matter being
determined without an oral
STATEMENT OF AGREED FACTS
Agreed facts
3. The parties filed a Statement
of Agreed Facts on 6 February 2020 in which they relevantly agreed on the
following facts.
4. Between 1 July 2018 and 30 June 2019, the respondent operated a restaurant
which employed at least fifteen employees, at least
ten of whom were nineteen
year or younger, four of whom were sixteen years or younger and at least two of
whom held student visas.
The employees were employed on a casual or
full-time basis and the
Restaurant Industry Award 2010
(“Award”) applied to their employment. Employees were paid the
following rates:
Monday to Friday
$10.82-$12.20 per hour
$13.52-$15.27 per hour
$16.15-$18.33 per hour
5. As a result of an investigation into the respondent’s business between
May and August 2019, Fair Work Inspector Cummings
formed a reasonable belief
that the respondent had contravened cls.20.1 (minimum wage), 13.1 (casual
loading), 13.3 (minimum payment
for two hours work for casual employees), 33.2
(overtime rates for full-time employees); and 34.1 (Saturday, Sunday and public
penalty rates) of the Award.
6. On 26 August 2019 the respondent was personally served with the Compliance
Notice, which concerned those contraventions. At the
same time, FWI Cummings
outlined to the respondent the steps involved in compliance and informed him
that legal action might result
if he failed to comply with the notice. The
Compliance Notice required the respondent to take the following actions to
contraventions and it required him to do so by 26 September 2019:
(i) identifying
each Employee employed by him from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;
(ii) identifying
the employment status, classification, hours worked by and amounts paid to each
Employee between 1 July 2018 to
30 June 2019;
(iii) calculating
and paying any outstanding amounts owing to each Employee, and the
superannuation payable to each employee in respect
of any outstanding amounts;
(iv) preparing
a schedule of outstanding amounts calculated and amounts paid to each Employee
to remedy any outstanding amounts identified
By 4 October 2019 he was required to show the
Ombudsman reasonable evidence of his compliance with the notice by producing a
of calculations and payments and evidence of paying each employee the
amounts they were owed.
7. A sample wage calculation that was provided to the respondent for guidance
showed the following underpayments:
Amount underpaid according to the sample wage calculation
Ms Connelly
8. The respondent contravened s.716(5) of the FW Act by virtue of the fact that
Ms Welfare $50.00 and Ms Grant $49.54 on 25 October 2019, but did not take the
steps required by the Compliance Notice and failed
to produce reasonable
evidence of compliance with it; and
not applied for review of the notice pursuant to s.717 of the FW Act, had no
reasonable excuse for failing to comply with it.
Agreed contraventions and declarations
9. The respondent having made those admissions, the
parties consented to the Court making a declaration that the respondent
contravened
s.716(5) of the FW Act by failing to comply with the Compliance
10. The parties also consented to the Court making the following
pursuant to
section 545(1) of the FW Act, the Respondent take the steps that were required
by the Compliance Notice within 28 days
of this order, by:
(i) calculating
the outstanding entitlements he was required to pay the Employees, including
superannuation;
(ii) paying
the outstanding entitlements he was required to pay the Employees referred to in
paragraph 20(a)(i) above, to the FWO
(on behalf of the Employees);
(iii) paying
superannuation into the Employees’ nominated superannuation funds for
additional superannuation contributions
he was required to pay on the
outstanding entitlements referred to in paragraph 20(a)(i) above (as required by
clause 30.2 of the
Restaurant Award); and
(iv) preparing
and producing to the FWO, a schedule outlining his calculation of the
outstanding entitlements he was required to
pay the Employees referred to in
paragraph 20(a)(i) above, and providing proof that the outstanding entitlements
were rectified as
set out in paragraphs 20(a)(ii) and 20(a)(iii);
(b) pursuant
to section 547(2) of the FW Act, the Respondent pay interest on the amounts owed
to the Employees pursuant to paragraph
20(a)(i) above, to the FWO within 28 days
of this order;
(c) the FWO
distribute to the Employees the amounts paid pursuant to paragraphs 20(a)(i) and
20(b) above within 180 days of the payment
being made, or in the event that any
of the Employees cannot be located within this timeframe, these amounts be paid
to the Commonwealth
of Australia pursuant to section 559 of the FW Act;
(d) pursuant
to section 546(1) of the FW Act, the Respondent pay a pecuniary penalty to the
Commonwealth for the contravention set
out in paragraph 19 within 28 days of
this order;
(e) the FWO
have liberty to apply; and
further orders as the Court considers appropriate.
LEGISLATION
11. Section 716 of the FW Act relevantly provides:
716 Compliance
Application of
this section
section applies if an inspector reasonably believes that a person has
contravened one or more of the following:
of a modern award;
inspector may, except as provided by subsection (4), give the person a notice
requiring the person to do either or both of
the following within such
reasonable time as is specified in the notice:
specified action to remedy the direct effects of the contravention referred to
in subsection (1);
(b) produce
reasonable evidence of the person’s compliance with the
notice must also:
(c) set out
brief details of the contravention; and
(d) explain
that a failure to comply with the notice may contravene a civil remedy
provision; and
(f) set out
any other matters prescribed by the regulations.
Relationship
with civil remedy provisions
inspector must not apply for an order under Division 2 of Part 4-1 in relation
to a contravention of a civil remedy provision
by a person if:
inspector has given the person a notice in relation to the contravention; and
of the following subparagraphs applies:
notice has not been withdrawn, and the person has complied with the notice;
person who complies with a notice in relation to a contravention of a civil
remedy provision is not taken:
(a) to have
admitted to contravening the provision; or
(b) to have
been found to have contravened the provision.
Person must not
fail to comply with notice
(5) A person
must not fail to comply with a notice given under this section.
12. Section 717 of the FW Act provides:
Review of compliance notices
(1) A person
who has been given a notice under section 716 may apply to the Federal Court,
the Federal Circuit Court or an eligible
State or Territory Court for a review
of the notice on either or both of the following grounds:
person has not committed a contravention set out in the notice;
notice does not comply with subsection 716(2) or (3).
time after the application has been made, the court may stay the operation of
the notice on the terms and conditions that
the court considers appropriate.
court may confirm, cancel or vary the notice after reviewing
13. Section 716(5) of the FW Act is a civil remedy provision: s.539(2) of the
FW Act. Pursuant to ss.539(2) and 546(2) of the FW
Act, the maximum pecuniary
penalty that can be imposed for an individual’s breach of s.716(5) is 30
penalty units. In the
period between the date for compliance with the
Compliance Notice, 4 October 2019, and the commencement of this proceeding, 17
2019, a penalty unit was worth $210: s.4AA
Crimes Act 1914
14. The Ombudsman relied upon the affidavit of FWI
Cummings affirmed 27 February 2020. No objection was made to the Ombudsman
on the affidavit and I will treat it has having been read. I accept
what it says. FWI Cummings deposed that:
investigation began on 8 May 2019 following a request for assistance by one of
the Employees, alleging underpayment;
investigation included a visit to the business’s premise and two notices
to produce documents, issued on 8 May 2019 and
12 June 2019 respectively. She
deposed that the respondent provided a completed entity information form on 22
May 2019 and attended
the Ombudsman’s office in Newcastle on 30 May 2019
and 27 June 2019 to provide documentation and on 11 June 2019 to meet with
and another inspector;
26 August 2019, at the Ombudsman’s office in Newcastle, she provided the
respondent with the Compliance Notice. The Compliance
Notice identified
contraventions of the Award during the period 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019 and
required the respondent to identify
each employee he employed in that period,
calculate any underpayments and superannuation owing to employees, rectify those
by 26 September 2019, and provide the Ombudsman with evidence of his
compliance by 4 October 2019. At that meeting the respondent
was given a
detailed explanation of the Award contraventions that had been identified, of
the notice’s covering letter and
of the actions the Ombudsman might take
if the notice was not complied with, such as legal action. She deposed that the
told her that he understood the notice and the actions he needed to
take and would comply. She deposed that she provided the respondent
pay guide and sample payments for four of the Employees and told him that he
would need to do calculations for the other
exchanged the following emails with the respondent:
September 2019 the respondent informed her that he could not find his roster
book but would locate it upon his 10 October 2020
Thailand, where he had had to travel owing to the death of his sister;
September 2019 she requested that by 10 October 2019 he provide whatever
calculations and information he had completed and in
the intervening period pay
any employees for whom he had completed calculations. The respondent did not
October 2019 she requested that the respondent urgently finalise his
calculations and produce proof of payment(s);
October 2019 the respondent informed her he had not read his emails due to poor
health and stated:
... I didn't
read email for many days so when I see your email today I immediately reply and
I check the underpaid of Emma that you
gave it to me that she work on
6/5/2019-12/5/2019 (You mark in yellow high light) that one I already paid
$192.31 on 14/5/2019 and
13/5/2019-19/5/2019 I already paid that one too $131.17
on 24/5/2019
staffs are happy and sign accepted of the rate we pay because they are young
students never work in any restaurant before
we train from don't know anything
to know how to work in the restaurant so they can have income by themselves
don't need to ask money
from parent
Most of them
are happy the rate and they write there paid by themselves except some people
that not agree with these So I want to
pay the under paid to the people (eg.
Sarah) that not accept the old rate but the others are happy and accept the old
since 1 July 2019 I update the pay rate as you gave me the sheets and I used the
STP and send pay slip to all of my payees
so from now everything are up to date.
She informed the
respondent that employers and employees could not agree on pay rates less than
those of the Award and that failure
to comply with the Compliance Notice might
result in legal action;
emails regarding the sample calculations followed between 24 and 30
October 2019 the respondent provided confirmation that $50.00 and $49.54 had
been paid to Ms Welfare and Ms Grant respectively;
November 2019 the respondent told FWI Cummings that he had:
...calculated
all the current staff that underpayment by using there copy that sent to me so
it should be complete by the end of
this week or early next week and I will let
(errors in original)
December 2019 she informed the respondent that the matter had been referred to
the Ombudsman’s legal department because
he had sent no further
correspondence. He did not respond to that email.
deposed that after this proceeding was commenced on 17 December 2019, she
had seen further email correspondence between the respondent
Ombudsman’s solicitors including emails dated:
February 2020 where the respondent attached a spreadsheet of underpayment
calculations for 10 employees for the period 3 September
2018 and 30 June
February 2020 where the Ombudsman’s solicitor reiterated the requirements
of the Compliance Notice and stated that no evidence
of compliance had yet been
February 2020 when the respondent showed payment of $144.09 to one employee
whom, he said, had been made aware of the underpayment;
February 2020 to which the respondent attached a second spreadsheet of
underpayment calculations regarding 12 employees for the
period 3 September
2018 and 30 June 2019. The Ombudsman’s solicitor responded the same day
informing the respondent that the
Compliance Notice required calculations for
all of the Employees.
15. FWI Cummings deposed that at the time of her affidavit, the respondent had
neither completed the calculations nor made the payments
required by the
Compliance Notice.
16. FWI Cummings deposed that she had accessed and read the Ombudsman’s
Industry profile and FWO interactions, Cafes and Restaurants Industry
report which summarised workplace law compliance within that industry. She
deposed that the report indicated that:
July 2016 to December 2018, the FWO completed 5,984 physical or online requests
for assistance (Dispute Forms) from workers
in the cafe and restaurant industry,
being 9.8% of all Dispute Forms completed in that period;
(b) Dispute
Forms for the cafe and restaurant industry were completed at an average rate of
42.3 Dispute Forms per 1000 businesses,
compared to an average of 15.5 Dispute
Forms per 1000 businesses across all industries;
workers (15-24 years of age) made up 40.2% of employment in the industry and
accounted for 40.4% of completed disputes
in the cafe and restaurant
(d) of those
Dispute Forms completed, 23% related to underpayments of hourly rates, 15%
related to not being paid for time worked
and 18% related to underpayment or
non-payment of weekend or public holiday penalty; and
Dispute Forms completed for the cafe and restaurant industry were from workers
who held visas, (such as working holiday
visas, international student visas or
migrant worker visas) compared to 19.5% of Dispute Forms completed across all
industries being
from workers who held visas.
17. FWI Cummings deposed that land title searches that she conducted on 14
February 2020 showed that the respondent was the owner
or part owner of seven
properties whose combined market value was estimated to exceed $2.3 million.
The title searches annexed to
FWI Cummings’s affidavit indicate that three
of those properties, owned solely by the respondent but of less value than the
other properties, were unencumbered by mortgages.
CONSIDERATION
18. Section 716 of the FW Act provides that when
contravention of a prescribed instrument is identified, a compliance notice may
employed to call upon the contravener to remedy the direct effects of the
contravention. In broad terms, if that is done and demonstrated,
compliance prevents the Ombudsman from applying for penalties, compensation,
interest or other relevant orders: s.716(4A).
Also, such compliance does not
operate as an admission or as a finding of contravention: s.716(4B).
19. Although the evidence does not indicate that it was made clear to the
respondent that compliance with the notice would mean that
the Ombudsman could
not later bring proceedings against him based on his underpayment of employee
entitlements, the probable consequence
of failure to comply with the
requirements of the notice was made clear. It is perhaps unfortunate that the
Compliance Notice’s
covering letter did not convey the message in a
positive as well as in a negative way, but the respondent was nevertheless given
an opportunity to remedy his underpayment contraventions and yet he still failed
to do what was plainly required by the FW Act, the
Award and the Compliance
20. In that connection, despite the respondent’s various contraventions of
his wages and superannuation obligations, I acknowledge
that this proceeding is
concerned with the single contravention of s.716(5) that arises out of the
respondent’s failure to
comply with the Contravention Notice. As the
respondent is an individual, the maximum penalty for his contravention is
When determining the appropriate penalty to impose, regard should be
had to all of the circumstances of the case, guided by the various
discretionary
considerations discussed in authorities such as
Kelly v Fitzpatrick
[2007] FCA 1080
(2007) 166 IR 14
, in order to arrive at a single result that is an instinctive
synthesis of those various factors.
21. The nature of the contravention appears clearly from the statement of agreed
facts as do its circumstances. The respondent was
served with the Compliance
Notice which set out what was required of him. The notice was explained to him,
he was given time to
comply, including a subsequent extension of time, but only
partial compliance was effected. This was in circumstances where a very
percentage of the respondent’s workforce were under 20 years of age and
two of the employees held student visas. A degree
of vulnerability can be
22. The respondent’s failure to comply with the Compliance Notice has
caused the Ombudsman to spend time and money bringing
this proceeding and it has
also engaged the Court’s time. Compliance would have avoided that and the
respondent has not led
any evidence which would explain his failure in that
regard. I note that he has not sought to contest the Ombudsman’s evidence
which indicates that he is not without financial resources, notwithstanding the
size of the business.
23. The respondent has co-operated with the Ombudsman to a limited degree in
that he has made the calculations and payment referred
to above. However, the
calculations did not cover the whole of the period in issue and there is no
evidence of other payments having
been made. In those circumstances, that
co-operation has been of practically no material value and does not warrant any
of the penalty. I do note however that the respondent has agreed facts
and has consented to the agreed declaration and orders, all
of which has
simplified this proceeding. Even so, his conduct does not evidence contrition
or recognition of wrongdoing and so I
will allow a discount on penalty of only
10%, which relates to the admissions in the statement of agreed facts and
consent to orders
and a declaration.
24. In connection with the issues of contrition and co-operation, the compliance
notice system appears to be an efficient way for
the Ombudsman to secure
cost-effective compliance with industrial instruments. Once breaches have been
identified, a compliance
notice can multiply the effect of the work done by the
Ombudsman’s inspectors by, such as in this case, requiring the
contraveners
themselves to identify all their contraventions and then to correct
them, saving inspectors much time and effort. It is also advantageous
contraveners because, once properly addressed, the compliance notice prevents
further action by the Ombudsman in relation to the
matters it has raised. In
the circumstances of this case, where the evidence does not indicate that any
attempt was made to challenge
the correctness of the notice by an application
for review under s.717 of the FW Act, the respondent’s failure to take
of the notice and to address the contraventions it identified
undermines that scheme and, given that the notice was based on unresolved
underlying contraventions of other provisions of the FW Act, suggests
unwillingness prior to what approximates the settlement of
this proceeding, to
comply with the requirements of industrial law and the maintenance of minimum
standards. For those reasons,
the penalty to be imposed should include an
element for specific deterrence and also general deterrence, particularly in
the fact that the industry in which the respondent operated is
notorious for its underpayment of employees. The penalty to be imposed
mark the Court’s disapproval of that conduct.
25. In all the circumstances, and after applying a 10% discount on penalty,
I consider a just and appropriate penalty in this case
26. The respondent is to pay a penalty of $3,402 to the
Commonwealth within twenty-eight days.
27. There will be a declaration and orders in accordance with the agreement of
the parties quoted earlier at [9] and [10].
I certify that the
preceding twenty-seven (27) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for
judgment of Judge Cameron
Date: 31 August 2021
RTF format (288 KB)
Signed PDF/A format