Invest Blue Pty Ltd (Consent to Review) [2025] ATP 6 (27 February 2025)
Reasons for Decision
Invest Blue Pty Ltd (Consent to
[2025] ATP 6
Catchwords:
Consent to review – decline to consent – reducing company to
less than 50 members – timely application – extend
time for making
application
Corporations Act 2001
section 231
Takeovers Panel Procedural Rules 2020, rules 11, 20
Takeovers Panel Procedural Guidelines 2020, 4.6(b)
Guidance Note 2: Reviewing Decisions
Moreton Resources Limited (Administrators Appointed) 02 (Consent to
Review) [2020] ATP 15, Careers Australia Group Limited 03R [2015]
ATP 2, Austral
Coal Limited 03R [2005] ATP 15
Interim order
IO undertaking
Declaration
Final order
Undertaking
INTRODUCTION
substantive President of the Panel, Alex Cartel, declined to grant consent to an
application for review of a decision of the sitting
Panel to decline to conduct
proceedings in
Invest Blue Pty Ltd
these reasons, the following definitions
Kanenaro Pty Ltd ATF Denaro Family Superannuation Fund
Austral Coal 03R
has the meaning given in paragraph
Careers 03R
has the meaning given in paragraph
Equity Plan Services
Equity Plan Services Pty Ltd
has the meaning given in paragraph
Invest Blue
Invest Blue Pty Ltd
Invest Blue Support
Invest Blue Support Pty Ltd, a related body corporate of Invest Blue
Ironbark Investment Partners Pty Ltd
has the meaning given in paragraph
has the meaning given in paragraph
Blue is a proprietary company limited by shares which operates in the financial
services sector.
Anthony Denaro, a former employee of Invest Blue Support, is both a beneficiary
of the Denaro Family Superannuation Fund and a
director of the Applicant.
March 2022, the Applicant acquired shares directly in Invest Blue, then a public
company with more than 50 members.
June 2022, Invest Blue requested that all employees transfer their shareholdings
to a bare trust arrangement to (among other things)
allow Invest Blue to
transition to a proprietary company.
August 2022, the Applicant appointed Equity Plan Services to hold its Invest
Blue shares on trust pursuant to a bare trust deed.
19 April 2023, Invest Blue applied to convert from a public company to a
proprietary company.
August 2023, Ironbark, which already owned approximately 40% of the shares in
Invest Blue through a related body corporate, offered
to acquire all of the
remaining shares in Invest Blue that it did not already own for scrip in
Ironbark pursuant to a share purchase
merger summary provided by Invest Blue to the Applicant stated
Plan Services Pty Ltd will act on behalf of shareholders in the bare trust to
execute the Share Purchase Agreement.
Equity Plan Services will contact
shareholders separately to seek consent for them to agree to the SPA on your
under the share purchase agreement occurred on 15 December 2023 (as
submitted by Invest Blue and Ironbark).
23 December 2024, Invest Blue Support commenced Federal Court proceedings
against Mr Denaro alleging that he had breached certain
post-termination
employment obligations, including a three-year non-compete clause.
17 February 2025, the Applicant made an application to the Panel. The Applicant
submitted that:
(a) at the time of the merger, Invest Blue was an
unlisted company with more than 50 members for the purposes of section
and that Invest Blue and
Ironbark had failed to comply with the requirements of Chapter 6 (
(b) in the alternative, if Invest Blue was not a
Chapter 6 company at the time of the merger, then certain steps taken by Invest
prior to the merger to extinguish the Chapter 6 rights of the Applicant and
other employee shareholders constituted unacceptable
circumstances (
sitting Panel concluded there was no reasonable prospect that it would make a
declaration of unacceptable circumstances and declined
to conduct proceedings.
In its email to parties dated 25 February 2025, the sitting Panel stated that it
considered the following
circumstances important to its decision (not listed in
any order of importance):
(a) on the material provided, [Invest Blue] had fewer than 50 members on 15
December 2023, when the share purchase agreement was entered
(b) it was unlikely that, after making enquiries, the Panel would make a
finding that there had been a deliberate strategy to reduce
Invest Blue’s
number of shareholders with a view to taking the company outside the ambit of
Chapter 6 of the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and depriving shareholders of the
benefits and protections afforded under that Chapter
(c) the orders sought by the applicant are apt to be unfairly prejudicial to
various parties, including Invest Blue, Ironbark Investment
Partners Pty Ltd,
and former Invest Blue shareholders, particularly given the time that has passed
since any relevant circumstances
occurred and
(d) the application was not timely.
sitting Panel also noted that the application was out of time for the purposes
section 657C(3)
and while the sitting Panel considered it was unlikely
to extend time, it was not necessary to consider the request for an extension
further given its decision not to conduct proceedings.
sitting Panel’s email states that the email communicates the decision of
the Panel but it does not constitute the Panel’s
reasons for its decision
which it will publish at a later date.
REQUEST FOR CONSENT
27 February 2025, the Applicant sought consent to review the sitting
Panel’s decision not to conduct proceedings.
the purposes of seeking consent, the Applicant relied on matters raised in its
review application and the original application
in relation to Issue 1 only.
The Applicant withdrew its request for any declaration of unacceptable
circumstances in relation to
a review application under
section 657EA
consideration of an
initial Panel’s decision.
Here, that decision was in relation to both Issue 1 and Issue 2.
Separately, there is provision for an applicant to withdraw its
application with
the consent of the Panel or the President (if the request is made before a Panel
is appointed).
unusual, I see no reason to deny the withdrawal of Issue 2 noting that the
sitting Panel’s decision did not involve
the making of a declaration of
unacceptable circumstances or orders. Accordingly, I focus on Issue 1 for the
purposes of considering
whether to grant consent to review, as requested by the
sitting Panel’s decision was a decision not to conduct proceedings and did
not involve a declaration of unacceptable circumstances
or orders. Accordingly,
section 657EA(2)
, my consent is a necessary precondition to the Applicant
applying for a review of that decision.
Note 2: Reviewing Decisions
) states (at [29]) that the
President’s approach to consenting to a review is guided by the following
considerations:
(a) that it is a policy underpinning
section 657EA(2)
that there should be a
prompt conclusion to Panel proceedings
(b) whether there was any potential error in the sitting Panel’s decision
(c) whether there is any other basis for granting consent, for example, if there
is new evidence, the importance of the dispute,
whether there would be material
prejudice to any party by consenting or by withholding consent, and the merits
of the sitting Panel’s
considering whether to grant consent, I have read:
Invest Blue Pty Ltd
application and its annexures
(b) the email communicating the sitting Panel’s decision and
(c) the review application (which included the Applicant’s request for
consent) and its annexures (which included the preliminary
submissions of Invest
Blue and Ironbark in
Invest Blue Pty Ltd
Applicant’s grounds for review
Applicant raised a number of matters in support of Issue 1. I address
specifically only those I consider necessary to explain
my reasoning.
the Applicant disputes that the acquisition of Invest Blue by Ironbark completed
on 15 December 2023 because ASIC records do
not reflect changes in
ownership consistent with the acquisition. I do not consider ASIC records to be
definitive on this question
and failure to report matters to ASIC is not a
matter for the Panel.
do not agree with the Applicant’s submission that the state of the ASIC
records and the failure of Invest Blue or Ironbark
to refute the position
disclosed by the ASIC records means that there was no evidence before the
sitting Panel that the acquisition
has completed.
the Applicant referred to an annexure attached to the preliminary submissions of
Invest Blue and an annexure attached to
the preliminary submissions of Ironbark,
both provided to the sitting Panel. The Applicant had not previously had an
opportunity
to make any submissions in respect of these two
The Applicant submitted
that the Panel could draw inferences from these documents that Invest Blue had
more than 50 members prior
to the merger.
this submission potentially raises new evidence because it represents the first
opportunity that the Applicant has had to comment
on the documents, I do not
consider the submission of sufficient weight to lead a review Panel to reach a
different decision.
Applicant further submitted that the sitting Panel’s concern regarding the
potential prejudice to other parties (including
former Invest Blue shareholders)
in relation to the orders sought by the Applicant (see paragraph
“underplays the capacity of
the Panel to fashion orders which would have ameliorated any possible
have not had the benefit of reviewing the sitting Panel’s reasons for
decision which were not published at the time of my
decision. While I agree
that the Panel has scope to fashion its orders in a manner that mitigates
prejudice, noting that it may
not make any order if it is satisfied that the
order would unfairly prejudice any
the Panel is entitled to
consider the remedies available when deciding whether to conduct
proceedings.
Based on its decision
email, the sitting Panel appears to have had concerns with the orders requested
by the Applicant. However,
I only read this as being one of several
considerations of the Panel and not definitive of the substantive issue (Issue
Applicant also submitted that the Shareholders Agreement of Invest Blue treats
and defines the employee shareholders (including
the Applicant) as shareholders
to the exclusion of Equity Plan Services highlighting specific clauses of that
agreement. This argument
may support a claim that the Applicant can take to a
Court but does not appear to me to be relevant to the question of the number
members of Invest Blue at the time of the merger.
the Applicant noted the three-year non-compete provisions in the Shareholder
Agreements of both Invest Blue and
It submitted that the
Panel should, when considering whether a company is a Chapter 6 company, oppose
an interpretation of the share
register that deprives employee shareholders of
the protections of Chapter 6 and avoids the disclosure requirements of
including the consequences of entry into any shareholders agreement
“the imposition of onerous non compete provisions affecting the
future livelihood of the employee shareholder”
. In this context, the
Applicant noted Treasury’s ‘Worker non-compete clauses and other
restraints’ Issues Paper
released last year and the possible future
legislative reforms.
make no comment on the government’s policy reforms. Again, this concern
does not change what is determinative of whether
a company is a Chapter 6
company. Whether the Applicant was (and other employee shareholders were) fully
informed about the establishment
and consequences of the bare trust arrangements
may be a relevant consideration in relation to Issue 2. However, that issue has
been withdrawn by the Applicant and the sitting Panel noted it would be
unlikely, after making enquiries, to make a finding on that
issue. Again, I
have not seen the sitting Panel’s reasons in relation to this issue but I
would expect that it would be a
difficult evidentiary exercise for a Panel to
draw a conclusion on this issue in a timely manner, noting (as the sitting Panel
the time that has passed since the bare trust arrangements were put in
understand that the enforcement proceedings by Invest Blue Support in the
Federal Court are of personal concern to Mr Denaro. However,
while the question
of whether a company is a Chapter 6 company is relevant to the Panel’s
withholding consent materially prejudices
the Applicant given that it has another forum (being a Court) to make its
Merits of the sitting Panel’s decision
(at [29(c)]) in posing the question as to whether there is any other basis for
granting consent lists the merits of the sitting
Panel’s decision. In
Austral Coal Limited 03R
[2005] ATP 15 (
Austral Coal 03R
the then acting President said (at [17]):
While it was not
necessary for the President to reconsider the merits of the First Instance
Decision, the President could find no
reasonable basis to suspect that a Review
Panel would decide to commence proceedings if he were to grant consent to such a
Careers Australia Group Limited 03R
[2015] ATP 2 (
) the then President, after quoting from
Austral Coal 03R
stated (at [29], footnotes omitted):
Whether a review Panel would
be likely to decide to conduct proceedings if consent were given is a relevant
consideration in my view.
There is some overlap between this and the error
ground above, but it is not necessary for the initial Panel to be in error for a
review Panel to come to a different conclusion. It is a de novo review. Were I
to form the view that a review Panel would be likely
to conduct proceedings, it
may tip the balance against other factors that incline to the contrary. Of
course all the factors must
be weighed in each case.
agree with this statement and consider whether a review Panel would be likely to
decide to conduct proceedings if consent were given
to be a relevant
consideration.
I consider the
merits of the sitting Panel’s decision here weigh against granting
submissions put forth by the Applicant ask the Panel to draw inferences from
various documents or circumstances in relation to
a question (Issue 1) that is
unambiguous – namely, how many members did Invest Blue have at the time of
the merger? This question
turns on how many names were entered on the register
of members of Invest Blue at that
The sitting Panel concluded
that on the material provided Invest Blue had fewer than 50 members at that
consider it unlikely that a review Panel would conduct proceedings on the basis
of Issue 1 (or would take the view that the application
was within time or that
it would otherwise extend time). And, as noted above, I am not persuaded that
there was any potential error
in the sitting Panel’s conclusion on Issue 1
nor any compelling new material which would change that conclusion.
Policy basis
(at [29(a)]) also provides that I consider the policy underpinning
when consenting to a review. This was enunciated in
Careers 03R
by the then President (at [14]) as follows:
underpinning
in my view is that, while it is usual for Commonwealth
administrative agencies to allow one merits review, if no declaration and
have been made no new rights or obligations have been created.
Section 657EA(2)
gives effect to the principle that there should be a prompt conclusion to Panel
proceedings because takeovers, and other control
transactions, are often fast
Careers 03R
the President went on to say that this aspect of the policy
did not have much application in that matter because the relevant bid
almost 18 months prior to the date of the initial application and therefore, the
matter involved a retrospective review.
according to Invest Blue and Ironbark, the merger completed on 15 December 2023
and so like in
Careers 03R
there is no transaction pending on the Panel
proceedings. I recognise that the facts are quite different between the two
Careers 03R
involved a successful cash takeover bid and
here the Applicant appears to be a beneficial shareholder in Ironbark following
and is allegedly subject to continuing contractual obligations.
Bringing this matter to a prompt conclusion is not a significant
factor from the
perspective that the proceedings are holding up any transaction, but I do
believe that prompt decision making is
still important where I consider it
unlikely that a review Panel will decide to conduct proceedings.
the basis of the above, I decline to grant consent under
section 657EA(2)
review of the sitting Panel’s decision.
President of the Panel
Decision dated 27 February
Reasons given to parties 13 March 2025
published 18 March 2025
Kanenaro Pty Ltd ATF Denaro Family Superannuation Fund
Pointon Partners
Unless otherwise indicated, all
statutory references are to the
Corporations Act 2001
all terms used in Chapter 6, 6A or 6C have the meaning given in the relevant
Chapter (as modified by ASIC)
Guidance Note 2: Reviewing Decisions at
Takeovers Panel Procedural
Rules 2020, rule 11
Takeovers Panel
Procedural Guidelines 2020 at
Employee shareholders
were required to sign of deed of accession to the Shareholders Agreement of
Ironbark in connection with the
Resources Limited (Administrators Appointed) 02 (Consent to Review)
ATP 15 at [25]-[26]
RTF format (7.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format