Estate of the late Geoffrey Croft v MTH & Ors [2025] HCATrans 77 (13 November 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 077
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S155 of 2025
B e t w e e n
ESTATE OF THE LATE GEOFFREY CROFT
First Respondent
STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Second Respondent
SANDRA CROFT
Third Respondent
BEECH‑JONES J
TRANSCRIPT OF
PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA AND BY VIDEO CONNECTION
THURSDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2025, AT 9.04 AM
____________________
HIS HONOUR:
In accordance with the protocol for remote
hearings, I will announce the appearances for the
MR K.W. ANDREWS
appears for the
appellant. (instructed by Keypoint Law)
MR C.P O.’NEILL
appears with
MS C.J. ROBERTSON
for the second respondent.
(instructed by Makinson d’Apice
MR P.A. TIERNEY
appears for the third
respondent. (instructed by Moin Morris Schaefer Armidale)
I will just start by asking: MTH, can you hear
Yes, your Honour. I can.
I think there is some problem with your screen. I am perfectly
happy to proceed as long as I can hear you very clearly.
That is fine with me also, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
right. Thank you. Just before we come to the question about an amicus,
Mr Andrews, can I just ask you something about your
MR ANDREWS:
Yes, your Honour.
The notice of appeal named the second respondent, the State of New
South Wales, and Sandra Croft – who I understand is the
the late Geoffrey Croft – as the third respondent.
She is the third respondent, yes, your Honour.
Yes. As I understand it, no substantive relief is sought against
them. Is that correct?
MR ANDREWS:
HIS HONOUR:
And so, were they named because they were
parties in the court below?
MR ANDREWS:
They were named because
they were in the court below, yes. That is exactly right.
Right. So, I will come to them at some point, but ordinarily you
would have anticipated submitting appearances?
MR ANDREWS:
That is correct.
HIS HONOUR:
All right. Ms MTH, I think
you have seen the terms of the grant of special leave to appeal and the
undertaking. As I understand
it, you have not been successful in obtaining
representation, so that the question about appointing an amicus arises. Is that
You have not been successful with obtaining
representation?
That is correct. Your Honour, though,
there is a cross‑claim that the other two parties are involved
HIS HONOUR:
Right. Now, that is what I wanted to come to
before we get to the question of an amicus. Your cross‑claim, as I have
it – parts of it, the first two paragraphs under the heading
“Grounds” I think are addressing matters concerning
the notice of
appeal. Is that right?
Yes, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
just go on.
HIS HONOUR:
The balance of
it, as I understand it, seeks to do two things. It seeks to increase the award
of damages and it seeks to agitate
the question of whether the State and
Mrs Croft are liable. Is that right?
Yes. It relates
to an ongoing freezing order that established a damages figure back
in 2020, and the appeal process – due
to many reasons, which I
hope to be able to establish – the judges were either mislead or did
not correctly understand certain
aspects of the matters against the other
parties and also a restriction of criminal evidence that needed to be
considered, plus a
new section 6A of connected abuse that also they seemed
to have no understanding of.
HIS HONOUR:
Right. I understand
that. So, to bring a cross‑appeal that has that effect – that
is, that seeks to increase the
damages awarded against the appellant and makes
the second and third respondents liable – you will need to get a
grant of special
leave to appeal. The Court cannot list the appeal until it
knows whether special leave will be granted on the cross‑appeal,
that will affect all the issues that need to be addressed and
HIS HONOUR:
So, what will need
to happen is that the process of seeking special leave to cross‑appeal
will go through the Court’s
usual paper process. When we know the outcome
of that, we will then be able to list the appeal. I just should note this at
outset, though, just for you to note. The undertaking as to costs that the
appellant’s solicitor has given does not relate
to the costs of any
cross‑appeal. It only concerns this appeal.
Your Honour, I have been given incorrect information, then. My
understanding is, because I put an extensive special leave application
the hearing was heard, there was a lot of evidence that was supplied at that
time. I was then advised that the submission
of a cross‑claim had been
accepted to be heard at the same time as this hearing, because I checked to see
that the Judges had
already considered all of the submissions that were put in
by way of the special leave.
HIS HONOUR:
Right ‑ ‑ ‑
And there were
quite some submissions, and I had been advised that all of that had been
considered as well.
HIS HONOUR:
I am sorry that you had that
misunderstanding. I do not know where it came from, but I can tell you that
there has been no grant
of special leave on the matters raised by your proposed
cross‑appeal, and that
Can I then check
with you if you actually saw the 140‑so pages and attachments that
were put into the special leave application?
HIS HONOUR:
lot of paper over a lot of time, but I do know that the subject matter of the
application for special leave to appeal was
the matters raised in the notice of
appeal. To deal with this, I will simply – and I will make them
after the hearing –
make some directions to allow the –
and it will be all seven Judges, we will consider on the papers, as we always
application for special leave to cross‑appeal. When that is
determined, we will then be in a position to know what the issues
heard by a Full Court in a hearing. Now, the
question ‑ ‑ ‑
Your Honour, may I ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes. I am sorry, yes?
Could I just ask one
question. On that notice of cross‑appeal, then, I actually kept it fairly
brief because of the assumption
that the information that was provided in the
special leave application had been viewed. To get a fair understanding of the
cross‑appeal,
I would either ask that those documents be presented or the
opportunity would be more specific about the items that I am referring
are also tying in the other parties. There is particular reason for that, and
those things are actually documented in the
appeal process.
All right. I think the best thing is, and I will come to
questions of timing, but I will make some directions that you will have
opportunity to put in what you wish to in accordance with the rules for your
application for special leave to cross‑appeal
as though it were an appeal.
Now, that would include the submissions with a relevant page limit and the other
rules as parties usually
do. What I have in mind is you having until sometime
in – and I will not give specific dates – the middle of
to do that, and
To provide the
additional information?
HIS HONOUR:
Yes, as per the rules. Then
I will come to the respondents shortly, but the idea will be that it will be
dealt with by the Full
Court on the papers in February of 2026, so that we will
then be in the position to know the scope of any appeal or
cross‑appeal.
Yes, your Honour.
I will just ask Mr O’Neill. Mr O’Neill, do
you have anything to add to that?
MR O’NEILL:
you, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
Just before you get to it, I
anticipate your concern – am I right that you anticipated only filing
a submitting appearance
to the appeal, if that
MR O’NEILL:
are, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
Sorry, what was
MR O’NEILL:
Yes, your Honour.
In terms of a timing of a response, my inclination is to have it
in February. That would mean that your response will probably
have to come in
the middle of January. Is that going to cause, for want of a better phrase,
more than the usual inconvenience?
MR O’NEILL:
your Honour.
HIS HONOUR:
Then, Mr Tierney, can you
MR TIERNEY:
I can, your Honour.
Is your position the same?
MR TIERNEY:
your Honour. The dates that I had pencilled down to suggest to
your Honour were 28 days from today for the application,
27 January for the response, but I can live with
20 January.
HIS HONOUR:
All right, well, I will take it on
board, and I will need to make provision for MTH to reply.
HIS HONOUR:
But I will note your timing
proposal. I am conscious of the time of the year, but I am also conscious that
it is the second and
third respondents who have the most – who are,
as it were, concerned about this in terms of what sort of hearing they are going
to be either participating or not participating in. So, I will take that on
MR TIERNEY:
Thank you, your Honour.
That then leaves the question of the amicus. The Court has a
usual process for pursuing that, and we will make the appropriate
directions.
One thing that the Court does is identify the questions for the
At the moment, pending consideration of any question of whether
or not to grant special leave to cross‑appeal, is that they
referable to the grounds of appeal, although – and you might want to
take this on board as well, MTH and Mr Andrews
– the Court would
benefit from assistance as to whether section 92 of the
Evidence Act
enabled the tender of a certificate of conviction in respect of a case against
the appellant. Mr Andrews, is there anything further
that needs to be
MR ANDREWS:
No, your Honour.
MTH, is there anything further you wish to say about the question
of the timing of the processing of the application for special
cross‑appeal or the appointment of an amicus?
only question that I have is, at this point, the only submissions that I would
be expecting would be from Mr Andrews, and then
I will be answering to
those submissions. Is that until February, is that correct?
Yes, but you also will need to put in whatever submissions in
support of your application for special leave to
cross‑appeal.
Yes. No, that is okay. Then I just
wanted to make the Court aware that in previous court processes, particularly
with submissions,
it has not really been considered that I am actually
responding, if that was the case, to three parties – and it is
one – and part of the issues that the court processes have
not been aware enough has been that I have had quite a restriction
given the fact that the other parties involved had a lot of time, because there
is three against one. So, that created
some of the issues and problems with not
properly hearing all matters in both cases, both the primary hearing and the
I just wanted to mention that because obviously this a fairly
serious process that I am now in, and it has been established along
the way that
there is certainly other things to focus on in the High Court than the special
leave that I am asking for, but I am
also trying to understand – I am
not really clear on the role of the amicus. Depending on the role of the
amicus, it will
also depend on the legislative requirements in relation to
certainly Mr Andrews, and if Mr O’Neill is included in this
at some stage.
HIS HONOUR:
Firstly, I readily understand
your issue with dealing with lots of parties. You can rest assured I have
experience with it myself.
We will endeavour, when we are dealing with what
effectively are two streams of this, to do what we can to accommodate
In terms of the amicus, the appointment of the amicus will not
curtail your ability to – within the same page limits and rules
other parties – put in your position. The amicus will also be of
assistance to the Court in bringing a legal expertise
in relation to the issues
at hand, but they do not cut across or inhibit your right to put in the same
length of submissions as other
I guess I was
trying to consider, your Honour, for the amicus to be of
support – from what I have researched very briefly,
obviously not very aware of these things – is that it is a case that
there is, consistently been through these processes,
a lack of understanding of
current legislation. When trying to apply that, it has not been recognised, and
I think that is where
there could be some support given for someone in my
position where you are encouraged to think certain things are able to be applied
and there does not seem to be any real knowledge of that, due to it being so new
or current or not used in the past.
Without going into it in too much
detail, I just wanted to clarify that this comes down to quite a lot
of – well, I am going
to be quite frank here, every legal
representative, I believe, has not followed protocols of a child matter by way
of sensitivities,
tactics – other things – that are not
supposed to really be happening, but to do that to someone who is
self‑represented
– sorry – has been pretty
If anything comes from this process, I want to make the courts
aware of my experience and understanding as to why those things have
not been adhered to, and that it does seem to be a lack of recognition, as far
as – the policies and processes are
there, but there does not seem to
be any recognition of when they should be used and how they should be used. So,
it seems to be
missing a step, if you can understand what I am
HIS HONOUR:
Those concerns are now on the transcript,
and no doubt the amicus will read the transcript of the
Okay. Thank you very much.
All right, the Court will now adjourn.
AM THE MATTER WAS ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.28 MB)
Signed PDF/A format