Lord and National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA 2401 (12 November 2025)
Lord and National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA 2401 (12
November 2025)
Applicant: Jodie
Respondent: National Disability Insurance
Tribunal Number: 2024/4929
Tribunal: General Member J McAteer
Place: Sydney
Date: 12 November 2025
The Tribunal affirms the decision under review.
.......................[
].................................................
Member J McAteer
NDIS – Support - whether participant will require lifetime support
– whether impairments result in substantially reduced
functioning –
whether engagement in treatment for psychosocial impairments – whether
impairments permanent
Legislation
Administrative Review Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions
1) Act 2024
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Getting the NDIS Back on
Track No.1) Act 2024
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant) Rules
Burrows and the CEO National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA
Drake and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
(1979) 2 ALD
LPRK and the National Disability Insurance Agency
[2022] AATA 4428
Foster and National Disability Insurance Agency
[2021] AATA 4738
Mulligan v National Disability Insurance Agency
[2015] FCA 544
National Disability Insurance Agency v Foster
[2023] FCAFC
Secondary Materials
Statement of Reasons
INTRODUCTION
Jodie Lord (
the Applicant
) applied to access the National Disability
Insurance Scheme (
) in November 2023. The application was
refused in April 2024, whereby a delegate of the Chief Executive Officer found
that the Applicant
did not meet the necessary access criteria for the Scheme and
become a participant of the NDIS. On internal review in early July
2024, another
delegate of the Chief Executive Officer affirmed or upheld the decision to
refuse access to the Scheme and the Applicant
remained excluded from the NDIS.
An application was lodged with the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) in mid
July 2024. On 14
October 2024 the Administrative Review Tribunal (
replaced the AAT (see [31] below).
issue before the Tribunal is whether the Applicant meets the access criteria to
be a participant of the National Disability Insurance
Scheme (NDIS) in
accordance with section 21 of the
National Disability Insurance Act 2013
Applicant is a 55-year-old woman who lives in Cawarral, north of Rockhampton in
Queensland. The Applicant lives with chronic pain
arising from her physical
impairments being Hereditary Neuralgic Amyotrophy (HNA), Cervical Discectomy,
Scoliosis, Dystonia as well
as psychosocial conditions of Post Traumatic Stress
) Anxiety and Depression.
February 2022, the Applicant initially applied for access to the NDIS on the
basis of the following reported disabilities:
(a) (Primary Impairment): Hereditary Neuralgic Amyotrophy (HNA). Other
impairments: (i) Dystonia, (ii) PTSD (iii) Anxiety / Depression
application was unsuccessful and a subsequent application, as noted at [1]
above, was lodged in November 2023 referencing the
disabilities outlined at [4]
above but also including Cervical Discectomy, Scoliosis and Dystonia.
April 2024, a delegate on behalf of the National Disability Insurance Agency
decided that although the Applicant satisfied the
age and residency access
criteria, they were not satisfied that the Applicant met the full disability
requirements, or the early
intervention requirements stipulated in sections 24
and 25 of the NDIS Act and the Applicant was subsequently refused access to the
primary basis for the finding concerning disability requirements concerned the
Respondent’s position that all available
and appropriate treatment that
were likely to relieve or cure the Applicant’s impairments had not been
explored by her. On
this basis, the NDIA were not satisfied that the permanency
requirement for an impairment under s 24(1) (b) of the NDIS Act had been
The NDIA purported that all treatment options are required to be explored by the
Applicant prior to a finding either way under
INTERNAL REVIEW
17 June 2024, the Applicant requested an Internal Review of the decision of 17
April 2024. During the Internal Review process,
the NDIA sought further
information from the Applicant, in particular, information relating to the
Applicant’s physical impairments.
10 July 2024, the NDIA completed their Internal Review and affirmed the original
decision. In reaching that conclusion, the NDIA
again formed the view that there
was insufficient evidence that the Applicant’s impairments were permanent.
Whilst accepting
that HNA, cervical discectomy, scoliosis, dystonia, PTSD, and
anxiety and depression were present impairments, the permanence of
impairments was only accepted for HNA, cervical discectomy, scoliosis and
delegate found that the Applicant met the age and residence requirements. In
respect of disability a summary of the delegate’s
position is set out at
[11] – [13] below.
NDIA delegate was not satisfied that permanency was met for PTSD, Anxiety and
Depression because there no evidence provided by
a treating psychologist or
psychiatrist or treatment history. In addition, in respect of functional impact,
the delegate was not
satisfied that there was a substantially reduced functional
capacity or psychosocial function in respect of communication, social
interaction, learning, mobility, self care and/or self management due to
neurological and physical impairments. Reference was made
in the internal review
decision to tasks being more difficult due to the impairments. The seriousness
and significance of the impairments
was noted and accepted (not disputed) by the
NDIA, with reference in the decision to the NDIA’s acknowledgment of the
which prevent the Applicant from participating in some tasks and the
seriousness of the Applicant’s impairment is not in dispute.
The delegate
was however unable to conclude that the evidence establishes that the Applicant
usually requires a high level of support
from others, or assistive technology or
equipment and home modifications to complete the activities assessed.
delegate accepted that the criteria for participation had been met in respect of
HNA, cervical discectomy, scoliosis and dystonia,
in that the impairments affect
the Applicant’s capacity for social and economic participation.
main issue impacting on the Applicant’s request to access the NDIS
concerns the criteria provided in s24(1)(e) of the NDIS
Act, being that as a
participant she would be likely to require lifetime support of the NDIS. This
appears based on the position
that all treatment options had not been considered
or explored as per [11] above as to permanency. The delegate referred to the
availability of mainstream treatment services outside of the NDIS including a
Chronic Disease Management Plan and a Mental Health
Section 25 Criteria – early intervention
internal review, the delegate found that the Applicant did not meet the early
intervention criteria set out in s 25 of the NDIS
Act. In regard to the initial
criteria, provided in s25 (1) (a) of the NDIS Act on impairments, the delegate
was satisfied that this
had been met for HNA, cervical discectomy, scoliosis and
dystonia. However, on criteria (b) relating to reducing funding for future
support, the delegate was not satisfied that the intervention of NDIS supports
would establish this aspect. As there had been a long
standing presence of the
accepted impairments, the delegate formed the view that on the available
evidence, early intervention supports
would be unlikely to reduce future needs
for the Applicant’s support in relation to her disabilities.
respect of the criteria set out in s25 (1) (c), that concerns improving
capacity, the delegate was not satisfied that early intervention
supports would
improve the communication, social interaction, learning, mobility, self care or
self management or prevent the deterioration
of existing functional capacity,
improve that capacity or strengthen the informal supports.
final criteria concern set out in s 25 (3), has since been repealed. As the
amendments which received assent on 5 September 2024
and commenced operation on
3 October 2024 post-date the application, the provisions brought about by the
amending Act,
National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Getting the
NDIS Back on Track No.1) Act 2024
do not apply retrospectively.
Section 25(3) provides:
Despite subsections (1) and (2), the person does not meet the early
intervention requirements if the CEO is satisfied that early intervention
support for the person is not most appropriately funded or provided through the
NDIS and is more appropriately funded or provided
through other general systems
of service delivery or support services offered by a person, agency or body, or
through systems of
service delivery or support services offered:
(a) as part of universal service obligation, or
(b) In accordance with reasonable adjustments required under a law dealing
with discrimination on the basis of disability.
delegate found that the available evidence did not indicate that NDIS support
was the most appropriate available early intervention
support. They found that
early intervention supports would be most appropriately provided
through the health system or other government services’
. The delegate
referred to
‘clinical treatment being a responsibility of the health
system, not the
the delegate found that the Applicant did not meet the disability requirements
under section 24 or the early intervention requirements
under section 25 of the
NDIS Act following Internal Review, the Applicant then sought review of the
Internal Review decision by this
Tribunal pursuant to section 103 of the NDIS
Act on 16 July 2024.
Tribunal held a hearing by video on 22 July 2025 and 23 July 2025. The Applicant
was not legally represented at hearing but was
assisted by an Advocate (Ms K
Smith) who was given leave to represent the Applicant pursuant to s 66 (1) of
the ART Act. The Agency
was represented by Mr J Sproule of Counsel instructed by
Sparke Helmore Solicitors (
The Respondent)
arriving at the decision on Administrative Review, the Tribunal has considered
the various documents contained in the joint tender
was accepted into evidence. The Applicant filed various documents including
notes and letters from her treating professionals
including Dr P Sandstrom, who
gave evidence at the hearing, two statements for the Applicant herself, and
reports from Clinical Psychologist
Dr Burman, a letter from her GP and a
schedule of treatments.
Respondent’s Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions (
dated 27 May 2025, and an independent medical report of Occupational Therapist
(OT) Laura Pizzica dated 25 November 2024 were also
admitted into evidence. The
Tribunal was assisted by the opening and closing submissions of both parties,
which were made orally
at the hearing.
AMENDMENTS TO THE NDIS AND
TRIBUNAL LEGISLATION
14 October 2024, the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) became the
Administrative Review Tribunal (
the Tribunal
). In accordance with the
transitional provisions in the
Administrative Review Tribunal (Consequential
and Transitional Provisions No.
1) Act 2024
the Transitional Act
proceedings in the AAT that were not finalised before 14 October 2024 are to be
continued and finalised by the Tribunal. Anything
done in relation to the
proceedings before 14 October 2024 is taken to have been done by the
National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Getting the NDIS Back on Track
1) Act 2024
(Cth) commenced on 3 October 2024 and made amendments to the
NDIS Act. As the Applicant’s request for access to the NDIS was made
before 3 October 2024, section 126 provides that the NDIS Act, Rules and
Guidelines apply as they existed before commencement of
the amending Act. Both
parties agreed that the amendments to the NDIS of October 2024 did not apply to
these proceedings being access
proceedings.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
The access criteria
noted above, these proceedings concern a review of a decision to refuse access
to the Scheme. Regarding the Applicant’s stated
circumstances, the
legislative criteria and policy provisions must be met on the available evidence
in order to access the Scheme.
the Tribunal has regularly observed from an examination of the Legislation, to
become a participant of the NDIS, the Applicant
must satisfy the access
criteria set out in subsection 21(1) of the Act, which provides as
(1) A person meets the access
criteria if:
(a) the CEO is satisfied that the person meets the age requirements (see
section 22); and
(b) the CEO is satisfied that, at the time of considering the request, the
person meets the residence requirements (see section 23);
(c) the CEO is satisfied that, at the time of considering the
(i) the person meets the disability requirements (see section 24);
(ii) the person meets the early intervention requirements (see section
noted from the decision under review, there is no dispute that the Applicant
satisfies the age and the residence requirements.
What the Tribunal must decide
is whether the Applicant satisfies the disability access criteria set out in
section 24 or early intervention
requirements provided in s25 of the NDIS Act.
24 of the NDIS Act states:
(1) A person meets the disability
requirements
(a) the person has a disability that is
attributable to one or more intellectual, cognitive, neurological, sensory or
physical impairments
or the person has one or more impairments to which a
psychosocial disability is attributable; and
(b) the impairment or impairments are, or are likely to be, permanent;
(c) the impairment or impairments result
in substantially reduced functional capacity to undertake one or more of the
following activities:
(i) communication;
(ii) social interaction;
(iii) learning;
(iv) mobility;
(v) self care;
(vi) self management; and
(d) the impairment or impairments affect
the person’s capacity for social or economic participation; and
(e) the person is likely to require support under the National Disability
Insurance Scheme for the person’s lifetime.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an impairment or impairments that
vary in intensity may be permanent, and the person is likely
to require support
under the National Disability Insurance Scheme for the person’s lifetime,
despite the variation.
the Applicant does not meet the disability requirements, the Tribunal must
consider whether they meet the early intervention requirements
section 25 of the NDIS Act which relevantly
(1) A person meets the
early intervention requirements
(a) the person:
(i) has one or more identified
intellectual, cognitive, neurological, sensory or physical impairments that are,
or are likely to be,
permanent; or
(ii) has one or more identified impairments that are attributable to a
psychiatric condition and are, or are likely to be, permanent;
(iii) is a child who has a developmental delay; and
(b) the CEO is satisfied that provision of
early intervention supports for the person is likely to benefit the
person by reducing
the person's future needs for supports in relation
to disability; and
(c) the CEO is satisfied that provision of early
intervention supports for the person is likely to benefit the person
(i) mitigating or alleviating the impact of the person's impairment upon
the functional capacity of the person to undertake communication,
interaction, learning, mobility, self-care or self-management; or
(ii) preventing the deterioration of such functional capacity; or
(iii) improving such functional capacity; or
(iv) strengthening the sustainability of
informal supports available to the person, including through building
the capacity of the
person's carer.
Note: In certain circumstances, a person with a degenerative condition
could meet the early intervention requirements and therefore
a participant.
subsection 209 (1) of the NDIS Act, the Minister may make rules prescribing
certain matters. Section 27 of the NDIS Act provides
that NDIS rules may
prescribe circumstances and criteria to be applied in assessing the disability
requirements and early intervention
requirements of the NDIS Act. The relevant
rules in the Applicant’s case are the
National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant) Rules 2016
Access Rules
), which form part of the legislative framework.
respect of the administrative review, I note that the NDIS Operational
Guidelines are relevant to making decisions in accordance
with the Act.
Operational Guidelines represent government policy and should be applied by the
Tribunal unless there is good reason
It is well established
that in considering an application for review the Tribunal is not constrained to
have regard only to the material
that was before the Agency, but may have regard
to any relevant material before it at the time of the
The relevant Operational
Guideline at time of the decision under review are:
Our Guidelines –
Becoming a participant – Applying to the NDIS
(1 February
previously noted by the Tribunal in the case
Federal Court held that the legislation pertaining to the access criteria
requires “a relatively high degree of precision
by decision-makers... in
assessing what a person can or cannot do. The assessment to be undertaken is
avowedly functional and
multifaceted”.
Court of the Federal Court of Australia in
explained that the legislation requires a functional, practical assessment of
what a person can and cannot do.
this regard, both parties often rely on OT reports to determine what a
prospective participant can and cannot do.
the Applicant to gain access to the Scheme, the Tribunal must be positively
satisfied that all the access criteria in either the
disability requirements or
the early intervention requirements are met. The Applicant carries what has been
described as a common
sense or practical onus to adduce sufficient evidence to
satisfy the Tribunal the criteria are
In accordance with
the Tribunal must consider a functional practical assessment of
what the Applicant can and cannot do.
Evidence at hearing
opening, the Applicant’s advocate Ms Smith submitted that in respect of
one witness, Clinical Psychologist Dr Burman, she
was not aware of the need to
arrange for her to be available for giving evidence at the hearing. She
submitted that in all likelihood
the matter would need to be delayed to meet Dr
Burman’s availability but that she would be willing to give evidence.
the Applicant was content to proceed without the witness, noting that
the Tribunal would consider any submissions by the Respondent
as to weight to be
applied to her written evidence.
Respondent submitted in opening that the case concerns whether the Applicant has
a need for lifetime NDIS supports and meets the
s 24 (1) (e ) criteria, as
provided by the NDIS Act.
Applicant’s Evidence
evidence in chief, the Applicant referred to her carer’s statement for her
mother. She noted that her mother now had stage
four breast cancer. Her
statement refers to the need to attend specialist medical appointments for the
Applicant in Brisbane. There
was a need to utilise a wheelchair at airports and
other locations due to the inability of the Applicant to walk long distances and
a minor limp, leg twisting and lifting issues and fatigue.
Applicant also noted in her evidence that she relied upon her written response
to the OT report prepared by Ms Pizzica (
Pizzica report
) based on an
assessment of 10 October 2024.
response emphasises that contrary to the OT advising that she communicated well,
no reference is made to the Applicant’s
emotional responses during the
assessment including crying. Reference was also made to asserted inaccuracies in
the report such as
the Applicant not needing to rely on her advocate during the
assessment whereas the Applicant says that she used the Advocate to
prompt her.
cross examination, the Applicant agreed that she was 55 years of age and
identified where she lived. She confirmed that she had
three friends and she
keeps in touch with them via the application Messenger. She confirmed that she
also spends time with her friends
and has good relationships with her partner,
nephew and mother.
Applicant confirmed that she was diagnosed with HNA at age 29 and her PTSD
diagnosis arose in her mid twenties. The Applicant
also confirmed that she could
read and write.
was made to the Disease Summary prepared by K Smith from Spinal Life
. The summary referred
to the HNA disorder referring to residual and persistent pain arising from the
condition. The author referred
to the OT’s references to pain management
in their report concerning dealing with HNA. There was disagreement with the OT
personal care including grooming where it was stated that the
Applicant could perform all of these tasks with modified technique.
disagreed with this finding and referred to the Applicant relying on family
support in order to carry out some for the
personal care and domestic activities
such as cleaning, drying her feet, toenail clipping, dyeing her hair and some
moisturising.
Disagreement
with the OT’s report was also raised by the Applicant in cross examination
in respect of accessing the community
independently. Reference was made in the
Pizzica report to the Applicant not being ‘able to drive or navigate
uneven terrain’.
reference was made to the need to hire a wheelchair when attending medical
appointments in Brisbane and having an ‘attendant’
Applicant referred to the impact of living with significant medication that
renders her unable to implement the OT’s recommendations
at this stage.
The Applicant was critical of the Pizzica report. The Applicant said that she
participates only occasionally in community
activities and performed written
tasks. An example of the later was making the abovementioned note / response.
Applicant was asked by the Respondent in cross examination about the Pizzica
report. Reference to her PTSD arising from family
based trauma in childhood was
referred to in the report under the subheading ‘Background’. The
Applicant confirmed that
other than some details in paragraph [2] about HNA, the
background aspect was broadly accurate. When questioned, the Applicant said
the 5-6 week pain ‘attacks’ require significant follow up treatment
including nerve treatment. The Applicant referred
to severe pain in her shoulder
and arm and confirmed many of the matters outlined in the OT report.
Applicant was questioned about an acute medical episode described in the Pizzica
report where she was hospitalised. The Applicant
confirmed that she has had
further episodes since the report was written. She referred to a section of the
report, where Ms Pizzica
refers to the Applicant’s mother staying during
periods of acute episodes arising from
The Applicant said that her
mother stayed for the two months she was in hospital and five months afterwards.
Reference was made to
the OT’s recording that 14 days out of a 30 day
period are bad days where the Applicant reported that her symptoms severely
limit her ability to carry out her daily activities.
Applicant was asked whether it was during the acute pain episodes that she had
reported that she was unable to get out of bed.
The Applicant said that this was
not the case and many other ailments such as flu resulted in her inability to
leave bed for days
as it compromised her immune system. Reference was again made
to the OT’s reporting that 15 or so days out of 30 are bad days.
Applicant stood by this. When asked what the purpose of the extended visit from
her mother was, the Applicant confirmed that
it was to give support to her and
that she had also come in 2023 and stayed for seven months.
Applicant also confirmed that her mother was at the Applicant’s home now
and that she had been there since 11 June 2025.
Whilst she had breast surgery
herself in April 2025, she had still come to provide the Applicant with
subsequent support.
Applicant was asked by the Respondent about her domestic situation and the
references made in the Pizzica report to ‘social
history and
The Applicant referred
to her partner working seven days on and seven days off in their work schedule.
The Applicant was asked about
the great friends that she told the OT about and
that these friends could provide support. The Applicant confirmed that one of
friends is the person who travels with her to Brisbane to attend
specialist appointments and obtain Botox injection treatment. Her
partner and
nephew provide limited informal support when not working, and her mother (as
noted) has provided significant support
during acute pain periods. The report
refers to the Applicant’s support needs as being that outside of her
partner and nephew,
she manages her life independently, noting great friends to
provide support if needed. Neighbours are also called upon to help where
available in certain circumstances, such as with difficulty in opening jars. The
Applicant noted that her disabilities change the
nature of her relationships
with people.
pages 123-124 of the JTB the Applicant confirmed that OT B Clarke had completed
an assessment. This report was provided as part
of the NDIA Access Request
process. The Applicant when questioned confirmed that the report sets out her
capacity in various activities
of daily living (ADL’s) after an acute
episode of HNA.
138-141 of the JTB comprises the statement of the Applicant’s mother.
Reference was made to the use of a wheelchair at
airports being an option that
they took up, rather than a necessity. The position being posited by the
Applicant being that the Applicant
could not carry her luggage in any event if
she had to walk.
to the Pizzica report, the Applicant was asked a number of questions about the
assessment. The Applicant was asked whether
she could get out of bed to move to
the couch to spend all day there. The Applicant said that it depended on how bad
she was on any
given ‘bad’ day. In her response to the Pizzica
report, the Applicant said that medication can have an impact on her
get out of bed. The Applicant’s evidence was that when she is
‘heavily medicated’ she relied on her
mother to help her to get out
of bed. When asked if she was ‘heavily medicated’ every day, the
Applicant confirmed that
she was. When questions as to how heavily medicated and
exactly what she meant, the Applicant advised that when she was discharged
hospital she was receiving 37 different medications.
was put to the Applicant in cross examination by the Respondent that when her
mother returns home interstate and her family is
away at work, how does she get
out of bed to the toilet. The Applicant said that she was intimidated by the
OT’s formal appearance.
The Applicant struggled to explain some aspects of
her personal care in the absence of informal supports. The Applicant confirmed
that she spoke to the OT and also that she had to discusses some sensitive
childhood trauma matters with her. The Applicant said
that these matters and
questions were highly invasive and were only brought up because of the PTSD
aspect of their claim. The Applicant
confirmed that she was able to speak with
the OT and that she was required to discuss to an extent some sensitive matters
her childhood. The Applicant said that the NDIA pressing her on her
PTSD diagnosis was highly invasive.
Applicant was also questioned about treatment with her Neurologist, Dr
Sandstrom. The Applicant confirmed that she had been treated
by Dr Sandstrom
since approximately 2011.
confirmed that she no longer receives the
Disability Support Pension (DSP). She
said that the reason for this was the threshold income calculated from her
Applicant agreed that on some of her good days she does not require support with
self care other than drying her feet and some
other matters referred to above.
She said that the OT’s reference to doing all aspects unaided was
incorrect. The Pizzica report
confirmed that the Applicant can perform self care
in the nature of grooming, bathing and showering without assistance. In
the Applicant referred to the report written by Ms Smith that states
that the Applicant relies on support with some aspects of self
care, as noted
above at [41].
Applicant was asked whether she agreed that she relied on some support of family
and friends for grooming. The Applicant said
that she has someone help her with
drying. She said that she sits on the floor of the shower and needs someone to
The Applicant explained that her feet have some weakness as a
result of steroid treatment and that her ankles ‘blew up’.
Tribunal was taken to the and asked whether that photo depicted how the
Applicant showered, which she confirmed that it
When asked whether she
could clean her feet by letting the water and soap run over them and then air
dry, the Applicant said that
she didn’t because her feet are usually very
Applicant was asked about safety at home especially outside in her yard. She
said that she was not safe mobilising at home. The
Respondent asked the
Applicant how she goes down to the chicken coop from the home. Safety concerns
were noted in the Applicant’s
The Applicant’s
handwritten notes also referenced accessing the chicken coop twice with no
reported problems.
In her oral
evidence the Applicant referred to the path being grassed. Other references in
the Applicant’s material address
checking the dogs and checking on the
asked whether the day that she saw the Ms Pizzica, was a good day or a bad day,
the Applicant said that it was a better day,
meaning to the Tribunal that it was
not a bad day. In accordance with the evidence at page 176 of the JTB, the
Applicant agreed that
she could complete light domestic duties on a good day.
There was some further evidence adduced from questions arising from the
Applicant’s
. The Applicant said that
period was when she was recovering from an acute episode. Whilst she could feed
the dogs and do the washing
the Applicant could not hang it out, or deal with
anything other than plastics from washing up or using the dishwater, due to the
weight of crockery.
The Applicant confirmed that she makes all of her own decisions and
self-administers all her medications unaided. The Applicant referred
seeing a psychologist in 1997 or 1998 when she was an employee under an
Employment Assistance Program. The Applicant said
that this arose due to issues
in the workplace. The Client Service Record at 163 of the JTB reflects these
sessions. When the Applicant
first saw Psychologist Ms Meynert for counselling
in the late 1990’s, she said that it was due to the termination of her
at that time.
Applicant agreed that the 9 December 2025 Ms Meynert report does not disclose
that The Applicant has either PTSD or
depression.
Reference was also
made to the Applicant’s GP and the Mental Health Care Plan. Whilst the
Applicant is on and complying with
the prescribed medications, she said that she
did not wish to engage in de sensitising sessions and as a result she has no
treating psychologist. However, the Applicant did refer to Dr Burman as
a treating psychologist that she could arrange to see if
her circumstances
deteriorated.
Applicant was asked when she last saw a psychologist, which she advised was
prior to 2007. The Applicant advised that she was
intolerant to the
SSRI’s being the type of medication designed to treat her diagnosis by way
of standard prescribed medication.
At this point, the Respondent submitted that
the Applicant had failed to provide evidence of her current treating
medications. The
Respondent noted that at page 164 of the JTB arising from the
Greenfields report by K Burman where the sources of information are
set out, the
Applicant had not called the author so that those matters could be tested.
was made by the Respondent to the case of
LPRK and the National Disability
Insurance Agency
[2022] AATA 4428
where the former Tribunal examined
the meaning of s 24 (1) (c ) of the NDIS Act At [61] of
Tribunal observed that:
61. The Respondent submitted that the Tribunal should ignore incapacity
arising from the Applicant’s history of cannabis use,
alcohol abuse and
smoking[158] because the Tribunal must consider only the incapacities for which
access to the NDIS is “claimed”.[159]
An Applicant may elect not to
focus on particular health issues, disabilities or impairment and, as a result,
the evidence available
to the Tribunal with respect to those may be insufficient
to determine whether they give rise to impairment that meet the disability
criteria. However, there is no requirement on a prospective participant to lodge
a “claim” that particularises the way
in which the disability
criteria is met, and no basis upon which the Tribunal, exercising review
before it that is relevant to the question
whether the access criteria is met merely because an impairment demonstrated by
that evidence
has not been identified by the Applicant. In this case, the
Applicant’s evidence is that she does not drink to excess, but
she asserts
that she suffers from COPD and sleep apnoea, which may well have been causative
of having been a smoker. She did not
give evidence about current cannabis use.
The Tribunal will consider the broad factual matrix arising from the available
to determine whether the access criteria are met in this case. The
Tribunal notes that evidence as to the Applicant’s past
issues with
alcohol are to be tempered against her sworn evidence that she does not drink
excessively and there is no evidence of
any cannabis-related impairment. Whilst
there may be a link between the Applicant’s COPD and her fatigue, there is
very little
medical evidence connecting the condition to her current
impairments., ..
this regard the Respondent submitted that the Tribunal can only concern itself
with permanent impairments that result in a functional
incapacity.
Occupational Therapist Evidence
Pizzica, the OT who was commissioned as an Independent Medical Expert by the
Respondent, gave evidence at the hearing. In evidence
in chief, she adopted her
report of 25 November 2024 as true and correct and confirmed that she conducted
the assessment on 10 October
2024. When asked how one assesses functional
capacity, the witness advised that the assessment is achieved by observations in
and Lawton’s are utilised. The assessment is based
on not just
observations but also what the subject has advised the clinician.
witness advised that the WHODAS responses are where the Applicant had provided
the answers.
Similarly, the
information recorded there such as 14 out of 30 days being considered ‘bad
days’, were what the Applicant
had told the
witness said that the Applicant described her day of the assessment as a
relatively good day. The witness said that on this day
she did not observe any
items such as ‘bed pans’ around the home. On page 216 of the JTB re:
transfers the witness said
that she recommends both a toilet frame for getting
in and off the toilet and a shower chair to sit in during showering. Also on
page 216 is a reference to the Applicants feeding and drinking which was largely
unproblematic other than some issues around gripping
cutlery. Assistive
technology items are not required at present however for cleaning a long handled
wiper, a shower chair and ‘built
up’ cutlery would be beneficial in
the longer term.
witness was taken to page 174 of the JTB where the Applicant’s response to
her OT report was set out. Having read that response
the witness said that it
does not change her opinion as expressed in her report. The OT said that she did
recall the Applicant being
tearful at times as well as noting that the Applicant
was the one who always answered her questions even though there was someone
supporting her during the assessment.
cross examination the witness was asked about the discrepancies raised by the
Applicant in her response and specifically whether
that changed or otherwise
altered her opinion. The witness said that she was willing to adjust the
commentary but not the findings
of her report based on that extra
information.
respect of the Applicant’s social situation as set out at page 223 of the
JTB, the witness said that she was advised by the
Applicant that she could drive
independently and go grocery shopping. The witness advised that the reference to
activities’ included grocery shopping and attending local
medical appointments. It was put to the witness that the nearest
medical appointments was 40 to 45 minutes drive away by car. The Applicant told
the witness that she no longer drives alone.
The witness noted that she wrote up
the WHODAS answers after asking the Applicant the various questions.
a sensitive issue, whereby the Applicant and her advocate believed that aspects
of the reports were somewhat dehumanising, the
witness clarified that the
references to some items such as bedpans only arose in the context of being
bedridden or staying in bed
for lengthy periods by way of the Applicant’s
own self reporting.
on the issue of the Applicant’s risk of falling, safety and ability to
mobilise, the witness said that whilst there
are references at pages 223 and 234
of the JTB, the witness said that her own clinical observations of the Applicant
during the assessment
were that she can mobilise adequately, with some clear
limitations.
Evidence of Dr P Sandstrom
On day two of the hearing Dr Sandstrom was called in his capacity as a clinical
neurologist treating the Applicant for many years.
In evidence in chief, he was
taken to his report at page 126 of the JTB and adopted it. In respect of HNA,
the witness advised that
it is genetic, rare, degenerative in respect of muscle
wasting and creates weakness. The witness advised that once a muscle wastes
it does not come back or return to former strength. His evidence was that as
patients become more disabled, wheelchairs begin
to be used more and more.
witness was asked whether there was any way of saying how far the condition
would progress and where is on this timeline. The
witness advised that in his
opinion the Applicant is about 50% or half way through her physical decline from
the condition. The witness
stated that he would have a better understanding of
the Applicant’s condition if she had the benefit of a ‘one
OT assessment due to the temporal nature of his observations.
Sandstrom advised that he had witnessed the Applicant in both an inpatient and
outpatient capacity. In answer to a question around
whether the Applicant would
regain any functioning lost due to the condition and if so in what time frame,
the witness answered ‘no’.
asked the witness advised that he agreed with the contents of the Pizzica
report. He also agreed with the OT’s reference
to bad days, noting that on
bad days there is more pain and limited movement. He reiterated that bad days
are worse for the Applicant.
He also agrees with the recommendations of the OT.
cross-examination, the witness confirmed that there had been no change in
treatment since the last discharge form hospital. That
was a lengthy admission
on the last occasion due to spinal surgery. The witness said that for a
‘normal’ admission for
acute episodes the length of admission would
be one to two weeks.
Respondent’s Submissions
Respondent referred to their SOFIC as being their written submissions, which
they relied upon. There was no change following the
evidence adduced during the
hearing. In oral submissions, the Respondent referred to the applicable law
being the law that was in
force at the time of the decision prior to the October
2024 amendments. Reference was made to the necessity to apply the evidence
fairly high threshold when determining access matters. In respect of the s 25
early intervention criteria the Respondent submitted
that Dr Sandstrom’s
evidence showed no early intervention criteria are relevant.
Respondent conceded at [51] of their SOFIC that the impairments for physical and
neurological are likely to be permanent. However,
they submitted that there is
insufficient evidence to indicate that the psychosocial impairments are or are
likely to be permanent
within s 24 (1) (b) of the NDIS Act. The crux of their
submission being that there is insufficient evidence before the Tribunal that
positively establishes what has been termed ‘the negative state of
fact’ in rule 5.4 of the Access Rules that there are
no known, available
and appropriate evidence based clinical, medical or other treatments that would
be likely to remedy the psychosocial
impairments. In support of this position
the Respondent, referred to the Applicant’s sporadic treatment since 1997
limited evidence in that regard concerning the effectiveness or
otherwise of such treatment.
was submitted that there was a lack of evidence of the stated treatments such as
the counselling sessions initially in a workplace
context. Psychologist Ms
Meynert does not address the workplace counselling sessions and the Applicant
last saw a psychiatrist in
2007 which is set out in the Burman report of early
these circumstances, the Respondent submitted that as the Applicant does not
meet the s 24 (1) (b) criteria for psychosocial impairments
then they cannot be
considered under s 24 (1) (c ) to determine whether the impacts of the
impairments in this area result in a
substantially reduced functioning across
any of the five domains to allow the Tribunal to be positively satisfied that s
) criteria is met.
respect of the physical or neurological impairments and whether they meet the s
24 (1) (c) criteria, the Respondent’s ultimate
position was that the
criteria were not met. The Respondent submitted that as the s 24 (1) (c)
criteria were an objective test then
the Tribunal should place more weight on
observational evidence rather than evidence obtained by the Applicant self
reporting. In
this regard, the Respondent submitted that a person’s
perception of their disability often lacks proper insight and as a result
inaccurate. In addition, they submitted that the Tribunal should prefer the
OT’s objective assessment and photographs
and observations. They submitted
that the main position of the Applicant centred on an acute period in May 2024
where hospitalisation
was required.
was made to the case of
Burrows and the CEO National Disability Insurance
Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA 607
where the approach of the
Tribunal to substantially reduced functioning was covered in some detail. At
[78] –[79] of
the Tribunal observed:
78. Applying these principles, it is to be recognised that s 24(1)(c) is a
component of a statutory test, the overall purpose of which
is to determine if a
prospective participant meets the requirements for access to the NDIS. In this
regard, it is an express object
of the NDIS Act to “facilitate the
development of a nationally consistent approach to access to ...supports for
people with
disability”.[83] In my opinion, fulfilment of this purpose
requires that the test operate normatively rather than arbitrarily.
It can only
do so if the tasks that fall within each activity area for the purposes of s
24(1)(c) are designated and determinate
rather than infinitely variate and
79. What is meant by the terms: “communication”, “social
interaction”, “learning”, “mobility”,
“self-care”, and “self-management” is not defined in the
Act or Rules. These are ordinary English words,
but this is not a case where a
literal approach to ascertaining their meaning is appropriate in my opinion.
That is because, in the
context of the statute, they have a determinate meaning
which is necessary for the application of the test of which they are part.
is not to say that these words have a meaning in the statute that is
inconsistent with their ordinary meaning, merely that they
have a determinate
Respondent submitted that when questioned during cross examination on her
functional capacity, the Applicant’s answers were
generalised and her most
precise answers contained terms such as ‘cannot get out of bed’. The
Respondent submitted that
the Tribunal should distinguish between what a person
does not do as opposed to what they cannot do.
was also made to the relevant Access Rules (Rule 5.8) and the scope of the
activity as described in
that the reference in Rule 5.8 to
‘activities’ means each of the activities described in s 24 (1) (c)
(such as self care)
rather than each of the individual tasks. The issue around
not being able to do one of those tasks did not necessarily mean that
substantially reduced functioning in the self care domain because a person had
difficulty with washing their feet or trimming
their nails.
respect of the activity domain of communication, the Respondent submitted that
the Applicant’s functioning was not substantially
reduced in this area
because of her impairments.
respect of social interaction, the Respondent submitted that it was sufficient
that the Applicant could interact with other people
that they feel comfortable
with. They submitted that the Applicant’s response to the sensitive of
difficult matters demonstrates
that she has appropriate human social responses.
As a result, they submitted that any reduced capacity in this domain was also
respect of learning, the Respondent submitted that the provision should not be
interpreted as any inability to learn every new
skill presented, and that any
inability to utilise a new skill is an inability to learn. Not all persons can
adopt and apply new
skills in all instances. Reference was also made to the IME
OT’s report stating an ability to read books.
respect of mobility, the Respondent’s main thrust in oral submissions
concerned the position that the Applicant could mobilise
around her home
carrying out her ADL’s independently. They referenced the Pizzica report
which observed weakness in upper and
lower limbs and reduced dexterity in both
hands impacting on fine motor skills. Walking on uneven surfaces, transfers and
crouching or bending are all impacted. The report observes that most
transfers can be conducted independently, with some instances
requiring the use
of aids or assistive technology. The report states that the Applicant is able
to walk for up to 30 minutes on
flat surfaces and for half that time on sloping
or uneven surfaces before resting. The report also notes that the Applicant can
and descend the 15 steps in her residence.
Respondent submitted that the Applicant’s circumstances do not meet the
requirements of Rule 5.8 in that the assistance
must be frequent and necessary
and that the assistance is also routine. In addition, an inability to drive does
not as, submitted
by the Respondent, amount to a substantially reduced
functional capacity in the mobility domain.
respect of self care, the Respondent submitted that it was concerned with
physical matters as opposed to self management. They
submitted that care
directed towards the self was not an instrumental ADL. The Respondent also
submitted that the use of common aids
to assist with self care does not engage
Rule 5.8 as the deeming Rules need to be engaged as a whole.
addition, the Respondent submitted that receiving ad hoc assistance from family
or friends concerning self care does not engage
Rule 5.8. The Respondent
submitted that the Applicant’s evidence went to difficulties in her
personal care and self care as
well as slight inconsistencies. The evidence that
she could not hold a toothbrush to independently brush her teeth was countered
by the evidence that she could hold a knife.
respect of self management the Respondent submitted that there were no deficits
in this area. The Applicant was able to commence
these proceedings and conduct
them herself, notwithstanding that she had available an Agent to assist.
Respondent accepted that s 24 (1) (d) of the NDIS Act in that the impairments
affect the Applicant’s capacity for social
or economic participation. But
of significance to their case they also submitted that the evidence misty be
sufficient for the Tribunal
to form a judgement that under s 24 (1) (e) the
Applicant is likely to require NDIS support for the rest of her lifetime.
this regard the Respondent submitted that the decision in
LPRK and NDIA
[2022] AATA 4428
illustrates how that with treatment the
functional incapacity might lessen so that the person would not continue to have
substantially
reduced functional capacity, and therefore not be in a practical
position to require NDIS support for their lifetime.
Applicant’s submissions
oral submissions, the Applicant stated her position briefly and advised that she
might like the option of filing brief written
submissions following the
evidence. No submissions of any length were made post evidence by the Applicant.
Consideration
Tribunal notes that the Respondent accepts that the Applicant meets disability
requirements of (a) a physical impairment resulting
from HNA, cervical
discectomy, scoliosis and dystonia in accordance with s 24 (1) (a) of the NDIS
Tribunal also notes that the Respondent accepts that in respect of and s 24 (1)
(b) and 25 (1) (a) of the NDIS Act the Physical
and Psychosocial impairments are
likely to be permanent and that they are likely to affect the Applicant’s
capacity for social
and / or economic participation in accordance with s 24 (1)
(d) criteria.
issue in contest as set out in the evidence above is whether the Applicant has a
substantially reduced functional capacity as
a result of those impairments,
which impact on the activities of communication, learning, social interaction,
mobility, self care
or self management.
further issue not conceded is that the Respondent submits that the evidence is
insufficient to establish that the Applicant is likely
to require NDIS support
for her lifetime. They maintained that the evidence was insufficient to
determine whether all know treatment
options had been explored, and if not
whether the health system was the appropriate alternate pathway for the
applicant to be medically
supported as a result of her disabilities and
impairments.
respect of the alternate pathway into the scheme under early intervention the
Respondent submitted that the evidence is insufficient
to establish that the
provision of support now in an early intervention context is likely to benefit
the Applicant in the manner
outlined in s 25 (b) and 25 (c) of the NDIS Act.
considered the evidence closely, whilst I accept that the impairments equating
to a disability were both present and permanent,
and that they affect the
Applicant’s capacity for social and economic participation, I do not
accept that the Applicant’s
functional capacity was likely to be
substantially reduced across any of the six domains. Whilst it resulted in some
reduction in
functional capacity in some of those domains, in the areas of
Communication and Learning, in my view the evidence as outlined above
demonstrate any meaningful reduction in functional capacity.
respect of the remaining domains of social interaction, mobility, self care and
self management, the impact of the impairments
on the Applicant’s
functional capacity differs markedly, with the impacts in the areas of Mobility
and Self Care being greater
than Social Interaction and Self Management.
However, the impact does not on the available evidence allow me to be positively
that the Applicant’s functioning in those domains is
substantially reduced because of her impairments.
Tribunal notes that the Applicant’s impairments do result in some reduced
functional capacity. The issue concerning how
the Applicant is able to
physically get things done was noted in the evidence.
has previously been observed, Rule 5.8 of the
National Disability Insurance
Scheme (Becoming a Participant) Rules 2016
sets out when an impairment
results in substantially reduced functional capacity to undertake relevant
activities. The Rule provides
that they (the applicant) are unable to
participate effectively or completely in the activity (including performing
tasks), the person
usually requires assistance, or the person is unable to
complete the tasks or actions even with assistance.
Self Care / Self Management
care is taken to mean personal care, hygiene, grooming, eating and drinking and
health. It also includes how one gets dressed,
showers, bathes and goes to the
toilet. The OT reports that whilst the capacity may vary on any given day, with
grooming the Applicant
can perform these matters broadly independently. The
evidence concerning holding the toothbrush was inconsistent with other evidence
around holding a knife in the context of preparing food.
occurs with modified technique, and minimal aids (shower chair) are recommended.
Dressing occurs independently with modified
technique. Likewise, toileting is
independent and when pain symptoms are very bad to limit mobility the OT
recommends adjustments.
and drinking is performed independently. Preparation of meals is again achieved
with modified technique. Shopping and domestic
duties are also achieved broadly
independently based on the evidence adduced at hearing.
previously observed, the deeming provisions of the Rules as clarified in
clarifies that the provision that an ability to undertake a single
task effectively or completely does not mean that the provision
applies to the
entire activity to be assessed. The Pizzica report does refer to the Applicant
completing tasks with some difficulty.
In respect of the domain of self care and
self management this evidence in the Tribunal’s view demonstrates that the
can still participate in most activities, albeit with some difficulty
the Applicant receives informal support from her partner, nephew and at lengthy
intervals her mother, these matters are factored
into and addressed in the NDIS
access criteria.
also falls under this criterion and the Tribunal noted that the use of a
wheelchair and having a person attend when travelling
by air to medical
appointments (in Brisbane) is only one aspect of the Applicant’s mobility
and health care needs. Being accompanied
by a support person and using a
wheelchair to traverse the often lengthy distances in an airport terminal is not
a matter that would
meet the criteria. In my view, such circumstances do not
meet the requirements of Rule 5.8 in that the assistance must be frequent
necessary and that the assistance is also routine. This assistance is clearly
beneficial, but not absolutely necessary, nor is
it frequent or routine. I
accept that when the Applicant travels by air this is the support model that she
has adopted. However,
such travel for specialist medical appointments would not
be considered on the available evidence as frequent and routine.
is minimal evidence other than some reduced functioning speed that the Applicant
cannot manage her person and / or has substantially
reduced functioning in the
self management criteria.
the disabilities have some impact on the Applicant’s abilities, the
impacts of these impairments do not substantially
reduce the Applicant’s
functionality in this area.
note that NDIS Guidelines refer to when assessing mobility it concerns how one
moves around their home and accesses the community.
Whilst the Applicant has
some limitations these manifest in the slower performance of tasks.
Applicant is physically able to leave home independently and mobilise in the
community. Though there is some dispute by the Applicant
concerning this, Ms
Pizzica reports that the Applicant is able to drive herself to the shops in her
car traveling distances that
take up to 30 minutes at a time.
respect of walking distance it is accepted that the physical disabilities reduce
the Applicant’s ability to walk long distances
without a break or for long
periods. However, the OT identifies 30 minute on flat even surface and 15
minutes on sloping or uneven
the disabilities have some impact on the Applicant’s abilities, and
balance can remain an issue, these impacts do not
substantially reduce the
Applicant’s functionality in this
Pizzica report and other reports conclude that there is no cognitive impairment.
The Applicant has no issues with reasoning, logic
or problem solving. Clearly
from the evidence in her journal or dairy notes the Applicant can achieve more
on good days than bad
days. The reference to reading books was noted.
the disabilities have some impact on the Applicant’s abilities, these
impacts do not substantially reduce the Applicant’s
functionality in this
Social Interaction
NDIS Guidelines refer to social interaction as including the making and keeping
of friends, interacting with the community, and
or the individual’s
behaviours response to feelings and emotions when in a social context.
Respondent emphasised that within the guidelines the criteria focus on social
skills rather than opportunities or abilities to
access the community. There is
little evidence that the Applicant does not retain her social skills. A person
is not required or
expected to be able to interact with the whole community but
sections of the community.
is limited if any evidence of any communication or behavioural deficits that
prevent the Applicant engaging socially when she
needs to. Whilst the Tribunal
accepts that the Applicant’s disabilities and impairments impact on her
ability to be involved
socially and her affect generally will at times be low
because of the level of physical and psychological disability, in my view
does not equate to substantially reduced functioning.
the disabilities have some impact on the Applicant’s abilities, these
impacts do not substantially reduce the Applicant’s
functionality in this
Communication
Communication
refers to how someone speaks, writes or uses some other methods (gestures, sign
language or similar methods) to express
themselves. The OT report did not find
any deficits in this area.
was no evidence of any practical issue preventing the Applicant’s full and
appropriate communication. As noted by the
Respondent and observed by the
Tribunal during the hearing, the Applicant was fluent in her oral testimony. She
is able to talk on
the telephone and speak without impediment.
the Applicant’s disabilities would (potentially due to the resultant pain)
have some impact on her ability to communicate,
the evidence as outlined in
detail above demonstrates that the Applicant’s abilities in this area do
not equate to a substantially
reduced functionality in this
Consideration of sections 24 (2) and 24(3)
the disabilities impact on the Applicant’s abilities, these impacts do not
substantially reduce the Applicant’s
functionality in any of the listed
has previously been noted, s 24 is part of the conjunctive suite whereby if any
matter under s 24 (1) is successfully discharged,
in that in one or more of the
six areas it were found on the evidence to substantially reduce a prospective
participant’s functional
capacity to undertake the specific activity or
activities, then the remaining subsections must also be enlivened to gain access
the scheme.
of the position that no impairment has sufficiently traversed s 24 (1) (c)
concerning substantially reduced functional capacity,
in the six domains, the
Tribunal deals with the remaining s 24 provisions in less detail.
24 (1) (d) concerning the impairment affecting the person’s capacity for
social or economic participation and (e) the
person is likely to require NDIS
support for the rest of their lifetime are not enlivened or discharged in any
positive manner if
subsection (c ) is not adequately traversed. However, I do
address them for completeness.
Respondent at hearing submitted that their position is that if a proposed
participant is unable to satisfactorily traverse the
s 24 (1) (c) substantially
reduced functional capacity criteria, then the position is that they are unable
to meet the criteria in
s 24 (1) (e). I agree with that submission. As has often
been observed, if an Applicant is not entitled to NDIS supports because
fail to traverse s 24 (1) (c), then the question becomes moot in practice but
also on a fair reading of the Section.
the Applicant cannot get NDIS support, the argument becomes that they are
therefore unable to
NDIS supports as they are not eligible. Only
if they were eligible would they be able to assessed as to how long the
supports might be necessary. The ability to require the supports
turns on access to the supports.
Respondent argues that in respect of psychosocial impairments, the lack of
exploration of treatments and continuation of same,
has resulted in a position
whereby the potential amelioration of the condition has not been established.
The evidence is such that
it is not possible to make a finding that the
condition has now plateaued and stabilised and is chronic in that it will in all
persist for the proposed participant’s lifetime. If as the
Respondent submitted all known treatments had been explored and
to an extent
continued rather than an absence of many years at various times, a more certain
picture on the possible long term nature
of those impairments would be
Respondent also submitted that whilst a condition might be permanent it might
also respond well at times to treatment. In respect
of psychosocial impairments
a person might be effectively treated for and with a chronic condition after
experiencing for example
a mental health episode, and then for a significant
period of time not require extra (non treatment support) as they have responded
well to treatment. Relapses down the track, possibly years or in some instances
decades apart, whilst chronic and a permanent diagnosis,
the impairment arising
from the diagnosis fluctuates such that at different times they might need
differing levels of support, including
at certain times no actual support.
even if the Applicant traversed s 24 (1) (c), in the above example it is
possible that s 24 (1) (e) could frustrate their
eligibility for access to the
more importantly on this issue, the Applicant’s engagement in treatment
for psychosocial impairments is at present
not occurring. Therefore s 25 (1) (e)
provisions cannot be satisfied as it is not possible to make the relevant
finding of lifetime
support under the section.
they were considered eligible in a preliminary assessment, the question becomes
would they be likely to require NDIS supports for
their lifetime. Clearly on
those psychosocial impairments this is not the case.
in respect of s 24 (1) (d) there is a different approach in play and the
decision maker need only consider once their conceded
impairments are met under
s 24 (1) (a) and (b), as is the case with the Applicant, then passing over
subsection (c) to (d) the language
is of a much lower threshold. In the current
matter it appears clear in the evidence that the accepted impairments do affect
Applicant’s capacity for social or economic participation.
because there is no positive finding in respect of the impairments causing a
substantially reduced functioning in any of the six
domains under s 24 (1) (c)
of the NDIS Act, all other provisions other than s 25 fall away.
Early Intervention requirements s 25
respect of s 25 (1) (a) the Tribunal accepts that some of the Applicant’s
impairments are permanent and meet that criteria.
However, in respect of s 25
(1) (b) there is little evidence to indicate that early intervention will reduce
the Applicant’s
need for future support arising from this disability. The
only areas touched upon in the evidence mainly concerns the acquisition
assistive technology or aids.
intervention is referred to at page 225 of the JTB with the targeted questions
to the OT. In response to the question:
Will these supports or any others you
may recommend, likely reduce her future disability specific support needs [and
if so] how?,
the OT opines that
: “Whilst I do not consider that Ms
Lord requires assistance or support with regard to learning, implementing these
will help her maintain a higher level of function, ultimately
decreasing the need for assistance with learning –related tasks
the area of mobility, assistive aids being an over toilet frame, are suggested
as they would reduce the risk of future falls or
injury. This was the only
recommended support (as well as pacing strategies) in this domain likely to
reduce future needs for support.
the area of self care reference is made to a longhandled wiper, the
aforementioned toilet frame, shower chair and modified cutlery.
Additionally
pacing strategies are again recommended. All of these items are relatively low
cost and not contingent on NDIS funding.
The position of the clinician seems to
be that the benefits are no so much in the realm of early intervention, but
general ‘treatment’
as a method of stabilising and limiting the
impacts of the impairments of the Applicant’s ADLs.
this is an alternative method of access to the Scheme the Tribunal notes that
the available evidence from the Applicant does
not address this criteria and
provide a position on whether the provision of supports now would reduce the
Applicant’s need
for continued support in the future.
this regard the Tribunal finds that the s 25 criteria are not met on the
available evidence.
substantive issue concerns whether any of the permanent impairments resulted in
the Applicant having substantially reduced functioning
in those areas across any
of the six stated domains. In the view of the Tribunal sufficient material was
before it to determine whether
the Applicant meets the necessary requirements of
s 24 (1) (a) – (e) inclusive having regard to his evidence and material
that of the Respondent and the witnesses of both parties, Dr Sandstrom and
Ms Pizzica.
addition, I am satisfied that through the hearing and prehearing process, both
parties had a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
the current application, for the reasons outlined above the Tribunal is not
satisfied that the Applicant meets the s 24 or section
25 criteria under the
NDIS Act. In that regard the Applicant does not satisfy the requirements of a
person to become a participant
in the NDIS.
Tribunal therefore affirms the decision of the Respondent dated 10 July 2024 as
the correct or preferable decision in accordance
(1) (a) of the
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
Date(s) of hearing:
22 and 23 July 2025
Self-represented
Respondent:
J Sproule of Counsel
Re Drake and Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 2 ALD 634
National Disability Insurance
Agency, Our Guidelines – Becoming a participant – Applying to the
NDIS, (1 February 2024).
Mulligan v National
Disability Insurance Agency
[2015] FCA 544
’) at [55].
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Foster
[2023] FCAFC 11
Beezley v Repatriation Commission
(North, Tracey and Mortimer JJ).
JTB, p 207.
JTB, pp 179-181.
at p181 at [1].
JTB, p 213.
JTB, p 210.
JHB, p 180 at [16].
JTB pp 161-162.
RTF format (13.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format