Danniell & Mounce (No. 2) [2021] FamCA 629 (27 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Danniell & Mounce (No. 2)
File number(s):
SYC 5699 of 2016
Judgment of:
ALTOBELLI J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PARENTING – Where
the mother and child reside in Regional NSW and the father resides in Sydney
– Whether the mother’s
history of alcohol use and abuse poses an
unacceptable risk – Interim orders made for the child to continue living
mother and spend time with the father pending final hearing.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Goode & Goode
(2006) FLC 93-286;
[2006] FamCA 1346
Huffman & Gorman
[2015] FamCA 317
(2010) 240 CLR 461
[2010] HCA 4
Orwell & Watson
[2008] FamCAFC 62
Re W (Sex Abuse: Standard of Proof)
(2004) FLC 93-192
W and W (Abuse allegations: unacceptable risk)
(2005) FLC 93-235
[2005] FamCA 892
(1997) FLC 92-787
[1997] FamCA 57
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr Campton SC
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Lander & Rogers
The Respondent:
SYC 5699 of 2016
MR DANNIELL
ALTOBELLI J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS PENDING FURTHER ORDER THAT:
1. All previous orders be discharged.
2. The parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, X
(‘X’) born ... 2015.
3. X continue to reside primarily with the mother in City A and spend time
with the father as agreed, or failing agreement:
(a) On Father’s Day 2021 from the after school on
the Friday preceding the Father’s Day weekend until 5pm on Father’s
(b) During Term 4 2021, on no fewer than three occasions, or failing agreement,
on the second, fourth, and seventh weekends of term
from after school on Friday
to 5pm on the day preceding the next school day.
4. For the purposes of Order 3 above:
(a) The time X spends with his father occur either in
Sydney or City A, as the father nominates;
(b) Where X is required to travel between City A and Sydney, he is to travel by
airplane as an unaccompanied minor, with each parent
being at the points of
departure or arrival;
(c) In the event that there are no suitable flights, X is to travel by motor
vehicle, with changeover to occur at K Town McDonald’s;
(d) Any travel occur in accordance with any relevant public health
5. X spend the entirety of the September/October 2021 school holiday period
with the father in Sydney by way of make up time on account
of the time X has
not spent with the father during the COVID-19 lockdown since June 2021.
6. For the purposes of Order 5 above, changeover is to be effected by X
travelling as an unaccompanied minor travelling on Qantas
flight QF... departing
City A at 10.15am on Saturday 18 September 2021, and on Sunday 3 October 2021
travelling on Qantas flight
QF..., arriving in City A at 4.25pm.
Video Calls
7. X communicate with the parent with whom he is not residing, by way of a
video call each Tuesday, Thursday and Sunday between 6pm
and 6.30pm, and each
Saturday between 10am and 10.30am, and at such other times in accordance with
X's wishes.
8. For the purpose of Order 7 above, the parent with whom X is living, shall
be responsible for initiating the video calls.
Mental Health and Alcohol Use
9. The mother be, and is hereby restrained, from consuming alcohol for a
24-hour period prior to X entering her care and whilst X
is in her care.
10. The mother continue to attend upon her current treatment team, comprising
of Psychiatrist Dr O, Treating Psychologist Ms Q, NSW
Health Drug & Alcohol
Counsellor Ms R, NSW Health Drug & Alcohol Specialist Dr S, and Dr T
(General Practitioner), and shall
do all acts and things to comply with the
recommendations of these treaters.
11. Within seven days of the date of these orders, the mother procure, file
and serve an undertaking from her father and stepmother
in the following
“That in the event I witness the mother consuming
alcohol or have reason to believe she has consumed alcohol whilst X is in
care or in the 24 hours prior to X coming into her care, I will immediately
notify the father and assume care of X.”
12. On a without admissions basis, the mother undergo random blood tests to
identify the level of carbohydrate deficient transferrin
in the mother’s
blood (CDT testing), in addition to liver function tests (LFTs) and Full Blood
Count (FBC), with such testing
to occur as follows:
(a) The mother do all acts and things necessary to
obtain within seven (7) days of the date of these orders, pathology test request
forms from her general practitioner for CDT testing, LFTs and FBC;
(b) The mother is required to undertake CDT, LFT, and FBC testing within 24
hours of notification from her treating psychiatrist,
Dr O or such other
treating medical practitioner;
(c) The mother is required to undertake CDT, LFT, and FBC testing within 24
hours of notification from the father’s legal representatives,
with such a
request to be not more than one occasion per three week period;
(d) The mother shall do all acts and things and sign all documents to authorise
and direct the testing laboratory and/ or her treating
practitioner (as the case
may be) to release the results of the tests undertaken in accordance with Order
12(b) to the father’s
legal representatives within 24 hours of receipt of
the results;
(e) In the event that the CDT, LFT, or FBC test is instigated by the
mother’s treating psychiatrist, Dr O, then the cost of
the testing is to
be met equally by both parties, and
(f) In the event that the CDT, LFT or FBC test is instigated by the father, via
his legal representatives, then the cost of the testing
is to be met in full by
the father.
13. The legal representatives for the father and
the mother have leave to issue such subpoena as they believe necessary for the
conduct of the proceedings between the date of these orders and the final
hearing on 6 December 2021.
14. Should a Notice of Objection in respect of any documents produced
pursuant to a subpoena be filed, liberty be granted to the parties
to approach
the Docket Registrar in respect of the filing of written submissions in respect
15. The mother facilitate X receiving gifts and necessary items from the
father and/or from members of X's paternal family, by providing
a nominated
delivery address within 24 hours' notice of request by the father or members of
X's paternal family.
16. Each party ensure that the other party is advised promptly of any medical
emergency or significant illness suffered by, or relating
to, X including
sufficient details to enable both parties to be consulted in respect to, and
being fully advised regarding, such
illness or condition and any treatment.
17. Both parties are entitled to attend X’s healthcare appointments
including consultations and any treating facilities and
each party is to provide
such authorities as X’s healthcare providers may require to authorise the
other party to have access
to X’s medical records.
18. Each of the parties are restrained from speaking to X or to any other
person in X’s presence or hearing in derogatory terms
party or their partners or their family members
19. The time for the father to file and serve his short Affidavit, in reply
to the mother's Trial Affidavit filed on 30 July 2021,
be extended to 4pm on 10
September 2021.
Filing Directions
20. Each party file one short updating affidavit by no later than 4pm on 18
October 2021.
21. By no later than 4pm on 18 October 2021, the mother and the father are to
file and serve a Case Outline document, setting out:
(a) a list of documents to be read in their case;
(b) a precise Minute of Orders Sought;
(c) a brief summary of argument touching upon the relevant matters set out in
Family Law Act 1975
, with reference to the evidence relied upon, and
any other considerations relevant to the decision.
22. By no later than 4pm on 24 October 2021, the Independent Children’s
Lawyer is to file and serve a Case Outline document,
setting out:
(a) a list of documents to be read in their case;
(b) a precise Minute of Orders Sought;
(c) a brief summary of argument touching upon the relevant matters set out in
Family Law Act 1975
, with reference to the evidence relied upon, and
any other considerations relevant to the decision.
23. The Independent Children’s Lawyer is granted photocopy access to
all material produced on subpoena in the proceedings including
any documents
produced by any Local Court or pursuant to an order made under
Family Law Act 1975
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection Act) 1998
and marked as a subpoena packet for
the purpose of preparing a tender bundle.
24. The Independent Children’s Lawyer shall by no later than 14 days
prior to the commencement of the final hearing liaise with
the parties legal
representatives as to the content of the bundle with a view to the tender bundle
being provided to the Registry,
placed on the court file, and tendered at the
final hearing for use during the hearing, NOTING THAT any copies of the
completed bundle
made prior to the hearing must remain in the possession of the
parties’ legal representatives and the Independent Children’s
only, and FURTHER NOTING THAT if a party becomes self-represented that party may
view a copy of the tender bundle at the Sydney
Registry in the subpoena viewing
25. In respect to tender bundle, only documents which are successfully
tendered during the hearing shall be in evidence.
26. In respect of the Chapter 15 Expert, Dr P;
(a) The parties are to provide copies of all Affidavits
and subpoenaed documents upon which they will intend to reply upon at the
hearing to Dr P by 4pm on 22 October 2021
(b) The father be responsible for meeting Dr P’s costs of and incidental
to attending the final hearing for the purpose of
cross-examination, inclusive
of his costs in respect of reading the material provided to him in accordance
with Order 25(a) above,
at the first instance.
Note: The form of the order is subject to
the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Danniell & Mounce
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
ALTOBELLI J:
INTRODUCTION
1 This case is about a
child, X, who is six years old. X currently lives with his mother in City A,
and usually spends time with
his father in either Sydney or City A. These
reasons for judgment explain the orders that the Court has made for X to spend
with his father pending the final hearing of this matter, which will
commence on 6 December 2021.
2 On 9 August 2021, I vacated the final hearing of
this matter which was listed to commence before me on 16 August 2021 for five
I did so because the mother became unrepresented and this was a matter to
which the provisions of
Family Law Act 1975
(‘the Act’) applied. I made the relevant
orders, listed the
matter for final hearing before me on 6 December 2021, appointed an Independent
Children’s Lawyer, and otherwise
listed the matter for possible interim
hearing at 10am on 16 August 2021. The father had strenuously opposed the
vacation of the
hearing and raised serious issues about the welfare of X in his
mother’s care. The purpose of the interim hearing was to facilitate
evidence being placed before the Court, and for both parties to make
submissions.
3 At the interim hearing the father was represented by his senior counsel, Mr
Campton. The mother had by then become self-represented
and made submissions on
her own behalf.
THE COMPETING PROPOSALS
4 Both the parties agreed the previous order should
be discharged, and that there should be an order for equal shared parental
responsibility.
5 The father’s main proposal was that X live with him in Sydney and
spend time with his mother each alternate weekend either
in Sydney or City A.
In the alternative, however, should X continue to live with the mother in City
A, he proposed an order for
X to spend time with him each alternate weekend, and
for the entirety of the forthcoming September/October school holidays.
6 The mother proposed that X continue to live with her, but spend time with
his father on two weekends during each school term with
the choice to elect an
additional weekend in City A, and for the entirety of the forthcoming
September/October school holidays.
7 The main issue in this case is whether there is an
unacceptable risk of harm if X continues to live in his mother’s care in
circumstances where the evidence establishes that the mother has struggled with
the use and abuse of alcohol for many years. The
father contends that this
unacceptable risk exists, but the mother contends that it does not. For all
practical purposes, this is
a risk assessment exercise conducted by the Court
without the benefit of cross-examination, but with the benefit of considerable
evidence including the single joint expert report of Dr P, as well as objective
evidence by way of business records.
THE APPLICABLE LAW
8 The applicable law is found in
Act. In determining parenting matters under
of the Act the Court
must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration:
9 The objects and principles of
are set out at
60B Objects of Part and principles underlying it
(1) The objects of this Part are to ensure that the best interests of children
are met by:
(a) ensuring that children have the benefit
of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the
extent consistent with the best interests of the child; and
(b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected
to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence;
(c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them
achieve their full potential; and
(d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities,
concerning the care, welfare and development of their
(2) The principles underlying these objects are that
(except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best
interests):
(a) children have the right to know and be
cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are
married, separated,
have never married or have never lived together; and
(b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate
on a regular basis with, both their parents and
other people significant to
their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives);
(c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care,
welfare and development of their children; and
(d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children; and
(e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy
that culture with other people who share that
(3) For the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an
Aboriginal child’s or Torres Strait Islander child’s right to enjoy
or her Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander culture includes the
(a) to maintain a connection with that
culture; and
(b) to have the support, opportunity and encouragement
(i) to explore the full extent
of that culture, consistent with the child’s age and developmental level
and the child’s
(ii) to develop a positive appreciation of that
10 At the very core of
of the Act is the creation of a presumption
of equal shared parental responsibility in
Section 61DA
61DA Presumption of equal shared parental
responsibility when making parenting orders
(1) When making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a
presumption that it is in the best interests of
the child for the child’s
parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
(2) The presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe
that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with
a parent of the child)
has engaged in:
(a) abuse of the child or another child who,
at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other
family); or
(b) family violence.
(3) When the court is making an interim order, the
presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate
in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that
(4) The presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it
would not be in the best interests of the child
for the child’s parents to
have equal shared parental responsibility for the
11 If the presumption applies, the Court is required to consider certain
65DAA Court to consider child spending equal time or
substantial and significant time with each parent in certain circumstances
(1) Subject to subsection (6), if a parenting order provides (or is to provide)
that a child’s parents are to have equal shared
parental responsibility
for the child, the court must:
(a) consider whether the child spending
equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child;
(b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is
reasonably practicable; and
(c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in
the order) for the child to spend equal time with
each of the
Substantial and significant time
(2) Subject to subsection (6), if:
(a) a parenting order provides (or is to
provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental
responsibility for
the child; and
(b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for
the child to spend equal time with each of the parents;
the court must:
(c) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with
each of the parents would be in the best interests
of the child; and
(d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with
each of the parents is reasonably practicable; and
(e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in
the order) for the child to spend substantial and
significant time with each of
the parents.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), a child will be
taken to spend substantial and significant time with a parent only
(a) the time the child spends with the
parent includes both:
(i) days that fall on weekends
and holidays; and
(ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays;
(b) the time the child spends with the
parent allows the parent to be involved
(i) the child’s daily
routine; and
(ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child;
(c) the time the child spends with the
parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of
special significance
to the parent.
(4) Subsection (3) does not limit the other matters to
which a court can have regard in determining whether the time a child spends
with a parent would be substantial and significant.
Reasonable practicality
(5) In determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is
reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time,
or substantial and
significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the court must have
(a) how far apart the parents live from each
(b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement
for the child spending equal time, or substantial
and significant time, with
each of the parents; and
(c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each
other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing
an arrangement
of that kind; and
(d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child; and
(e) such other matters as the court considers
refers to the best interests of the child the Court must
then go back to consider
which specifies how the Court must determine
what is in a child’s best interests.
Determining child's best interests
(1) Subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best
interests, the court must consider the matters set out
in subsections (2) and
Primary considerations
(2) The primary considerations are:
(a) the benefit to the child of having a
meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents; and
(b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
Note: Making these considerations the primary
ones is consistent with the objects of this Part set out in paragraphs 60B(1)(a)
(2A) In applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to
give greater weight to the consideration set out in
paragraph (2)(b).
Additional considerations
(3) Additional considerations are:
(a) any views expressed by the child and any
factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court
are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views;
(b) the nature of the relationship of the child
(i) each of the child's parents;
(ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the
(c) the extent to which each of the child's
parents has taken, or failed to take, the
opportunity:
(i) to participate in making
decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child; and
(ii) to spend time with the child; and
(iii) to communicate with the
(ca) the extent to which each of the child's
parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain
(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the
likely effect on the child of any separation
(i) either of his or her
parents; or
(ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other
relative of the child), with whom he or she has been
(e) the practical difficulty and expense of
a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that
or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain
personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular
(f) the capacity of:
(i) each of the child's parents;
(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual
(g) the maturity, sex,
lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the
child and of either of the child's
parents, and any other characteristics of the
child that the court thinks are relevant;
(h) if the child is an Aboriginal child or a Torres Strait Islander
(i) the child's right to enjoy
his or her Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander culture (including the right to
enjoy that culture
with other people who share that culture); and
(ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this Part will have on
that right;
(i) the attitude to the child, and to the
responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents;
(j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's
(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member
of the child's family--any relevant inferences that
can be drawn from the order,
taking into account the following:
(i) the nature of the order;
(ii) the circumstances in which the order was made;
(iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order;
(iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order;
(v) any other relevant
(l) whether it would be preferable to make
the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further
proceedings
in relation to the child;
(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is
(2010) 240 CLR 461
, the High Court referred to
9. Each of sub-ss (1)(b) and (2)(d) of
the Court to consider whether it is reasonably practicable for the child to
spend equal time or substantial and significant
time with each of the parents.
It is clearly intended that the Court determine that question. Sub-section (5)
provides in that
respect that the Court "must have regard" to certain matters,
such as how far apart the parents live from each other and their capacity
implement the arrangement in question, and "such other matters as the court
considers relevant", "[i]n determining for the purposes
of subsections (1) and
(2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or
substantial and significant time,
with each of the child's
14 A little later in the judgment the High Court said:
Section 65DAA(1)
is expressed in imperative terms.
It obliges the Court to consider both the question whether it is in the best
interests of the
child to spend equal time with each of the parents (par (a))
and the question whether it is reasonably practicable that the child
spend equal
time with each of them (par (b)). It is only where both questions are
answered in the affirmative that consideration
may be given, under par (c), to
the making of an order.
15 At [15] the High Court emphasised the need for a practical approach:
Section 65DAA(1)
is concerned with the reality of
the situation of the parents and the child, not whether it is desirable that
there be equal time
spent by the child with each parent. The presumption in
is not determinative of the questions arising under
s 65DAA(1).
65DAA(1)(b)
requires a practical assessment of whether equal time parenting is
16 The Full Court’s decision in
Goode & Goode
93-286 provides some guidance about the interpretation of
and the way
to proceed in interim hearings.
68. In our view some of the comments of the Full Court
in paragraph 18 are still apposite. For example, the procedure for making
parenting orders will continue to be an abridged process where the scope
of the enquiry is “significantly curtailed”.
Where the Court cannot
make findings of fact it should not be drawn into issues of fact or matters
relating to the merits of the
substantive case where findings are not possible.
The Court also looks to the less contentious matters, such as the agreed facts
and issues not in dispute and would have regard to the care arrangements prior
to separation, the current circumstances of the parties
and their children, and
the parties’ respective proposals for the future.
72. In our view, it can be fairly said there is a legislative intent evinced in
favour of substantial involvement of both parents
in their children’s
lives, both as to parental responsibility and as to time spent with children,
subject to the need to protect
children from harm, from abuse and family
violence and provided it is in their best interests and reasonably practicable.
where there is a status quo or well settled environment, instead of
simply preserving it, unless there are protective or other significant
interests concerns for the child, the Court must follow the structure of the Act
and consider accepting, where applicable, equal
or significant involvement by
both parents in the care arrangements for the child.
82. In an interim case that would involve the
(a) identifying the competing proposals of
the parties;
(b) identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing;
(c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts;
(d) considering the matters in
that are relevant and, if possible, making
findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested
evidence to
enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take
(e) deciding whether the presumption in
that equal shared parental
responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply
because there are reasonable
grounds to believe there has been abuse of the
child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the Court does not consider
appropriate to apply the presumption;
(f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because
application of it would not be in the child’s best
(g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order
that the child spend equal time with the parents
unless it is contrary to the
child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the
, or impracticable;
(h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests,
considering making an order that the child spend substantial
and significant
time as defined in
with the parents, unless contrary to the
child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the
, or impracticable;
(i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to
be in the best interests of the child, then making
such orders in the discretion
of the Court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of
consideration of one or more
of the matters in
(j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as
is in the best interests of the child, as a result
of consideration of one or
more of the matters in
(k) even then the Court may need to consider equal time or substantial and
significant time, especially if one of the parties has
sought it or, even if
neither has sought it, if the Court considers after affording procedural
fairness to the parties it to be in
the best interests of the
Unacceptable risk
17 A comprehensive statement of the applicable law
in unacceptable risk of abuse cases is contained in the Full Court’s
W and W (Abuse allegations: unacceptable risk)
[2005] FamCA
, at paragraphs 92-115. It was a case that involved allegations of sexual
abuse, but the same principles apply to other forms of abuse,
such as physical,
emotional, and psychological: see, e.g.,
Orwell & Watson
Huffman & Gorman
[2015] FamCA 317.
Whilst the following
extract from
is lengthy, the law is complex, and the context of
these cases is always one of high levels of emotion and concern for the parents
and other persons involved. It is important for all who are affected by this
case to know what the relevant law is:
92. The High Court’s unambiguous statement in
is that a trial Judge should not make a positive finding of sexual
abuse unless the high standard of certainty referred to in
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) (“the
”)) is discharged.
Unacceptable risk test
(a) What is meant by “unacceptable risk”?
93. In his submissions before us counsel for the father has referred us to
recent decisions of this Court decided after M and M in
dealing with cases
involving child sexual abuse, and in particular, with the manner in which
subsequent decisions have applied the
principles enunciated therein.
94. Prior to our consideration of these decisions we find it appropriate, as a
starting point, to re-state what may be regarded as
obvious, that is, the
significant detrimental harm to a child who is sexually abused. Although
contained in a dissenting judgment,
the discussion of Fogarty J about the effect
of sexual abuse on a child remains as poignant and relevant as it was in 1996.
N and S and the Separate Representative
[1995] FamCA 139
(1996) FLC 92-655
his Honour said:
(i) The reality of
sexual abuse
The sexual abuse of a young child by a parent or care-giver or other person
associated with that household is so alien to the concepts
and actions of most
people in the community that there is an understandable resistance to accepting
that it may or does occur. Regrettably,
the actuality is otherwise.
It is difficult to overstate the importance of protecting children from sexual
abuse, and from the consequences which often follow
from sexual abuse. Sexual
abuse involves the most severe exploitation of children, the most serious
invasion of their rights to personal
integrity and freedom, and the most serious
denial of their rights to personal growth and development. Its effects, both in
and long-term, can be
devastating.”
95. We also have regard to Fogarty J’s
acknowledgment of false allegations. At 82,711 his Honour, referring to Thomas
judgment in
[1993] NZFLR 657
“courts must be aware that
not all allegations of sexual abuse are true. False allegations may be made
either by parents acting
in good faith, as a result of a misperception of
information about their child, or by parents deliberately fabricating
allegations
in order to gain an advantage in proceedings. Ambiguous events often
have an innocent
explanation.”
96. The core principles in the determination of a case
of alleged sexual abuse are those enunciated by the High Court in
“In proceedings under
of the Act in relation to a child, the Court is enjoined to ‘regard
the welfare of the child as the paramount consideration’
(sec. 60D). The
paramountcy of this consideration in proceedings for custody or access is
preserved by
sec. 64(1).
The consequence is that the ultimate and paramount
issue to be decided in proceedings for custody of, or access to, a child is
the making of the order sought is in the interests of the welfare of the
child. The fact that the proceedings involve an allegation
that the child has
been sexually abused by the parent who seeks custody or access does not alter
the paramount and ultimate issue
which the Court has to determine, though the
Court’s findings on the disputed allegation of sexual abuse will naturally
an important, perhaps a decisive, impact on the resolution of that
But it is a mistake to think that the Family Court is under the same duty to
resolve in a definitive way the disputed allegation
of sexual abuse as a court
exercising criminal jurisdiction would be if it were trying the party for a
criminal offence. Proceedings
for custody or access are not disputes inter
partes in the ordinary sense of that expression:
Reynolds v. Reynolds
(1973) 47 A.L.J.R. 499
1 A.L.R. 318
McKee v. McKee
(1951) A.C. 352
pp. 364-365. In proceedings of that kind the Court is not enforcing a parental
right of custody or right to access. The Court
is concerned to make such an
order for custody or access which will in the opinion of the Court best promote
and protect the interests
of the child. In deciding what order it should make
the Court will give very great weight to the importance of maintaining parental
ties, not so much because parents have a right to custody or access, but because
it is prima facie in a child’s interests to
maintain the filial
relationship with both parents: cf.
J. v. Lieschke
[1987] HCA 4
(1987) 162 C.L.R. 447
at pp. 450, 458, 462, 463-464.
Viewed in this setting, the resolution of an allegation of sexual abuse against
a parent is subservient and ancillary to the Court’s
determination of what
is in the best interests of the child. The Family Court’s consideration of
the paramount issue which
it is enjoined to decide cannot be diverted by the
supposed need to arrive at a definitive conclusion on the allegation of sexual
abuse. The Family Court’s wide-ranging discretion to decide what is in the
child’s best interests cannot be qualified
by requiring the Court to try
the case as if it were no more than a contest between the parents to be decided
solely by reference
to the acceptance or rejection of the allegation of sexual
abuse on the balance of probabilities.
In considering an allegation of sexual abuse, the Court should not make a
positive finding that the allegation is true unless the
Court is so satisfied
according to the civil standard of proof, with due regard to the factors
mentioned in
Briginshaw v. Briginshaw
(1938) 60 C.L.R. 336
There Dixon J. said:
‘The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of
the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue
has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not
produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect
inferences.’
His Honour’s remarks have a direct application to an allegation that a
parent has sexually abused a child, an allegation which
is often easy to make,
but difficult to refute. It does not follow that if an allegation of sexual
abuse has not been made out, according
to the civil onus as stated in
, that conclusion determines the wider issue which confronts
the Court when it is called upon to decide what is in the best interests
No doubt there will be some cases in which the Court is able to come to a
positive finding that the allegation is well-founded. In
all but the most
extraordinary cases, that finding will have a decisive impact on the order to be
made respecting custody and access.
There will be cases also in which the Court
has no hesitation in rejecting the allegation as groundless. Again, in the
things there will be very many cases, such as the present case, in
which the Court cannot confidently make a finding that sexual
abuse has taken
place. And there are strong practical family reasons why the Court should
refrain from making a positive finding
that sexual abuse has actually taken
place unless it is impelled by the particular circumstances of the case to do
In resolving the wider issue the Court must determine whether on the evidence
there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody
or access be granted and
assessing the magnitude of that risk. After all, in deciding what is in the best
interests of a child, the
Family Court is frequently called upon to assess and
evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they
come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child’s welfare. The
existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse,
as with other risks of harm
to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in
deciding issues of custody
and access. In access cases, the magnitude of the
risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access. Even in
a case, however, there may be a risk of disturbance to a child who is
compulsorily brought into contact with a parent who has sexually
abused her or
whom the child believes to have sexually abused her.
Efforts to define with greater precision the magnitude of the risk which will
justify a court in denying a parent access to a child
have resulted in a variety
of formulations. The degree of risk has been described as a ‘risk of
serious harm’ (
[1976] VicRp 24
(1976) V.R. 298
at p. 300), ‘an
element of risk’ or ‘an appreciable risk’ (
(1987) FLC 91-830
at pp. 76,240-76,242;
[1986] FamCA 62
(1987) 11 Fam. L.R. 765
and 771 respectively), ‘a real possibility’ (
B and B [Access]
[1986] FamCA 52
(1986) FLC 91-758
at p. 75,545), a ‘real risk’ (
(1983) 54 B.C.L.R. 164
at p. 167), and an ‘unacceptable
In re G. (a minor)
(1987) 1 W.L.R. 1461
at p. 1469). This
imposing array indicates that the courts are striving for a greater degree of
definition than the subject is capable
of yielding. In devising these tests the
courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child’s paramount
to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from
sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from
parental access.
To achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court
will not grant custody or access
to a parent if that custody or access would
expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual
97. An examination of cases in Australia following
and subsequent to the amendments to the Act by reason of the
Law Reform Act 1995
(“the Reform Act”) demonstrate some of the
practical difficulties in applying the principles enunciated in
the trial Judge was found by the Full Court to have
correctly applied the
test in reaching his finding that the
father had acted in a sexually inappropriate way with the children the subject
of the application,
and then considering that the children should continue to
have access (as contact was then defined) to the father, such access to
supervised for a defined period with provision for a further expert report. In
their joint judgment Fogarty, Baker and Purvis
JJ at 79,778 discussed the
relevant principles to be applied in a sexual abuse case having regard to the
High Court’s decision
. Their Honours
“The test propounded by
the High Court in
and which is authoritative in this
‘that a court
will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would
expose the child to an unacceptable
risk of sexual abuse.’ (at page
The ‘unacceptable
risk’ test is therefore the standard used by the Family Court to
‘achieve a balance between the
risk of detriment to the child from sexual
abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access’.
words, where the Court makes a finding of unacceptable risk it is a
finding that the risk of harm to the children in having access
with a parent
outweighs the possible benefits to them from that access.
It should be noted that the M and M ‘unacceptable risk’ test is
employed within the context of ‘resolving the wider
issue’, namely
the determination of what is in the best interests of the child, to which
principle the unacceptable risk test
was said by the High Court to be
‘subservient and ancillary’. The overriding consideration in all
custody and access
decisions is the welfare of the child: see s64(1)(a) of the
Family Law Act
Brown and Pedersen
99. Their Honours further commented on the fact that a
finding of unacceptable risk in respect of unsupervised contact did not
a finding that there is no unacceptable risk to the child if
supervised contact is ordered”.
100. One of the issues in
was whether an order for supervised
findings on supervised
at 83,341 and 83,342 per Fogarty and May JJ). The
discussion in the latter case on types of supervision and treatment are
particularly
apposite in this case.
101. It is however important to note at the time of both decisions the
availability in Australia of professionally supervised contact
in accredited
children contact centres was not widespread, the Commonwealth Government funding
the first pilot of 10 children’s
through its Family Relationship Service Program.
the father asserted that the trial Judge had not applied
the appropriate test in determining whether an unacceptable risk of sexual
existed. The trial Judge found, on the balance of probabilities, he could not be
satisfied that the father had sexually abused
the child, and went on to find
however that he could not be satisfied he did not do so. The trial Judge then
determined, after looking
at the evidence as a whole, there was an unacceptable
risk of sexual abuse if he ordered unsupervised contact. In his dissenting
judgment Kay J emphasised the right of a child to maintain personal
relationships with both parents on a regular basis and said at
“With the greatest respect
to their Honours in
I have difficulty in seeing how that
conclusion can be drawn from the words in
. All I read
as saying in the passage referred to is that the presence or absence of a
risk of sexual abuse is not necessarily determinative of
whether access is
granted. Other issues such as the effects on the child of having to confront the
abuser need to be taken into
allegations of sexual abuse of a
4 year old child were made with the child naming the father as the perpetrator.
The father denied
the allegation. The trial Judge had before him expert evidence
from a child psychiatrist. The trial Judge said that the expert had
stated that
it was most likely that the child had not been abused by either the father or
the mother’s new partner, that the
child used accusations to get attention
from the mother, and the child was not truthful. There was evidence before the
trial Judge
of a social worker from a child sexual assault service who believed
the child had been sexually assaulted by the father. The trial
findings on sexual abuse were recorded by the majority (Kay and Hilton JJ) at
82,732 as follows:
“Coleman J, as well as Dr
Fairley, concluded that he could not entirely discount the possibility that the
child may have been
sexually interfered with and may have been sexually
interfered with by the father. Coleman J concluded on the balance of
probabilities
that this did not happen. He was not however prepared to conclude
that it certainly could not have
104. Their Honours noted, as in this case, that the
appeal was from a discretionary judgment, and the relevant principles to be
in such a case. They then (at 82,740) referred to the passage in
(set out by us in paragraph 96) and said:
“Whilst the High Court did
not further expand on what circumstances might create such an unacceptable risk,
Coleman J, weighing
up all the material before him, concluded that there would
be no such risk to the child during the proposed six month access
105. In his judgment, which was in dissent as to the
outcome of the appeal, Fogarty J discussed the question of what is meant by the
term “unacceptable risk” and reviewed earlier authorities concluding
“it is inevitable that Courts will have to
make some effort to quantify
the relevant risk”. He then said at 82,714:
“In asking whether the
facts of the case do establish an unacceptable risk the Court will often be
required to ask such questions
as: What is the nature of the events alleged to
have taken place? Who has made the allegations? To whom have the allegations
made? What level of detail do they involve? Over what period of time have
the allegations been made? Over what period of time are
the events alleged to
have occurred? What are the effects exhibited by the child? What is the basis of
the allegations? Are the allegations
reasonably based? Are the allegations
genuinely believed by the person making them? What expert evidence has been
provided? Are there
satisfactory explanations of the allegations apart from
sexual abuse? What are the likely future effects on the child?
This is not a catalogue of the correct questions, but a reminder that it is
questions such as these which are required to be considered
in deciding whether
an unacceptable risk may be shown. The weight to be attached to the various
answers to the relevant questions
will inevitably vary from case to case. But it
is essential that questions like these be
106. His Honour went on to discuss the standard of proof
necessary for a finding of unacceptable risk. His Honour did not advocate
step approach, that is, a consideration of whether or not sexual abuse was
proved on the balance of probabilities, and a second
step of assessing
unacceptable risk to the same standard. He expressed the requirement at 82,715
as follows:
“There is no requirement
to ask whether the evidence satisfies a balance of probabilities finding in
favour of abuse, though
that may nevertheless be useful in some cases. There is,
however, a requirement to ask whether the evidence establishes an unacceptable
107. The Full Court in
(Baker, Kay and
Morgan JJ) at paragraph 48 reaffirmed the consequences to a child in a residence
or contact dispute of a finding of
sexual abuse proved to the standard required
Evidence Act
“...In these
circumstances, evidence which, for example, is relevant and probative in
relation to the question of unacceptable
risk of abuse occurring, may not be
relevant or probative when deciding whether or not a specific incidence of abuse
has in fact
[2004] FamCA 1081
Finn, Kay and
Holden JJ considered specifically s 60B of the Act and whether the benefits of
the risks of such contact. In this case the
trial Judge found that the children had been sexually abused, but was unable to
the identity of the perpetrator. The trial Judge refused to make
orders for either supervised or unsupervised contact on the basis
reviewed the evidence in the case, their Honours
set out the submission made by
counsel for the Child Representative at paragraph 56 as
“Accordingly it was put by
Mr [M] that any finding that the father had in fact been involved
inappropriately with these children,
or might have been inappropriately involved
with the children to the point where he would create a serious danger to the
could only be sustained if the Court had been properly aware of the
gravity of upholding such an assertion in accordance with
principles. An order for no contact is a grave order which should only be made
upon very strong proper supporting
109. The Full Court held that the trial Judge was in
error in finding there was a real risk of sexual abuse if there was unsupervised
the father was the perpetrator.
TF and JF and Children’s Representative
[2005] FamCA 394
May J highlighted that the “concept of unacceptable risk is one that is
far from settled in its application to many family
situations”. May J,
having found that the evidence in the case, “objectively viewed reveals
the potential for an unacceptable
risk to the children if contact with the
father is not supervised...” then referred to the difficulty associated
term supervised contact and said “the necessity for contact to
be supervised apparently indefinitely leads to the need to finely
balance what
is in the children’s best interests”. Her Honour then
“Whilst supervised contact
in this case will protect the children from any potential physical harm, the
effect on their emotional
well-being cannot be ignored.”
111. In summary, the law is well settled as to the
standard of proof required to make a positive finding of sexual abuse, and that
such a finding should not be made unless a trial Judge is satisfied to the
highest standard, on the balance of probabilities abuse
has occurred. We accept,
as a matter of practice, a trial Judge will almost inevitably be required in a
case where sexual abuse allegations
are raised to consider whether abuse has
been proven on the balance of probabilities as well as considering whether or
not an unacceptable
risk of abuse exists. The High Court in
recognised the difficulty in defining with any degree of precision what
constitutes an “unacceptable risk” and the cases
determined after
that decision testify to the difficulty. However, the questions posed by Fogarty
, and referred to by us in paragraph 105, do provide a
structure or framework which may assist a trial Judge to assess future risks
(b) The contact issue
Re W (Sex abuse: standard of proof)
at 93,192 and in
at paragraph 53 the Court emphasised the importance of maintaining a
worthwhile relationship between a parent and child, and that
termination of such
relationship “ought, in most cases, be the course of last resort”.
We acknowledge that s 60B emphasises
the objects of
of the Act and that
generally children have a right to know and be cared for by both their parents.
This provision was the subject
of discussion by the Full Court in
Family Law Reform Act
(1997) FLC 92-755 at 84,213-84,217. The objects
provision is, of course, subject to the exception that the provisions do not
apply when it is or would
be contrary to a child’s best interests.
113. The practical difficulties in assessing an unacceptable risk are
highlighted by May J at in paragraph 74 of
. Further, at
paragraph 94, the tension between the protection offered by supervised contact
(and the maintenance of a child’s
relationship with his or her parent) and
that child’s emotional well-being is considered. We have not in our
discussion of
unacceptable risk canvassed in any detail the question of the
impact of contact on the resident parent as it is not relevant in the
circumstances of this case, nor is E’s emotional well-being in issue.
114. Further we note it is not always possible to provide for appropriate
supervision particularly if a children’s contact
centre is not a practical
option. Centres too have their limitations. The guidelines established between
courts administering the
Act and children’s contact centres accredited by
the Commonwealth Department of Family and Community Services recognise that
“long term supervision may not be in a child’s best interests”
and place emphasis on the need to move to “self
management” by
parents and others availing themselves of the present restricted services.
115. We appreciate that the decisions in these difficult cases have the
potential for long term consequences for a child, and that
they require very
careful consideration. We do not think it is appropriate or practical to set
guidelines as to when supervised contact
could or should be ordered, or whether
such contact should be in a professionally run contact centre or supervision by
private arrangement.
The latter, which was deemed appropriate in the
circumstances of this case, affords a potentially longer term solution which is
to afford the opportunity for enjoying more realistic and relaxed
parenting time between a parent and child.
[1997] FamCA 57
, the Full Court emphasised the standard
of proof that applies in these cases at [47]:
In children’s matters under
Family Law Act
, where the issue is a child’s contact or residence
with a significant person in his or her life, the grave consequences of
finding of sexual abuse cannot be overstated. Accordingly, before trial Judges
find themselves impelled to make a positive finding
of sexual abuse, as opposed
to a finding of unacceptable risk, the standard of proof they are required to
apply must be towards the
strictest end of the civil spectrum as set out in
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth). Inexact
proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences are insufficient to ground
a finding of abuse.
Re W (Sex Abuse: Standard of Proof)
[2004] FamCA 768
referring to
the Full Court observed at [18]-[19]:
18. In setting out those authorities it does not appear
that his Honour paid any attention to the views of the Full Court in
where the Court emphasised the very high standard by which a Court needs to
be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that something
has actually
occurred. Unless such a rigorous approach is taken, where the often-inevitable
result of a positive finding is a cessation
of the relationship between parent
and child, there is a major risk of inflicting upon the parent and child the
disastrous effects
of a positive finding that is reached in error.
19. The termination of a worthwhile relationship between the parent and child
ought in most cases be the course of last resort. The
Court should not shy away
from reaching such a result in an appropriate case but at all times judges
should be conscious that the
adversarial or inquisitorial systems often reach
results that are artificial. The truth does not always come out. A false
finding accompanied by appropriate safeguards as to the future
relationship between parent and child, such as adequate supervision
against possible abuse, may be far less disastrous for the child than an
erroneous positive finding that leads to a cessation
of the parent-child
relationship. The Court needs to be remain conscious of this imperfection at all
20 In that same decision, the Full Court made some important comments about
expert evidence in the context of these cases, at [38]-[39]:
Re W Abuse Allegations; Expert Evidence
[2001] FamCA 216
(2001) FLC 93-085
Nicholson CJ and O'Ryan J (with whom Kay J agreed on this
point) warned of giving weight to expert evidence of a psychiatrist who
seen the parties nor the children but had reviewed the material. Their Honours
said at para 147 "...there are grave dangers
in reliance upon expert evidence
given in such circumstances."
39. Whilst much of their Honours' rejection of the evidence of the psychiatrist
appears to turn on the fact he was retained by one side and must
have brought unconscious bias to his task, in our view the criticism
upon an opinion about the ultimate issue from a witness who has not seen the
parties nor the children remains just as
valid when the witness is called by the
court. If an expert witness still purports to give an opinion as to the ultimate
such opinion would be expected to be heavily qualified by the expert
having regard to the fact that the expert had not seen the parties
THE EVIDENCE
21 In support of his application, the father relied
on the following documents:
(a) Single expert report of Dr P dated 28 April
(b) His Affidavit filed 16 July 2021;
(c) His Case Outline document filed 13 August 2021;
(d) A document containing extracts of material produced on subpoena by U
Hospital, Dr O, and Ms Q, marked as exhibit A1; and
(e) A schedule prepared by his solicitor detailing the carbohydrate-deficient
transferrin (‘CDT’) testing undertaken
by the mother from 5 March
2020 to date, marked as exhibit A2.
22 In support of her case, the mother relied on the following documents:
(a) The Affidavit of Ms D filed 5 September 2018;
(b) The Affidavit of Mr E filed 12 October 2018;
(c) Single expert report of Dr P dated 28 April 2020;
(d) The Affidavit of Ms Q filed 5 July 2021;
(e) Her Affidavit filed 30 July 2021;
(f) The Affidavit of Ms V filed 30 July 2021;
(g) The Affidavit of Ms W filed 30 July 2021; and
(h) Her Case Outline document filed 16 August 2021.
23 Both parties also referred to material produced by Y School in response to
a subpoena issued on 15 July 2021, for which no Notice
of Request to Inspect had
yet been filed. The Court granted leave to the parties to inspect and photocopy
the material, and the parties
consented to the Court viewing the material to
inform its decision. Accordingly, the material produced on subpoena by Y School
marked as exhibit C1.
The evidence about the mother’s alcohol use
24 The main sources of reliable evidence about the
mother’s use of alcohol is Dr P’s report, and various business
tendered to the Court.
25 Dr P’s report is dated 28 April 2020 and was based on interviews
conducted on 2 March 2020 together with subsequent telephone
conversations with
various third parties. There was a further telephone attendance with the mother
on 6 April 2020.
26 Dr P was aware of the concerns in relation to the mother’s
problematic use of alcohol. Nonetheless, he recommended at paragraph
continue to live with his mother in City A but spend regular time with his
father in Sydney on some weekends and for half
of all school holidays. There
were a number of conditions, however, including the following:
813. X continue to live with the mother in the City A
region [or other locale, as discussed below], and to spend regular time with
father in Sydney on some weekends and for half of all school holidays, on the
condition that [unless the court is satisfied that
any of the conditions below
are not required, in order to ensure her reasonably reliable capacity to meet
X’s needs over time]:
813.1. The mother is willing to commit to
the process of treatment of her alcohol dependence, PTSD, and personality/
relational vulnerabilities
outlined at para 816 to 818 below, and contingent
upon her constructive engagement with an initial year of treatment during which
she is able to demonstrate abstinence from alcohol through the processes
outlined at para 816.6, in the context of comments at 816.7
813.2. For the first six months of that process, the mother and child live in
the home of the maternal grandfather and his partner
[even if the maternal
grandfather and his partner are away], not spending overnight time away from
that home for more than a set
maximum, e.g. four nights per month and an
occasional holiday.
813.3. For the second six months of the above process, the mother and child
spend at least one period of three nights in a row [e.g.
a weekend] staying at
the home of the maternal grandfather and his partner, each month.
813.4. The maternal grandfather give an undertaking to inform the court if the
mother does not comply with the above orders about
arrangements.
27 The reference at 813.1 to paragraphs 816.6 and 816.7 is important, as is
816.5. Those paragraphs state:
816. The mother engage in a process of intensive and
robust treatment of her alcohol dependence, this
816.5. Consideration of medication treatment to support abstinence. This can
include the medications acamprosate or naltrexone, both
of which have been
demonstrated to improve outcome after intensive rehabilitation and to reduce
cravings and relapse, or the medication
Antabuse, which creates aversive
symptoms if one drinks having taken the medication, and is only effective if
given daily by another
adult e.g. a family member. Medications would not be
essential and are not the central element of treatment, but can be useful. The
mother would discuss these in the first instance with Dr N, who could then seek
specialist input if need be.
816.6. Regular monthly measurement of blood CDT and “Liver Function
Tests”[includes GGT, AST, ALT], on a set day for
example on the first
Monday of each month. The CDT would be expected to decrease to normal range
within a month of abstinence, and
the GGT over a few months. In this context, a
subsequent rise would be strongly suggestive of relapse into problem drinking.
could manage this process, seeking specialist input to interpret testing if
required. Results could be shared with the mother, and
with her treating
816.7. Lapse/ relapse management. Lapse [for example, one episode of drinking]
or relapse [return to a pattern of problem drinking
over a few days] are
relatively common during a treatment process, and should not be equated with
treatment failure, if the mother
[alone or with assistance] is able to seek help
and to get back on track. Such a lapse or relapse needs to be acknowledged and
28 At paragraph 694 of his report Dr P provides expert evidence which assists
the Court in interpreting the results of the mother’s
CDT tests. He
explains that the normal range is less than 1.8 per cent and measures alcohol
excess in the preceding two weeks to
29 Some significant events occurred after the interviews and the release of
the report.
30 On 5 March 2020, a few days after the mother was interviewed by Dr P, her
CDT result was 2.9.
31 The mother was hospitalised between 22 May 2020 and 19 June 2020. The
records (contained in exhibit A1) indicate that the principal
diagnosis was
severe depressive episode without psychotic symptoms, with some additional
diagnoses, including mental and behavioural
disorders due to alcohol dependence
syndrome. The discharge summary records that the principal diagnosis at
discharge was excessive
use/abuse of alcohol. The document records:
Alcohol use disorder was present prior to presentation
without clear physiological dependence issues prior to admission, with
consumption
of up to 2 bottles of wine a night and no break days. Alcohol use
had been present in various measures over the previous 12 year
period with
intermittent periods of abstinence (e.g. during her pregnancy). Periods of
alcohol abstinence had reportedly been associated
with a decreased capacity to
sleep, and an increase in subjective anxiety experience related to her stated
consternation regarding
issues within her relationship.
32 During this admission CDT testing was not performed. The document records
that “[it] was agreed to continue CDT testing
with LFT for a further 5
months (6 months of abstinence since admission to this unit), after which the
need for this close testing
protocol would be reviewed”. The nursing
admission form, also part of the hospital records, confirms a history of daily
consumption
of two bottles of wine, with the last use being the night before
admission. The record indicates the mother disclosing that she
drinking alcohol to sleep. The progress notes record that the mother was
subjected to a breathalyser test at 1.30pm on
22 May 2020 which resulted in a
reading of 0.076. Another record of that date indicates the mother disclosing
that she had been
drinking two bottles of wine per night for several years.
Reasons given included to help with sleep after the breakup with the father
some drinking to cope with domestic violence whilst with the father.
33 On 17 July 2020, the mother’s CDT result was 1.9.
34 The mother was reviewed by her psychiatrist Dr O on Friday, 4 September
2020. The progress notes referred to the mother stating
that her drinking has
been a “hell of a lot less”. She stated that “she is now only
drinking up to [half] a bottle
of wine per day max” on days when X is in
the father’s care. There is a record of the mother being disappointed
her recent blood test result.
35 On 10 September 2020, the mother’s CDT result was 1.9.
36 On 26 November 2020, the mother’s CDT result was 3.3.
37 On 22 December 2020, the mother’s CDT result was 2.6.
38 There was a further review with Dr O on Tuesday, 19 January 2021. This
document records the mother stating that she is now not
drinking daily. It
further records: “Wine (reduced alcohol version) now consumed with soda
water and works out to last her
3 days – now only having 1 standard drink
39 On 21 January 2021 Dr O seems to report to the mother’s general
practitioner following the review held on 19 January 2021.
For present
purposes, Dr O notes that the mother’s CDT reading of 2.6 was inconsistent
with what the mother told him about
her current drinking.
40 The mother obviously undertook another CDT test following her consultation
with Dr O. On 22 January 2021, her CDT result was 2.2.
41 On 26 February 2021, the mother’s CDT result was 2.0.
42 On 1 March 2021 the mother’s treating psychologist wrote to Dr O
As we know, when faced with unbearable stress, Ms
Mounce’s principle [sic] coping strategy has been alcohol. She continues
struggle against this pattern, with not drinking and going to the gym
regularly. ...Under too much pressure she, unsurprisingly,
returns to alcohol,
and intensifies a cycle of shame and disempowerment.
43 On 17 March 2021 the mother’s treating psychologist wrote to Dr O
referring to the mother as “[becoming] increasingly
unravelled with this
pressure and it seems to have resulted in more alcohol use and some suicidal
ideation”. The reference
to “this pressure” is a reference to
her ongoing interactions with the father and her attempts to navigate the Family
Court system.
44 The mother was hospitalised again between 1 April 2021 and 27 April 2021.
The principal diagnosis was severe depressive episode
without psychotic
symptoms, with some additional diagnoses, including mental and behavioural
disorders due to use of alcohol (referred
to as harmful use). The principal
diagnosis at discharge, recorded in the discharge summary was moderate
depression, cluster B personality
style, and post-traumatic stress disorder.
The discharge summary refers to the mother as having a past history of major
depression,
post-traumatic stress disorder and substance use disorder. She was
admitted with a relapse of major depressive disorder on a background
increased psychosocial stressors with increased alcohol consumption.
Consumption was recorded as being one to two bottles of
wine per day, though
with no apparent withdrawal symptoms or craving for alcohol on admission. The
mother was able to recognise
that the symptoms of her depression and alcohol use
were linked. In relation to the mother’s drug and alcohol history, the
note records a 12 year stated history of alcohol use/abuse with variable periods
of abstinence in between. Under the heading of
‘Progress &
Management’, it is recorded that the mother was commenced on Naltrexone on
9 April 2021 which was supplemented
with Acamprosate on 13 April 2021. She was
referred to City A Drug and Alcohol Services for follow-up in the community. A
was made to undertake random CDT levels following discharge. At the time
of discharge, the mother acknowledged experiencing brief
thoughts regarding
alcohol use but was able to dismiss these and felt more confident in avoiding
alcohol use and remaining abstinent
when at home. The intake form contains a
box headed ‘Risk Screening’ which contains ticks for suicidality,
legal issues,
stressors, and substance abuse. The psychiatric history and
examination form dated 1 April 2021 (the day of admission) records the
declining to undertake a CDT test. This document, under the heading
‘Reason for Referral and Presenting Symptoms’,
describes the
mother’s return to alcohol use as a result of the stress from Family Court
proceedings in which she may need
to represent herself at a five day hearing,
financial pressure, and difficulty coping. There is a reference to the
ex, presumably the father, writing a letter stating that she was
intoxicated at a party. There is another reference to the consumption
two bottles of wine per day.
45 Exhibit A2 records three further CDT tests: 23 June 2021 with a result of
1.5; 9 July 2021 with a result of 1.9; and 26 July 2021
with a result of
46 The school records produced by Y School (where X is in kindergarten) is
reassuring from the risk of harm perspective. There are
no indicators of X
showing behaviours consistent with having experienced any form of neglect or
abuse. The only notable matters
include one occasion where X was noted to be
extremely tired having come home on a plane from Sydney, suggesting a visit with
father on the preceding weekend. There is also a notation that appears to
have been made during the time of the mother’s hospital
admission in 2021.
X referred to his mother being in a “special house” because she was
“drinking too much [and]
not eating”. It is unclear, of course,
whether this is his own observation, or whether it is something he was told by
his mother, grandfather, or someone else who is involved in his care.
What is abundantly clear from this record is that X does have
some understanding
of what is happening in his mother’s life.
47 The mother submitted to the Court on 16 August 2021 that she had abstained
from alcohol since her discharge from her last hospital
admission, an
achievement assisted by medication.
RISK OF HARM TO X IN THE MOTHER’S CARE PENDING THE FINAL
48 The mother’s submission to the Court that
she was abstinent from alcohol is broadly consistent with the three known CDT
since her discharge on 27 April 2021. The mother’s acknowledgement
that her abstinence was assisted by medication is consistent
with the hospital
records indicating that the mother had commenced on the medications known as
Naltrexone and Acamprosate. The Court
knows from Dr P’s report that these
medications have been demonstrated to improve outcomes after intensive
rehabilitation and
to reduce cravings and relapse. The mother has now had two
month-long hospital admissions over the last two years. She clearly
after the first admission and this Court believes that the greatest risk to X is
the possibility of a further relapse.
The history set out above does create the
impression that the mother relapses when under stress, indeed almost the same
as presently exist in her life. She is neither more nor less supported
in her life than she was after her relapse in 2020. Nonetheless,
four months
has elapsed since the mother’s discharge, and there is no evidence of
relapse. The final hearing of this matter
is less than four months away. The
orders proposed by both parents provide for means of managing this risk.
49 The risk of relapse is not an abstract risk. The Court’s focus is
on the potential implications for X if his mother relapses
into alcohol use.
The mother’s order proposes that X continue to live with her in the home
of her father and his wife. This
is a protective factor, particularly in
circumstances where the mother herself proposes that her father and stepmother
undertaking to the Court that if they observe her, or otherwise have
reason to believe that she has consumed alcohol whilst X is
in her care or in
the 24 hours prior to X coming into her care, they will immediately notify the
father and assume care of X. The
Court accepts the father’s concerns that
the mother’s family have not hitherto disclosed to the father the
previous hospitalisations. What is proposed, however, is that
they offer undertakings to the Court, which provide the Court with
reassurance that they will act appropriately. The Court is reasonably satisfied
that X would be safe in the care of his
grandfather and his wife.
50 The risk of the mother’s relapse needs to be measured against the
alternative of X going into his father’s care, pending
a final hearing
which is only four months away. This would be a very significant change for X.
Whilst the evidence does create
the impression that his father was quite
actively involved in his life before X and the mother relocated away from
Sydney, there
are still concerns about the impact of change on X, as well as
some lingering uncertainties about the father’s parenting capacity,
particularly in terms of his availability to personally care for X, even
accepting that he would be perfectly entitled to work full-time.
It is notable
that Dr P’s recommendations only propose X live with his father if the
mother is unable to meet the conditions
contained in subparagraphs 813.1 to
813.4 of his report.
51 Another protective factor for X is that an Independent Children’s
Lawyer has been appointed for him.
52 The other obvious safety net for X is the amount of time that he spends
with his father. In circumstances where the Court is satisfied
on the basis of
the evidence that is before it at this point that the risk of harm to X in his
mother’s care is not unacceptable,
the focus will then be on his time with
his father.
X’S TIME WITH HIS FATHER.
53 The mother proposes that X spends time with his
father on two weekends during each school term including any long weekend, from
after school on Friday evening until 5pm the day before he would need to return
to school. The Court notes that there would be one
long weekend left this year
during the school term, as well as the September school holidays. The mother
proposes that X travel
by air between City A and Sydney as an unaccompanied
minor, and at the father’s expense. The mother also proposes that the
father can elect to spend one additional weekend each school term with X in the
City A area.
54 The father proposes that X spend each alternate weekend with him, from
after school on Friday until Sunday afternoon. X would
travel to Sydney as an
unaccompanied minor unless there were no suitable flights, in which case
changeover would take place at K
Town McDonald’s. The Court infers that
the father would meet the costs of travel.
55 Even the mother acknowledged that X has not been spending time with his
father in accordance with the current arrangements. She
attributed this to the
COVID-19 pandemic, but was somewhat sheepish in attempting to explain why she
declined to comply with the
order when the relevant public health order contains
an exemption for arrangements for contact between parents and children.
56 In the circumstances, the Court prefers to make an order that facilitates
X spending regular weekend time with his father during
the school term. In Term
3 2021, which the Court notes ends on Friday, 17 September, X should spend the
Father’s Day weekend
with his father either in Sydney or in City A, as his
father nominates.
57 Term 4 commences on 4 October 2021. The father is to spend time with X
either in Sydney or in City A, as he nominates, no less
than three times this
term, as agreed, or failing agreement on the second, fourth and seventh weekend
of the term. The Court is
concerned that fortnightly travel for X may be
tiring, and disruptive to his routine both at home and school.
58 The Court could find no reference in the evidence of the parents as to
whether X has travelled before on an accompanied or unaccompanied
Likewise, there is no evidence about the policies of the relevant airlines in
this regard. In the circumstances, the Court
will make an order for
unaccompanied travel, noting that it is a relatively short flight, and X’s
parents will be at the points
of departure and arrival.
59 The mother proposes that X spend the entirety of the September/October
school holiday period with his father. This is consistent
with the proposal
made by the father, and an order will be made in these terms.
60 Both parties propose that X spend time with his father on the
Father’s Day weekend, and this will be reflected in the orders
for school term time.
61 There appears to be some commonality in the orders about video calls, and
any differences are determined in favour of the orders
proposed by the father.
62 Both parents propose restraints on the mother’s alcohol consumption,
as well as treating and testing regimes.
63 As a general proposition the Court will adapt the wording proposed by the
father in his minute of order contained in his Case Outline
document. There are
a number of other non-contentious orders proposed by the father at orders 18-24,
which the Court will make,
with some minor modification.
I certify that the preceding sixty-three (63)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 27 August 2021
RTF format (560 KB)
Signed PDF/A format