Paullie Skin IP Pty Ltd v Amy Ventures Pty Ltd [2025] ATMO 208 (3 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by Paullie Skin
IP Pty Ltd to registration of trade mark application number 2385525 (classes 25)
- in the name of Amy Ventures Pty Ltd
Benjamin Goldsworthy
REPRESENTATION:
Gilbert Tsang instructed by Thynne and Macartney
Andrew Petale of Yip Legal Pty Ltd
2025 ATMO 208
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – opposition under
– grounds of opposition under
– no grounds
established – trade mark may proceed to registration.
matter concerns an application (‘Application’) filed on 1 September
2023, for registration of a trade mark under
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) (‘Act’).
Application is in the name of Amy Ventures Pty Ltd (‘Applicant’). I
extract further details of the Application below:
: Paullie (‘Trade Mark’)
Priority date
: 1 September 2023 (‘Relevant Date’)
Specification
: Apparel (clothing, footwear,
headgear); Athletic clothing; Beach clothes; Boys' clothing; Clothing; Clothes;
Children's clothing;
Casual clothing; Clothing for sports; Clothing for
swimming; Collars (clothing); Cyclists' clothing; Denims (clothing); Dance
Girls' clothing; Headbands (clothing); Ladies clothing; Plush
clothing; Playsuits (clothing); Pants (clothing); Pockets for clothing;
clothing; Wraps (clothing); Thongs (clothing); Jackets (clothing); Dresses;
Dress shoes; Dress shirts; Dressing gowns; Evening
dresses; Fancy dress
costumes; Gym leggings; Leggings (leg warmers); Leggings (trousers); Shapewear
(slimming underwear); Underwear
: Online retail services; Retail services; Retail clothing
shop service
examination of the Trade Mark under
, its acceptance was advertised on 2
February 2024. On 22 February 2024, Paullie Skin IP Pty Ltd
(‘Opponent’) filed its
Notice of Intention to Oppose. On 22 March
2024, the Opponent filed its Statement of Grounds and Particulars
9 April 2024, after having received the SGP on 8 April 2024, the Applicant
amended the specification of goods and services by deleting
the class 35
services entirely and amending the class 25 goods by further specifying the
goods. The Application now seeks registration
of the following goods
(‘Applicant’s Goods’) (bold text being the additional
: Athletic clothing; Beach clothes; Boys'
clothing; Clothing; Clothes; Children's clothing; Casual clothing; Clothing for
Clothing for swimming; Collars (clothing); Cyclists' clothing; Denims
(clothing); Dance clothing; Girls' clothing; Headbands (clothing);
clothing; Plush clothing; Playsuits (clothing); Pants (clothing); Pockets for
clothing; Women's clothing; Wraps (clothing);
Thongs (clothing); Jackets
(clothing); Dresses; Dress shoes; Dress shirts; Dressing gowns; Evening dresses;
Fancy dress costumes;
Gym leggings; Leggings (leg warmers); Leggings (trousers);
Shapewear (slimming underwear); Underwear;
clothing; clothing; articles of
clothing for human beings; articles of clothing for human beings; articles of
clothing; articles of
clothing; work clothing; work clothing; women's clothing;
women's clothing; clothing of denim; clothing of denim; articles of clothing
humans; articles of clothing for humans; clothing for girls; clothing for girls;
leather clothing; leather clothing; clothing
for women; clothing for women;
cotton clothing; cotton clothing; girls' clothing; girls' clothing; clothing for
men; clothing for
men; men's clothing; men's clothing; clothing of cotton;
clothing of cotton; clothing of linen; clothing of linen; work clothes;
clothes; ladies' clothing; ladies' clothing; woolen clothing; woolen clothing;
knitwear [clothing]; knitwear [clothing]; clothing
for ladies; clothing for
ladies; ready-to-wear clothing; ready-to-wear clothing; casual clothing; casual
clothing; jackets being
clothing; jackets being clothing; ready-made clothing;
ready-made clothing; clothing for martial arts; clothing for martial arts;
blouses [clothing]; blouses [clothing]; bottoms [clothing]; bottoms [clothing];
tops [clothing]; tops [clothing]; fabric belts [clothing];
fabric belts
[clothing]; jumpsuits [clothing]; jumpsuits [clothing]; children's clothing;
children's clothing; boys' clothing; boys'
clothing; clothes for sports; clothes
for sports; slipovers [clothing]; slipovers [clothing]; dresses; dresses; dress
shirts; dress
shirts; clothing for babies; clothing for babies; knitted
clothing; knitted clothing; underwear and nightwear; underwear and nightwear;
leather dresses; leather dresses; dance clothing; dance clothing; sports
clothing; sports clothing; denim dresses; denim dresses;
shirts; shirts; dresses
for girls; dresses for girls; clothing for gymnastics; clothing for gymnastics;
pants; pants; shirts for
women; shirts for women; beach clothing; beach
clothing; dress suits; dress suits; plush clothing; plush clothing; footwear;
women's pants; women's pants; nightwear; nightwear; underwear;
underwear; casual wear; casual wear; gymnastic clothing; gymnastic
18 April 2024 the Applicant filed its Notice of Intention to Defend.
30 July 2024 the Opponent filed its Evidence in Support (‘EIS’)
consisting of:
a declaration of
Anna Louise Paul, Director at Paullie Skin IP Pty Ltd, dated 30 July 2024
including Exhibits AP-1 to AP-15 (‘Paul’);
a declaration of
Samuel James Mangan, Director at Paullie Skin IP Pty Ltd, dated 30 July 2024,
including Exhibits SM-0 to SM-12 (‘Mangan
a declaration of
Danh Nguyen, Solicitor at Thynne and Macartney Lawyers, dated 30 July 2024,
including Exhibit DN-1 (‘Nguyen
7 November 2024 the Applicant filed its Evidence in Answer, consisting of:
a declaration of
Amy Bain, Director at Amy Ventures Pty Ltd, dated 6 November 2024 including
Annexures AB-1 to AB-7, AB-9 to AB-12
and Confidential Annexure AB-8
13 January 2025, the Opponent filed its Evidence in Reply (‘EIR’)
consisting of:
a declaration of
Samuel James Mangan, dated 13 January 2025, including Exhibit SM-13
(‘Mangan 2’); and
a declaration of
Danh Nguyen, dated 13 January 2025, including Exhibits DN-2 to DN-4
(‘Nguyen 2’).
period for evidence then ended and the parties requested to be heard. On 23 June
2025, the Opponent filed its written submissions.
On 30 June 20205, the
Applicant filed its written submissions.
heard the matter on 7 July 2025 by video conference. Gilbert Tsang of Counsel
appeared for the Opponent, instructed by Thynne and
Macartney Lawyers. Andrew
Petale of Yip Legal Pty Ltd appeared on behalf of the Applicant. I am to decide
this matter as a delegate
of the Registrar of Trade Marks
(‘Registrar’).
Paul is a director of the Opponent. Anna Paul is also declared to be an
influencer. An influencer is a person with a high public
profile who sometimes
is used to market or promote goods, especially on their social media. Paul
declares that she is:
...a media celebrity and entrepreneur, who
first became famous in 2018 for posting about my daily life on my TikTok
account. I was
also one of the top OnlyFans creators in Australia. Exhibit AP-1
are articles on popular online websites Cosmopolitan, Fashion Journal
Pedestrian written about me and how I became famous Australia-wide and in other
declares that there was first use of the word ‘PAULLIE’ on Anna
Paul’s Instagram page ‘anna_paullie’,
in October 2022. Exhibit
AP-2 to Paul is a screenshot from Ms Paul’s personal Instagram page, dated
27 October 2022, showing
what is declared as the first use of the trade mark
‘PAULLIE’ as part of the name ‘ANNA_PAULLIE’. Paul
this was followed at that time by millions of followers (and which is
now followed by more than 7 million followers).
10 May 2023 the Opponent was incorporated. Paul declares that the Opponent,
‘is a member of the Paullie Skin group of companies,
including also
Paullie Skin Pty Ltd and Paullie Skin Holdings Pty Ltd... all of which are
co-directed and half beneficially owned
The Opponent refers
collectively to these entities as the ‘Paullie Skin Group’. Paul
declares that the Paullie Skin Group
carries on the business in Australia of
designing and retailing, including online at www.paullie.com
(‘Opponent’s Website’),
a range of cosmetics and skin care
products, accessories, scrunchies and headband products, all sold under and by
reference to the
declares that prior to the Relevant Date, plans were formed to launch a
cosmetics label and by December 2022 these had
progressed.
Various costs were
incurred in the preparation of products. Internal communications between Ms Paul
and Mr Mangan appear in evidence
in Mangan, including mock-ups. By 15 June 2023,
Mr Mangan had procured a supplier for four
By July 2023, an initial
order had been placed. Between 3 to 15 August 2023, Paullie Skin Pty Ltd
procured an overseas contract manufacturer
to supply headbands, serum bottles,
mask bottles, cleanser bottles and branded box
preparations are said to have led up to announcements of the launch of the
Opponent’s PAULLIE range of products on social
media on 29 August 2023. I
attach examples of screen captures of social media posts in this regard, of the
same date, below:
attach further images of other social media posts which contain launch
announcements below:
launch of goods is said to have been scheduled for 10 September
However, Paul appears to
suggest that sales were accepted as early as 30 August
The evidence states that
the products were sold out within minutes of the launch. Paul contains a
spreadsheet of almost 200 pages
documenting the sale of goods in individual
transactions which appear to be dated from 5 September 2023
Most of the
transactions appear to be from Australia, although there are also sales to
numerous other countries.
specifically declares:
[the] Opponent's promotional activities prior
to and on the first week of its first sale of its PAULLIE branded products on 30
2023 were extensive, including multiple social media posts on all of my
social media accounts, my in-person promotion, and interviews
I gave to various
online popular fashion and news websites.
The Opponent's cosmetic, scrunchies, headband and online retail business
commenced on 30 August 2023, with a six-figure waitlist that
began on 10 May
is no documentary evidence before me which corroborates the statement that there
was a waitlist in existence that began on 10
I extract example images of some of the products referred to in Paul, these
likely correspond to those mentioned in spreadsheet:
evidence also includes examples of collaborations occurring after the Relevant
Date, including one with the brand ‘HiSmile’.
financial information for the Opponent and Paullie Skin Pty Ltd for the quarter
1 July 2023 provided which shows a large amount
of reported sales. An amount for
sales between 30 August 2023 to 10 September 2023 is also declared and this is a
substantial amount.
in part is dedicated to establishing the fame of Ms Paul, including news
articles describing her fame. One of the news articles,
at the website
mamamia.com.au and dated 29 August 2022, describes Ms Paul as, for example,
‘one of Australia’s biggest
social media influences and [having]
tapped into the Gen Z market
globally...’.
Mangan also
provides a similar history to that in Paul, describing the preparation and
launch of goods by the Opponent and its related
1 summarises research performed after the Relevant Date, about the url
www.paullie.com.au and declares on visiting that url
on 21 March 2024, the
website was redirected to the website www.pawlie.com.au
(‘Applicant’s Website’). Exhibit
DN-1 contains copies of the
screenshots that captured when the research was conducted showing these
otherwise refer to the EIS where relevant throughout these written
canvasses the history and activities of the Applicant which includes the sale of
leggings under the trade mark ‘Pawlie’.
also notes what appears to be past use of the words ‘PAULLIE PAWS’
on the Applicant’s Website in respect of
leggings, attaching an example at
Annexure AB-10 to Bain. This evidence is dated well before the launch of
products by the Opponent
and before the Relevant Date.
otherwise refer to the EIA more specifically where relevant throughout these
written reasons.
2 declares a search of the Opponent’s Instagram Account. Exhibit SM-13
‘contains a copy of the screenshots that
[Mangan] captured showing that
Amy Bain or the Applicant has endorsed the Opponent’s Instagram posts in
the comments.’
The screen captures do show this and are dated in September
2 seeks to contradict Bain by other evidence captured from the Applicant’s
Website. Nguyen 2 declares that when the Applicant’s
Website is accessed
on the Wayback Machine, the earliest capture date is 28 November 2023. A number
of individual screen captures
of the Applicant’s Website are also
extracted in Nguyen 2.
Grounds and onus
Opponent has the onus of establishing one of the nominated grounds of
opposition.
The standard of
proof is the ordinary civil standard of the balance of
probabilities.
presses the opposition grounds under
Opponent clarifies that it no longer presses the initially particularised ground
of opposition under
I consider this ground to be abandoned.
Consideration
Opponent relies upon
similar to trade mark that has acquired a reputation in Australia
The registration of a trade mark in respect of particular goods or services
may be opposed on the ground that:
(a) another trade mark had, before the priority date for the
registration of the first‑mentioned trade mark in respect of those
or services, acquired a reputation in Australia; and
(b) because of the reputation of that other trade mark, the use of the
first‑mentioned trade mark would be likely to deceive
priority date
section 12.
, the Opponent must establish that as at the Relevant Date
another trade mark had acquired a reputation in
‘reputation’ here means, ‘the recognition of the [trade mark]
by the public generally’.
Something more than a reputation among a small number of persons is required and
the size and extent of the class of persons may
vary depending on the
circumstances.
Reputation may be
inferred from a high sale volume, together with substantial advertising
expenditures and other promotions, without
direct evidence of consumer
appreciation of the Trade Mark.
The use as shown in the evidence must be use such that it indicates a connection
in the course of trade the goods and/or services
and the person who applied the
trade mark to the goods.
of a sign as a trade mark is to be assessed as an objective question from the
perspective of the ordinary
Opponent relies on the use of the trade mark ‘PAULLIE’ as well as
(I consider these to be substantially identical and I refer to them
collectively as the ‘Opponent’s Trade Mark’).
The Opponent in
part relies on the social media posts beginning on 29 August 2022 which announce
the launch of goods. Paul also declares
that there were pre-launch sales.
However, there is little evidence to corroborate this other than the statement
itself. Sales figures
in the EIS appear to be dated from 5 September 2023. These
begin with 12 sales on 5 September 2023, 1 sale on 7 September 2023 and
on 8 September 2023, all for a small volume of goods which weighs against a
finding of there being a reputation as at the
Relevant Date. I acknowledge that
the sale of goods developed dramatically after those dates. However, I also note
that all of these
events occurred after the Relevant
few days of marketing activities before the filing of a trade mark are only in
specific and evidenced occasions likely to result
in the generation of a
reputation in another trade mark
Here the period of marketing before the
Relevant Date was three days. The examples of marketing before the Relevant Date
are limited
to the social media posts which occasioned the launch of goods. The
social media posts by Anna Paul announcing the launch of goods
appear high in
terms of the number of views. However, I cannot determine what number of persons
actually viewed the posts as at the
Relevant Date and the extent to which these
viewers were located in Australia. There is no indication of the number of
viewers for
other social media accounts announcing the launch as at the Relevant
sales that did occur in the aftermath of the launch announcements are not
necessarily indicative of a reputation in the Opponent’s
Trade Mark. This
is because many of those sales may equally have followed from the reputation of
the individual, Anna Paul, rather
than the Opponent’s Trade Mark and
exposure on Anna Paul’s social media account. The sales may otherwise have
from events and activities occurring after the Relevant Date. It is
likely that Ms Paul’s own reputation was used, at least
in part, as a
springboard for the initial launch of products by the Opponent, which resulted
in the quantity of sales that did occur
post the launch announcements.
launch announcements made from 29 August 2023 onwards do not clearly refer to
the goods to be sold, which makes it less definite
that there a was any
reputation in another trade mark. Even assuming that many persons saw the social
media posts beginning 29 August
2023 for the launch of goods, it is difficult to
discern the offer the Opponent’s Trade Mark was in respect of, other than
that it might relate to nonspecific skincare or cosmetics goods. In
Queen, LLC v Taylor
Full Federal Court found that
was established for the purposes of
cancellation proceedings brought under
, relying on a reputation in the name
of a celebrity singer alongside evidence from the trade. I contrast the
circumstances on the
evidence before me firstly as to the proximity in time of
the first mention of the Opponent’s Trade Mark before the Relevant
Killer Queen
, the Court relied on evidence of use for a far more
extensive period than three days, leading up to the filing date of the trade
mark in question.
I also observe
that there is limited evidence of use of the Opponent’s Trade Mark in
relation to goods before the Relevant
Date, and there appears to be no such
corroborated public use before 29 August 2023.
is also little to no evidence which corroborates
recognition generally
the Opponent’s Trade Mark
as at the Relevant Date
For there to be a reputation in a trade mark, there must be recognition of the
trade mark as a trade mark in the sense that it designates
the trade origin of
some goods or services. The other trade mark in
Killer Queen
have had a direct and more longstanding connection to the personality and fame
of a celebrity,
whereas the
Opponent’s evidence of a few social media posts is insufficient to
establish a connection between the Opponent’s
Trade Mark and the celebrity
of Anna Paul as at the Relevant Date, such that there was a reputation in the
Opponent’s Trade
Mark. The Opponent’s evidence does not satisfy me
that there was recognition of the Opponent’s Trade Mark generally,
resulting from Ms Paul’s social media exposure of the launch.
it is not impossible because of a short length of promotion leading up to the
Relevant Date that there was a reputation, such
circumstances are not likely to
result in such and would require a quality of evidence not before me. Overall, I
am not satisfied
on the balance of probabilities that the Opponent’s Trade
Mark had acquired a reputation as at the filing of the Trade Mark.
the requirements set out in
are not made out.
Accordingly,
the ground of opposition under
is not established.
Section 42(b)
[a]n application for the registration of a trade
mark must be rejected if... its
would be contrary to law [my emphasis
requirement for
is that I am satisfied that the use of the Trade Mark
be contrary to
The Opponent has two main
bases for its
ground of opposition, which I now consider.
SGP states the following in respect of the
opposition:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010 (‘CCA’);
Tort of passing off; Other
...The Opponent has used and promoted (including via its principal, Anna
Paul) its trade mark PAULLIE since before the Priority Date
and, by reason of
that use, had at the Priority Date acquired a substantial reputation in the
trade mark PAULLIE in Australia.
...By virtue of the Opponent’s reputation in its trade mark PAULLIE in
Australia, the use and registration of the Opposed Mark
in Australia in relation
to the goods and services covered by the Application would be likely to mislead
or deceive in breach of
sections 18 and/or 29 of the Australian Consumer Law
[‘ACL’ which is in Schedule 2 to the CCA] or would constitute
off at common law
requirements of s 18 of the ACL are that there be a likelihood that the relevant
consumer would be misled or deceived as to the
origin of the Applicant’s
Services due to the conduct of the Applicant – that is, the consumer would
be likely to be
led into error.
29 of the ACL concerns representations that are false or misleading. The
expression ‘mislead or deceive’ in s
18 of the ACL is effectively
equivalent to the expression ‘false or misleading’ in s 29 of the
test for determining whether conduct contravenes the ACL is one that is stricter
than the that under s 60 of the Act. Section
60 requires only that consumers
would be likely to be deceived or confused. Since I am not satisfied that the
ground of opposition
under s 60 has been established, it follows that on the
more demanding test to be applied under the ACL, I am not satisfied that
Applicant’s use of the Trade Mark would be likely to mislead or deceive,
or amount to a false or misleading representation
under the ACL.
Determining
whether there is passing off involves similar considerations to misleading and
deceptive conduct in that there must be
reputation in the relevant trade mark
mark or indicia; a misrepresentation leading to deception; and damage to
goodwill, or the likelihood
thereof. Where a trade mark is not likely to
contravene the ACL, it is also not likely to amount to passing off. In this
Hill J noted in
Re Equity Access Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking
Corporation
The scope for the operation of s.52 will thus
be broader than that involved in the tort of passing off so that in a case such
present where the claim is for the protection of the reputation in a name
against the use of that name by another, failure to succeed
under s.52 or s.53
will invariably mean that proceedings for passing off would likewise
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) are the predecessor
sections for
of the ACL. Given my findings in relation to
of the ACL, I am also satisfied that use of the Trade Mark would not
constitute passing off.
Accordingly,
the ground of opposition under
has not been not established.
Section 62A
62A provides that the registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground
that the Application was made in bad faith.
For this ground of opposition, I
must determine whether, ‘in all the particular circumstances, the
applicant’s knowledge
was such that [her] decision to apply for
registration at the relevant date would be regarded as in bad faith by persons
standards’.
This question
is determined as at the Relevant Date.
SGP states the following in respect of the ground of opposition under s 62A:
10. The Opponent reiterates the matters set out in respect of
sections 59
11. Given the circumstances referred to in 10 above, as at the Priority Date
the Applicant knew, or ought to have known, that the
trade mark PAULLIE was
being used by the Opponent in relation to the Opponent’s online retail
business at the Paullie Website.
12. In addition, as at the Priority Date, the Applicant knew, or ought to
have known, that the trade mark PAULLIE had gained, or was
gaining, significant
attention in the media as a trade mark for the Opponent’s goods and/or
13. By filing the Application, the Applicant seeks to: (a) foster the false
or misleading impression that the Opponent, its goods
and/or services and/or its
business, is somehow affiliated with the Applicant, its business and/or its
trade mark “Pawlie”;
and/or (b) appropriate for itself the benefit
of the reputation generated by the Opponent and its principal, Anna Paul, in the
mark PAULLIE, by creating an association in the minds of consumers between
the Opponent’s trade mark PAULLIE and the Applicant’s
“Pawlie”; and/or (c) prevent the Opponent from making, or limit the
Opponent’s ability to make, full
use of the Opponent’s trade mark
PAULLIE in respect of its current and future business activities.
14. The conduct referred to in 13 falls short of the standards of acceptable
commercial behaviour observed by reasonable and experienced
15. Further and in the alternative, since as early as the Priority Date, the
Applicant has obtained the domain licence for, and continuously
Paullie AU Domain to redirect users to the Applicant’s Pawlie Website. To
the extent that the Application was filed
solely or primarily for the purpose of
enabling the Applicant to obtain registration of the Paullie AU Domain to
redirect the Opponent’s
customers or potential customers to the Pawlie
Website, the Applicant’s conduct falls short of the standards of
commercial behaviour observed by reasonable and experienced persons.
16. Registration should be refused under section 62A of the Act.
Opponent submits that there is an irresistible inference that I must draw
concerning the awareness of Ms Bain. The allegation
is that Ms Bain had become
aware of the shop at the Opponent’s Website and was aware that consumers
might type a similar web
address with the Australian .au extension, when trying
to access the Opponent’s Website. Further, the Opponent says that I
infer Ms Bain knew of the 8 million online followers of Ms Paul and likely
exposure of consumers to social media posts. The
Opponent notes that the
evidence shows the Applicant’s own business had a direct presence on the
social media platforms used
for launch announcements.
Opponent also points to circumstances which it says Ms Bain does not explain.
These include the decision on how to file the Trade
Mark, noting that there is
no attempt to say it was a coincidence with the launch of products announced by
the Opponent and Ms Paul.
The Opponent submits that an inference of awareness
can be drawn on the basis of the evidence as it is not contradicted.
because a person has a social media account, it does necessarily follow that
there will be a finding of an awareness for any
content also present on that
social medial platform. However, I acknowledge there is evidence of Ms Bain or a
social media account
likely controlled by Ms Bain dated after, though close to,
the Relevant Date which appears to be interacting with social media accounts
related to the Opponent or Ms Paul. Even if Ms Bain was aware of Ms Paul and the
launch announcements as at the Relevant Date, because
of the limited information
given in the announcement that awareness could rise no higher than awareness of
an upcoming skincare and
cosmetics range, possibly under the sign
attempts to answer parts of the EIS as it might relate to s 62A. Bain notes what
appears to be past use of the words ‘PAULLIE
PAWS’ in material that
depicts leggings. In this context, the Applicant says the filing of the
Application, whatever the awareness
of Ms Bain, was not underhanded. The
Opponent submits that the dating of this evidence is not clear. The Opponent
refers me to a
screen capture of the Applicant’s Website for the specific
page of the Applicant’s Website at
www.pawlie.com.au/products/paullie-paw-causual-capris.
The earliest capture
appears to be dated 28 November 2023, which the Opponent submits casts doubt
the sign ‘PAULLIE PAWS’ might have
been. In addition to this, the Opponent’s written submissions are that,
reviews which appear in the screen capture at Annexure AB-10 to Bain
do not appear in the individual screen capture dated later on
at Exhibit DN-3 to Nguyen 2.
inspection of the screen captures of the Applicant’s Website at the
specific page shown in Nguyen 2, reveals that whilst
individual reviews do not
appear, under the heading ‘Paullie Paws – Casual Capri
Leggings’ are the words ‘5
Reviews’. This is consistent with
the evidence in Bain. The listing at Annexure AB-10 to Bain contains the 5
individual reviews,
some of which are dated as early as in 2021. One of the
reviews dated 5 July 2022 in a screen capture which contains the words
Paws – Causal Full Legging’, shows an image of what
appears to be a garment with the same paw pattern as the leggings
shown in the
screen captures of the pages shown Bain. Further, the screen capture in DS-2 to
Nguyen 2 by the Wayback Machine suggesting
the absence of earlier dated captures
cannot rule out the possibility such at some point earlier to the launch by the
Opponent of
its products. Bain also contains a direct statement that suggests
that the products under the title ‘PAULLIE PAWS’ on
Applicant’s Website are those pictured and sold before the launch by the
I do not consider the
EIR and EIS to successfully impugn this purported use of these words, nor the
explanation of events offered
in Bain. It is also my assessment that the use of
the words ‘PAULLIE PAWS’ in Bain offers important context and
explanation
as to the reasons for the filing of the Application to register the
Trade Mark, even if a reaction to, or with an awareness of the
announcements for the Opponent’s goods.
awareness of an applicant of interests in an earlier trade mark prior to the
filing of an application goes only some way in establishing
a ground of
opposition under s 62A. The context and all of the circumstances must also be
considered in combination with the ultimate
question as to whether in those
circumstances, commercial minded persons would consider the action of filing the
Application as underhanded
or unscrupulous. Ms Bain offers some explanation for
the choice of trade mark,
well as evidence which supports a use of a core constituent element of the Trade
Mark well before the launch announcements of
Ms Paul in August 2023. I accept
this evidence. I also note that the filing of the Application, even in its
amended form, goes no
further in the specification of Applicant’s Goods
than what might be considered reasonably necessary to cover a range of clothing.
Some of these goods are goods in respect of which the Applicant appears to have
had years of use of the words ‘PAULLIE PAWS’.
There is nothing in
the specification which, necessarily for example, pertains to cosmetics or
skincare which was the subject of
the launch announcement.
the commercial decision to file the Application
have been in part
influenced by an awareness of the Opponent’s or Anna Paul’s launch
announcements, in this context I
do not view the conduct as necessarily
commercially unscrupulous. Rather, the filing of the Application appears to be
the conduct
of a trader concerned with the protection of their reasonably
perceived extant rights in a trade mark in relation to different goods
mentioned in the launch announcements for the Opponent’s goods.
Accordingly,
the ground of opposition under s 62A has not been established.
59 provides:
59 Applicant not intending to use trade
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the
applicant does not intend:
(a) to use, or authorise the use of, the trade mark in Australia;
(b) to assign the trade mark to a body corporate for use by the
body corporate in Australia;
in relation to the goods and/or services specified in the application.
see section 6.
is an often noted notion in trade marks law that an application for registration
of a trade mark attracts with it a presumption
that an applicant intends to use
the trade mark.
The onus is said
to be on the opponent to displace this presumption by making out a prima facie
case that the applicant lacked the
requisite intention at the filing
If the opponent makes out
a prima facie case, the evidentiary onus is said to shift to the applicant to
show its intention to use
the trade mark at the filing
It has also long been
recognised that the absence of the requisite intention to use should not be
inferred from lack of use of a
trade mark, particularly as there can be good
reasons to defer use until a registration is
Actual use, or absence
thereof, may be relevant to the existence of the relevant intention in all of
the circumstances and alongside
SGP states the following in respect of the ground of opposition under s
17. As at the Priority Date, the Applicant had no intention to
use, or authorise the use of, the Opposed Mark in Australia, or to
Opposed Mark to a body corporate for use in Australia.
18. The Applicant has since 2020 operated an online retail business selling
leggings and associated apparel at the domain name www.pawlie.com.au
Website). The Applicant’s various goods have at all material times been
exclusively sold under or by reference to the
word ‘Pawlie’.
19. On 29 August 2023, the Opponent publicly announced, including on social
media and several popular third party blogs, the launch
of its online retail
business selling to consumers in Australia and beyond a range of cosmetics and
associated products under and
by reference to Opposed Mark at the website
paullie.com (Paullie Website). The launch was widely publicised, including by
the Opponent's
principal, Anna Paul, to her extensive network of followers on
her various social media platforms, and attracted significant attention
social media and online news outlets.
20. The Applicant filed the Application on 1 September 2023, less than a week
after the Opponent’s launch announcement.
21. On or about 1 September 2023, the Applicant registered in its own name
the domain name for paullie.com.au (Paullie AU Domain).
Since then, the Paullie
AU Domain has been used to redirect users to the Pawlie Website.
22. To the best of the Opponent’s knowledge, to this day there has been
no genuine use of the Opposed Mark by the Applicant.
23. In the circumstances, as at the Priority Date, the Application for the
Opposed Mark was filed for purely defensive and/or tactical
reasons, including
possibly for the sole purpose of obtaining registration of the Paullie AU
the hearing the Opponent’s Counsel took me to several decisions concerning
the shifting of the onus in matters which concern
the intention to use the Trade
assessment is that the registration of a web address and redirection to another
website, without more, does not here say very much
the Trade Mark. It is on its face a normal practice for a trader to acquire some
variations of a domain
name which derives from a word which they have already
used for some time. That there has been no use in the evidence of the Trade
in insolation as yet also does not necessarily compel the conclusions the
Opponent presses about an intention to use. Further,
the existence of another
trade mark more often in use, here the word ‘pawlie’, also does not
result in an irresistible
initial finding of there being a lack of intention to
use the Trade Mark.
must be shown is at the time of filing the Applicant lacked an intention to use
the Trade Mark. I note that there is nothing
in the evidence which establishes
that the Applicant could not provide the Applicant’s Goods. Otherwise, the
evidence does
not establish that the Applicant filed the Application, for
example, for entirely speculative or defensive reasons, even if the domain
has only been used a redirector to the Applicant’s Website.
evidence of the use of words ‘Paullie Paws’ in respect of leggings
also supports a finding of the Applicant having
an intention to use the Trade
Mark in respect of the Applicant’s Goods, which are all forms of clothing,
and my findings in
that regard for the ground of opposition under s 62A apply
summarise, the Opponent’s submissions largely focus on a lack of use by
the Applicant and explanation of its actions by the
Applicant, rather than
establish a requisite lack of intention to use the Trade Mark. The evidence
relied on by the Opponent, and
its submissions, rise no higher than speculative
allegations of there being a lack of intention to use the Trade Mark. For these
reasons, I find that the evidence and the circumstances relied on by the
Opponent do not establish a prima facie case that the Applicant
requisite intention to use the Trade Mark for the Applicant’s Goods as at
the Relevant Date. Consequently, the onus
has not shifted to the Applicant.
Overall, the Opponent has not discharged its onus.
Accordingly,
the ground of opposition under s 59 has not been established.
55 relevantly
(1) Unless subsection (3) applies to the proceedings, the Registrar
must, at the end, decide:
(a) to refuse to register the trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations)
in respect of the goods and/or services
then specified in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
limitations
see section 6.
am not satisfied that a ground of opposition has been established. Accordingly,
the Trade Mark may proceed to registration not less
than one month from the date
of this decision.
the Registrar is served with a notice of appeal before that time, I direct that
registration of the Trade Mark shall not occur
until the appeal has been decided
or discontinued and the disposition of the application should otherwise be in
accordance with the
Court’s order or direction.
Applicant has sought its costs, which ordinarily will follow the event. I award
costs against the Opponent under s 221, in accordance
with Schedule 8 to the
Regulations.
Benjamin Goldsworthy
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
Unless specified otherwise, a
reference in these reasons to a section is a reference to such in the
Marks Act 1995
(Cth) and a reference to a regulation is a reference to such
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
(‘Regulations’).
Paul, [8] and Exhibit AP-4. See
also, Mangan, Exhibit SM-1.
Paul, [4], [8], [21] and
Exhibit AP-12.
Paul, [14] and Exhibit
Paul, Exhibit AP-10.
Mangan 1, Exhibit SM-2
Mangan 1, Exhibit SM-3.
Mangan 1, Exhibit SM-7
Mangan 1, Exhibit SM-8.
Mangan 1, Exhibits SM-9 and
Paul, [11], [18] and
Paul, Exhibit AP-11.
Paul, [17]-[18].
Mangan 1, Exhibit SM-4.
Paul, Exhibit AP-12,
Paul. Exhibit AP-12, 292.
Paul, Exhibit AP-12, 291.
Mangan, Exhibit SM-0.
Food Channel Network Pty
Ltd v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and
Jagot JJ) (‘
Food Channel
Telstra Corporation Ltd v
Phone Directories Co Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot and
Edelman JJ).
ConAgra Inc v McCain
Foods (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 159
, [77] (Lockhart J)
ConAgra Inc
McCormick & Co Inc v
[2000] FCA 1335
, [81] (Kenny J)
ConAgra Inc
[131]-[132].
(n 24) [80]
Coca-Cola Co v All-Fect
Distributors Ltd
[1999] FCA 1721
, [19] (Black CJ, Sunberg and Finkelstein
JJ), cited with approval in
E & J Gallo Winery v Lion Nathan Australia
[2010] HCA 15
, [43] (French CJ, Gummow, Crennan and Bell JJ).
Shell Company of
Australia Ltd v Esso Standard Oil (Australia) Ltd
[1963] HCA 66
(1963) 109 CLR 407
Paul, Exhibit AP-11.
[2024] FCAFC 149 (Yates
Burley and Rofe JJ) (‘
Killer Queen
’). I note that the High
Court has granted special leave to appeal, including in respect of the Full
Federal Court decision
regarding s 60.
See for example,
E2Interactive v Cabcharge Australia Limited
[2017] ATMO 62
, [54] (Hearing
Officer K Brown), where a period of even 10 months of use was considered a short
period of time.
Killer Queen
Advantage-Rent-A-Car Inc
v Advantage Car Rental Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 683
, [28] (Madgwick J).
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty Ltd
, [40] (Allsop CJ).
Re Equity Access Pty Ltd
v Westpac Banking Corporation
[1989] FCA 771
, [40] (Hill J).
Fry Consulting Pty Ltd v
Sports Warehouse Inc (No 2)
[2012] FCA 81
, [167] (Dodds-Streeton J).
Opponent’s written
submissions, [66]-[67].
Bain, [19].
Bain, [18]-[19].
Suyen Corp v Americana
International Ltd
[2010] FCA 638
, [197] (Dodds-Streeton J) (‘
Aston v Harlee
Manufacturing Co
[1960] HCA 47
, [21] (Fullagar J).
Food Channel
RTF format (10.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format