Douglas v Chief of Army [2017] ADFDAT 5 (28 April 2017)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Douglas v Chief of Army
[2017] ADFDAT 5
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 3 of 2016
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), LOGAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND HILEY (MEMBER)
Date of decision:
Date of publication of reasons:
Catchwords:
– appeal from a decision of a
Defence Force Magistrate – convictions for an act of indecency and for
prejudicing the
discipline of the Army – where the respondent conceded the
convictions were unsafe – whether convictions ought to be
whether a new trial ought to be ordered
Legislation:
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Crimes Act 1900
Cases cited:
Gilham v The Queen
(2012) 224 A Crim R 22
[2012] NSWCCA 131
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
[2002] HCA 53
R v Anderson
[2001] NSWCCA 488
(2001) 127 A Crim R 116
SKA v The Queen
(2011) 243 CLR 400
[2011] HCA 13
Date of hearing:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Appellant:
D McLure SC and J Lawton
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Gabbedy Milson Lee
Counsel for the Respondent:
J Woodward and A Lye
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 3 of 2016
SCOTT MICHAEL DOUGLAS
CHIEF OF ARMY
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), LOGAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND
HILEY (MEMBER) JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
appeal be allowed.
convictions of the appellant on Charge 3 and the alternative Charge 4 be
new trial be had on Charge 3 and alternative Charge 4.
REASONS FOR
THE TRIBUNAL:
appellant appeared before a Defence Force Magistrate (“DFM”) in
Canberra on 12 September 2016. He faced four charges
and three alternative
charges. He pleaded not guilty to each charge.
a four day trial he was convicted on two charges — Charge 3 and
alternative Charge 4. He was found not guilty of
the remaining charges.
charges arose from events which were alleged to have occurred during a course
being conducted at the Warrant and Non Commissioned
(“WONCO”) Academy at Canungra in late June and July 2015. The
appellant and the complainant were students on
the course.
third charge alleged that the appellant had committed an act of indecency on the
complainant contrary to
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT). The appellant was
alleged to have committed the act on a date between 7 and 15 July 2015 “by
pushing his drill cane
between her legs and moving it up the inside of her legs
until it was touching her genital area on the outside of her clothing while
simultaneously making wet slurping noises with his mouth, without her consent
and being reckless as to her consent”.
alternative charge to Charge 4 alleged that, on or about 15 July 2015, the
appellant said to other persons, “All you have
to do is get [the
complainant] drunk and you could have her”, or words to that effect,
thereby prejudicing the discipline of
the Army. This conduct was said to be
contrary to
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
his amended notice of appeal, the appellant advanced multiple grounds for
asserting that each conviction was unreasonable, could
not be supported on the
evidence and was unsafe or unsatisfactory. These grounds arose from the reasons
(or, in some cases, the
lack of them) given by the DFM to support his findings
of guilt on the two charges.
Director of Military Prosecutions (“the DMP”), acting on behalf of
the Chief of Army, has conceded that the DFM made
a series of errors which
render the convictions unsafe and unsatisfactory and, in respect of one of the
charges, that a substantial
miscarriage of justice has occurred.
considered that the concessions were properly made and, at the end of the
hearing on 28 April 2017, we ordered that the appeal
be allowed, the
convictions quashed and that a new trial be had. We advised the parties that we
would provide our reasons for so
ordering at a later date. These are those
prosecution called evidence from two witnesses in relation to Charge 3. They
were the complainant and Sergeant Roy Diaz.
complainant’s evidence was that the act of indecency occurred on the
veranda of the Sergeant’s Mess where students
had congregated before being
ushered into the mess. She said that she had been talking to another student
when she felt a cane being
inserted between her legs from behind. She said that
she first felt the cane at knee level and then it was raised past her inner
thigh until it was touching her crotch. As this was happening she said that she
heard the appellant making what she described as
a wet, inappropriate noise.
The complainant said that she reacted by moving forward away from the cane,
turning and telling the
appellant: “Don’t fucking touch me. You
touch me again I’m going to the SI”, or words to that effect.
said that she had spoken in a raised voice and made a scene.
Diaz gave evidence that he observed the appellant walk up behind the complainant
and brush his cane along the back of her
thighs just below her buttocks. The
complainant had responded by turning around and yelling, “Don’t
fucking touch me”.
appellant gave evidence in which he denied placing the cane between the
complainant’s legs. He said that had poked the
tip of his cane in to the
complainant’s hair bun as a joke. He described the noise he made when
doing so as “an immature
sound” rather than a wet, sexual-sounding
appellant’s evidence was corroborated by Corporal Joseph Burns. When
Corporal Burns was cross-examined, it was not put
to him that he was wrong in
recalling that the appellant’s cane was put into the complainant’s
hair bun. It was not
put to him that the cane had been placed between the
complainant’s legs and raised up to her crotch. It was not suggested
Corporal Burns that his evidence had been influenced in any way by
discussions he had had with the appellant.
DFM made credit findings in respect of each of these witnesses. He found that
the complainant generally was “an honest
and reliable witness”
although he had reservations about her delay in making a complaint and her
unwillingness to make certain
appropriate concessions.
DFM found Sergeant Diaz to be “an honest and reliable witness who was
doing his best to assist the court”. He regarded
Sergeant Diaz as being
an objective witness and an experienced and mature soldier.
DFM found the appellant to be “generally ... an honest and reliable
witness”. He did however express “some
doubts about [the
appellant’s] assessment of the events and some doubts about his
recollections” of those events.
DFM said that he found Corporal Burns “to be generally honest and
reliable”. The DFM went on:
there is a certain risk that, not intentionally, the discussions between the
appellant and CPL Burns after their removal from [the]
course may have
influenced each other’s recollections. As such, their ability to
corroborate each other has to be somewhat
discounted; the risk of reconstruction
versus recollection.
With respect to CPL Burns, principally, I am only interested in the
Sergeants’ Mess balcony incident. He corroborates the
[appellant].
Indeed, he closely corroborates the [appellant] in its details, both leading up
to and being on the balcony and the
events. I am concerned that on some
critical issues it is possible that CPL Burns’ testimony, whilst honestly
believed, could
be influenced by an element of reconstruction rather than
recollection.
dealing with the evidence of the appellant generally, including in relation to
the third and fourth charges, the DFM said:
The summary of that is whilst I find the [appellant] to have generally have been
an honest and reliable witness, I have some doubts
events and some doubt about his recollections and would again look for
independent corroboration before,
if needing to, accepting his version with
respect to an event.
Later, when dealing explicitly
with the third charge, he said that:
I accept the complainant’s version of the events as corroborated by SGT
Diaz. Importantly, it is not that I do not accept
the [appellant’s]
version as supported by CPL Burns – I do not – but having done that,
I have separately considered
the matter and I accept the complainant’s
version with corroboration and I accept it beyond reasonable
DMP acknowledged that these passages bespoke error and, in particular, were
inconsistent with the principles explained by Brennan
Liberato v The
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
at 515. His Honour there
The jury must be told that, even if they prefer the evidence for the
prosecution, they should not convict unless they are satisfied
beyond reasonable
doubt of the truth of that evidence. The jury must be told that, even if they
do not positively believe the evidence
for the defence, they cannot find an
issue against the accused contrary to that evidence if that evidence gives rise
to a reasonable
doubt as to that issue.
DFM’s reasons did not explain why it was, that following his separate
consideration, he accepted the complainant’s
version “with
corroboration” beyond reasonable doubt. He had made generally favourable
assessments of the credit of
both the appellant and Corporal Burns.
Corporal Burns had given unchallenged evidence that the appellant’s cane
had made contact
with the complainant’s hair bun, and not her legs and
genital area. Sergeant Diaz’s “corroboration”, on
the DFM relied, did not support the complainant’s version that the cane
had been inserted between her legs but was otherwise
consistent with the
complainant’s evidence about this incident.
DFM’s apparent acceptance of most of the evidence of both the appellant
and the complainant suggests that he may have approached
the matter by carrying
out some kind of balancing exercise rather than asking himself whether the
evidence of and in support of the
accused caused him to have a reasonable doubt
reasonable doubt of the appellant’s guilt based upon the whole of
the evidence. By approaching the matter in this way he does
not appear to have
correctly applied the requirements of
DMP’s concession that the conviction on this charge should be quashed
because there had been a substantial miscarriage of
justice was properly made.
So too was her concession that the conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory. In
accepting this latter
concession we have been mindful of the principles
propounded in
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
(2002) 213 CLR 606
[2002] HCA 53
SKA v The Queen
243 CLR 400
[2011] HCA 13.
They required us, independently, to consider
whether, on the whole of the evidence, it was open to the DFM to be satisfied
reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty as charged. This required
us to examine both the sufficiency and the quality of the
evidence called at
trial. We have done so. Given that there may be a retrial it is not desirable
that we elaborate on our reasons
for concluding that we were not so
coming to this conclusion, we were not unmindful of the appellant’s
contention that a restatement of the
directions by Kirby P (has
his Honour then was) (Sheller JA and Dowd J agreeing) provided even stronger
support for the quashing
of the convictions. In
R v Anderson
[2001] NSWCCA 488
A Crim R 116
[2001] NSWCCA 488
his Honour, having referred to
standard directions in Canadian criminal trials analogous to those in
, continued:
Directions along these lines are customarily given, although I prefer the
following formulation:
“First, if you believe the evidence of the accused, obviously you must
Second, if you find difficulty in accepting evidence of the accused, but think
that it might be true, then you must acquit.
Third, if you do not believe the accused, then you should put his testimony to
one side. The question will remain; has the Crown,
upon the basis of the
evidence that you do accept, proved the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable
Particular emphasis was
placed on the second direction, having regard to what the DFM had said about the
appellant’s credibility
and the resultant possibility that his denials
might be true.
ALTERNATIVE CHARGE 4
days after the incident which was the subject of Charge 3, it was alleged that a
further incident occurred, this time in the
accommodation block which housed the
students on the course. The female students were accommodated at level 3 and
the male students
on the two lower levels.
complainant gave evidence that she was on level 3. A group of other students
was standing in the smoking area on the ground floor.
She had heard the
appellant say to the group: “All you have to do is get her drunk and you
could have her.” Her name
had been mentioned by the appellant as the
person to whom he was referring.
Diaz was one of the group. He gave evidence that he was with at least four
other members of the course at the time. The
appellant had approached the group
and spoken the words heard by the complainant to him (Sergeant Diaz).
appellant denied uttering these words.
of the other students who were present at the time was called to give evidence.
DFM accepted the evidence of the complainant and Sergeant Diaz. He gave no
reasons for rejecting the appellant’s denials.
The DMP conceded that it
was difficult to see how the DFM could have been satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt, consistently with the
principles, that the appellant
uttered the words alleged, having found him to be, generally, “an honest
and reliable witness”.
A NEW TRIAL?
DMP submitted that a new trial on Charges 3 and alternative Charge 4 should be
ordered pursuant to
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
(Cth). The appellant opposed the making of such an order.
power to award a new trial is discretionary. Some of the considerations which
guide the exercise of this discretion were summarised
by McClellan CJ at
Common Law in
Gilham v The Queen
(2012) 224 A Crim R 22
[2012] NSWCCA
The relevant principles were discussed in
Reid v The Queen
[1980] 1 AC
Director of Public Prosecutions (Nauru) v
[1984] HCA 48
154 CLR 627]:
R v Anderson
(1991) 53 A Crim R 421
(Gleeson CJ). The overriding consideration is whether the interests of
justice require a new trial:
at 630. Unless the interests of
justice require the entry of a verdict of acquittal, an appellate court should
ordinarily order a
new trial of a charge where a conviction in respect of that
charge has been set aside but there is evidence to support the charge:
v The Queen
[2000] HCA 43
(2001) 201 CLR 603
. The court determines
where the interests of justice lie by considering various factors,
the public interest in the due
prosecution and conviction of offenders (
R v Taufahema
[2007] HCA 11
(2007) 228 CLR 232
the seriousness of the alleged crimes (
[2008] NSWCCA 209
(2008) 188 A Crim R 331
(Johnson J));
the strength of the Crown case (
the desirability, if possible, of having the guilt or innocence of the
accused finally determined by a jury, which, according to
the constitutional
arrangements applicable in New South Wales, is the appropriate body to make such
a decision (
the length of time between the alleged offence and the new trial, and in
particular whether the delay will occasion prejudice to
the accused
Parker v The Queen
[1997] HCA 15
at 520 (Dawson, Toohey and McHugh JJ);
whether the grant of a new trial would impermissibly give the prosecution an
opportunity to supplement or "patch up" a defective
case or to present a case
significantly different to that presented to the jury in the previous trial
[1948] HCA 22
(1948) 77 CLR 511
[1986] HCA 59
(1986) 161 CLR 423
at 433 (Dawson J);
at 520 (Dawson, Toohey and McHugh J);
the interests of the individual accused, and in particular whether it would
be unduly oppressive to put the accused to the expense
and worry of a further
whether a significant part of the sentence imposed upon conviction has
already been served (
Jiminez v The Queen
[1992] HCA 14
(1992) 173 CLR
at 590 (McHugh J));
the expense and length of a further trial (
whether a successful appellant to the Court of Criminal Appeal has been
released from custody (
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
at 302 (Brennan, Deane, Dawson and
Gaudron JJ);
(1981) 28 SASR 362
; (1981) A Crim R 5 at
367–68 (King CJ)); and
whether an acquittal would usurp the functions of the properly constituted
prosecutorial authorities, which are entrusted with responsibilities
discretions to act in the public interest in the initiation and conduct of
criminal prosecutions (
R v Thomas (No 3)
[2006] VSCA 300
(2006) 14 VR
DMP submitted that the allegations made against the appellant were, in a service
context, serious. There had been direct and
cogent evidence which supported the
prosecution case and which could have supported the convictions absent the
conceded errors on
the part of the DFM. The prosecution case on any retrial
would not differ substantially from that presented before the DFM. Given
reduction in the number of charges to be considered, any second trial could
reasonably be expected to be shorter than the original
trial. It could take
place within three months.
DMP advised the Tribunal that, even if it were minded to order a retrial, the
question of whether or not the appellant should
be re-presented would rest with
her and that her discretion would be exercised having regard to the
circumstances pertaining at the
time she was called upon to make a decision.
This would ensure that the appellant had the opportunity of placing before her
submissions which he might wish to make relating to the exercise of her
discretion.
appellant resisted the application for an order that there be a new trial. He
submitted that, at a retrial, the prosecution would
be able to “patch
up” its case by challenging the corroborative evidence, given by Corporal
Burns, in relation to Charge
3. He also relied on the adverse consequences
which he had suffered prior to and following the trial. Once the complainant
reported the conduct, the appellant had been separated from the course but
kept within the precincts of the barracks. Whilst there
he was required to
perform menial tasks such as shredding paper and disassembling a marquee. He
was ordered to wash vehicles. Upon
removal from the course and on returning to
his unit, he was removed from training roles involving female recruits.
Following the
trial, he had been reduced in rank to Private and posted to an
infantry battalion in Queensland. He had fallen well behind his cohort
pursuing promotion opportunities. This had put pressure on his marriage and had
had detrimental financial implications for his
family. Any retrial would, as a
result, be oppressive.
relevant events had occurred almost two years ago.
accept that any retrial would be burdensome for the appellant. We are not,
however, persuaded that, on balance, the relevant considerations
weigh against
the granting of a retrial. Indeed, we consider that the interests of justice
require it.
exists cogent evidence which, if accepted, would support convictions on the two
charges. The charges are serious. The evidence
to be presented at a retrial
would be substantially the same as that heard by the DFM. No “patching
up” of a deficient
case on the evidence would be involved. The
complainant’s interests and those of the Army are also properly to be
to account. As with any retrial, the witnesses will be called on to
give evidence again and called upon to recollect events which
occurred at a
greater temporal distance than was the case at the first trial. The evidence is
not, however, complicated and the
witnesses’ memories of events are
unlikely to have faded and can be refreshed by reference to previous statements
made by them.
are conscious of the lengthy period during which the consequences of the charges
have borne heavily on the appellant. These are,
however, matters which will, no
doubt, be considered by the DMP when she decides whether or not to re-refer the
charges. They will
also be relevant to any sentence that might be imposed if
the appellant is ultimately convicted.
I certify that the preceding thirty-eight (38)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision herein of the
Justices Tracey (President), Logan (Deputy President) and Hiley
RTF format (330 KB)
Signed PDF/A format