Tran and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs (Migration) [2025] ARTA 2403 (12 November 2025)
Tran and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(Migration) [2025] ARTA 2403 (12 November 2025)
Applicant: Thi Phuong Thao TRAN
Respondent: Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
Tribunal Number: 2025/4826
Tribunal: Senior Member Hon J Rau SC
Place: Adelaide
Date: 12 November 2025
The Tribunal affirms the decision under review.
..................[SGND]......................
Senior Member Hon J Rau SC
MIGRATION –
mandatory cancellation of Class BB Subclass 155 Resident Return visa under
section 501(3A) – where Applicant
does not pass the character test –
Applicant has substantial criminal record – whether the original visa
cancelation
should be revoked under section 501CA (4) – consideration of
Ministerial Direction No. 110 – decision under review is
LEGISLATION
Migration Act 1958
Uelese v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2016] FCA 348
YNQY v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCA 1466
Afu v Minister for Home Affairs
[2018] FCA 1311
Suleiman v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
FYBR v Minister for Home Affairs
[2019] FCA 500
FYBR v Minister for Home Affairs
[2019] FCAFC 185
SECONDARY MATERIAL
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, and Multicultural Affairs (Cth),
Direction No 110 – Visa refusal and cancellation under
section 501
revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a visa under
section 501CA
REASONS FOR DECISION
Senior Member Hon J Rau SC
November 2025
INTRODUCTION
Applicant seeks a review of the decision by a delegate of the Minister for Home
Respondent’
) made under
section 501CA
Migration Act 1958
on 28 August 2025,
not to revoke
the mandatory cancellation of her Class BB Subclass 155 Resident Return visa
’). Her visa was cancelled on 6 September 2025
section 501(3A)
on the basis that she did not pass the character
(7)(c) of the Act provide that a person does not pass the
character test if they have been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
months or more.
Applicant fails the character test on account of her conviction for various
dishonesty offences on 9 August 2024 and sentence
to a term of 1 year, 9 months
and 6 days imprisonment, with a non-parole period of 4 months and 10
Applicant concedes that she does not pass the character
issue before the Tribunal is whether there is ‘
to revoke the mandatory visa cancellation pursuant to
501CA(4)(b)(ii)
of the Act.
case is somewhat unusual in that the Applicant has been in the community since
28 August 2025, on a Class WR Bridging R (Removal
Pending) (subclass070) visa
(the BVR). She is
currently facing involuntary removal from
underlying assumption upon which this case was conducted by both parties, was
that the BVR was granted because the Respondent
was not satisfied that the
Applicant had Vietnamese citizenship.
Submissions
were made by the Applicant’s counsel however, that she
Vietnamese citizen, by reason of her parentage and the operation of Vietnamese
The Applicant suggested that
for this reason, the future of the BVR was very uncertain.
Respondent’s specific reasons for issuing the BVR were initially unclear
on the evidence before the
the hearing, at the Tribunal’s request, the Respondent produced a further
document dated 28 August 2025. The Tribunal
has received this document, as
This relevantly
“NZYQ determination
On 28 August 2025, the Department decided not to revoke the
cancellation of Ms TRAN’s Resident Return (subclass 155) visa under
section 501C(4).
There is current a duty to remove Ms TRAN under
section 198
Consular Engagement and Liaison Team advised that “there is not
enough information for Post to refer this case to Vietnam Immigration
to verify Ms TRAN’s identity and in turn issue a TD”,
No third country removal options have been identified by the Department
for Ms TRAN.
there are no real prospects of Ms TRAN’s removal from
Australia becoming practicable in the reasonably foreseeable future
On 28 August 2025, Ms TRAN was assessed by the Department as being NZYQ
seems, having regard to Exhibit 3, that the Respondent has come to a different
conclusion about the Applicant’s citizenship,
to that urged upon the
Tribunal, by the Applicant’s counsel.
Applicant has
made an application to become a Vietnamese citizen and
has no intention of doing so.
a result of this apparent dispute regarding the Applicant’s citizenship
and other questions concerning possible future events,
a significantly different
approach has been urged upon the Tribunal, by the Applicant and the
Respondent.
Applicant says that whilst the Applicant is not
change at any time, for a variety of reasons.
According to the Applicant, this
possibility is very real. The Tribunal should consider removal as being at the
very least, a foreseeable
consequence of affirming the Respondent’s
decision. It should be weighed accordingly
Respondent contends in response, that the Tribunal must deal with the facts as
they are, not as they may possibly be, at some
indeterminate time in the
the parties both submitted that it was unlikely, the possibility exists that a
relevant future event, may itself be a reviewable
. Any number of things
happen. For example, the BVR may, in its own terms, expire as a result of some
future event. A third country may offer the Applicant
a visa, and so on. That
said, the current Minister or a future Minister, may also determine to grant the
Applicant some other visa.
We simply don’t know.
have considered these submissions carefully. This issue permeates all aspects of
have come to the view that speculation on the hypothetical occurrence of any
number of future events, is beyond the capacity and
remit of the Tribunal. There
is insufficient evidence upon which to make any such assessment. All that can be
said with certainty
is that things
change. The how, why, what and
when, of any such possible change, is presently unforeseeable.
the extent that an anticipation of the future is necessary, I will proceed to
deal with this matter on the basis that the
will continue, for
the foreseeable future.
practical terms, this means that the weight to be given to the considerations
required by the Direction, are quite different in
this case, to those that would
be required if the Applicant was facing the imminent prospect of
deportation.
hearing was held on 3 and 4 November 2025. The Applicant was represented by Mr
Oliver Morris of Mitchell Chambers and the Respondent
was represented by Ms Emma
Carnell of HWL Ebsworth Lawyers.
Applicant gave evidence by video from her home in Sydney.
Applicant was concise and direct in her answers to questions. She did not
attempt to make excuses, or to evade responsibility
for her actions. This is
a case where the Applicant’s demonstrable lack of credibility
is an important issue.
significant underlying issue in this case is whether/ to what extent, the
Applicant has in fact reformed. The evidence in support
of this proposition,
advanced by the Applicant, is mostly based on steps that she has taken since her
very recent release from immigration
detention on 28 August 2025. This is
discussed further below.
Applicant called her husband, Mr TT. They have only been married since 22
October 2025.
Australian citizen,
and has been
here since January 1980, when he was 20 months old. He is 16 years older than
the Applicant. He has 3 children from
his former marriage aged, 25, 18 and 16.
The Applicant had never met these children prior to 28 August 2025. The
Applicant’s
counsel confirmed that there was
reliance placed on
the Applicant’s relationship with these children.
TT gave evidence in a direct and straightforward manner. He knew in general
terms about the Applicant’s past criminal history
and drug use but was not
across the detail. As he put it, he was looking to the future, not the past. I
accept that he intends to
support the Applicant. He lives in Sydney. He has
family responsibilities there and a small business.
Applicants brother Mr AT gave evidence by phone. His evidence confirmed that he,
along with his mother, are and have almost always
been, Child A’s primary
caregivers. He also confirmed that he was a victim of the Applicant’s
Applicant’s mother was made available to give evidence, but she was not
required by the Respondent.
note that the Applicant did
call Dr Lim, a forensic psychologist,
previously retained by the Applicant’s former lawyers, in June
Applicant is presently aged 30.
was born in a Thai refugee camp on 19 December
Her mother had fled to
Thailand from Vietnam.
parents separated in Vietnam before she was
discussed above, she
may be eligible to become a citizen of
but this is
the same as being a citizen. As previously observed, the Respondent is not
satisfied that she is a
Applicant entered the country on an humanitarian visa, on 14 June 1995 with her
mother (Ms.TP) and her older brother (Mr
The Applicant was 6 months
old when she at the time.
Vietnamese man. This relationship lasted for about 10
Applicant says that she only speaks
She told the Tribunal
that she can understand some Vietnamese, but she does not really speak the
language. This was confirmed by
Mr TT. Her mother understands some English but
does not speak it properly.
6 September 2004, the Applicant was granted the
2000 and 2007, the Applicant attended Ridley Grove Primary
2008 and 2009 the Applicant attended Woodville High School. At the age of 14,
part way through year 9, she dropped
This occurred after an
alleged instance of sexual abuse by a teacher at the
She went to live with
her then boyfriend until she was found by authorities and returned home to her
mother. She ran away again a
few months later and spent some time
“couch surfing”
with friends. She began a relationship with
Mr HT, who introduced her to methamphetamines
the next year the Applicant remained with Mr HT and developed a significant meth
addiction. This addiction continued up until
she was remanded in custody in
August 2023.
Applicant had a troubled upbringing. According to her statement of 26 September
9. My parents had separated before my birth and
consequently I have never met my father.
10. Growing up I did not have a father figure in my life, even though my
mother repartnered when I was about 5 years of age.
11. My stepfather was a good man though he did not appear to be
emotionally available for me or my brother.
12. He and my mother eventually separated and it did not bother me a lot
because I did not have an emotionally close relationship
13. My mother worked very hard and provided for me and my brother, though
she was a very strict mother.
14. At primary school I was very shy and struggled to make
15. At high school I was bullied by other students because my mother did
not allow me to socialise with my school friends.
16. Though my mother never physically hit me, I was always fearful of
making my mother upset because of my behaviour.
17. When I was in high school, I was sexually assaulted by a high school
teacher and this incident left me traumatised.
18. I was so scared and ashamed of what had happened that I could not tell
19. After the incident I was always angry and ready to fight and started
being a rebel.
20. Around the same time, I started dating boys and had a sexual
relationship with my then-boyfriend.
21. Soon after I ran away from my mother’s house to live with my
boyfriend and soon after I dropped out of school as
22. I had to return home when I was found by police after some
23. After a few months, I decided to run away from my mother's house again
and started couch surfing.
24. Even though I ran away from home at a young age, I maintained regular
me throughout
25. At the age of 14, I was introduced by methamphetamines by my second
boyfriend [HT].
26. I was soon addicted to drugs and soon developed a gambling problem as
27. I have never had an intimate relationship with someone who genuinely
28. All of my relationships have been very dysfunctional, and I have been
a victim of domestic violence as
Applicant dropped out of school in year
She has worked only briefly,
when she was 17-18 years old, in a Hungry Jack’s Restaurant and in a nail
2009-2010, when the Applicant was 15 to 20 years of age, she was in a violent
and abusive relationship with Mr CP. They were both
methamphetamine
not reconnect until March this year.
19 January 2015, the Applicant’s son, Child A was
His father is Mr. CP.
Child A lives with the Applicant’s mother (Ms.TP) and her brother (Mr AT),
in Adelaide.
Child A is an
Australian citizen. He is now 10 years old.
Applicant told the Tribunal that Child A has always lived with his grandmother
and his uncle. The Applicant only lived with them
during the first year of Child
After that she
only lived there
“on and off”
“not often at
. The Applicant accepted that as far as Child A was concerned,
that was his home.
after Child A was born, the Applicant was severely bashed and abused by Mr CP.
She left him and moved back to live with her
6 July 2016, the Applicant took out an intervention order against Mr CP. This
order was for both her protection and Child
CP continued to stalk the Applicant despite the intervention order. She left her
mother’s house and resumed a transient lifestyle
Child A was left in the
full-time care of the Applicant’s
2017, the Applicant commenced a relationship with Mr TC. He was criminal and a
Corrections records state:
At interview, Ms Tran disclosed
that two years prior to the offending she was the victim of a kidnapping,
perpetrated by an ex-partner
who held her captive in his J1ouse for "fifteen
hours" and assaulted her with weapons including a knuckleduster. After this
experience,
she said that she was not "in the right frame of mind" and ran away
from her mother’s address where she met the co-offender
introduced her to the offending behaviour. Ms Tran said that Mr [TC] had already
been making false identities prior to their
relationship but asked for her help
in "setting up people's credit cards". She explained that Mr [TC] was using fake
job advertisements
online to deceive people and obtain their personal
information so he could apply for credit cards in their name. Ms Tran said that
her role was to use the credit cards in the stores and purchase expensive goods,
where she would then sell them ''on gumtree" for
profit. She estimated that she
engaged in this behaviour on a regular basis for over a year.
Ms Tran is considered to have displayed little remorse for her offending
and instead concentrated on the impacts that her imprisonment
has had on life.
She also presented with limited victim understanding and empathy, however, was
able to identify the "people" of
whom she obtained money from. Ms Tran displayed
cognitive distortions at interview and had little insight into her offending
She appeared to diminish responsibility and shifted the blame onto
the co-offender who she claimed was responsible for her involvement.
minimised her role in the offending by stating that she purchased goods with the
credit cards and that she became "used to
it" and was not in the right frame of
mind due to her experience of domestic violence.
The Individual Development Plan (Bolton, 2024) states 'Ms Tran returned a
score of 6, placing her within the MAXIMUM category of risk
of recidivism. As
items 5 and were not endorsed she was not considered suitable for the Stepping
Stones program. In consultation
with Acting Senior Assessment Clinician Sharna
Plummer, a clinical override was determined appropriate, and it was recommended
Ms Tran be considered for the Stepping Stones program given her illicit
substance use and the presences of problem-solving deficits,
behaviour, poor emotional management and antisocial associates, pending HASI
assessment.'
At the time of this report, institutional social workers had not responded
to the writer's request whether Ms Tran was being considered
for any upcoming
programs. At interview, Ms Tran said that she would prefer to not engage in any
Departmental programs as she wants
to be released to immigration detention to
"concentrate on my Visa matters".
Ms Tran said that she experimented with alcohol use as a teenager but
denied regular or ongoing use. She said that she "doesn't drink"
and could not
recall the last time she consumed alcohol. In discussing drug use, Ms Tran said
that she experimented with marijuana
use as a teenager but denied any further
use. She also reported commencing the use of methamphetamines at the age of 14
any further use until her current imprisonment. Ms Tran agreed to
having used methamphetamines in custody and claimed she was peer
pressured into
using by other prisoners. She told the writer that she was experiencing stress
regarding her daughter and Visa issues
so decided to use 11 one time". According
to JIS, Ms Tran has been subject to five urinalysis during her term of
imprisonment, with
the last two dated 08/06/2024 and 12/08/2024 being positive
for methamphetamines. At interview, Ms Tran agreed to the use of methamphetamine
in custody and said she was experiencing stress and peer pressure to use with
the other prisoners.
With regards to family support, Ms Tran advised that she has ongoing
vegetables. She said that she is "really close and tight" with her mother and
identified her as her main support. Ms Tran
advised that her brother [VT] is
employed in retail and said that neither he or her mother have been involved in
the criminal justice
system. It is noted by the writer that her brother [VT] is
a banned visitor, after an incident on 22/08/2024 where he was observed
Ms Tran an item during a visit.
At interview, Ms Tran said that he would like to reside her mother's
address of [redacted address]. She advised that her mother does
English and recommended the writer contact her brother in order to translate. On
06/09/2024 the writer contacted [VT] who
confirmed that their mother was willing
to accommodate Ms Tran on Parole and she had no concerns or questions. He said
that he does
not live at the address and now lives independently. On 13/09/2024
SAPOL: Corrections did not provide any concerns with the address,
however noted
it is a South Australian Housing Trust property and they have Ms Tran's brother
residing there. Despite this, the address
appears to be
May and August 2017, the Applicant committed numerous dishonesty offences,
defrauding Centrelink, in collaboration with Mr
Her brother Mr AT was one of
her victims. He told the Tribunal that he has had to repay $2000 to Centrelink.
The Applicant has not
repaid him.
Applicant used the significant proceeds of her criminal activities to fund her
meth and gambling addictions, as well as on living
expenses, while on the run
from police.
14 March 2019, the Applicant was placed on home detention
1 April 2019, the Applicant removed her electronic monitoring device and
absconded. She was “
not recommended for Home Detention bail
9 April 2019, the Applicant was dealt with in Pt Adelaide Magistrates Court for
Estreatment of bail
. She was fined
October 2018 and December 2020, the Applicant and Mr TC, committed numerous
fraud related offences.
14 January 2020, the Applicant attempted to bring a prohibited item into the
Adelaide Women’s Prison. She was separated from
28 February 2020, the Applicant was convicted of obtaining a financial advantage
by deception and sentenced to 2 months and 24
imprisonment.
This sentence
related to the Centrelink offending.
8 April 2020, the Applicant was placed on Home Detention
11 May 2020, the Applicant was arrested and remanded in custody at the Adelaide
Women’s Prison.
24 August 2020, prison records say that authorities intercepted a fake legal
letter containing 8 orange strips believed to be
31 August 2020, prison records say that authorities intercepted mail containing
2 strips believed to be
3 September 2020, the Applicant was dealt with in the Adelaide Magistrates Court
for failure to comply with a bail agreement. A
conviction was recorded, but
without penalty.
late 2020, the Applicant’s relationship with Mr TC ended.
23 December 2020, the Applicant was placed on Home Detention
6 January 2021, the Applicant removed her home detention bracelet and
A warrant of
apprehension was ordered. A SA Corrections report
At interview, Ms Tran acknowledged that she has
removed her electronic monitoring device on two occasions. She told the writer
with regards to her most recent breach, she was "scared to go back to
jail... I didn't know how long I’d get". Ms Tran said
that she was
pregnant at the time and was fearful to give birth in custody, adding that her
partner at the time encouraged her to
travel to Sydney where she lived for two
years before being arrested and extradited back to Adelaide. With regards to her
Parole, Ms Tran said that if released into the community she will be
able to comply with the conditions of
also a criminal and a heavy drug
15 February 2023, the Applicant’s daughter, Child B was
Her father is Mr MT. Child
B lives with her paternal grandmother in
She is an Australian
from Child A and Child B, the Applicant has had 6 other pregnancies. Two of
these ended in terminations and 4 in
miscarriages.
convicted of assaults and fire-arms offences and
sentenced to 10 years
imprisonment.
Correspondence
from Centrelink dated 20 May 2023, indicate that the Applicant was in receipt of
Family Assistance payments.
16 August 2023 Dr Begg a psychiatrist prepared a medico-legal report. He thought
that the Applicant was suffering from PTSD and
he recommended Cognitive
Behavioural Therapy. He thought that she would struggle to obtain work in the
labour market.
18 August 2023, the Applicant was arrested extradited back to SA from
Corrections records state that on 15 December 2023, the Applicant attempted to
obtain suboxone through the prison mail
13 and 15 February 2024, the Applicant was detained under the Mental Health
1 April 2024, the Applicant refused to provide a urine
Pre-Sentence report dated 15 April 2024
Criminogenic factors
The criminogenic factors identified during the preparation of this report
include antisocial associates, procriminal thinking, poor
problem solving,
substance use, and poor impulse control.
Evidence of Defendant's Responsiveness
In December 2020, the defendant became subject to bail home detention with
supervision for 31 months and 27 days. Records inform that
a breach report
was submitted
after the defendant removed her electronic monitoring device
and absconded from her nominated residence.
In April 2020, the defendant became subject to two bails home detention
with supervision for 1 month and 27 days, and two months and
respectively.
Records inform that while
no breach report was submitted,
defendant was remanded in custody in May 2020 for prior offences.
In March 2019, the defendant became subject to bail home detention with
supervision for two months and eight days. Records inform
report was submitted
after the defendant removed her electronic monitoring
device and absconded from the nominated residence, thereby being considered
whereabouts unknown.
Based on information gathered for this report, should the defendant be
ordered to be under the supervision of a Community Corrections
Officer, the
following Enhanced Community Corrections Service Standards could apply in the
first instance, subject to further comprehensive
risk assessment:
The ASSIST tier requires the offender to receive a moderate level of
supervision by a Community Corrections Officer to address criminogenic
This may involve attending external community based programs.
To assist in the effective supervision of this defendant in the community
the following conditions would seem appropriate:
• I will report to the Adelaide Community Correctional Centre at
within two working days.
• I will report to the Courts Unit, Adelaide Magistrates Court
• I will place myself under the supervision of a Community
Corrections Officer be of good behaviour and comply with the lawful
of that Officer for a period of.....
• I will notify any change of my place of residence within two
working days to my assigned Community Corrections Officer.
• I will not consume alcohol and/or any other drug which is not
medically prescribed or otherwise legally available and then
only at the
prescribed or recommended dosage and I will submit to any drug and alcohol
testing as directed by a Community Corrections
Officer and sign all required
forms and comply with the requirements of the testing procedures.
• I will attend an assessment for Department for Correctional
Services programs, and where assessed as suitable, will attend
and participate
in such therapeutic programs, counselling and treatment as directed by my
assigned Community Corrections Officer.
• I will attend an assessment for externally provided programs, and
where assessed as suitable, will attend and participate
in such therapeutic
programs, counselling and treatment as directed by my assigned Community
Corrections Officer.
• I agree to attend for psychiatric, psychological and medical
assessment as directed by my assigned Community Corrections Officer
and for such
treatment specified in any assessment
8 June 2024, the Applicant returned a positive urinalysis for
13 June 2024, Dr Loraine Lim prepared a forensic psychological report on the
Applicant. In this Dr Lim states:
In my opinion there is a
direct nexus between Ms Tran’s compulsive gambling and methamphetamine
addictions in the wider community
and her commission of the current offences.
Reportedly, she had committed the offences in order the defray the costs of her
use and gambling conduct, and to fund her living expenses. Her chronically
compromised mental state during the period encompassing
her offending behaviours
due to her psychotic symptoms, whether they were drug induced or organic in
nature, were also likely to
have contributed to her impaired judgement,
aggravated her propensity to behave recklessly, as well as her lack of
consideration
for the consequences of her actions at the time.
Ms Tran has reported a relatively complex psycho-emotional background
which is characterised by unresolved trauma and adversity in
the form of alleged
sexual abuse by a teacher when she was in high school, and her involvement in
several domestically violent relationships
since her mid-teens. It was possible
that the strict and sheltered home environment that she was raised in, albeit
she was not neglected
or abused in that context, had ill-prepared her in respect
to navigating challenging life situations effectively and/or to manage
with negative distress in a healthy and constructive manner. Consequently, this
had led her to develop a drug problem from
a young age as an emotional coping
strategy, which in turn, had apparently caused her to develop persistent
symptoms of psychosis.
In my opinion, Ms Tran has also developed a number of borderline
personality features which had contributed to her involvement in
dysfunctional
and unhealthy relationships with men over the years. Of note, I am currently
reluctant to formally diagnose her with
a Borderline Personality Disorder prior
to confirmation of the exact nature of her psychotic illness by a properly
qualified medical
professional such as a psychiatrist, and whilst she remains
incarcerated with her mental health continuing to be somewhat vulnerable
time of this report writing. Nevertheless, individuals with borderline
personality traits generally tend to be hypersensitive
to stress, have an
increased propensity to suffer from poor emotional regulation, an unstable
personal identity, and a poor sense
of self-esteem and self-worth.
Consequently, this increases their risk of resorting to substance abuse
and/or other addictive forms of behaviours (e.g. gambling
or excessive shopping
sprees) especially in women either as emotional numbing or self-soothing
strategies.
In my opinion, Ms Tran’s capacity to exercise good judgment
and make healthy decisions for herself has therefore been chronically
compromised against the background of her significant mental health issues and
borderline personality traits. Her protracted methamphetamine
abuse in the wider
community, in conjunction with the absence of professional rehabilitation thus
far, also appear to have progressively
eroded away her emotional resilience and
her capacity for coping in a healthy and constructive manner in the context of
situational
and/or psychosocial crises.
In my opinion, Ms Tran would be at a high risk of a methamphetamine
relapse if she is released from prison in the near future without
professional
intervention, on the account that she is still reportedly experiencing cravings
in that regard
. If she suffers a drug relapse, and, if her mental illness is
not properly treated or managed at the time, then I believe that her
committing similar re-offending (i.e., deception/fraud charges) would also
rapidly become acute against that background.
As such, it is respectfully suggested that the Presiding Magistrate
consider crafting a penalty that would prioritise Ms Tran’s
psychological,
psychosocial, and psychiatric rehabilitation needs, regardless of whether a
community or a custodial sentence is imposed.
In my opinion, Ms Tran would
require a multifaceted, holistic, assertive as well as supportive approach (as
opposed to dictatorial
and punitive) in respect to her future case management
and treatment intervention. The emphasis should be on promoting her sense
personal safety and trust by focusing on the rapport building process and a
strong therapeutic alliance with her treating professionals
stabilising her psychosocial circumstances in the wider community by providing
her with practical support such as in relation
to housing (if her mother is
unable to accommodate her return home) and improving her parenting skills for
example. She would also
benefit from being supported to remain engaged with her
psychiatric treatment, and to assist her to implement her psychological
rehabilitation
in respect to her drug and gambling addictions as well as any
unresolved history of past trauma.
The type of supervision and specific rehabilitation options that Ms
Tran would benefit from in order to assist her to maintain a low
recidivism in the foreseeable future are outlined below:
• To be subjected to supportive and assertive case management by
• To be subjected to regular drug testing as an incentive to
support her to achieving abstinence from illicit drug use in the
• To be referred to a psychosocial agency or organisation such as
OARS with regards to accommodation assistance, financial counselling,
to a parenting skills program, vocational assistance, and for domestic violence
counselling and support (if necessary).
• To continue to engage with a GP to monitor her mental health
and to facilitate referrals to specialists and allied health
professionals on an
as-needs basis.
• To be referred to a psychologist, via a GP Mental Health
Treatment Plan, for assertive skills training and assistance with
developing her
psychological resilience and improving her emotional coping skills. Ms Tran
would benefit from receiving either Dialectical
Behaviour Therapy (DBT) or
Schema Therapy to address the key features of her Borderline Personality
Disorder, as well as interventions
to address her unresolved history of past
• A referral to a group-based DBT Skills Training Group for women
that is offered by SA Health’s Borderline Personality
Collaborative (BPD Co) would also be beneficial.
• A referral to the Statewide Gambling Rehabilitation Program to
address her pathological gambling issues.
• Engagement in a substance use rehabilitation program such as
the MATRIX stimulant use program or SMART Recovery to support
her to address her
illicit drug use.
• Ongoing contact with FMHS or community Mental Health Services
to confirm the nature of her psychotic illness, engage in regular
psychiatric
reviews and to monitor her psychotropic medication
compliance.
Lim was not called as a witness by the Applicant. It would have assisted the
Tribunal to have been able to ask Dr Lim about the
Applicant’s more recent
history, and to ask her opinion on whether this has changed any of the views
expressed in her report.
Applicant has made attempts since her release from detention, to address some of
Dr Lim’s recommendations. Some of them,
she has not as yet, for example
BPD therapy, gambling rehabilitation and management of her psychotic illness as
recommended.
9 August 2024, the Applicant was convicted in the Magistrate’s Court of
South Australia of various dishonesty offences. She
was sentenced to a term of 1
year, 9 months and 6 days imprisonment, with a non-parole period of 4 months and
She had already served
1 year, 8 months, 3 weeks and 4 days since her
sentencing remarks of Magistrate Soetratma state:
Tran, you have pleaded guilty to 20 counts of dishonesty offences. In addition,
you have asked the court to consider, when sentencing
you in respect of those 20
counts, another 166 offences which you admit that you have committed, set out in
a list of considerations
provided to the court.
I am going to take into account the fact of your plea of guilty and the
timing of that plea and the list of considerations. I will
be imposing a 30%
reduction upon the sentence that the court would have otherwise imposed if you
had gone to trial and you had been
found guilty of those offences
I will commence with the facts of the charges to which you have pleaded
By way of overview, the prosecution alleges that in March 2018 someone
placed false job advertisements on popular employment websites
Seek.com and
Indeed.com. These false advertisements related to non-existent jobs. The false
application process required unsuspecting
applicants to supply significant
personal identification information about themselves, like copies of their real
driver's licences,
passports, their real Medicare numbers or other forms of
identification.
It appears that you and your partner [TC] came into possession of these
other people's personal identification information, and it
appears that on
multiple repeated occasions between October 2018 and December 2019 you used
their real identification information
falsely, in order to pretend that you were
those other people.
It appears that in this way you were able to do things like rent houses
in other people's names, open bank accounts in other people's
names, and obtain
credit cards in multiple other people's names. Because you used multiple
identities falsely to gain multiple credit
accounts, you gained access to a very
large amount of credit from the Westpac Bank and BankWest, which it is extremely
unlikely you
would ever have had access to had those banks known the truth: that
in fact one single person – you – were applying for
all this credit.
Once you were given that credit, you could spend the money that the banks had
unwittingly lent to you without necessarily
ever paying it back.
Using multiple false identities had a second benefit to you. It minimised
the risk that if you failed to pay your credit card debts,
that the banks would
ever find you to recover their money, because you had used false identification,
and the banks would wrongly
pursue the true owner of that identification
Your lawyer has said that no doubt, once the banks realised that the
credit card debts were not being repaid, they would have stopped
credit at some stage, thus placing a practical ceiling on the damage done by
your offending. But he has also said quite
candidly that when that did actually
happen, you would simply repeat the process and start over.
While it appears that between you, you and [TC] obtained over a million
dollars of benefit from Westpac and Bankwest, of that figure,
you personally
were able to access $282,556 worth of credit that you had falsely
I sentence you on the basis that you used the credit and the credit
cards that you had falsely obtained to spend $282,556 of the banks’
that you never paid back to those banks.
On count 1 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of deception, which is
punishable by a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment.
On count 2 you have
pleaded guilty to using another person's personal identification information to
facilitate the commission of
that offence. That is punishable by a maximum
penalty of 6 years and 8 months imprisonment.
On 6 March 2018 a man called [redacted name] had a rental property in
Collinswood. On that day you produced a driver's licence and
payslip in the name
of a person called [redacted name], in order to help you pretend to be [redacted
name]. You were consequently
granted a lease. I do not know whether you ever
actually paid the rent or how long you remained at the Collinswood rental
On count 3 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of possessing equipment
for making prohibited material like personal identification
information,
intending to use it to produce such prohibited material. That is an offence
punishable by a maximum penalty of 3 years
imprisonment.
On 18 February 2019, police were searching your Brompton unit where they
found, among other things, a blank bank card, and a printer
that contained a
cassette for printing false driver's licences.
On count 4 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of dishonest dealing with
documents, which is punishable by a maximum penalty of
imprisonment.
This occurred after police had raided your Brompton unit in February 2019.
On 15 March 2019, you applied online for a Westpac credit
card in the name of
[redacted name] with a $15,000 credit limit. In order to pretend that you were
[redacted name], you produced
a Commonwealth Bank account statement in her name,
and you used her SA driver's licence number. As it happened, Westpac was fooled,
and it issued the credit card to you, which you later used to make $16,630 of
transactions that you were not entitled to make without
paying back any of that
money to Westpac.
On count 5 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of theft, which is
punishable by a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment.
On 25 March 2019, a parcel containing an online purchase of $37.49 worth
of merchandise was delivered to [redacted name]’s premises.
Closed circuit
television footage showed that at about 5pm that evening you took that
On count 6 you have pleaded guilty to using another person's
identification information intending to commit an offence of dishonest
with documents, which is punishable by a maximum of 6 years and 8 months
imprisonment.
On 1 May 2019, you applied online for a Westpac credit card in the name of
[redacted name] with a $27,100 credit limit. In order to
pretend that you were
[redacted name] in that online application, you were in possession of, and you
used, [redacted name]’s
SA driver's licence number. Again, you fooled
Westpac, which issued a credit card in [redacted name]’s name to you,
later used to make $27,100 of transactions without paying any of that
money back to Westpac.
On count 7 you have pleaded guilty to engaging in conduct, namely creating
a false document, intending to deceive Westpac in order
to benefit yourself.
That is punishable by a maximum of 10 years imprisonment.
On 7 May 2019, you applied online for a Westpac credit card in the name of
[redacted name] with a $27,100 credit limit. In that application
pretending to be [redacted name], which was false. You apparently used his SA
driver's licence number as part of the pretence.
Again, you succeeded in
deceiving Westpac, which issued a credit card in [redacted name]’s name to
you, which you later used
to make $36,821.31 of transactions without paying any
of that money back to Westpac.
On count 8 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of possessing prohibited
material intending to use it for a criminal purpose, that
is, to deceive
Westpac. That offence is punishable by a maximum of 3 years
imprisonment.
On 9 May 2019 you were in possession of 2 payslips from Brighton Foodland
for a man called [redacted name], which you used as part
of another online
application by you, pretending to be [redacted name], in order to obtain a
credit card in his name. As it happened
on that occasion, that application was
On count 9 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of deception, punishable
by 10 years imprisonment.
On 2 June 2019, using the name [redacted name], and using credit card
details that you had never had the authority to use, you submitted
order to buy $1075.90 worth of clothing from Lexi Clothing. You thereby deceived
staff member [redacted name] into supplying
those items.
On count 10 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of dishonest dealing
with documents, punishable by a maximum of 10 years imprisonment.
On 13 June 2019 you were in possession of [redacted name]’s driver's
licence number, which you used in order to help you pretend
to be [redacted
name], so you could make an online application to open an account in [redacted
name]’s name with National Australia
On count 11 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of using another
person's identification information intending to commit an offence
of dishonest
dealing with documents. That offence is punishable by a maximum of 6 years and 8
months imprisonment.
On 3 July 2019 you were in possession of [redacted name]’s driver's
licence number, which you used in order to help you pretend
to be [redacted
name], so that you could make an online application for a credit card in
[redacted name]'s name with a credit limit
of $27,300, which you later used to
make $29,863.54 of transactions without paying any of that money back to
On count 12 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of dishonest dealing
with documents, punishable by a maximum of 10 years imprisonment.
On 8 August 2019, you were in possession of [redacted name]'s SA driver's
licence number, which you used in order to help you pretend
to be [redacted
name], so that you could make an online application for a credit card in
[redacted name]'s name with a $18,800 credit
limit, which you later used to make
$20,843.38 of transactions, without paying any of that money back to
On count 13 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of using another
person's identification information intending to commit an offence
of dishonest
dealing with documents. That offence is punishable by a maximum of 6 years and 8
months imprisonment.
On 16 September 2019 you were in possession of [redacted name]'s SA
driver's licence number. You used it to help you pretend to be
[redacted name],
so that you could open a bank account with the National Australia Bank in
[redacted name]'s name.
On count 14 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of deception, punishable
by 10 years imprisonment.
On 18 September 2019, you used the name [redacted name], and used credit
card details that you had never had the authority to use,
to submit another
online order to buy, on this occasion, $283.90 worth of clothing from Lexi
Clothing. You thereby deceived staff
member [redacted name] into supplying those
On count 15 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of dishonest dealing
with documents, punishable by a maximum of 10 years imprisonment.
On 3 December 2019, you again used [redacted name]'s SA driver's licence
number in order to help you pretend to be [redacted name],
so that you could
open another National Australia Bank account in [redacted name]'s name.
On count 16 you have pleaded guilty to making what is called a s144B false
pretence, intending to commit or facilitate the commission
of dishonest dealings
with documents. That offence is punishable by 6 years and 8 months
imprisonment.
Between 11 December 2019 and 10 May 2020, you pretended that you were a
person called [redacted name], in order to facilitate the
commission by you of
offences of dishonest dealings with documents which permitted you to make false
applications for credit cards
or credit accounts.
On count 17 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of dishonest dealing
with documents, punishable by a maximum of 10 years imprisonment.
On 16 December 2019 you produced a document applying for a credit card
account in which you falsely pretended that you were a person
called [redacted
On count 18 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of dishonest dealing
with documents, punishable by a maximum of 10 years imprisonment.
On 26 April 2020 you produced a document applying for a Westpac credit
card account in which you falsely pretended that you were a
person called
[redacted name].
On count 19 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of dishonest dealing
with documents punishable by a maximum of 10 years imprisonment.
On 26 April 2020 you produced a document to Latitude Finance applying for
a credit card in which you false pretended to be a person
called [redacted
On count 20 you have pleaded guilty to an offence of unlawful possession,
punishable by a maximum of $10,000 fine or two years imprisonment.
On 27 April 2020, police searched your Ferryden Park home where they
found: three infant car seats with a delivery notice to a person
[redacted name]; a box or prescription medication in the name of a person called
[redacted name]; they found some of the women’s
clothing items from the
Lexi store - all of which they suspected you had obtained by unlawful
That, very much in a nutshell, is a summary of the 20 offences for which
you stand to be sentenced.
However, they are not the only offences that you admit that you have
You have filed and served a list of offences, which you are not charged
with committing, but admit that you have committed, and you
have asked that the
court takes those into consideration when it sentences you for the 20 counts
that are before the court.
There are 166 such offences to be taken into consideration, over a period
of just over two years from March 2018 to April 2020. I
have not been supplied
with the individual factual allegations relating to each of those 166 offences,
but I can see immediately,
and it is admitted, that they involve further,
consistent use of false identification to obtain benefits for yourself,
in the form of credit accounts that you may never have got if you had
applied for that credit in your own name.
So that everybody is clear about this, I am still only sentencing you in
respect of the 20 offences to which you have pleaded guilty.
However, when I do
so, I assess the gravity of those 20 offences against the factual background
that those 20 offences were not isolated
offences but occurred against a very
significant background of similar offending.
The parties are agreed that as at today - 9 August 2024 - you have
spent 1 year, 8 months, 3 weeks and 4 days in custody. You also
spent some 62
days on home detention bail, but as I have already mentioned you twice cut your
- and on the second occasion, you were not
found for over two years.
Eventually, you were arrested in New South Wales, and you were
extradited to South Australia in August 2023.
The court has been told that you committed two offences of obtaining
financial advantage by deception in May 2017, for which you were
sentenced in
2020 to 2 months and 24 days imprisonment. Those offences took place prior to
the offences for which I am sentencing
you now, but you were not sentenced until
after the completion of the offences for which I am sentencing you now. For
practical purposes,
what it means to me is that the offences now before me are
not the first that you had ever committed - but I am alive to the fact
because you had not been sentenced for the earlier offences when you committed
the offences before me, it is not possible to
say that you should have been
deterred by the court's sentence from committing the offences that are now
The prosecution submits that the offending demands a sentence of
imprisonment due to its seriousness, and its persistence despite
your arrest on
occasions by police during the offending period. It appears that on 14 April
2019 and on 6 January 2021 you cut your
on the latter occasion not being located for over two years, when you were found
interstate.
I consider, in light of that information, that you are not an
appropriate person to serve any further imprisonment on a home detention
From about the age of 14 you have been a user of methamphetamine, and you
reported that for several years you would use a gram daily.
You have never had much real employment, but once worked in Hungry Jacks
and in a nail salon. From age 14 to age 20 you were in a
relationship with the
man who is the father of your 9-year-old. You described that relationship as
abusive and violent, and the pre-sentence
report author confirmed that there is
a non-contact intervention order in existence.
You then formed a relationship with [TC]. He is the father of your 12-
month-old daughter. He is also the person you say introduced
you to this
offending behaviour, which took place against a setting of drug use. While the
pre-sentence report author says it also
took place against a setting of
accommodation and rental
properties in false names over that period. The
presentence report author has confirmed that your offending period tends to
with the period of your relationship with [TC] and noted that he had
prior criminal history for similar offending. The presentence
report author
considered that you might have been vulnerable to pro-criminal thinking and
behaviour, however, the number, the type
and sophistication of your offending
was a strong indicator of a level of willing complicity which could not be
explained away by
fear or coercion.
A 14 June 2024 psychological report of Dr Loraine Lim suggests that you
have suffered drug-induced psychosis, a stimulant use disorder,
methamphetamine, an impulse control disorder, manifesting itself in, among other
things, a poker machine addiction, and she
says you have traits consistent with
borderline personality disorder although she would be reluctant to formally
diagnose that without
confirming that you had a psychotic illness. I note that
you were admitted to the Lyell McEwen hospital in February this year after
reporting auditory hallucinations about killing a cellmate with a pen and seeing
ghosts. Dr Lim has confirmed that your reported
sexual abuse by a teacher and
your involvement in domestically violent relationships thereafter have led to
unresolved trauma for
you. She considers that you are at high risk of
methamphetamine relapse without professional intervention noting that even at
time of her report in June 2024 you were still reporting cravings. Dr Lim
has suggested to the court that whether its sentence is
custodial or in the
community, it should craft a penalty that prioritises your psychological,
psychosocial and psychiatric rehabilitation
needs. She says you would require
assertive and supportive multifaceted holistic approach as opposed to
dictatorial and punitive.
You have told the pre-sentence report author that you are remorseful,
regret your behaviour, want to live a normal life, and you want
to be a positive
role model for your kids. In assessing your compliance and responsiveness in the
community the presentence report
author has confirmed that in March 2019 you
absconded from home detention bail; in April 2020 you completed an 18-day period
detention bail without absconding, in December 2020 you absconded from
If you had not pleaded guilty but were found guilty of these offences,
and for this purpose I have to notionally assume, found guilty
of the offences
contained in the list of considerations, I would have sentenced you to 5 years
imprisonment with a 3-year non-parole
. However, you did plead
guilty, and I apply the 30% sentence reduction to which you are entitled,
reducing that figure to 3 years,
6 months and 3 days imprisonment with 2 years,
1 month and 7 days non-parole period. From that head sentence and from that
period I will deduct the 1 year, 8 months, 3 weeks and 4 days that
you have spent in custody thus far.
That means that there will be a single sentence pursuant to section 26 of
the Sentencing Act which, after taking into account the
30% and taking into
account the time in custody, will be: 1 year, 9 months and 6 days imprisonment
commencing today, in respect of
which I fix a non-parole period of 4 months and
10 days commencing today.
I decline to suspend that sentence; it will be served in a prison.
You will be eligible to apply for parole in four months and ten
12 August 2024, the Applicant returned a positive urinalysis for meth.
22 August 2024, corrections records report that CCTV recorded the
Applicant’s brother passing her an item during a visit.
He was banned from
visiting her.
Mr AT told the
Tribunal that he could not recall this.
23 August 2024, the Applicant was assessed as being within the maximum category
of risk of recidivism.
27 August 2024, the Applicant was supposed to complete various
, but she told the
Tribunal that this did not actually occur.
6 September 2024, the Applicant received notice that the Visa had been cancelled
under s 501(3A) of the Act.
30 September 2024, the Applicant made a request for revocation of the mandatory
cancellation of the Visa.
stated her reasons for seeking revocation as:
Australia since I was only 6 months old. In 14/06/1996 my mother arrived to
Australia with my brother and I as refugees
escaping the war. I grew up in
Australia since 6 months old as a baby. I have 9 year old son which I am sole
carer for as there is
an intervention order for domestic violence with my ex
partner (his father). I am the only parent my son has. I have another baby
age 18 months old without her father being in the picture too as he is serving
another 8 years in prison. I am also her only
parent. Both my children needs me.
They are my life. I also am not citizenship of any country. I was born in a
refugee camp in Thailand
without birth certificate or citizenship there. I
don’t speak any other language except for English. I also have no family
or anyone I know outside of Australia. My life and family are all in Australia.
This has been my home since I was a baby. I have
no ties with any other country.
I will never commit any offence again in the future. I just want to raise my
children because they
have no one and care for my
18 December 2024, the Applicant was released from the Adelaide Women’s
Prison and taken into Immigration
She moved to
Villawood in Sydney.
Applicant told the Tribunal that she last used meth when in prison. She later
conceded that she had also used once in Villawood.
told the Tribunal that she didn’t “
want to think about meth any
“re-connected”
on social media after 12 years. They connected through mutual friends. They
began to speak by phone and he visited her
a couple of
” at Villawood.
28 August 2025, the Respondent decided not to revoke the cancellation of the
on 28 August 2025, the Applicant was released into the community on the BVR.
Upon her release, the Applicant moved in with Mr
BVR is subject to various conditions. A failure to comply with these conditions
may result in the cancellation of the
Applicant says that she has not used drugs since her release.
a result of the Applicant being granted the BVR, the direct consequence of
affirming the Respondent’s decision, would
be that the
Applicant was immediately detained pending removal. She could continue to live
in the community, subject to the conditions
attached to the BVR. This is
discussed further below.
5 September 2025, the Applicant sought review of the Respondent’s
10 September 2025, the Applicant was again assessed by corrections as being
within the maximum category of risk of
recidivism.
Dept. for Correctional Services note dated 10 September 2025 refers to the
Applicant’s
verifying he is happy to keep (The Applicant) at the house in NSW rent
free due to her
circumstances
22 September the Applicant completed an online Drug and Alcohol
22 October 2025, the Applicant married Mr
They told the Tribunal that
they had decided to marry 2 or 3 weeks earlier.
27 October 2025, the Applicant was put on a mental health treatment
Applicant has provided various statements in support of her request for
revocation of the visa
cancellation.
Some have the
flavour of a pro-forma letter. All speak in terms of character qualities such as
“integrity”, “hard-working”, “devoted
mother”, “respectful”, “responsible”,
“selfless”, “reliable”
“trustworthy”
the Applicant’s record as set out above, these characterisations and
references are of limited value.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
the Applicant Pass the Character Test?
Applicant was sentenced in the Magistrates Court of South Australia to a term of
imprisonment of 1 year, 9 months and 6 days with
a non-parole period of 4 months
and 10 days.
Tribunal finds that the Applicant has a “
substantial criminal
” and, therefore, she does not pass the character test. This is
not disputed by the Applicant.
Tribunal must now consider whether
“there is another reason why the
original decision should be revoked”
Is there another reason why the original decision should be
revoked under section 501CA (4)?
considering whether to the original decision should be revoked, the Tribunal is
bound by s 499(2A) to comply with any directions
made under the Act. In this
Direction No 110 – Visa refusal and cancellation under section
501 and revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a visa under
section 501CA
(“the Direction”) has
application.
the purposes of deciding whether to refuse or cancel a non-citizen’s visa
or whether or not to revoke the mandatory cancellation
of a non-citizen’s
visa, paragraph 5.2 of the Direction contains several principles that must
inform a decision maker’s
application of the considerations identified in
Part 2 where relevant to the decision.
principles that are found in paragraph 5.2 of the Direction may be briefly
stated as follows:
(1) Australia has a sovereign right to determine whether non-citizens who are of
character concern are allowed to enter and/or remain
in Australia. Being able to
come to or remain in Australia is a privilege Australia confers on non-citizens
in the expectation that
they are, and have been, law-abiding, will respect
important institutions, such as Australia’s law enforcement framework, and
will not cause or threaten harm to individuals or the Australian community.
(2) The safety of the Australian Community is the highest priority of the
Australian Government.
(3) Non-citizens who engage or have engaged in criminal or other serious conduct
should expect to be denied the privilege of coming
to, or to forfeit the
privilege of staying in, Australia.
(4) The Australian community expects that the Australian Government can and
should refuse entry to non-citizens, or cancel their
visas, if they engaged in
conduct, in Australia or elsewhere, that raises serious character concerns. This
expectation of the Australian
community applies regardless of whether the
non-citizen poses a measurable risk of causing physical harm to the Australian
(5) Australia has a low tolerance of any criminal or other serious conduct by
visa applicants or those holding a limited stay visa,
or by other non- citizens
who have been participating in, and contributing to, the Australian community
only for a short period of
time. However,
Australia may afford a higher level
of tolerance of criminal or other serious conduct by non- citizens who have
lived in the Australian
community for most of their life, or from a very young
(6) With respect to decisions to refuse, cancel, and revoke cancellation of a
visa, Australia may afford a higher level of tolerance
of criminal or other
serious conduct by non-citizens who have lived in the Australian community for
most of their life, or from a
very young age.
(7) Decision-makers must take into account the primary and other considerations
relevant to the individual case. In some circumstances,
the nature of the
noncitizen’s conduct, or the harm that would be caused if the conduct were
to be repeated, may be so serious
that even strong countervailing considerations
may be insufficient to justify not cancelling or refusing the visa, or revoking
mandatory cancellation.
(8) The inherent nature of certain conduct such as family violence is so serious
that even strong countervailing considerations may
be insufficient to justify
not cancelling or refusing the visa, or revoking a mandatory cancellation, even
if the information available
at the time of consideration suggests that the
non-citizen does not pose a measurable risk of causing physical harm to the
6 of the Direction provides that:
Informed by the principles in paragraph 5.2, a decision maker must take into
account the considerations identified in sections 8
and 9, where relevant to the
7(2) of the Direction requires that protection of the Australian community
(Primary Consideration 8.1), is generally to
be given greater weight than other
primary considerations.
8 of the Direction sets out five Primary Considerations that the Tribunal must
take into account, and they are:
(1) protection of the Australian community from criminal or other serious
(2) whether the conduct engaged in constituted family violence;
(3) the strength, nature and duration of ties to Australia:
(4) the best interests of minor children in Australia; and
(5) expectations of the Australian community.
9 of the Direction sets out three Other Considerations which must be taken into
account. These considerations are:
a) Legal consequence of the decision;
b) extent of impediments if removed;
c) impact on Australian business interests
note the importance of the Other Considerations being
considerations, as opposed to
“secondary”
considerations.
As noted by Colvin J in
Suleiman v Minister for
Immigration and Border
...Direction 65 [now Direction 110] makes clear that an
evaluation is required in each case as to the weight to be given to the 'other
considerations' (including non‑refoulement obligations). It requires both
primary and other considerations to be given 'appropriate
Direction 65 does provide that, generally, primary considerations should be
given greater weight. They are primary in the
sense that absent some factor that
takes the case out of that which pertains 'generally' they are to be given
greater weight. However,
Direction 65 does not require that the other
considerations be treated as secondary in all cases. Nor does it provide that
considerations are 'normally' given greater weight. Rather,
Direction 65 concerns the appropriate weight to be given to both 'primary'
and 'other considerations'. In effect, it requires an inquiry as to whether one
or more of the other considerations should be treated
as being a primary
consideration or the consideration to be afforded greatest weight in the
particular circumstances of the case
because it is outside the circumstances
that generally apply
Offending History
Applicant’s criminal record as produced by the Australian Criminal
Intelligence Commission is outlined at Annexure B.
Primary Consideration 1 – Protection of The Australian
considering this Primary Consideration 1, paragraph 8.1 of the Direction
requires decision-makers to keep in mind the safety of
the Australian community
is the highest priority of the Australian Government. To that end, the
Government is committed to protecting
the Australian community from harm as a
result of criminal activity or other serious conduct by non-citizens.
Decision-makers should
have particular regard to the principle that entering or
remaining in Australia is a privilege that this country confers on non-citizens
in the expectation that they are, and have been, law abiding, that they will
respect important institutions and that they will not
cause or threaten harm to
individuals or the Australian community.
determining the weight applicable to Primary Consideration 1, paragraph 8.1(2)
of the Direction requires decision-makers to give
consideration to:
a) The nature and seriousness of the non-citizen’s conduct to date; and
b) The risk to the Australian community should the non-citizen commit further
offences or engage in other serious conduct.
The Nature and Seriousness of the Applicant’s Conduct
assessing the nature and seriousness of a non-citizen’s criminal offending
or other conduct to date, paragraph 8.1.1(1)
of the Direction specifies that
decision-makers must have regard to a number of factors. I will now turn to
addressing these considerations.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction provides that without limiting
the range of conduct that may be considered very serious, violent
and/or sexual
crimes; crimes of a violent and/or sexual nature against women or children
(regardless of the sentence imposed); or
acts of family violence (regardless of
whether there is a conviction for an offence or a sentence imposed) are viewed
very seriously
by the Australian Government and the Australian community.
Applicant was involved in a prolonged process of premeditated deception and
fraud. This involved a considerable amount of money.
The proceeds of these
crimes were spent on drugs, gambling and living “
This offending is very serious. As the sentencing Magistrate
“.......it appears that between you, you and [TC]
obtained over a million dollars of benefit from Westpac and Bankwest, of that
figure, you personally were able to access $282,556 worth of credit that you had
falsely obtained.
I sentence you on the basis that you used the credit and the credit cards
that you had falsely obtained to spend $282,556 of the banks’
you never paid back to those
Applicant has offended against many victims, including the Australian government
and even her brother.
Applicant has offended when on bail and absconded as set out above.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction provides that without limiting
the range of conduct that may be considered serious, the types
of crimes or
conduct described below are considered by the Australian Government and the
Australian community to be serious:
(i) causing a person to enter into or being party to a forced marriage (other
than being a victim), regardless of whether there is
a conviction for an offence
or a sentence imposed;
(ii) crimes committed against vulnerable members of the community (such as the
elderly and the disabled), or government representatives
or officials due to the
position they hold, or in the performance of their duties;
(iii) any conduct that forms the basis for a finding that a non-citizen does not
pass an aspect of the character test that is dependent
decision-maker’s opinion (for example, section 501(6)(c));
(iv) where the non-citizen is in Australia, a crime committed while the
non-citizen was in immigration detention, during an escape
from immigration
detention, or after the non-citizen escaped from immigration detention, but
before the non-citizen was taken into
immigration detention again, or an offence
against section 197A of the Act, which prohibits escape from immigration
Applicant does not pass the character test.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker (with
the exception of the crimes or conduct mentioned in sub-paragraphs
(a)(iii) or (b)(i) of paragraph 8.1.1(1)) to have regard to the sentence(s)
imposed by the Courts for a crime or crimes
of a non-citizen/applicant. The
imposition of a custodial term is regarded as the last resort in any reasonably
and correctly applied
sentencing process. Custodial terms are viewed as a
reflection of the objective seriousness of an applicant’s offending.
Applicant has been sentenced to a significant term of imprisonment. But for her
pleas of guilty, it would have been much
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to have
regard to the impact of the offending on any victims offending
or other conduct
and their family, where information in this regard is available and the
non-citizen whose visa is being considered
for refusal or cancellation, or who
has sought revocation of the mandatory cancellation of their visa, has been
afforded procedural
is limited direct evidence of any impact on specific victims, except that her
brother Mr AT, was required to repay $2000 to
Centrelink. He has not been repaid
by the Applicant.
fact that the Applicant was prepared to behave in this way, demonstrates a very
serious breach of trust.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to have
regard to the frequency of a non-citizen’s offending
and whether there is
any trend of increasing seriousness.
Applicant’s offending was premeditated and repeated. It did not even cease
when she was charged and placed on bail.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to have
regard to the cumulative effect of an Applicant’s
repeated offending.
cumulative effect of the Applicant’s offending was personally gaining
access to $ 282,556 in credit, by fraud.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to have
regard to whether a non-citizen has provided false or misleading
information to
the Department, including by not disclosing prior criminal offending.
is no evidence of this.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to have
regard to whether the non-citizen has re-offended since being
formally warned
migration status ( noting that the
absence of a warning should not be considered
to be in the non-citizen’s favour).
is no evidence of this.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to have
regard, where the offence or conduct was committed in another
country, to
whether that offence or conduct is classified as an offence in Australia.
is no evidence of this.
do not consider factors (g) to (i) of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction apply
to the Applicant’s offending or circumstances.
The rest of the relevant
sub-paragraphs of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction, in their totality, weigh
heavily against revocation
of the cancellation of the Applicant’s
The Risk to the Australian Community Should the Applicant
Commit Further Offences or Engage in Other Serious Conduct
8.1.2(1) provides that in considering the need to protect Australian community
(including individuals, groups or institutions)
from harm, decision-makers
should have regard to the Government’s view that the Australian
community’s tolerance for
any risk of future harm becomes lower as the
seriousness of the potential harm increases. Some conduct and the harm that
caused, if it were to be repeated, is so serious that any risk that it
may be repeated may be unacceptable.
8.1.2(2) provides that in assessing the risk that may be posted by the
non-citizen to the Australian community, decision-makers
must have regard to,
cumulatively:
a) the nature of the harm to individuals or the Australian community should the
non-citizen engage in further criminal or other serious
b) the likelihood of the non-citizen engaging in further criminal or other
serious conduct, taking into account:
(i) information and evidence on the risk of the non-citizen re-offending; and
(ii) evidence of rehabilitation achieved by the time of the decision, giving
weight to time spent in the community since their most
recent offence;
consideration is being given to whether to refuse to grant a visa to the
non-citizen - whether the risk of harm may be affected
by the duration and
purpose of the non-citizen’s intended stay, the type of visa being applied
for, and whether there are strong
or compassionate reasons for granting a short
of harm should the Applicant engage in further criminal or other serious
the nature of the harm to individuals or the Australian community that may occur
if the Applicant were to engage in further
criminal or other serious conduct, is
informed by the nature of her offending to date, including any escalation in her
This assessment also notes that the Direction provides that the
Australian community’s tolerance for harm becomes lower as
the seriousness
of the potential harm increases. Some conduct and the harm that would be caused,
is so serious that any risk that
it may be repeated may be unacceptable
(Paragraph 8.1.2(1)).
the Applicant were to reoffend, the consequences to members of the Australian
community and/or Australian businesses could be very
Australian community would have very little tolerance of any repetition of the
Applicant’s dishonesty offending, whatever
specific form it may take. She
and her co-offenders have been versatile in the methods that they have employed,
and unscrupulous
in their selection of targets.
Applicant has a history of involvement two quite different schemes, both
calculated to extract money from victims, by fraud.
Applicant says in relation to her offending:
committed was with my ex partner whom led me to do fraud. I’ve had a lot
of time incarcerated to reflect and I deeply
regret doing my crime. I put myself
in a new family orientated environment and have put the life of offending into
the past. I regret
everything so much. I am certain that I have changed. I can
assure I will give both my children with a normal stable life without
anything illegal again. My offending was with my ex partner. I have ended
relationship with him and no longer surround
myself with anything/anyone who is
of bad influence in my
Likelihood of engaging in further criminal or other serious
Applicant says of her risk of offending:
I trust in myself
and I really do believe that I will never offend again. I have 2 young children
who only has me to look after and
raise in a normal life and an elderly mother
who is very sick. They are my only focus and I intend to spend my future to look
my children and my
Corrections records dated 8 October 2024, place the Applicant within
the MAXIMUM category of risk of
recidivism”
10 September 2025, the Applicant was again assessed by corrections as being
within the maximum category of risk of
recidivism.
Applicant also reported the following to Correctional
Substance abuse issues
At interview, Ms Tran said that she experimented with alcohol use as a
teenager but denied regular or ongoing use. She said that she
"doesn't drink"
and could not recall the last time she consumed alcohol. In discussing drug use,
Ms Tran said that she experimented
with marijuana use as a teenager but denied
any further use. She also reported commencing the use of methamphetamines at the
of 14 but denied any further use until her current imprisonment. Ms Tran
agreed to having used methamphetamines in custody and claimed
she was peer
pressured into using by other prisoners. She told the writer that she was
experiencing stress regarding her daughter
and Visa issues so decided to use
"one time".
According to JIS, Ms Tran has been subject to five urinalyses during her
term of imprisonment, with the last two dated 08/06/2024
and 12/08/2024 being
positive for methamphetamines. At interview, Ms Tran agreed to the use of
methamphetamine in custody and said
she was experiencing stress and peer
pressure to use with the other prisoners.
Mental health/physical health issues
At interview, Ms Tran said that he is currently living with scoliosis and
is medicated but could not recall the name of the medication
she is prescribed.
She said that in community she accesses the Arndale Medical Centre but does not
have a regular General Practitioner.
With regards to mental health, Ms Tran advised that she has been diagnosed
with schizophrenia and said she believed this diagnosis
was from institutional
psychologists. She reported currently being prescribed Paroxetine but that she
still hears voices and experiences
hallucinations. Collateral records indicate
that on 13/02/2024 Ms Tran was transferred to hospital and detained under S56
Control after experiencing auditory and visual hallucinations. A JIS
case note dated the same day states 'possible psychosis, thoughts
cell mate'. At the current interview when discussing hallucinations, Ms Tran
advised that she still hears voices bul
that her medication "helps me control.
.. it helps but still here". She denied a history of, or any current thoughts of
or suicide.
According to JIS, Ms Tran has been monitored by the High Risk Assessment
Team (HRAT) during February 2024 after her admission into
Education/Training/Finances
Ms Tran advised that she completed Year 12 at Woodville High School before
leaving to commence a TAFE course. She said that she completed
a Certificate III
in Nail Technology and attempted a Certificate IV in Government but "didn't
finish it". According to JIS, Ms Tran
was assessed for education on 14/10/2020
and was determined to have the skills to engage in a criminogenic program. Ms
that she has no concerns with reading and writing and said that she
can speak both English and Vietnamese, where her mother does
not have English
speaking skills.
Ms Tran denied a history of, or any current issues with gambling and
stated that he never frequented hotel gaming rooms. She reported
not having her
driver's licence and will be reliant on public transport to attend Parole and
other appointments. Ms Tran said that
she is unsure whether she will be able to
apply for Centrelink upon release and that she does not have any outstanding
Applicant told Dr Lim that she had used methamphetamine and had maintained a
1 gram a day habit since she was 14 years
Applicant also told Dr Lim that she had developed a significant gambling problem
with poker machines at the age of about 20. There
was a connection between her
abuse of methamphetamines and her gambling. Her gambling addiction was consuming
any money that she
had until she was arrested in August
Applicant has reported a history of drug induced psychosis and a diagnosis of
schizophrenia. This has only been treated since
her admission to the Adelaide
Women’s Prison in August 2023. In February 2024 she was admitted to the
psychiatric ward of the
Lyall McEwen Hospital. She was then under the care of
Forensic Mental Health
is not clear whether she has taken all of the steps recommended by Dr Lim to
address this risk factor.
Applicant was still using drugs as recently as late last year, when in prison.
She conceded that she had also used once in Villawood.
Applicant conceded that she had a gambling problem, but she was prioritising
other things, before she will be able to get around
to getting treatment for
that problem.
refer to the report of Dr Lim set out above. I note her recommendations for the
Applicant to maintain a low risk of recidivism.
Not all of these recommendations
have yet been taken up.
Applicant told the Tribunal that she now saw things differently, had
was happy and that
her children were her main focus.
do note that since leaving immigration detention on 28 August 2025, she has
taken some positive steps to engage with appropriate
services. She as recently
obtained a mental health treatment
She has engaged with
Odyssey House.
Applicant told the Tribunal that she planned to prioritise her mental health and
to do a beauty course. She said that she was
financially stable because of her
husband’s income and Centrelink payments.
Applicant’s mother and brother did not act as protective influences in the
past. Indeed, her brother was reportedly banned
from visiting the Applicant in
prison as a result of apparently being observed passing an item to her during a
As mentioned above, he
told the Tribunal that he did not recall this.
Applicant does not presently intend to live with her mother, Child A and her
brother. She has no immediate plans to do so.
will continue to live in Sydney with Mr TT. This relationship of co-habitation
is very new. Things have moved very quickly since
the Applicant’s release
from immigration detention on 28 August 2025. They were married on 22 October.
This relationship has
not been tested beyond a couple of months.
is far too early for the Tribunal to have any confidence that this relationship
will in fact be a protective measure.
Applicant has been non-compliant with bail conditions in the past.
Applicant presently has little if any skills, that might enable her to obtain
gainful employment. She has basically never worked.
I am satisfied that given all of the above, especially the Applicants lengthy
history of drug abuse, mental health issues, gambling
addiction and consorting
with criminals and criminal offending, she presents at least a moderate risk of
reoffending.
refer to the earlier discussion about the BVR.
am mindful that the direct consequence of non-revocation would
Applicant’s return to detention and removal to Vietnam. The Applicant is
currently the holder of the BVR. This permits
her to remain in the community,
indefinitely, subject to various
conditions.
is on parole until 14 May
was submitted by the Applicant’s counsel that the BVR offered no
additional level of protection to the community, above that
which would be
offered by the Visa. Having reviewed the conditions of the BVR, I am
satisfied that this is so. The BVR has for example, reporting
requirements
. The conditions
of the BVR may also be varied over time. A breach of BVR conditions may result
in a prosecution.
protective measure.
am satisfied that the BVR serves as an additional protective measure for the
Australian community, over and above any assurances
given by the Applicant, as
to her future conduct.
Protection of the Australian community is strongly engaged in this case.
do accept that the Applicant’s right to remain here would be more secure
and less restrictive from her perspective, if the
Visa were to be
Conclusion: Primary Consideration 1
consideration number one weighs heavily against revocation of the
Applicant’s visa cancellation.
Primary Consideration 2: Family Violence
is no evidence of the Applicant being a perpetrator of family
Conclusion: Primary Consideration 2
consideration is neutral.
Primary Consideration 3: Ties to Australia
8.3 of the Direction provides:
Decision-makers must consider any impact of the decision on the
non-citizen’s immediate family members in Australia, where
those family
members are Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents, or people who
have a right to remain in Australia indefinitely.
Where consideration is being given to whether to cancel a non-citizen’s
visa or whether to revoke the mandatory cancellation
of their visa, the
decision-maker must also consider the strength, nature and duration of any other
ties that the non-citizen has
to the Australian community. In doing so,
decision-makers must have regard to:
a) how long the non-citizen
has resided in Australia, including whether the non-citizen arrived as a young
child, noting that:
weight should be given where the non-citizen began offending soon after arriving
in Australia; and
weight should be given to time the non-citizen has spent contributing positively
to the Australian community
b) the strength, duration and nature of
any family or social links with Australian citizens, Australian permanent
residents and/or
people who have an indefinite right to remain in Australia.
Applicant says that:
My mother had 2 strokes within the
last 3 years and also extreme high blood pressure. She is asking for me to come
back home to care
for both my young children and also to care for my mother too.
It will bring much depression and stress upon my family. Her health
bad. At days she cannot move with spinal conditions too. She has not been eating
and I fear she can’t cope if I get
I grew up in Australia since I was 6 months old baby. I have 2 young
children under my care ages 18 months old daughter and 9 years
old son. Both
children has no father. I also have an elderly mother whom has had 2 strokes
recently that I must take care of. I don’t
have a citizenship in any other
refer to the earlier discussion regarding the BVR.
Applicant has virtually no legitimate employment
She has been the
beneficiary of Centrelink payments and the proceeds of crime.
Applicant has made no appreciable positive contribution to the Australian
community. Indeed, she has defrauded innocent victims
and the Australian
Government, of considerable amounts of money. She has been a burden on our
criminal justice system.
Applicant has 2 biological children, Child A and Child B, who are Australian
citizens and who may be affected by an affirmation
the Respondent’s
children are discussed in more detail in the context of Primary Consideration 4.
I refer to that discussion.
summary however, the Applicant has spent very little time as the primary carer,
for either child. I do accept that there are nevertheless
ties between them. I
also accept that the Applicant is probably the only natural point of contact
between the two children.
Applicant’s mother lives in Adelaide. The Applicant lives in Sydney with
her husband. I accept that the Applicant is close
to her mother, but she has
been of little, if any practical/ financial support to her over the many years
since she left home as
a teenager.
Applicant’s brother lives with her mother. He has been a victim of her
offending. I accept that they are nonetheless siblings
and accordingly
is the Applicant’s husband. He is an Australian
They have been
living together since she was released from Immigration Detention on 28 August
2025. This is a link to the Australian
community, but a very recent one. It is
too early to say where this may lead. The mere formality of marriage, in the
current circumstances,
carries little weight.
TT has provided a statement dated 10 October
Applicant has essentially spent her entire life in Australia. This weighs
significantly in her favour.
of her life since she was 14 has however, been spent in the company of criminals
and drug addicts. She says that she is no longer
in contact with them.
accept that the Applicant has close ties, particularly to her brother, her
mother, Child A and Child B. Mr TT may well now also
be in this category.
is important to note however, as previously observed, that
does not determine whether the Applicant is removed from Australia. A
non-revocation decision will
result in her removal. She will be able
to remain here, subject to the conditions attached to the BVR.
previously observed, I
accept that the Applicant’s right to
remain here would be more secure and less restrictive from her perspective, if
were to be restored.
Conclusion: Primary Consideration 3
consideration weighs moderately in favour of revocation of the cancellation of
the Applicant’s visa
Primary Consideration 4: The best interests of minor children
in Australia
8.4(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to make a determination about
whether cancellation or refusal under section
501, or non-revocation under
section 501CA is in the best interests of a child affected by the decision.
Paragraphs 8.4(2) and 8.4(3)
respectively contain further considerations. The
former provides that for their interests to be considered, the relevant child
children) must be under 18 years of age at the time when a decision about
whether or not to refuse or cancel the visa or not to revoke
the mandatory
cancellation decision is being made. The latter provides that if there are two
or more relevant children, the best
interests of each child should be given
individual consideration to the extent that their interests may differ.
8.4(4) of the Direction sets out a number of factors to take into consideration
with respect to the best interests of minor
children in Australia. Those
include, relevantly:
a) the nature and duration of the relationship between the child and the
non-citizen. Less weight should generally be given where
the relationship is
non-parental, and/or there is no existing relationship and/or there have been
long periods of absence, or limited
meaningful contact (including whether an
existing Court order restricts contact);
b) the extent to which the non-citizen is likely to play a positive parental
role in the future, taking into account the length of
time until the child turns
18, and including any Court orders relating to parental access and care
arrangements;
c) the impact of the non-citizen’s prior conduct, and any likely future
conduct, and whether that conduct has, or will have
a negative impact on the
d) the likely effect that any separation from the non-citizen would have on the
child, taking into account the child’s or non-citizen’s
maintain contact in other ways;
e) whether there are other persons who already fulfil a parental role in
relation to the child;
f) any known views of the child (with those views being given due weight in
accordance with the age and maturity of the child);
g) evidence that the child has been, or is at risk of being, subject to, or
exposed to, family violence perpetrated by the non-citizen,
or has otherwise
been abused or neglected by the non-citizen in any way, whether physically,
sexually or mentally;
h) evidence that the child has suffered or experienced any physical or emotional
trauma arising from the non-citizen’s conduct.
relevant minor children in Australia are Child A and Child B.
Applicant’s counsel was directly asked to confirm that these were the only
relevant children. He did so.
relation to these children the Applicant says:
your relationship with each of your minor child/ren above, including how often
you contact/see the child/ren and the role
you play in their life
I am their sole parent and carer. I have 100% custody of both my children,
[Child A] and [Child B]. I lived with them until I was
incarcerated. Upon my
arrest, my son [Child A] currently lives with my mother in Adelaide and my
daughter [Child B] is currently
living with my ex partner’s mother in
Sydney. I have great impact on my children’s lives. I currently have
weekly ipad
visit at least 3-4 times phone calls to them now and I also write
and draw pictures every fortnight to my children. If I am granted
Australia, I will get my daughter back from Sydney to live with my mother and my
son. I will continue to care for them
both day to day. I will be with them
everyday and raise them. Both of their fathers are not in their lives with no
father) we have an intervention order against and my
daughter’s father is incarcerated for the next 8 years with no contact
from both of my children’s fathers. I am everything to both my children
and they are also my everything.
Describe any current impact on your minor children above, and/or any
likely impact on them in the event of a negative s501 decision
outcome (i.e. a
non-revocation or visa cancellation/refusal decision).
Both my children are still very young. One is 18 months old and another is
9 years old. They both don’t have their fathers in
their lives. All they
have is me as their mother. There is an indefinite intervention order for
domestic violence with non-contact
between my son’s father. Me and my son
([Child A]) are protected persons on the intervention order. And for ([Child B])
daughter, her father is not in the picture too. He has been sentenced in
prison for the next 8 years to be incarcerated. His name
is [MT] at [redacted]
Prison. Both of my two children has no father in their lives. I am sole carer
and parent.
A is at school, but he has experienced learning and behavioural
difficulties.
Child A has
been proscribed
has had limited ongoing contact with the Applicant. His maternal grandmother and
his uncle are and/or have been, his primary
caregivers.
relationship with his biological father. He has had limited contact with his
half-sister.
Applicant has an aspiration to be a good mother to Child A, but she concedes
that she has a lot of work to do on her own life,
before this could happen. She
speaks with him every 2-3 days.
Applicant accepts that it would be inappropriate to remove Child A from all that
he has known for his whole life and to move him
away from Adelaide, his
grandmother and his uncle. She says that she may eventually move to Adelaide to
live to be with Child A,
visa conditions permitting. This would, however, create
an issue for her husband, who has family and business responsibilities in
the present time this is a dream or an aspiration, it is not really a plan.
accept that
the Applicant were to turn her life around and to
contribute constructively to the community, it would be in Child A’s
for her to remain in Australia. That possibility is
however, presently under threat, whatever the Tribunal may determine.
ability to lead a constructive life is now being tested, in the community, with
the granting of the BVR.
Applicant has electronic contact with Child A.
Applicant has not been consistently present in Child A’s life and there is
little reason to believe that she will be his
primary carer any time soon,
notwithstanding her wishes.
however, the Applicant were to resume her past lifestyle as a meth addict and a
criminal, it may well be in Child A’s interests,
to have very little to do
B is 2 ½ years old. Her father is the Applicant’s former partner Mr
MT. Child B is present living with Mr MT’s
mother, Ms.LT.
MT is in prison and will continue to be for the next 8 years. Child B has no
relationship with him.
B has had very little contact with the Applicant since she was 6 months old and
has effectively been parented by Ms LT for most
of her life.
Applicant has resumed contact with Child B since 28 August 2025. She has been
seeing her for an hour every weekend.
Applicant acknowledges that she is not yet ready to take on a parenting role for
Child B. She says that the child’s grandmother
would not refuse to let her
see Child B. Mr TT is happy for the Applicant to engage with Child B.
accept that
the Applicant were to turn her life around and to
contribute constructively to the community, it would be in Child B’s
for her to remain in Australia. That possibility is
however, presently under threat, whatever the Tribunal may determine. They both
presently live in Sydney.
ability to lead a constructive life is now being tested, in the community, with
the granting of the BVR. This may or may not lead
to the Applicant becoming
Child B’s primary care giver, in due course.
however, the Applicant were to resume her past lifestyle as a meth addict and a
criminal, it may well be in Child B’s interests,
to have very little to do
is again important to note however, as previously observed, that
decision does not determine whether the Applicant is removed from Australia. A
non-revocation decision will
result directly in her removal. She will
be able to remain here, for the foreseeable future, subject to the conditions
attached to
previously observed, I
accept that the Applicant’s right to
remain here would be more secure and less restrictive from her perspective, if
were to be restored.
Conclusion: Primary Consideration 4
regard to all of the above, primary consideration 4 weighs moderately in favour
of revocation of the Applicant’s visa
cancellation
Primary Consideration 5 – The Expectations of The
Australian Community
The relevant paragraphs in the Direction
making the assessment for weight to be allocated to Primary Consideration 5,
paragraph 8.5(1) of the Direction provides that the
Australian community expects
non-citizens to obey Australian laws while in Australia. I should consider
whether the Applicant has
breached, or whether there is an unacceptable risk
that he would breach, this expectation by engaging in serious conduct.
8.5(2) of the Direction directs that a visa cancellation or refusal, or
non-revocation of the mandatory cancellation of
a visa, may be appropriate
simply because the nature of the character concerns or offences are such that
the Australian community
would expect that the person should not be granted or
continue to hold a visa. In particular, the Australian community expects that
the Australian Government can and should refuse entry to non-citizens, or cancel
their visas, if they raise serious character concerns
through conduct, in
Australia or elsewhere, of the following kind:
(a) acts of family violence; or
(b) causing a person to enter into, or being party to (other than being a victim
of), a forced marriage;
(c) commission of serious crimes against women, children or other vulnerable
members of the community such as the elderly or disabled;
in this context,
‘serious crimes’ include crimes of a violent or sexual nature, as
well as other serious crimes against
the elderly or other vulnerable persons in
the form of fraud, extortion, financial abuse/material exploitation or
(d) commission of crimes against government representatives or officials due to
the position they hold, or in the performance of
their duties; or
(e) involvement or reasonably suspected involvement in human trafficking or
people smuggling, or in crimes that are of serious international
including, but not limited to, war crimes, crimes against humanity and slavery;
(f) worker exploitation.
8.5(3) of the Direction provides that the above expectations of the Australian
community apply regardless of whether the
non-citizen poses a measurable risk of
causing physical harm to the Australian community.
8.5(4) of the Direction provides guidance on how the expectations of the
Australian community are to be determined. This
paragraph states:
This consideration is about the expectations of the Australian community as a
whole, and in this respect, decision-makers should
proceed on the basis of the
Government’s views as articulated above, without independently assessing
the community’s
expectations in the particular case.
8.5(4) is consistent with the decision of the Full Court of the Federal Court in
FYBR v Minister for Home Affairs
[2019] FCAFC
which affirmed the approach established in previous authorities that it is
not for the Tribunal to determine for itself the expectations
of the Australian
community by reference to an Applicant’s circumstances or evidence about
those expectations. The Tribunal
is to be guided by the Government’s views
as to the expectations of the Australian community, which are to be found in the
8.5 contains a statement of the Government’s views as to the expectations
of the Australian community, which operates
to ascribe to the whole of the
Australian community an expectation aligning with that of the executive
government which the decision
maker must have regard to.
Analysis – Allocation of Weight to Primary
Consideration 5
Accordingly,
in assessing the weight attributable to Primary Consideration 5, it is necessary
to have regard to the following matters:
Applicant’s criminal record as set out in Annexure B
other matters set out above
issue in this case is whether the Applicant remains in the community for the
foreseeable future, subject to the conditions imposed
by the BVR, or the Visa is
satisfied that the BVR with its attached conditions, offers an additional level
of safety to the community, especially after
the Applicant’s parole ends
in May 2026.
Conclusion: Primary Consideration 5
consideration 5 weighs heavily against revocation of the cancellation of the
Applicant’s visa.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
is necessary to look at the Other Considerations listed at paragraph 9 of the
(a) legal consequence of the decision:
Applicant is the holder of the BVR.
decision to affirm the Visa revocation will
disturb that fact.
previously observed, I
accept that the Applicant’s right to
remain here would be more secure and less restrictive from her perspective, if
were to be restored.
is possible that at some time in the future, the BVR may cease. Applicant may,
for example, be subject to removal to a third country.
It is not for the Tribunal
however, to speculate on such an eventuality.
accept that a non-revocation decision would limit the Applicant’s ability
to apply for any other visa while in Australia.
This, however, is the intended
purpose of the legislative scheme.
this Other Consideration (a) weighs at best slightly in favour of revocation.
(b) Extent of Impediments if Removed
9.2 of the Direction directs a decision-maker to take into account the extent of
any impediments that the non-citizen may
face if removed from Australia to their
(in the context
of what is generally available to other citizens of that
country), taking into account:
(a) the non-citizen’s age and health;
(b) whether there are any substantial language or cultural barriers; and
(c) any social, medical and/or economic support available to that non-citizen in
that country.
Applicant says:
Do you have any concerns or fears about
what would happen to you if you were to return to your country of
citizenship?
I don’t have any citizenship with any country. I don’t speak
any other language or have any ties anywhere. I fear for
my safety. I
don’t have anyone I know in any other country. I don’t speak any
other language. I don’t have anywhere
to live or any
have also noted the claimed impediments, as set out in the Applicant’s
SOFIC at paras 51-56.
Applicant arguably does not presently hold the citizenship of any
BVR means that she is
presently subject to removal to Vietnam, or
indeed anywhere else, irrespective of the decision in this matter.
am satisfied that in the context of the present matter before the Tribunal, this
Other Consideration is neutral.
(c) Impact on Australian business interests
was no evidence on this topic, so this consideration is neutral.
is necessary to weigh up all the primary and other considerations. In doing so I
have had regard to all the evidence before the
Tribunal. I refer also to the
detailed history and discussion set out above.
Primary consideration
1 weighs heavily against revocation.
Primary consideration 2 is neutral.
Primary consideration 3 weighs moderately in favour of revocation.
Primary consideration 4 weighs moderately in favour of revocation.
Primary consideration 5 weighs heavily against revocation
Other consideration (a) weighs slightly in favour of revocation.
Other consideration (b) is neutral.
Other consideration (c) is neutral.
note that paragraph 7(2) of the Direction requires that protection of the
Australian community is generally to be given greater
weight than other Primary
Considerations, and that Primary Considerations should generally be given
greater weight than the Other
Considerations.
Applicant has been a burden on our community since she was a teenager. She has
been a long-term meth addict. She has habitually
consorted with criminals. She
has parented 2 children, both of whom she has failed to care for, passing on her
responsibilities to
others. She has engaged in serious, premeditated crimes of
deception for long periods, to fund her drug and gambling habits. She
off the proceeds of crime. This weighs heavily against revocation of the Visa
cancellation.
the other hand, the Applicant is almost entirely a product of this country. She
has been here since she was an infant. Her closest
relatives are here, including
2 biological children. The fact of the nature and extent of the
Applicant’s ties to Australia,
carries weight in the Applicant’s
favour. Her connection to her children carries much less weight than would have
case, if she had been their primary carer.
accept that the Applicant has taken positive steps towards rehabilitation, since
her release from detention on 28 August 2025.
the Applicant had been in the community for some years and could demonstrate a
consistent pattern of rehabilitation, her assurances
may carry more weight. In
this case however, we are reliant on a very brief trial period, essentially
since 28 August this year.
This is simply not long enough to establish a
reliable pattern of conduct. The Tribunal cannot be satisfied at this very early
that the Applicant has reformed.
am mindful that the decision before the Tribunal is
, the Applicant being held in immigration detention, followed by
involuntary deportation,
an unconditional return to our community.
that were the choice, the Tribunal’s task would be different.
Different considerations would be engaged, for example, the nature
and extent of
her impediments if removed to Vietnam.
decision before the Tribunal is between
the Applicant being in the
community, subject to the conditions of the BVR for the foreseeable future,
an unconditional return to our community with the
regard to all of the matters set out at length above and giving due weight to
the protection of our community, I am satisfied
that the proper application of
the Direction requires an affirmation of the subject decision.
decision under review is affirmed.
I certify that the preceding two hundred and sixty two (262) paragraphs
are a true copy of the reasons for the decision herein of
Senior Member Hon J
.............................[sgnd]....................................
Dated: 12 November 2025
Date of hearing:
3 and 4 November 2025
for the Applicant:
Mr Oliver Morris (Mitchell Chambers)
Ms Catherine Follett (MSM
Advocate for the Respondent:
Ms Emma Carnell (HWL Ebsworth Lawyers)
ANNEXURE A – LIST OF EXHIBITS
Hearing Book
Applicant’s Bundle of Documents (2.1-2.8)
Respondent’s Post Hearing Submission
ANNEXURE B – APPLICANT’S OFFENDING HISTORY
Court Result
Magistrates Court of South Australia
Unlawful possession
Make false pretence as to own identity or qualifications
Deceive another to benefit self or third person - basic (3)
Use another`s identification information to commit offence (4)
Dishonest dealings with documents - basic offence (8)
Produce prohibited material (identity theft)
Possess equipment to make prohibited material-identity theft
Basic offence: dishonestly take
property without consent
CONVICTED 1 YEAR 9 MONTHS 6 DAYS IMPRISONMENT
Adelaide Magistrates Court
Fail to comply with bail agreement
CONVICTED DISMISSED WITHOUT PENALTY
Adelaide Magistrates Court
OBTAIN A FINANCIAL ADVANTAGE BY DECEPTION
CONVICTED AND SENTENCED TO 2 MONTHS, 24 DAYS
IMPRISONMENT
Adelaide Magistrates Court
ATTEMPT TO OBTAIN A FINANCIAL ADVANTAGE BY DECEPTION
CONVICTED AND SENTENCED TO 2 MONTHS, 24 DAYS
IMPRISONMENT
Port Adelaide Magistrates Court
Estreatment of bail
FOUND PROVED ESTREATMENT $1000
HB 325-331.
HB 139 at [3.1].
See HB 206-224, Article 16.
HB 473-484.
Exhibit 3: Respondent’s
Post Hearing Submission.
Whether by the Tribunal or
For example: Other
Consideration B, “Impediments if Removed”.
Exhibit 2.4: Marriage
Certificate of the Applicant and Mr TT.
Exhibit 2.1: Statutory
Declaration of the Applicant.
HB 172-184.
HB 149 at [4.56]; 161.
HB 149 at [4.56].
HB 96, 149 at [4.55].
Respondent’s Post Hearing Submission.
HB 161, 164.
HB 138 at [2.8].
This is a totally different
history to that given by the Applicant to SA Corrections. See HB 495.
According to Mr AT, it was
even less time than that.
HB 150 at [4.62],
HB 390, 493.
HB 390,393, 493.
HB 154 at [4.102].
HB 139, 178.
Exhibit 2.7: Psychology
Report from Dr Jules Begg dated 16 August 2023.
HB 422, 501, 507, 513.
HB 410-415.
HB 384, 492, 501.
HB 172-184.
HB 382, 429, 492.
HB 145 at [4.29].
HB 325-330.
HB 447, 489.
HB 110-136.
HB 27, 473-484, 693-696.
Presumably Mr TT.
Exhibit 2.4: Marriage
Certificate of the Applicant and Mr TT.
Exhibit 2.3: Mental Health
Care Plan for the Applicant.
E.g. see HB 684-691.
HB 684-691.
On 21 June 2024, the former
applicable direction,
Direction No. 99 – Visa refusal and cancellation
under s501 and revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a visa under
, was revoked and was replaced by Direction 110.
Mainly Mr TT.
Exhibit 2.3: Mental
Health Care Plan for the Applicant.
HB 382, 486.
HB 473-484.
E.g. see HB 479-484.
HB 104, 108 at [14].
HB 703-706.
HB 193-197.
HB 110-118.
Uelese v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCA 348
Afu v Minister for
[2018] FCA 1311
YNQY v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2017] FCA 1466
FYBR v Minister for Home Affairs
[2019] FCA 500.
See s 76AAA of the
HB 109 (item 13).
See discussion above.
At least after May 2026
when her parole period ends.
RTF format (13.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format