In the matter of an application by Mr Gambetto for leave to issue or file [2025] HCASJ 28 (2 September 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
BEECH-JONES J
IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION BY
MR GAMBETTO FOR LEAVE TO ISSUE
[2025] HCASJ 28
Date of Judgment: 2 September
S70 of 2025
application for leave to issue or file the document entitled "Application for a
constitutional or other writ" dated 4 June 2025
is dismissed without an oral
Representation
The applicant is unrepresented
BEECH-JONES J.
This is an ex parte application for leave to issue or file an application
for a constitutional or other writ. For the
reasons that follow, leave is
or about 4 June 2025 the applicant, known by the pseudonym
Mr Gambetto, sought to file an application for a constitutional or
writ ("the Application"). On 5 June 2025, Edelman J directed the
Registrar of this Court to refuse to issue or file that document
without the
leave of a Justice first had and obtained by the party seeking to issue or file
On 6 June 2025,
Mr Gambetto sought that leave. He relies on an affidavit that he swore on
4 June 2025.
Application named the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia ("the
FCFCOA") as the defendant. By the Application Mr Gambetto
seeks writs of
certiorari to quash the "orders and reasons" of a Judge of the
FCFCOA (Division 2) (Judge Shoebridge) described below,
of mandamus remitting some of Mr Gambetto's applications to be heard by a
Judge of the FCFCOA (without specifying a Division
thereof) "who has not heard
from [Mr Gambetto] previously". He also seeks that this Court consider
referring Judge Shoebridge for
consideration by the Commonwealth Parliament
Constitution
. This latter aspect of the
Application is self‑evidently untenable and will not be considered
Application arises from Mr Gambetto's attempts to file applications, in
which Mr Gambetto alleges breaches by his former wife
of final parenting orders
made by the FCFCOA (Division 1) and brings an application for the
purposes of locating and recovering his
13 October 2023 a Justice of the FCFCOA (Division 1)
(Altobelli J) made final parenting orders which, inter alia, granted sole
parental responsibility to Mr Gambetto's former wife with respect to the
child's education and health. His Honour made an order pursuant
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) ("the
prohibiting Mr Gambetto from instituting further proceedings under the
in a court having jurisdiction under the
without first obtaining leave under
("the vexatious proceedings order"). His Honour also ordered each
of Mr Gambetto and his former wife to pay half the costs of the
independent
children's lawyer who acted in the proceedings ("the costs order").
18 October 2024 Mr Gambetto
application seeking leave under
to commence proceedings
against his former wife in respect of alleged contraventions of the orders made
on 13 October 2023. On 18
November 2024 Mr Gambetto attempted to file
another application seeking leave under
, this time to
commence proceedings "for the purpose of locating and recovering" his child.
27 November 2024 the FCFCOA (Division 2) ordered that
Mr Gambetto file an affidavit within 14 days deposing to his
or non‑compliance with the costs order. On 28 November
2024 Mr Gambetto advised the FCFCOA (Division 2) that he
"respectfully
decline[d] [h]is Honour's offer to adduce further evidence" and
reiterated the alleged urgency of his application.
5 December 2024 Judge Shoebridge dismissed the application filed on
18 October 2024. His Honour noted that the application Mr
attempted to file on 18 November 2024 was not filed but instead referred
directly to his Honour. His Honour ordered that,
to the extent that leave might
be required to file the application, it was declined but in any event the
application was dismissed.
In fact, leave was not required to file the
application.
Section 102QE(2)
enabled Mr Gambetto to "apply to the court
for leave to institute proceedings that are subject to the" vexatious
proceedings order.
His application for leave to institute a proceeding was to be
made in accordance with r 10.24 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court
of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) ("the Rules"). If leave were
granted, Mr Gambetto could then "institute" the substantive proceeding in
accordance with the
Honour dismissed the applications because of Mr Gambetto's failure to
comply with the costs order. His Honour referred to
provides that a court vested with jurisdiction under the
"may proceed with
the hearing of proceedings in relation to a child even though the person who
instituted the proceedings has failed
to comply with an order of the court or of
another court having jurisdiction under this
." His Honour treated this power
as permitting the Court either to hear or to refuse to hear a proceeding in
circumstances where there
has been a failure to comply with an order of the
court or of another court having jurisdiction under the
. His Honour referred
to authority treating the exercise of that discretion as "depend[ing] upon the
balance which must be struck
between the applicant's right to procedural justice
and countervailing public policy considerations" bearing in mind that it is a
"serious step" to "[l]ock[] an applicant out of procedural access to a
Implicit in his
Honour's reasoning is that where
is relied on to refuse to proceed
with a hearing the Court may dismiss the proceedings.
or around 4 February 2025 Mr Gambetto filed another application
seeking leave under
to commence proceedings in relation to the
"[l]ocation and recovery of children" and in relation to alleged "contraventions
of child-related
orders". The application was listed for hearing before
Judge Shoebridge on 30 April 2025. In the meantime Mr Gambetto
filed written
submissions.
Judge Shoebridge
dismissed the application on 30 April 2025. In his reasons, his Honour
noted that there had not been a material
change in circumstances from those that
existed when the previous applications were dismissed on 5 December
Leave must be refused
discretion to refuse leave to issue or file a document will ordinarily be
exercised where the document appears "on its face to
be an abuse of the process
of the Court, to be frivolous or vexatious or to fall outside the jurisdiction
of the Court".
The concept
of abuse of process includes "an attempt to invoke the original or appellate
on a basis that is confused or
manifestly untenable".
exercise of the discretion to refuse leave "is appropriate only in the clearest
Mr Gambetto's
application raises six grounds said to justify the relief sought. The first is
that in his Honour's reasons for making
the order on 30 April 2025 Judge
Shoebridge failed to "address his assumption" in his judgement dated
5 December 2024 that Mr Gambetto
failed to comply with the costs order
and thereby displayed "bias". The sixth ground makes a similar contention in
relation to his
Honour's judgment and orders of 5 December 2024. However,
from at least 27 November 2024 Mr Gambetto had every opportunity to
whether he had complied with the costs order and his Honour was
more than entitled to conclude that he had not. In any event, these
grounds are
a manifestly untenable basis for a claim of apprehended much less actual
Mr Gambetto's
other four grounds are that, in dismissing his applications, his Honour: relied
on an irrelevant consideration, namely
Mr Gambetto's failure to comply with
the costs order, when neither the independent children's lawyer nor the "Legal
Aid Commission
NSW" was a party to the proceedings he sought to institute;
failed to apply the mandatory principles for conducting child‑related
proceedings formerly found in s 69ZN of the
supposedly wrongly
prioritised the question of costs over questions of parental access and violence
against a child; and otherwise
failed to have regard to the best interests of
it was open to Judge Shoebridge to address Mr Gambetto's applications
by reference to
, the question raised by the Application is not
whether Mr Gambetto has raised a claim that is not manifestly untenable
Shoebridge erred in dismissing his applications. Rather, the
question is whether Mr Gambetto has raised a claim that is not manifestly
untenable that his Honour committed a jurisdictional error in rejecting those
applications. In circumstances where there is no attempt
to address the
authority of his Honour to rely on
in the manner in which his Honour
did or the fact that his Honour did not consider Mr Gambetto's applications
by reference to
, these complaints at best rise no higher than a
complaint of an error within
potentially be raised if an appellate process is
They do not
however raise a tenable claim of jurisdictional error. This conclusion renders
it unnecessary to address the relevance
of the failure of Mr Gambetto to
invoke any avenue of appeal from Judge Shoebridge's orders that may be available
upon whether he
should be granted leave to file his Application.
to issue or file the document is refused and Mr Gambetto's ex parte
Application is dismissed without an oral
High Court Rules
(Cth), r 6.07.2.
Dautry v Wemple
[2018] FamCAFC 237
(2018) 59 Fam LR 184
High Court Rules
[2020] HCA 13
(2020) 94 ALJR 448
[2020] HCA 13
376 ALR 567
[2020] HCA 13
(2020) 94 ALJR 448
[2020] HCA 13
376 ALR 567
Section 69ZN, which appeared
in Div 12A of Pt VII of the
, was repealed by s 75 of the
Family Law Amendment Act 2024
(Cth) with effect from 10 June
2025. A similar provision now appears in
Family Law Act
Craig v South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
at 178-180;
Kirk v Industrial Relations Commission of
New South Wales
(2010) 239 CLR 531
at 571-573 [66]‑[70].
As to which see:
Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Federal Court and Federal Circuit and Family Court Regulations
(Cth), reg 4.02(1)(b).
RTF format (208 KB)
Signed PDF/A format