Jacob Lye v Commonwealth of Australia (Bureau of Meteorology) and others [2025] FWC 3402 (13 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3402
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Appeal of decision
Commonwealth of Australia (Bureau of Meteorology) and
(C2025/10939)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT COLMAN
MELBOURNE, 13 NOVEMBER 2025
Application for a stay under
– application refused
today, I refused an application by Jacob Lye for a stay under s 606 of the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Act). The stay was sought in connection with Mr
Lye’s appeal from a decision of Commissioner Redford (
) not to recuse himself from further dealing with his antibullying
application. Mr Lye sought a stay of the Commissioner’s refusal
himself, and of ‘all subsequent procedural directions and actions’,
including the further hearing of his application
before the Commissioner
tomorrow. I dismissed the stay application for the following reasons.
606 of the Act provides that, if the Commission hears an appeal from a decision,
it may order that the operation of the decision
be stayed until the appeal is
determined. A stay suspends the operation of the decision. Insofar as Mr
Lye’s stay application
was directed at the Commissioner’s refusal to
recuse himself, I considered that there was nothing to stay. It makes no sense
to suspend a decision
to do something, because it would not change
anything. In this case, the Commissioner would still remain seized of the
the stay hearing, Mr Lye said that his appeal and stay application
were also directed at the Commissioner’s decisions, or failure
decisions, concerning reasonable accommodations for his disabilities, but these
too were negative decisions that cannot logically
even if one takes the view that these negative decisions have operational effect
because they facilitate the further conduct of
the proceeding, and that they are
somehow capable of being stayed, I considered that Mr Lye has failed to present
an arguable case
of error on the part of the Commissioner. The recusal decision
appears to me to reflect an entirely orthodox application of the test
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63.
And in my view
there is no arguable basis to contend that the Commissioner erred by failing to
make reasonable accommodations. Mr
Lye submits that the Commissioner ought to
have made different decisions, but this does not speak to any arguable error.
as Mr Lye sought to stay all subsequent procedural directions and actions of the
Commissioner, including his decision to further
hear the matter tomorrow, it was
clear that this travelled beyond what s 606 permits, which is to stay the
operation of a decision
that is under appeal. These other decisions are not the
subject of Mr Lye’s appeal.
and in any event, Mr Lye’s appeal appears to me to lack any utility,
because he has now been dismissed, and he is therefore
not at any risk of being
bullied at work. The existence of such a risk is a precondition to the
Commission’s power to make
orders under s 789FF. Mr Lye suggested that the
employment relationship had survived his dismissal. I find this to be illogical
contrary to authority. Given the apparent absence of utility in the appeal,
it is difficult to see any basis on which permission
to appeal would be granted.
while it was not necessary to consider the balance of convenience, I did not
consider that it favoured a stay.
the stay hearing, Mr Lye submitted a note raising various matters and inviting
me to reconsider my disposition of the stay application.
None of the matters
raised warrants a reconsideration of my decision.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Hearing details:
Melbourne (by Microsoft
13 November
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth
Government Printer
RTF format (532 KB)
Signed PDF/A format