'AYM' and Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 165 (12 September 2025)
‘AYM’ and Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission (Freedom of
information)
[2025] AICmr 165
(12 September 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of Freedom of Information
Commissioner, Toni Pirani
Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission
Decision date
Freedom of Information — Whether documents are subject to legal
professional privilege — (CTH)
Freedom of Information Act 1982
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I affirm the
decision of the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission (the Commission) of 27
January 2022.
decision discusses the application of s 42 to a document containing advice from
the Commission’s in-house legal team. It
affirms the well-established
position that an independent legal-adviser client relationship can exist between
an agency’s in-house
lawyers and other staff of the agency if certain
criteria are satisfied.
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
28 December 2021, the applicant applied to the Commission for access to
information in relation to what happens if a decision is
not made within the
specified timeframes in the legislation on whether to approve a person as a
provider of aged care (see
Commission identified one document within the scope of the request and refused
access to it in full, claiming the s 42
applicant sought Information Commissioner review (IC review) on the basis that
they were not seeking access to any documents that
may be exempt under s 42,
rather they were seeking general information regarding what happens when the
delegate does not make a decision
within 90 days as required under the
legislation.
FOI Guidelines provide that the right of access under the FOI Act is to existing
documents, rather than to
information.
The FOI Act does not
require an agency or minister to create a new document in response to an FOI
request except in limited
circumstances,
which are not
applicable in this matter. Given the Commission has only identified one document
within scope of the applicant’s
request, then it is the document at issue
for consideration in this IC review.
this IC review the Commission submitted that it considered whether it was
possible to provide an edited copy of the document
at issue in accordance with s
22. However, given it found that the whole of the document was exempt under s
42, it did not consider
any useful purpose would be served by providing the
applicant with a skeleton of the document at issue.
submissions to this IC review, the applicant submitted that they wished to
proceed with the review and are seeking access to the
document at issue.
issue to be decided in this IC review is whether the document that the
Commission claims is exempt under s 42 is exempt under
that provision.
an IC review of an access refusal decision, the agency bears the onus of
establishing that its decision is justified, or that I
should give a decision
adverse to the applicant.
making my decision, I have had regard to the following:
Commission’s decision and reasons for decision of 27 January 2022
the Guidelines
issued by the Australian Information Commissioner under s 93A of the FOI
to which agencies must have
regard in performing a function or exercising a power under the FOI
parties’ submissions.
Legal professional privilege (s 42)
document will be exempt under s 42 if it is of such a nature that it would be
privileged from production in legal proceedings on
the ground of legal
professional privilege (s 42(1)) and privilege has not been waived (s 42(2)).
term ‘legal professional privilege’ is not defined in the FOI Act,
and as noted in the FOI Guidelines, common law
concepts of legal professional
privilege are to be applied in determining whether s 42 applies to a document,
rather than the statutory
test of client legal privilege under the
professional privilege protects the confidentiality of certain communications
made in connection with giving or obtaining legal
advice or in the provision of
legal services, such as representation in legal
proceedings.
The underlying policy
basis for legal professional privilege is to promote full and frank disclosure
between a lawyer and client
to the benefit of the effective administration of
common law, determining whether a communication is privileged requires a
consideration of:
whether there is
a legal adviser-client relationship
whether the
communication was for the dominant purpose of giving or receiving legal advice,
or for use in connection with actual or
anticipated litigation
whether the
advice given is independent, and
whether the
advice given is
confidential.
Parties’ submissions
summary, the Commission submitted that:
the document
contains legal advice obtained by the Commission from its internal legal
advisers and communications for the purposes
of giving or receiving the same,
which is protected by legal professional privilege
professional privilege protects confidential communications between lawyer and
client from compulsory production
adviser-client relationship exists between the Commission’s internal legal
section and the recipient of the advice,
which is reflective of the type of
relationship described by Judge Dawson in
Waterford v Commonwealth
the Commission
submits that its exemption of the material was the correct decision, in
circumstances where the document was prepared
by the Commission’s internal
legal adviser,
confidential and privileged communications between the Commission’s legal
section and another area of the Commission
for the dominant purpose of obtaining
and providing legal advice, and where the Commission’s internal legal
advisers were acting
in their capacity as independent and professional legal
professional privilege has not been waived in respect of any material contained
within the document
the document
does not contain any ‘operational information’ as defined by s 8A of
the FOI Act. In this regard the Commission
submits the document at issue
contains legal advice considering the operation of legislation in particular
circumstances and was
not prepared for wider or general use within the
Commission.
applicant did not provide substantive submissions in relation to the s 42
exemption claim. They did, in essence, submit that they
were seeking access to
the document at issue on public interest grounds on the basis that they
considered the Commission had made
decisions in contravention of the
legislation.
Consideration
Legal adviser-client relationship, independence and
confidentiality
the issue of whether legal professional privilege can apply to advice or
communications to or from lawyers working within an agency
has been examined in
various IC reviews, AAT
Federal Court decisions.
well established that an independent legal adviser-client relationship can exist
between an agency’s in-house lawyers
and other staff of the
Whether a true
legal-adviser client relationship exists will be a question of fact, to be
determined by reference to:
the nature of
the lawyer's involvement and the content and circumstances of the
communication,
the substance of
the communications, subjective intentions of those making them, and objective
conclusions that can be drawn from
on my review of an unedited copy of the document at issue, it is apparent that
the material in question was created in the context
of communications with the
relevant in-house lawyers in their capacity as professional legal advisers.
the courts have indicated that an in-house lawyer will lack the necessary
independence if their advice is at risk of being compromised
by his or her
personal loyalties, duties and
there is nothing
before me to suggest that these circumstances arose in the present case. In this
regard, I note there has been some
judicial consideration about whether a
requirement of ‘independence’ must be separately
It has been held
that ‘the better view is that there is no separate requirement to prove
that the in-house lawyer was acting
independently of any pressure from his or
her employer, or had the requisite measure of independence, so long as the
in-house lawyer
was acting in his or her professional capacity as his or her
employer’s lawyer and the communication otherwise meets the dominant
purpose test’.
light of these considerations, and the parties’ submissions, I am
satisfied that the document at issue was created in the
context of a legal
adviser-client relationship, in which the advice given was both independent and
confidential. I am further satisfied
that the in-house lawyers were qualified
and competent to provide legal advice, and that their employment consisted of
the provision
of legal advice to officers in operational or other areas of the
Commission. There is nothing before me to suggest that staff within
Commission’s legal branch lacked independence.
dominant purpose of the document and waiver of the privilege
be exempt under s 42 of the FOI Act, a document must constitute a
communication for the dominant purpose of giving or receiving
legal advice or
use in actual or anticipated litigation. The High Court has confirmed that the
common law requires a dominant purpose
test rather than a sole purpose test. The
communication may have been brought into existence for more than one purpose but
privileged if the main purpose of its creation was for giving or
receiving legal advice or for use in actual or anticipated
litigation.
Ltd v Cole [No 5]
noted that ‘in the ordinary case of a client consulting a lawyer about a
legal problem in uncontroversial circumstances,
proof of those facts alone will
provide a sufficient basis for a conclusion that legitimate legal advice is
being sought or given’.
Further, a broad approach is to be taken as to what is included in the scope of
the privilege.
have reviewed the material at issue, and considered its context, substance and
nature. It is clear that the communications arose
in the course of, and for the
purpose of, obtaining or receiving ‘professional advice as to what a party
should prudently or
sensibly do in the relevant legal
consider that the material can be characterised as internal communications that
are a routine part of an agency’s
administrative functions.
the above, I am satisfied the document at issue was brought into existence for
the dominant purpose of giving or receiving legal
advice. Also, there is no
evidence before me to indicate that the material in the document at issue has
been disclosed or widely
distributed. There is therefore nothing to suggest that
privilege has, or may have, been waived. I am satisfied that privilege has
been waived.
Finding (s 42)
the reasons set out above, I am satisfied the document at issue attracts legal
professional privilege and is exempt under s 42
Toni Pirani
Freedom of Information Commissioner
FOI request
I want to access the documents that will establish what happens if a delegate do
not make a decision within 90 days of receiving
an application under the
Commission's ACT's sub-section 63B(1) as required by section 63D as
sub-section 63D(1) requires that "
If a person makes an application under
subsection 63B(1), the Commissioner MUST decide whether to approve the person as
of aged care within:(a) if a request for further information in
relation to the application has been made under subsection 63C(1)—90
after receiving the further information; or(b) otherwise—within 90 days
after receiving the application.
2. There seems to be no provision in the Commission Act or Rules that allows a
delegate to go beyond 90 days. But there may have
been cases which may not have
been decided within 90 days, So, what do the Commission do under this
circumstance and which Act or
Rule or administrative laws authorizes such the
Commission to take actions in contravention of section 63D ?
Relevant provisions of the FOI Act, FOI Guidelines, and
11A(4) of the FOI Act states the agency or Minister is not required by
this Act to give the person access to the document
at a particular
time if, at that time, the document is an exempt document.
Legal professional privilege
Section 42 of the FOI
Act states:
(1) A document is an exempt document if it is of such a nature that it would
be privileged from production in legal proceedings on
the ground of legal
professional privilege.
(2) A document is not an exempt document because of
subsection (1) if the person entitled to claim legal professional privilege in
relation to the production of the document in legal proceedings waives that
(3) A document is not an exempt document under subsection (1) by reason only
(a) the document contains information that would (apart from this subsection)
cause the document to be exempt under subsection (1);
(b) the information is operational information of an agency.
Relevant parts of the FOI Guidelines and case law
discussed in the FOI Guidelines and in IC review
a document will be
exempt under s 42 if it is of such a nature that it would be
privileged from production in legal proceedings on
the ground of legal
professional privilege (s 42(1)) and privilege has not been waived
Legal professional privilege protects confidential communications between a
lawyer and a client from compulsory production. The FOI
Guidelines relevantly
explain that, at common law, determining whether a communication is privileged
requires consideration of the
there is a legal adviser-client relationship
the communication was for the purpose of giving or receiving legal advice, or
use in connection with actual or anticipated
the advice given is independent, and
the advice given is
confidential.
FOI Guidelines explain that a communication may have been brought into existence
for more than one purpose but will be privileged
if the main purpose of its
creation was for giving or receiving legal advice (legal advice privilege), or
for use in connection with
actual or anticipated litigation (litigation
privilege).
In relation to whether a legal adviser client relationship exists, the FOI
Guidelines relevantly explain:
A legal adviser-client relationship exists where a client retains the services
of a lawyer for the purpose of obtaining professional
advice. If the advice is
received from an independent external legal adviser, establishing the existence
of the relationship is usually
straightforward.
The FOI Guidelines further explain that the following factors are relevant to
establishing whether a legal adviser-client relationship
adviser must be acting in his/her capacity as a professional legal adviser
the giving of
the advice must be attended by the necessary degree of independence
the dominant
purpose test must be satisfied
the advice must
be confidential
the fact that
the advice arose out of a statutory duty does not preclude the privilege from
whether the
lawyer is subject to professional standards can be
communications were confidential communications between a professional legal
adviser and client for the dominant purpose of
giving or receiving legal advice,
they will attract the privilege.
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
In their decision of 27 January
2022, the Commission’s decision maker noted that the document identified
was the same document
that fell within the scope of a previous request by the
applicant. In that matter the Commission had also claimed the document was
exempt in full under s 42.
Paragraph [2.47] of the FOI
Guidelines.
These circumstances arise when
the FOI applicant seeks access in a different form
or where it appears
that the FOI applicant seeks information that is not available in a discrete
form in written documents but is
stored in an agency computer system rather than
in a discrete form (see
of the FOI Guidelines).
FOI Act s 55D(1).
Section 42 as set out in
Annexure B.
FOI Guidelines (April
Set out in Annexure B.
FOI Guidelines at [5.145].
Australian Government
Solicitor (AGS) Legal Briefing No. 117
Esso Australia Resources
Ltd v Commissioner for Taxation
(1999) 201 CLR 49
, 64-65 [35].
FOI Guidelines at [5.148],
Comcare v Foster
[2006] FCA 6
(2006) 42 AAR 434.
FOI Guidelines at [5.149],
Grant v Downs
(1976) 135 CLR 674
Waterford v Commonwealth of
(1987) 163 CLR 54
Esso Australia Resources
Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1999) 201 CLR 49.
For examples of the application of these
considerations see
'VO' and Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility
(Freedom of information)
'VH' and Australian Taxation Office
(Freedom of information
and Clifford Chance Lawyers and
National Competition Council (Freedom of information)
The Commission referred to
paragraphs [95] – [96], ‘...there is authority in this Court and
elsewhere for the proposition
that legal professional privilege may attach to
communications passing between a salaried legal adviser and his employer,
that the legal adviser is consulted in a professional capacity in
relation to a professional matter and the communications are made
in confidence
and arise from the relationship of lawyer and client’.
This person is an admitted
Australian lawyer with a current practising certificate.
The Commission cited
paragraphs [5.182] and [13.123] of the FOI Guidelines.
'AQL' and Department of
Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water (Freedom of information)
(19 November 2024).
The former Administrative
Appeals Tribunal, now the ART.
Ransley and Commissioner of Taxation
(Freedom of information)
[2015] AATA 728
'AEE' and Department of Defence
(Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 69
'ADM' and Services Australia (No.
7) (Freedom of information)
'ACV' and Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency
(Freedom of information)
(1 February 2023).
Ransley and Commissioner of Taxation (Freedom of
information)
[2015] AATA 728
'AEE' and Department of Defence
(Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 69
'ADM' and Services Australia (No.
7) (Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 66
Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Authority (Freedom of
information)
[2023] AICmr 3
Rudd and Civil Aviation
Safety Authority
[2013] AICmr 56
Philip Morris Ltd and
Prime Minister
[2011] AATA 556
even Network News v News
(2005) FCA 1551.
Guidelines,
Archer Capital 4A Pty Ltd
as trustee for Archer Capital Trust 4A v Sage Group plc (No 2)
FCA 1098 [59]–[73].
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v NSW Ports Operations Hold Co Pty Ltd
(2020) FCA 1232
Martin v Norton Rose
Fulbright Australia (No 2)
(2019) FCA 96
Esso Australia Resources
Ltd v Commissioner for Taxation
[1999] HCA 67
(1999) 201 CLR 49.
AWB v Cole No
[2006] FCA 1234
(2006) 155 FCR 30
Ibid, [47].
Ransley and Commissioner
of Taxation (Freedom of Information)
[2015] AATA 728
Ransley and Commissioner
of Taxation (Freedom of Information)
[2015] AATA 728
Generally, see
at [5.144] – [5.182];
Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility (Freedom of information)
[2020] AICmr 47
VH’ and Australian
Taxation Office (Freedom of information)
[2020] AICmr 43
‘PQ’ and Australian
Taxation Office
(Freedom of information
[2019] AICmr 1
‘PO’ and Australian
Federal Police (Freedom of information)
[2018] AICmr 72
hris Lewis and Australian National
University (Freedom of information
[2018] AICmr 63
Rex Bashford and Department of
Jobs and Small Business (Freedom of information
[2018] AICmr 55
Department of Home Affairs (Freedom of information)
[2018] AICmr 36
FOI Guidelines
FOI Guidelines
FOI Guidelines
FOI Guidelines
[5.154], footnotes omitted.
AWB v Cole (No.
[2006] FCA 1234
(2006) 155 FCR 30
Waterford v
Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1986) 163 CLR 54
RTF format (22.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format