F v Contract Service Provider to a Commonwealth Government Agency [2011] PrivCmrA 6 (3 May 2011)
Case Citation:
F v Contract Service Provider to a Commonwealth Government Agency
[2011] PrivCmrA 6
Subject Heading:
Collection of Information from a Contract Service Provider to a Commonwealth
Government Agency.
Information Privacy Principles 1 and 3 in Part III Division 2 of the
section 95B
(Cth) and section 13A(c) in
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner (the Commissioner)
prior to 1 November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the
powers of the
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
A Commonwealth Government Agency contracted the Contract Service Provider
(the CSP) for the purpose of conducting a Code of Conduct
investigation about
the complainant. The investigation concerned an allegation that the
complainant had behaved inappropriately
during a meeting with a third party.
The complainant claimed that the misconduct investigation by the CSP
was unlawful as it contravened discrimination legislation. On the
basis that the investigation was unlawful, the complainant alleged
that it was
unlawful and unfair for the CSP to collect information about him from a third
party for the purpose of conducting that
investigation
Section 95B
requires an agency to take contractual
measures to ensure that a contract service provider does not do an act or engage
in a practice
that would breach an Information Privacy Principle if it were done
by the agency.
Information Privacy Principle 1 (IPP 1) regulates the way in which agencies
collect person information. It provides that agencies
may only collect personal
information:
for a lawful purpose that is directly related to their functions or
activities; and
if collecting the information is necessary for or directly related to that
IPP 1 also states that agencies must not collect personal
information by unlawful or unfair means.
IPP 3 provides that agencies should take such steps as are reasonable in the
circumstances to ensure that the information they collect
is relevant to the
purpose of collection, up-to-date and complete. In addition, the
collection of the information should not intrude
to an unreasonable extent upon
the personal affairs of the individual.
The Commissioner found that the collection of the complainant's information
by the CSP was necessary for a lawful purpose directly
related to the CSPs
functions or activities. The Commissioner was also of the view that the
information collected was relevant to
the purpose of collection, up-to-date and
complete and the collection did not intrude to an unreasonable extent upon the
affairs of the complainant. The Commissioner took account
of the following considerations in coming to this view.
The Commissioner has produced Plain English Guidelines to Information Privacy
Principles 1 to 3 (IPP Guidelines) to assist with their
interpretation.
The IPP Guidelines make clear that for the means of a collection to be
considered ‘unlawful' it needs to be
against the law. Additionally,
for the means of collection to be ‘unfair' it will generally need to have
occurred by misleading
an individual or through deception.
The IPP Guidelines also advise that collecting personal information may be
considered intrusive if it involves asking questions about
sensitive personal
affairs or the collection requires physically touching or observing
It was considered that the CSP's collection of the complainant's personal
information was for the lawful purpose of investigating
the complainant's
behaviour during a meeting with a third party. The CSP had been contracted
by the Government Agency to conduct
a Code of Conduct investigation into that
behaviour. Thus, the personal information the CSP collected was necessary
for or directly
related to the purpose of conducting the Code of Conduct
investigation.
The CSP collected the information from the third party by correspondence and
through an interview. Based on this information, the
Commissioner formed
the view found that the interview between the third party and the CSP did not
unreasonably intruded upon the
complainant's personal affairs. Asking
questions about the complainant's behaviour at the meeting was reasonable given
the investigation
related to that subject. Likewise it was not
unreasonably intrusive for the CSP to obtain the third party's report about the
given that report was central to the investigation.
Therefore, the information was collected through lawful and fair means.
For these reasons, the Office considered that the CSP complied
obligations under IPP 1 and did not interfere with the complainant's privacy in
this instance.
The Commissioner closed the matter under 41(1)(a) of the
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (46.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format