1400388 [2015] RRTA 310 (26 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 310
(26 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
Afghanistan
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
John Blount
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the
direction that the applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Statement made on 26 May 2015 at
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicant
a Protection visa under
Migration Act 1958
applicant who claims to be a citizen of Afghanistan, applied for the visa [in]
November 2012 and the delegate refused to grant
the visa [in] January 2014. On
8 January 2014 the applicant applied to the Tribunal for review of that
decision. The case was constituted
to this Member on 25 February 2015.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 17 April 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The Tribunal hearing was conducted
with the assistance of an
interpreter in the Hazaragi and English languages.
applicant was represented in relation to the review by his registered [migration
RELEVANT LAW
criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa
must meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c).
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has
protection obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same
Refugee criterion
36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the Convention).
is a party to the Refugees Convention and generally speaking, has protection
obligations in respect of people who are refugees
as defined in Article 1 of the
Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a refugee as any person
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group
political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or,
owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that
country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his
former habitual residence,
is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to
91R and 91S of the Act qualify some aspects of Article 1A(2) for the purposes of
the application of the Act and the Regulations
to a particular person.
are four key elements to the Convention definition. First, an applicant must be
outside his or her country.
an applicant must fear persecution. Under s.91R(1) of the Act persecution must
involve ‘serious harm’ to the applicant
(s.91R(1)(b)), and
systematic and discriminatory conduct (s.91R(1)(c)). Examples of ‘serious
harm’ are set out in s.91R(2)
of the Act. The High Court has explained
that persecution may be directed against a person as an individual or as a
member of a
group. The persecution must have an official quality, in the sense
that it is official, or officially tolerated or uncontrollable
authorities of the country of nationality. However, the threat of harm need not
be the product of government policy; it may
be enough that the government has
failed or is unable to protect the applicant from persecution.
persecution implies an element of motivation on the part of those who persecute
for the infliction of harm. People are persecuted
for something perceived about
them or attributed to them by their persecutors.
the persecution which the applicant fears must be for one or more of the reasons
enumerated in the Convention definition -
race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular social group or political opinion. The phrase
‘for reasons of’
serves to identify the motivation for the
infliction of the persecution. The persecution feared need not be
attributable to a Convention reason. However, persecution for multiple
motivations will not satisfy the relevant test unless a Convention
reasons constitute at least the essential and significant motivation for the
persecution feared: s.91R(1)(a) of the Act.
an applicant’s fear of persecution for a Convention reason must be a
‘well-founded’ fear. This adds an
objective requirement to the
requirement that an applicant must in fact hold such a fear. A person has a
‘well-founded fear’
of persecution under the Convention if they have
genuine fear founded upon a ‘real chance’ of being persecuted for a
Convention stipulated reason. A ‘real chance’ is one that is not
remote or insubstantial or a far-fetched possibility.
A person can have a
well-founded fear of persecution even though the possibility of the persecution
occurring is well below 50 per
addition, an applicant must be unable, or unwilling because of his or her fear,
to avail himself or herself of the protection of
his or her country or countries
of nationality or, if stateless, unable, or unwilling because of his or her
fear, to return to his
or her country of former habitual residence. The
expression ‘the protection of that country’ in the second limb of
1A(2) is concerned with external or diplomatic protection extended to
citizens abroad. Internal protection is nevertheless relevant
to the first limb
of the definition, in particular to whether a fear is well-founded and whether
the conduct giving rise to the fear
is persecution.
an applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations
is to be assessed upon the facts as they
exist when the decision is made and
requires a consideration of the matter in relation to the reasonably foreseeable
Complementary protection criterion
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of
a protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a real
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm: s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
‘Significant
harm’ for these purposes is exhaustively defined in s.36(2A): s.5(1). A
person will suffer significant harm
if he or she will be arbitrarily deprived of
their life; or the death penalty will be carried out on the person; or the
person will
be subjected to torture; or to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment; or to degrading treatment or punishment. ‘Cruel or
treatment or punishment’, ‘degrading treatment or punishment’,
and ‘torture’, are further defined
in s.5(1) of the Act.
are certain circumstances in which there is taken not to be a real risk that an
applicant will suffer significant harm in a
country. These arise where it would
be reasonable for the applicant to relocate to an area of the country where
there would not
be a real risk that the applicant will suffer significant harm;
where the applicant could obtain, from an authority of the country,
such that there would not be a real risk that the applicant will suffer
significant harm; or where the real risk is one
faced by the population of the
country generally and is not faced by the applicant personally: s.36(2B) of the
Section 499 Ministerial Direction
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs
and Trade expressly for protection status determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
applicant is a [age] year old Hazara man from Afghanistan, who arrived in
Australia as an unauthorised maritime arrival [in] June
Tribunal has before it the Department’s file relating to the applicant.
The Tribunal also has had regard to the material
referred to in the
delegate’s decision. The applicant’s circumstances and claims were
in the first instance provided
to the Department in his protection visa
application [in] November 2012, an accompanying statutory declaration dated 19
2012, and at an interview [in] April 2013.
Protection visa application
Protection visa application and claims statement, November 2012
applicant is a Hazara Shia from a small village in the Jaghori district of
Ghazni province, 30 to 45 minutes by car from the nearest
bazaar, [location].
His family has a small plot of land on which they have a vegetable garden. His
father was a shop keeper selling
[products] in [a] bazar which was about 45
minutes by car in the opposite direction to [location].
applicant stated that at the end of spring 2011 his father was killed when the
vehicle he was travelling in from Kabul to Ghazni
was destroyed by a land mine
near Qarabagh which is a Taliban area. The family now survive on the proceeds
of the sale of his father's
shop, which was sold in March 2012.
applicant travelled from Jaghori to Kabul between September and December in
2009, 2010 and 2011. He completed his secondary education
at [location] (the
district capital) in December 2011.
applicant stated that at the beginning of 2012 he tried to enrol in a private
university in Kabul but was unable to do so because
he did not have proof of his
school certificate. He and a friend travelled back to Jaghori to get their
certificates. Because the
Taliban have a policy of persecuting Hazaras and
other people who attempt to gain an education, his mother sewed his certificates
into the applicant’s clothing and he warned his friend that he should do
applicant stated that on their way back to Kabul, travelling with four other
people, they were stopped by the Taliban on the road
near Qarabagh. The Taliban
found his friend’s
documents. They were separated from the other
travellers, blindfolded and hands tied and taken away by car to a house where
were kicked and punched. The Taliban threatened to kill them, accusing
them of wanting to be educated and that when they were qualified
they would use
their skills to help the Taliban’s enemies. They were left in a small
locked room and were only brought some
bread and water after 24 hours. They
were checked on every 2 or 3 hours.
managed to free themselves from their bindings and escaped through a small
window that was high up in the wall. They found themselves
on the edge of a
small village but were unable to see very much as it was very dark. They walked
for across country until dawn to
a road. Eventually a Hazara picked them up and
took them to Ghazni, from where they went by road to Kabul.
he arrived in Kabul the applicant met some people where he was staying who were
talking about going to Australia. After discussing
it with his mother by phone,
they decided that he should leave Afghanistan and try get to Australia using
some of the proceeds from
the sale of his father's shop. He left Afghanistan in
April 2012.
applicant stated that he fears that he would be known to the Taliban because
they had taken his education documents and he had
escaped from them and a result
they would kill him if they caught him again. The Taliban have a policy of
persecuting those who seek
to educate themselves.
applicant stated that relocation is not a reasonable option because he has no
relatives in any other part of Afghanistan except
for his village. Even though
he has been a student in Kabul over the last couple of years he would be very
fearful of returning
there as a result of the Taliban having taken his documents
and knowing of his previous intentions to study there.
Protection visa interview, [April] 2013
applicant repeated his claims at a subsequent interview with the delegate [in]
addition to his written claims, the applicant added that:
His mother still
resides in their village in Jaghori.
He has travelled
to Kabul several times for educational courses.
His friend had
remained in Afghanistan and was killed by the Taliban in late 2012 on the road
between Kabul and Jaghori.
how he was able to escape given that he was being guarded and monitored every 2
or 3 hours, the applicant responded that the
Taliban guards were not actually in
the room and they were not checked on more than every two hours. It was the
middle of the night
so the guards were perhaps were not as alert.
applicant stated that although it was the middle of the night, they could see by
the stars. They took shelter until dawn until
they could properly see the
terrain and vehicles. The Hazara who picked them up helped them with some money
and once he was in Ghazni
his mother was able to provide money from the sale of
the shop. He then took that money with him to Kabul.
applicant's IAAAS representative made oral submissions. It was submitted that
the applicant's claim of abduction is plausible
as Qarabagh is a dangerous road.
The applicant is familiar with the terrain and used to rural life, so it is
plausible that he was
able to walk in the dark and negotiate the terrain. Even
though the applicant has been to Kabul on several occasions it was on a
term basis only in Kabul and only for educational purposes. He has never worked
there and was supported by his family in Ghazni.
Delegate’s decision, [January] 2014
delegate found the applicant to be generally honest and credible and in the
absence of countervailing information accepted that
he was detained and escaped
delegate concluded that Hazaras do not face persecution in Afghanistan on the
basis of their race and religion alone.
Review application, 8 January 2014
copy of the delegate’s written decision record dated [in] January 2014 was
submitted to the Tribunal by the applicant with
application.
Submissions, 10 April 2015
following does not purport to be an exhaustive summary of the 25 page submission
provided to the Tribunal on 10 April 2015. The
full submission is held on the
RRT file. There was also attached the 106 page Human Rights Watch 2015 report,
“Afghanistan’s
Strongmen and the Legacy of Impunity”.
was stated that the applicant relies on his previous written and oral claims as
articulated in his statement of 19 November 2012
and summarised in the
delegate’s decision record [in] January 2014. The submission noted that
the delegate had accepted the
applicant’s claims about his own
experiences.
submission contested the delegate’s finding that Hazaras do not face
persecution in Afghanistan on the basis of their race
and religion alone and
submitted that very recent events in Afghanistan ‘tilt the balance’
in favour of a well-founded
fear of harm by the Taliban or associated militant
groups on the basis of the applicant’s Hazara ethnicity and Shia religion.
The submission cited several news reports from Hazara and other sources in
relation to three incidents in 2015 where Hazaras and/or
Shias travelling on the
roads were killed or kidnapped. A report on an Hazara website also asserted
that several hundred foreign
families had been settled in Pashtun areas near
Jaghori and “it has been said by many” that they are members of
lengthy Human Rights Watch Report attached to the submission refers to
“the inability or unwillingness of the Afghan government
institutions, including the military, police, and courts, to challenge the
strongmen and militias who operate throughout
much of the country”.
television report was cited, that hundreds of Hazaras in Kabul cannot return to
their home areas elsewhere because of the risks
involved on the roads.
submission discussed the present security situation in Afghanistan which it
submitted was rapidly deteriorating and would continue
to do so with the final
withdrawal of foreign troops.
submission included a 12 page attachment “which addresses why it is not a
reasonable option for [the applicant] to relocate
attachment referred to ongoing insurgent activity in Logar province, adjoining
Kabul province. Reference was made to increasing
attacks in Kabul itself, with
a list of “the most relevant attacks in terms of target and location in
Kabul in 2013-15”.
was asserted that there is discriminatory withholding of state protection from
Hazaras and Shias in Kabul. The attachment placed
weight on the present role as
Defence Minister of a person said to have been associated with massacres of
Hazaras in Kabul during
fighting in 1993. It was asserted that extortion and
criminality in Kabul disproportionately affect Hazaras and a 2011 report was
cited referring to links between Kabul police and warlords. Finally, there was
reference to a 2012 incident involving clashes between
Tajiks and Hazaras in
RRT hearing, 17 April 2015
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 17 April 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The Tribunal hearing was conducted
with the assistance of an
interpreter in the Hazaragi and English languages. The applicant was
accompanied by his [agent].
applicant expressed fears for his safety as an Hazara Shia in Jaghori, and in
particular concerns about the dangers generally
of travelling on roads in and
out of Jaghori. Hazaras are being abducted on the roads, and killed, as
evidenced in recent news reports.
There were not only Taliban but Da-esh [i.e.
ISIS] in the areas surrounding Jaghori (for example, in Andar district).
applicant provided a detailed account of his circumstances (including, in
particular, the incident when he was abducted by the
Taliban in 2012 in
Qarabagh) consistent with his previous evidence. When he escaped, the Taliban
had retained his taskera and school
certificate.
applicant stated that his mother had been unwell since his father’s death
in 2011. About three years ago the applicant’s
[brother] had started
taking their mother to Kabul to seek medical attention. She was told that they
could not help her and should
seek medical attention overseas. They had
therefore planned to travel to [another country] for this purpose and had
obtained taskeras
and passports in Jaghori to enable them to do so. About two
months ago, when the applicant’s mother and brother were travelling
Jaghori to Ghazni on their way to undertake this travel, the vehicle they were
in was stopped and checked by the Taliban. The
Taliban had said that from his
father’s name on the taskera, it appeared that his brother was the brother
of the person who
had escaped from them three years earlier (that is, the
applicant). At this point, the proceedings were interrupted by gunfire and
radio message and the Taliban left. The applicant’s mother and brother
resumed their journey towards Kabul. After this
his brother was not able to
is. His mother is back
in Jaghori, where he has [relatives].
applicant did not think it was just because of the taskera that they knew about
his brother but the Taliban has spies. Everyone
back in Jaghori knows the
applicant's story and spies would have told the Taliban. If he returns from
Australia he will be identified
Tribunal discussed with the applicant material in relation to Jaghori, Hazaras
and the situation with secure and insecure roads.
The Tribunal referred to a
DFAT assessment (in March 2014) that Hazaras are not currently at any greater
risk of violence than other
ethnic groups in Afghanistan. It had also advised
that the greater risk of the roads was for persons associated with the
or foreign agencies, especially if they were carrying documentation.
The applicant acknowledged that areas where only Hazaras live,
such as Jaghori,
are safe because outsiders cannot come in there. Other areas are unsafe for
Hazaras. Recent incidents targeting
Hazaras had occurred on both the Qarabagh
and Nawur roads from Jaghori to Ghazni; after Nawur to Ghazni the road goes
through areas
where there are Taliban. Hazaras and Shias have been singled out,
not just those with government documents. Wherever there are
Pashtun areas,
there are Taliban and there is fighting.
Tribunal referred to material indicating that Shias are not generally persecuted
in Afghanistan, although there had been some
serious incidents and the situation
was different in different areas.
Tribunal also discussed in some detail material relevant to the possible issue
of relocation in Kabul. DFAT had advised in October
2014 that Kabul is
Afghanistan’s largest urban centre with a population of around six million
and that because of its size
and diversity, returnees would be unlikely to be
discriminated against or targeted in Kabul on the basis of ethnicity or
There is a large Hazara community in Kabul, drawn from all parts of
the country (including Jaghori): DFAT estimated in March 2014
population of Kabul may comprise between 1.7 and two million people, which would
make Hazaras the largest ethnic group
Tribunal noted reference in the recent submissions to an incident in September
2012 involving Tajiks and Hazaras in Kabul. However,
the reports did not
suggest that the Tajiks or police had attacked the Hazaras in the first instance
and the strong Hazara response
might be seen as indicative of the strength of
the Hazaras in their area of Kabul rather than of their vulnerability. The
cited in the submission had also noted that “ethnic violence in
Kabul is unusual”.
applicant commented that it is not possible for him to live in Kabul because he
does not have any friends or relatives there from
whom he could get
Tribunal put to the applicant that several reliable sources quoted in a
well-documented 2012 Danish report about Kabul, states
that it is most unlikely
that a low-profile person would be pursued or tracked down by the Taliban in
Kabul. DFAT assesses that
because of its size and diversity, individuals may be
more likely to be able to remain anonymous in Kabul than in rural areas. DFAT
also assesses that in Kabul the primary targets for Taliban activity are
government institutions, political figures, Afghan National
Security Forces, and
international forces and organisations, rather than ordinary Afghans. This
assessment appeared to be consistent
with the list of incidents contained in the
recent submission. Overall, DFAT assesses that the Government maintains
effective control
of Kabul. The nature and incidence of security incidents, and
serious criminality, in Kabul (and the extent to which ordinary citizens
Kabul may be directly affected) is such that in a city of six million people the
risk of harm for an ordinary individual might
be seen to be exceedingly
Tribunal noted that it was widely acknowledged that ethnic, tribal and family
networks may be important in relation to relocation,
especially with regard to
employment and accommodation. There is strong evidence about the prevalence of
ethnic and tribal networks
in Kabul, both from DFAT and from agencies working in
Kabul cited in the 2012 Danish report.
Tribunal also put to the applicant information concerning medical services,
education and employment in Kabul. It also referred
to reintegration programs
or financial assistance offered by the Australian government and the
International Organisation for Migration
and other organisations. The Tribunal
noted that the applicant had a good secondary education, had lived in Kabul for
several periods,
and had acquired some employment experience in Australia (as
well as some rudimentary English language skills).
applicant commented that he could not go back and just live in Kabul and not go
anywhere and just keep himself in one place.
The Tribunal noted that in a city
of 6 million, this was not comparable to feeling confined in Jaghori. The
applicant said that
his parents had lived their whole lives in Jaghori so it was
impossible for him to start a new life in Kabul.
applicant repeated that he would face harm should he return. When another
person had returned from Australia, he was recognised
and killed. The applicant
was concerned that the Taliban had known about him and was able to identify his
brother. Their spies
would know if he returned and would possibly harm
Tribunal provided an opportunity for the applicant's adviser to make oral
submissions and to provide subsequent written submissions.
The adviser referred
to recent reports about ISIS and attacks on Hazaras and Shias and suggested that
DFAT reports from 2014 were
out of date and not relevant. He undertook to
provide further written submissions by 5 pm on Friday 1 May
Post-hearing submissions,22 April 2015
following does not purport to be an exhaustive summary of the submission (and
attachments) dated 22 April 2015 and provided to
the Tribunal on 24 April 2015.
The full document is held on the RRT file.
submission, and its attachments, addresses the issue of an increasing ISIS
presence in Afghanistan. Although the submission acknowledged
that the adviser
had been unable to track the source for the story of hundreds of foreign
(suspected ISIS) families settling around
Jaghori, it did cite reports of
foreign fighters being settled in (non-adjacent) areas of adjoining Zabul
province, as well as ISIS
activity in some Pashtun districts of Ghazni
FINDINGS AND REASONS
Country of Reference.
Tribunal accepts that the applicant is a national of Afghanistan and is not a
national or citizen of any other country. Nor does
he have an established right
to enter and remain in any other country. The country of reference is therefore
Afghanistan
Credibility
considering an applicant’s account, undue weight should not be placed on
some degree of confusion or omission to conclude
that a person is not telling
the truth. But nor can significant inconsistencies or embellishments be lightly
dismissed. The Tribunal
is not required to accept uncritically any and all
claims made by an applicant.
this particular instance the Tribunal found the applicant's evidence about his
own direct experiences to be generally credible.
Country Information
Tribunal has had regard to country information cited and specifically referred
to in the delegate’s decision as well as
material cited by the
applicant’s adviser in support of his submissions.
Tribunal has also consulted and taken into account the DFAT Country Report,
Afghanistan
, 26 March 2014, the DFAT Thematic Report,
Afghanistan and Pakistan
, 26 March 2014, and the DFAT Thematic Report,
Conditions in Kabul
, 3 October 2014. The Reports are stated to be based on
DFAT’s on-the-ground knowledge and discussions with a range of sources,
taking into account relevant and credible open source reports. Where DFAT does
not refer to a specific source of a report or allegation,
this may be to protect
the source.
Ministerial
Direction Number 56 of 21 June 2013 under
Migration Act 1958
Where the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has prepared
a country information assessment expressly for protection status determination
processes, and that assessment is available to the decision maker, the decision
maker must take into account that assessment, where
relevant, in making their
decision. The decision maker is not precluded from considering other relevant
information about the country.
Tribunal has where appropriate preferred the recent advice provided by DFAT as
well as other authoritative material including:
Immigration Service,
Afghanistan: Country of Origin Information for Use in
the Asylum Determination Process, Report from Danish Immigration Service’s
fact finding mission to Kabul, Afghanistan
, 24 February to 4 March 2012
NPS Program for
Cultural and Conflict Studies November 2011
Uruzgan Provincial Overview,
at http://www.nps.edu/programs/ccs/Uruzgan.html
http://www.nps.edu/programs/ccs/Docs/Executive%20Summaries/
Uruzgan_Executive_Summary.pdf
Human Rights
Watch report, “Impunity, Militias, and the Afghan Local Police”,
September 2011, at
http://www.scribd.com/doc/64790395/31/The-ALP-in-Uruzgan
the Tribunal accepts that DFAT advice is recent and authoritative, the Tribunal
has also had regard to the currency and provenance
of the country information
provided for the applicant and has relied upon other material as cited in the
ensuing discussion. The
Tribunal has had particular regard to the most current
material where it comes from reliable sources (especially when considering
reasonably foreseeable future), and which in some respects goes beyond the DFAT
reports of March and October 2014, particularly
with regard to the increasing
ISIS presence in Afghanistan..
applicant’s claims have been set out fully. The Tribunal accepts the
essence of the applicant’s account of his own
circumstances and
experiences. The applicant - a Hazara Shia living in the Jaghori district of
Ghazni province – in 2012 was
stopped, threatened and detained by the
Taliban on the basis of documents he was carrying in relation to attendance at a
institute in Kabul. He escaped and shortly afterwards left
Afghanistan. The applicant states that his identity is known to the
they took his documents. In 2015 when the applicant’s mother and brother
were also stopped by the Taliban, his
brother was specifically identified as the
brother of a person who had escaped from them earlier, the applicant. The
therefore believes that he has been identified by the Taliban and on
return would be targeted.
Tribunal accepts that the Taliban has a record of targeting education
institutions and persons pursuing an education and that
tertiary students may be
regarded by them as having associations with, or working towards employment by,
the government, and targeted
for this reason. The Hazara ethnicity of the
applicant may also have made the Taliban suspicions of the applicant as a person
to be hostile to the Taliban.
applicant has already attracted the adverse attention of the Taliban, who
detained him. It further appears that by escaping from
them, the applicant has
in their eyes confirmed his opposition to them and that they are aware of his
identity and retain an adverse
interest in him.
Tribunal accepts that should the applicant return to Jaghori he would need to
travel there by road and would again need to travel
on a regular basis to Kabul
to pursue his education. In these circumstances should the applicant again be
stopped by the Taliban,
there is a real chance that he would be identified and
targeted and suffer harm by reason of an imputed political opinion. His
who was detained and escaped in the same circumstances was
subsequently again stoped on the road by the Taliban and killed. Although
routes from Jaghori to Ghazni (and Kabul) are identified as less dangerous than
others, all appear to carry some risk of at
least being stopped and questioned
and while in most instances this might not result in harm, the particular
circumstances of the
applicant make it likely that in such an event he would
face a real chance of harm.
claims that returnees are suspect and targeted
e they are failed
asylum seekers returned from Australia or other Western countries to Afghanistan
are unsupported by authoritative
independent evidence, and the Tribunal was not
satisfied that this would
lead to an imputed political opinion
for the applicant on return to Afghanistan, the Tribunal accepts that it might
in this instance
exacerbate existing suspicions of the applicant.
Tribunal is therefore satisfied that, should the applicant seek to return to his
own district of Jaghori, he would face a real
chance of persecution by reason of
an imputed political opinion, compounded by his ethnicity.
applicant and his adviser have also advanced claims about Hazaras and Shias in
relation to Afghanistan more generally.
following paragraphs are drawn from the DFAT Thematic Report,
Afghanistan and Pakistan
, of 26 March 2014:
An estimated three
million Hazaras live in Afghanistan—approximately nine per cent of the
country’s population and the
third largest ethnic group. Hazaras live
mostly in the central highlands region of the country, particularly the
Hazara-majority
provinces of Bamiyan and Daikundi and parts of Ghazni, Ghor,
Uruzgan and Wardak provinces—referred to collectively as
‘Hazarajat’.
Sizable Hazara populations are found in Kabul and other
major urban areas in Afghanistan.
The 1992 fall of the Soviet-backed regime commenced a period of instability
in Afghanistan, during which Hazara militias took part
in fighting for Kabul.
The takeover of Kabul and most of Afghanistan by the mostly Sunni Pashtun
Taliban in 1996 resulted in a period
of repression and conflict for Shia
Hazaras. For example, thousands of fighters and civilians were killed in
fighting for Mazar-e-Sharif
in 1997–98, during which at least 2000 Hazaras
were killed by the Taliban in reprisal for earlier killings of Taliban fighters.
As a result of these incidents, many Hazaras fled Afghanistan to Pakistan and
DFAT assesses that since the removal of the Taliban regime in 2001,
minorities in Afghanistan have made significant gains, albeit
from a low base.
Afghanistan’s Hazara community has taken advantage of the opportunities
available to them since then, particular
in politics and education.
Afghanistan’s Hazaras are active participants in Afghanistan’s civil
DFAT has no evidence of any official policy of discrimination pursued by the
Government on the basis of ethnicity. However, societal
discrimination exists.
Most commonly, societal discrimination tends to be in the form of nepotism in
favour of particular ethnic
and religious communities. Although Hazaras do face
societal discrimination by other ethnic groups, equally these groups face
discrimination
in Hazara-dominant areas.
DFAT assesses that individuals working for, supporting or associated with the
Government and the international community are at high
risk of violence
perpetrated by insurgents. Due to the improvements in the situation of the
Hazara community since 2001, Hazaras
are widely perceived to be affiliated with
both the Government and the international community. Many Hazaras have expressed
that they are targeted by insurgents as a result of this perception (see
‘Violence’, below).
The historical enmity between Afghanistan’s Hazara and Pashtun
to the Hazara
community’s uncertainty about the security situation in Afghanistan ahead
of the ISAF drawdown in 2014.
The Hazara community’s fears of violence must also be viewed in the
context of the generalised environment of criminal and insurgent
violence in
Afghanistan which affects many other ethnic groups, including Tajiks, Uzbeks and
Turkmen. Violence is particularly high
in Pashtun-majority areas of
Afghanistan—these are the areas most contested between the Taliban and the
Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) and the International Security Assistance
Force, (ISAF) and from which the greatest number of civilians are internally
displaced. In this security environment, Hazaras have been killed in recent
ethnic violence but have also reportedly killed members
of other ethnic groups
either as instigators or in reprisal attacks.
In general, DFAT’s current assessment is that there is currently a low
risk of criminal or insurgent violence for Hazaras in
Afghanistan relative to
the overall security situation. Hazaras are not currently at any greater risk of
violence than other ethnic
groups in Afghanistan.
Report raises concerns about the situation of Hazaras, at least in areas where
they are in a minority, notwithstanding the more
reassuring note in the final
paragraph cited. These concerns are put at their strongest in reports prepared
by Professor Maley,
On the Return of Hazaras
to Afghanistan
, 16 February 2015) and in material on Hazara websites. On
the other hand, an important 2012 article by Professor Saikal of the ANU
suggests that Hazaras are not generally persecuted and have succeeded in
securing a sizable share in the political and economic life
of Afghanistan and
are now well-positioned to be able to defend their rights and interests,
particularly in
Tribunal notes that that a report that some particular Hazaras have been
targeted or killed does not of itself demonstrate they
have been targeted for a
Convention reason, or that Hazaras generally are persecuted. The Taliban have
intimidated, threatened and
killed individuals – including, but not only,
Hazaras - suspected of working for, or being supportive of, the Government and
the international military forces. Individual Hazaras have been harmed as part
of the general insurgency and the Taliban’s
attacks on communications and
facilities - but it is clear that non-Hazaras and non-Shias in Afghanistan are
also the victims of
the insurgency and of Taliban attacks. Pashtuns also have
featured prominently as victims in reports of attacks in Afghanistan.
there are disturbing reports of recent killings and abductions on the roads by
insurgents of Hazara Shias, although it is
not clear whether they were targeted
by reason of their ethnicity or their religion (not always easy to disentangle).
Concerns in
relation to Shias are discussed more fully below.
carefully considered these issues, the Tribunal is satisfied that Hazaras are at
heightened risk from insurgents in
of Afghanistan on the basis
of their ethnicity and imputed political opinion and heightened by their
religion as Shias. This will
add to existing risks for some individuals
(including the applicant). However, the Tribunal is not satisfied that Hazaras
in Afghanistan face a real chance of persecution now or in the
reasonably foreseeable future by reason of their ethnicity.
are overwhelmingly Shia. Shias represent about 19% of the population of
Afghanistan. Afghanistan’s Constitution and
laws recognise some separate
legal rights for Shias. Article 131 of the Constitution provides that
Afghanistan’s courts shall
apply Shia jurisprudence in certain civil cases
involving Shias. In 2009, Afghanistan’s Parliament passed a Shia Personal
Status Law, which recognised differing practices on issues like marriage,
divorce and inheritance among Afghanistan’s Shia
DFAT assesses that Shia Muslims face a low level of societal discrimination,
primarily as a result of nepotism within the
Sunni majority and that
Shia–Sunni sectarian violence is infrequent in Afghanistan, it
acknowledges that Shias have been subject
to occasional violence. For example,
a bombing of the Shia Abu Fazl mosque in Kabul in December 2011 (attributed to
the Pakistan-based
Lashkar-e Jhangvi) reportedly killed at least 70 people. The
US State Department 2013
Religious Freedom
report refers only to societal
discrimination in relation to Shias in Afghanistan and does not suggest that
there is discrimination
against Shias generally so serious or pervasive as to
amount to persecution.
submissions referred to a number of incidents in recent years in which Shias
were apparently specifically targeted. Not all reports
of such incidents in
fact demonstrate that persons were targeted as Shias. However, there is
persistent evidence of targeting of
Shias by insurgents in some particular
areas. The UNHCR 2013
report (at p.44) that although overt
discrimination by Sunnis against the Shia community has reportedly decreased,
violent attacks
targeting the Shia population continue to occur. It refers to
the murder of five Hazara Shias by the Taliban in Andar district of
province and the murder, allegedly by the Taliban, of five Hazara Shias from
Bamyan province when travelling on the road connecting
Bamyan province to Kabul
via Wardak province. Other reports also indicate that the incidence of targeted
attacks on Shias has increased.
Annual Report 2012
Afghanistan, Amnesty International referred to the Ashura bombing in Kabul in
December 2011 as “a serious escalation of
previously rare sectarian
violence.” Although a Christian Science Monitor report on this attack,
published on 7 December 2011,
considered that “the pattern does not
suggest growing tensions between Sunnis and Shiites”, this is now in
There have been in recent months several reports of persons
travelling on the roads singled out as Shias and abducted or killed
reason. Several people were also killed in an attack on an Ismailia Shia mosque
in Kabul in February 2014.
submissions also highlighted what is said to be an increasing ISIS presence in
Afghanistan and the implications for Shias. It
is uncontentious that ISIS
regards Shias as “apostates” and “infidels”. The
violent targeting of Shias by
ISIS in other countries where it operates is well
documented and there is increasing evidence of recent scattered self-identified
ISIS presence or activity in Afghanistan. One report indicates that Islamic
State militants were responsible for the destruction
of Shia shrines and the
killing of a civilian in the Charkh district of Logar Province on 21 February
In February
2015 Islamic State militants killed a Taliban commander in an early morning
clash between the two groups in the main
Charkh district bazaar and ordered
residents to stop watching TV programmes. The armed men, who called themselves
IS soldiers, entered
into local houses and broke down television sets, antennas,
tape-recorders and other household
recently ISIS claimed responsibility for a bombing in Jalalabad in April 2015 in
which more than 30 persons were killed. The
Afghan President noted that ISIS
(or Daesh) had claimed responsibility for the attack and the AFP report of the
incident noted that
“The Afghan government has also raised the ominous
prospect of IS making inroads into the country” (AFP, “Jalalabad
bombing: Islamic State claims responsibility”, 18 April 2015, at
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-18/afghanistan-suicide-blast-kills-more-than-30/6403356
accessed 18 April 2015
). President Ghani had previously warned that
Islamic State was already sending fighters to
Afghanistan.
have been reports of Islamic State fighters being sighted in Farah, Helmand and
Zabul provinces
suggestions that Islamic State was responsible for the abduction in Zabul
Province on 23 February 2015 of 31 (Hazara) Shias travelling
by bus on the
highway from Kandahar to
post-hearing submission also documents ISIS activity, including in some Pashtun
districts of Ghazni province (although not in
Jaghori itself).
the evidence does not yet substantiate that Shias generally in Afghanistan at
present face a real chance of serious harm,
there appears to be greater cause
for concern now than at any time since the fall of the Taliban and worrying
signs that (particularly
with indications of ISIS activity in Afghanistan) this
might become a more pervasive problem in the future.
Tribunal accepts that this increasing activity by ISIS, and their antipathy to
Shias, may heighten the personalised risks the
applicant faces in returning to
Jaghori and travelling from there to Ghazni or Kabul for educational or other
purposes. The Tribunal
has therefore considered whether relocation to a safe
place would be possible and reasonable and has given careful consideration
the option of Kabul, as discussed with the applicant in detail at hearing.
background and aspects of security and life in Kabul are addressed in the Danish
Immigration Service,
Afghanistan: Country of Origin Information for Use in
the Asylum Determination Process, Report from Danish Immigration Service’s
fact finding mission to Kabul, Afghanistan
, 24 February to 4 March 2012 and
the DFAT Thematic report,
Conditions in Kabul
, 3 October 2014. Material
provided on behalf of the applicant has been considered against this
background.
assesses that as Afghanistan’s largest urban centre with a population of
around six million, Kabul provides the most viable
option for many people for
internal relocation and resettlement in Afghanistan. It assesses that because
of Kabul’s size and
diversity, returnees would be unlikely to be
discriminated against or targeted on the basis of ethnicity or religion.
Several reliable
sources quoted in the well-documented 2012 Danish Immigration
Service report state that it is most unlikely that a low-profile person
pursued or tracked down by the Taliban in Kabul. DFAT also assesses that
because of its size and diversity, individuals
may be more likely to be able to
remain anonymous in Kabul than in rural areas. Although the Tribunal is not
satisfied that the
applicant would be personally and individually pursued and
targeted in Kabul, it accepts that he might be identified and targeted
travel from Kabul to visit his family in Jaghori.
Tribunal acknowledges that ethnic, tribal and family networks may be important
in relation to relocation, especially with regard
to employment and
accommodation. In relation to this, the Tribunal notes that the applicant has
stated that he does not know anyone
in Kabul and there is no evidence to the
is good evidence about the prevalence of ethnic and tribal networks in Kabul and
DFAT assesses that there are generally options
available for members of most
ethnic and religious minorities to be able to relocate from other parts of
Afghanistan to relative
safety in Kabul. The Danish Information Service 2012
Report also cites evidence concerning networks in Kabul. UNHCR had told it
the culture in Afghanistan is such that everybody within a certain ethnic
community would try to find protection within their
own ethnic community.
According to IOM (the International Organisation for Migration) all ethnic
groups have their own communities
in Kabul and young men will usually find their
own ethnic community when they come to the city.
is the case that there is a very large Hazara community in Kabul which Professor
Saikal (already cited) has assessed to be in a
position of some strength. The
DFAT March 2014 report on Hazaras states that the population of Kabul is likely
to be up to seven
million people, of which the Hazara population may comprise
between 1.7 and two million people, which would make Hazaras the largest
group in Kabul.
regard to accommodation, it is acknowledged that rents can be very high in some
areas of Kabul (although there are areas like
Dasht-e Barchi – where many
Hazaras live - with lower rents). There are however extensive areas of
sub-standard accommodation
in informal settlements.
is also good evidence from the Danish Immigration Service Report and the DFAT
October 2014 report in relation to access to and
availability of medical care
and health services and education in Kabul compared to other areas of
Afghanistan (reflected in the
applicant's own efforts to pursue his education in
employment is a significant issue, where access to tribal or family or ethnic
networks can be critical. The applicant has
no previous work experience in
Kabul and has limited work experience in Australia. This could pose a problem
for the applicant on
return, given that there is very significant unemployment
and under-employment in Kabul. On the other hand, DFAT states that because
its size and growth Kabul offers a greater range of employment opportunities
than many other areas of Afghanistan.
issues may cumulatively pose significant challenges for the applicant in Kabul,
particularly as a young man seeking to secure
a livelihood.
is a further significant issue in relation to personal security in Kabul (which
would likely impact on the issues already discussed
in relation to Kabul).
this regard, the submissions of 10 April 2015 refer to poor security in Kabul
for Hazaras, with particular reference to a 2012
incident involving clashes
between Tajiks and Hazaras (and, subsequently, Hazaras and police) in Kabul.
The Tribunal has carefully
considered these submissions and other information
concerning this incident, including reports in “Bomber Strikes Near NATO
Office in Afghanistan”, New York Times, 8 September 2012, at
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/09/world/asia/in-kabul-suicide-bomber-strikes-near-nato-headquarters.html?_r=0
and “Rival Ethnic Groups Clash on Streets of Afghan Capital”, Wall
Street Journal, 9 September 2012,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10000872396390444554704577641833333191196.html
Essentially, a Tajik procession/convoy, commemorating the death of former
Northern Alliance leader Massoud was involved in a traffic
incident injuring an
Hazara. A perceived police failure to act resulted in a massive Hazara armed
demonstration against the police.
In the ensuing violence at least two
policemen, as well as five or six Hazaras, were killed and four police
checkpoints burned.
Neither of the reports suggest that the Tajiks or police
attacked the Hazaras in the first instance.
Tribunal is not satisfied that this incident reflects either any particular
vulnerability of Hazaras in Kabul or targeting of
them by Kabul police. DFAT
assessed (March 2014) that the security situation for Hazaras in Kabul does not
differ significantly
from that experienced by the general population of the city
and Hazaras are not disproportionately targeted by criminals or insurgents
Kabul. However, the incident does add to the picture of Kabul as a place where
violence is increasingly pervasive, affecting
its population generally.
stated in its March 2014 Report that the ongoing insurgency, particularly in the
south and east of Afghanistan means that the
Government struggles to exercise
effective control over many parts of the country. As a result, the Government
lacks the ability
to adequately address human rights issues, protect vulnerable
groups and prosecute human rights violators in those areas.
DFAT assesses that the Government maintains effective control in major urban
areas, particularly Kabul, the October 2014
DFAT Report also acknowledges that
insurgents regularly conduct high-profile attacks in Kabul. While DFAT assesses
that the primary
targets for insurgent attacks in Kabul are government
institutions, political figures, Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF),
International
Security Assistance Forces (ISAF), other security services and
international organisations, it acknowledges that such attacks often
significant casualties amongst civilian bystanders in addition to those being
specifically targeted. More recent reports have
further highlighted the risk of
civilian casualties.
submissions have stressed what is said to be increasing violence and insecurity
in Kabul in recent times. Although most of the
attacks over this period have
targeted Afghan government personnel and institutions, security forces,
foreigners and foreign institutions
(the exception being a February 2014 attack
on an Ismailia Shia cultural centre) they have as noted often involved
significant civilian
casualties as well as those targeted. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in its annual report on
Protection of
Civilians in Armed Conflict in Afghanistan for 2014
, reported an overall
increase of 22 per cent in civilian casualties in 2014 compared to
nature and incidence of security incidents in Kabul (and the extent to which
ordinary citizens in Kabul may be directly affected)
is such that the risk of
harm for any individual may not be statistically high. Nonetheless, it is
relevant to consider what implications
such an uncertain environment may have
for the reasonableness of relocation.
relation to the developing security situation, it is the case that foreign
forces have been progressively withdrawing from Afghanistan.
Secretary-General in his December 2014 report to the General Assembly,
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and
, stated that since the end of the summer period the Afghan
Government has faced a sustained and determined challenge in securing
districts that remained under insurgent pressure. He stated that insurgents had
embarked on attacks against the Government in
most parts of the
also reflected in an article published by the Security Sector Reform Resource
Centre in September
information provided to the Tribunal suggests that this increasing insurgent
activity has been reflected in attacks and casualties
in Kabul also. For
Washington Post
report of November 2014 suggested that the
total number of attacks in Kabul thus far in 2014 had already exceeded double
that of 2013
(a military analysis group had recorded 80 insurgent attacks in
Kabul as of mid-November) and that “The city is now the front
line of the
Recent indications of a covert ISIS presence in Kabul are also disturbing. The
material does not suggest that Kabul is likely to
sustain a full-scale offensive
or fall to the Taliban at any time in the reasonably foreseeable future.
However this deteriorating
security situation (and the likelihood of continuing
and increasing incidental civilian casualties) must raise the question of
Kabul is a safe and reasonable place for a person to relocate in terms
of personal security. In addition, as a Shia the applicant
may also be at
greater risk of harm as a result of renewed attacks in Kabul (whether by Taliban
or other insurgent groups including
ISIS) targeting Shia places of worship.
relation to the reasonably foreseeable future, the Tribunal has given careful
consideration where reliable evidence suggests ongoing
(and future) trends,
while eschewing mere speculation. Having considered these issues cumulatively
and in relation to the totality
of the applicant’s individual
circumstances, the Tribunal was not satisfied that the applicant could safely
and reasonably
relocate to Kabul to avoid the real chance of serious harm
amounting to persecution that (the Tribunal has found) he faces in travelling
and from his home area.
CONCLUSIONS
the reasons given above, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is a
person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the
Refugees Convention. Therefore the applicant satisfies the criterion set out in
s.36(2)(a).
Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the direction that the
applicant satisfies
Migration Act
John Blount
Saikal, Journal
of Muslim Minority Affairs, Vol 32, No 1, March 2012:
Afghanistan: The Status
of the Shi’ite Hazara Minority
Khudaidad, ‘Clash between radicals: ISIL vs Taliban in Afghanistan’,
Khaama Press
, 26 February 2015, downloaded from
http://www.khaama.com/clash-between-radicals-isil-vs-taliban-in-afghanistan-9341,
accessed 5 March
http://www.pajhwok.com/en/2015/03/10/fighters-kill-taliban-commander-warn-tv-viewers?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_term
"Afghanistan's new president warns of 'terrible threat' from Islamic State",
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
(ABC) (News)
, 26 March 2015,
CXBD6A0DE3611
‘Fears of “Islamic State” in Afghanistan’, Deutsche
Welle, 26 January 2015,
CXBD6A0DE2955
Frud Bezhan, ‘Mass Abduction Of Hazaras In Afghanistan Raises Fears Of
Islamic State’, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
(RFE/RL), 25 February
2015, CXBD6A0DE1904; Ali M. Latifi and Shashank Bengali, ‘Afghan officials
acknowledge Islamic State
presence in their country’, Los Angeles Times,
17 March 2015,
CXBD6A0DE3139
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Afghanistan Annual
Report 2014: Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict,
18 February 2015,
CISEC96CF1205
Assembly, The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security: report of the Secretary-General,
9 December 2014,
A/69/647-S/2014/876
http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/2014/876
accessed 28 March 2015
Security Sector
Reform Resource Centre,
The Danger of Unfinished Security Sector Reform in
Afghanistan,
30 September 2014,at
http://www.ssrresourcecentre.org/2014/09/30/the-danger-of-unfinished-security-sector-reform-in-afghanistan/
accessed 20 April
Washington Post, Taliban brings war to Afghan capital”, 29 November 2014,
http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/in-afghanistan-taliban-fighters-attack-foreign-compound-in-capital/2014/11/29/f0aef902-77d4-11e4-a755-e32227229e7b_story.html
accessed 20 April 2015.
RTF format (255 KB)
Signed PDF/A format