Winemakers Federation of Australia v Agriculture and Rural Development of European Commission EU [2018] ATMOGI 1 (6 August 2018)
AUSTRALIAN GRAPE AND WINE AUTHORITY REGULATIONS
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH
Re: Opposition by the
Winemakers’ Federation of Australia to an application by the Agriculture
and Rural Development of
the European Commission of the European Union for the
determination of Avola as a geographical indication
Katrina Brown
The Agriculture and Rural Development of the European
Commission of the European Union
The Winemakers’
Federation of Australia
2018 ATMOGI 1
Australian Grape and Wine Authority
Regulations 1981
– objection to determination under reg 58(5)(b)
– the ground has not been made out – evidence establishes that
d’Avola is used in Australia as the name of a variety of grapes –
evidence does not establish that Avola solus is
used in Australia as the name of
a variety of grapes.
Agriculture and Rural Development of the European Commission of the European
) applied to the Geographical Indications
Committee (
) for the determination of 906 foreign
geographical indications (
) for wine.
to regulation 57 of the
Australian Grape and Wine Authority Regulations
, a notice was published on Wine Australia’s
on 24 May 2017 inviting
persons to make written objections to the determination of any of the 906
proposed items. This notice was
published on IP Australia’s
on 2 June 2017 and in the
Official Journal of Trade Marks
on 8 June 2017.
22 August 2017 the Registrar of Trade Marks received an objection from the
Winemakers’ Federation of Australia (
determination of the proposed item, Avola.
11 September 2017 this office notified the GIC of the objection.
Legislation
provides for both parties to simultaneously file evidence in support of their
position and then to simultaneously provide
evidence in answer. In this matter,
the WFA filed evidence in support of its objection within the designated period
to do so. The
EU did not avail itself of the opportunity to file evidence in
support of its application, nor did it file evidence in answer to
the material
filed by the WFA.
the period for filing evidence in answer was completed, this office invited both
parties to request a hearing. Neither party
requested a hearing and as such the
matter has been delegated to me, a delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks, to
decide on the
the notice of
objection filed by the WFA;
the evidence in
support filed by the WFA; and
any other matter
that the Registrar of Trade Marks thinks is
Relevant Legislation
Wine Australia Act 2013
defines a geographical indication
) as follows:
geographical
, in relation to wine goods, means an indication that
identifies the goods as originating in a country, or in a region or locality
that country, where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the
goods is essentially attributable to their geographical
Wine Australia Regulations 2018
replaced the
Australian Grape and Wine
Authority Regulations 1981
and came into effect on 1 April 2018. The
Australia Regulations 2018
contain transitional provisions in relation to
the determination of GIs, in which reg 118 relevantly
Despite the repeal of the
Australian Grape and Wine
Authority Regulations 1981
old Regulations
(c) Part 6A of the old Regulations, as in force immediately before the
repeal, continues to apply in relation to the determination
of a foreign GI or
translation of a foreign GI (including any decision under Division 3 of that
Part on an objection) if a notice
regulation 57 of the old Regulations...
this matter, the notice about the determination was published under regulation
Australian Grape and Wine Authority Regulations 1981
‘the Regulations’
). As such it is those regulations that
are relevant to the matter at hand.
Grounds and onus
the notice of objection, the WFA nominated reg 58(5) as the basis for it
objecting to the determination of Avola. Regulation 58
58 Grounds of objection to determination of foreign GI
or translation of foreign GI
A person may object to the determination of a proposed item on the ground
that the proposed item is used in Australia:
(a) as the common name of a type or style of wine; or
(b) as the name of a variety of grapes.
the WFA’s notice of objection cited all of reg 58(5), the particulars of
the notice and the evidence that followed
it are such that I take it that the
WFA objects to the determination of the proposed item under paragraph (b),
alleging that Avola
is used in Australia as the name of a variety of grapes.
WFA bears the onus of establishing the ground of
The standard of proof is
the ordinary civil standard of the balance of
probabilities.
stated earlier in this decision, the WFA filed evidence in support of its
objection. The material includes the following:
The 2013 edition
of the International Organisation of Vine and Wine’s
International list
of vine varieties and their
Nero d’Avola is
listed as a vine variety of Australia. There are no synonyms listed for Nero
Statistics from
Wine Australia showing that 31,245 litres of Nero d’Avola or Nero
d’Avola blends were exported from Australia
between November 2013 and
November 2017.
Data extracted
from Vinehealth Australia Vineyard Register on 6 December 2017. The data relates
to Nero d’Avola plantings in
South Australia and shows that there are: 7
regions within South Australia that have Nero d’Avola plantings (Adelaide
Barossa, Clare, Currency Creek, Eden Valley and Riverland); 28 different
vineyard owners; and 7.6 hectares of Nero d’Avola
in South Australia.
A tax invoice
from Binjara Vine Nursery Pty Ltd dated 1/9/2009 in relation to ‘Vinifera
Cuttings – Nero d’Avola’
and an agreement dated 15/9/2009
between Chalmers Nurseries Pty Ltd and Thorpe Wines Pty Ltd for the purchase of
Nero d’Avola
A letter from
Kim Chalmers, Director of Chalmers Viticulture Pty Ltd, dated 2/1/2018. The
letter details the importation and distribution
of the ‘grape variety Nero
d’Avola in Australia’.
An excerpt from
James Halliday’s
Wine Companion
which states that Nero
d’Avola ‘is now being made in Australia’ and ‘there are
more than 55 Nero d’Avola
vineyards in Australia’.
Pictures of wine
bottles described as examples of current Australian wine brands/labels made from
Nero d’Avola grapes.
A copy of the
Registrar of Trade Mark’s decision -
Winemakers’ Federation of
Australia v European Commission
[2013] ATMOGI 1.
An email from
Brad Hickey the Winemaker and Co-Director of Brash Higgins Wine Co. in McLaren
Vale, South Australia stating: that they
were the first to graft cuttings in
McLaren Vale in 2009; their first release of Nero d’Avola in 2011 won
“Best Emerging
Red’ at the Good Food and Wine Awards in 2012; the
2015 vintage won the “Rule Breaker” award at the South Australian
Hot 100 Wine Show; their wine is called NDV.
the notice of objection, the WFA submits that:
“Avola” is a part name of the common internationally recognised
grape variety produced in Australia and internationally.
The grape variety (full
name) “Nero d’Avola” is a common Australian wine grape which
is prominent with Australian
wine brands and growing in popularity.
This opposition is lodged on the grounds that Nero d’Avola is a
commonly used grape wine varieties [sic] which is produced in
Australia and
markets across the world.
wording of reg 58(5)(b) is a convenient starting point for my reasoning in this
matter. It states that ‘a person may object
to the determination of a
proposed item on the ground that the proposed item is used in Australia as the
name of a variety of grapes’.
Unlike other grounds for objecting to the
determination of a foreign GI,
58(5)(b) does not make reference to the proposed item being likely to cause
confusion with a word, expression or other indication
being used in Australia.
The question posed by reg 58(5)(b) is whether, as a matter of fact, the proposed
item is used in Australia
as the name of a variety of grapes. As such, I do not
think it is open to me to simply find that the ground has been made out where
the proposed item only forms
of the name of a variety of grapes.
That said there may well be exceptions, such as where the evidence establishes
that the proposed
item has been used in Australia to the extent that it is
regarded as the shortened name of a variety of grapes.
evidence in this matter demonstrates that Nero d’Avola is used in
Australia as the name of a variety of grapes. The letter
from Kim Chalmers,
Director of Chalmers Viticulture Pty Ltd details the history of Nero
d’Avola in Australia as follows:
Bruce and Jenni Chalmers,
through their business Chalmers Nurseries Pty Ltd of Euston NSW, imported a
selection of Nero d’Avola...The
selection was identified as Nero
d’Avola MAT 1.
This selection was released to Chalmers out of Australian Government
Quarantine in May 2000. The single plant was propagated over
a couple of seasons
and a mother black was established in 2002 at the Chalmers property in Euston
The first vines of Nero d’Avola were sold in 2006 and have been
propagated and sold every year since across most wine growing
to the International Organisation of Vine and Wine’s
International list
of vine varieties and their synonyms
, Nero d’Avola has been a
recognised grape variety in Australia since September 2011. The article on the
Wine Companion website,
statistics from Wine Australia and Vinehealth Australia,
awards given to Brash Higgins Wine Co. and labels of Australian wine bottles
further substantiate that Nero d’Avola is used in Australia as the name of
a variety of grapes.
in this matter the proposed item being objected to is Avola, not Nero
d’Avola. The evidence before me demonstrates
that the proposed item Avola
is contained within the name of a variety of grapes, namely Nero d’Avola.
However, this does not
automatically equate to use of Avola as the name of a
variety of grapes. Further, the evidence does not demonstrate that there is
tendency for Nero d’Avola to be shortened to Avola in Australia, nor has
the WFA suggested this is the case.
WFA has also drawn my attention to the Registrar of Trade Marks decision in
Winemakers’ Federation of Australia v European
Commission.
decision was also in relation to an objection under reg 58(5)(b) of the
Regulations to the determination of Prosecco. On the
basis of the evidence
before them, the delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks determined that
Prosecco had been used in Australia
as the name of a variety of grapes and as
such concluded that the ground under reg 58(5)(b) had been made out.
the facts, the
Prosecco Decision
can be distinguished from the matter
before me. In the
Prosecco Decision
, the proposed term being objected to
was Prosecco and the evidence demonstrated that Prosecco was used in Australia
as the name of
a variety of grapes. In this matter, the evidence does not
demonstrate that Avola is used in Australia as the name of a variety of
Rather, the evidence demonstrates that it is Nero d’Avola which is used in
Australia as the name of a variety of grapes.
the information before me, I am not satisfied that the proposed item Avola has
been used in Australia as the name of a variety
of grapes. As such, the ground
of objection under reg 58(5)(b) of the Regulations has not been made out.
67 of the Regulations relevantly provides:
(1) The Registrar of
Trade Marks must, as soon as practicable after the last day set for evidence to
be filed, make a decision in
writing whether the ground of objection is or is
not made out...
the reasons set out above, I find that the ground of objection under reg
58(5)(b) has not been made out.
decision may be appealed to the Federal Court.
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
www.wineaustralia.com/news/articles/european-union-geographical
-indications
www.ipaustralia.gov.au/about-us/news-and-community/official-notice/opportunity-object-registration-european-union
Australian Grape and Wine Authority Regulations 1981
Winemakers’
Federation of Australia v European Commission
[2013] ATMOGI 1
http://www.oiv.int/public/medias/2273/oiv-liste-publication-2013-complete.pdf
http://www.winecompanion.com.au.
See regs 58(1); 58(3) and 58(4) of the Regulations.
[2013] ATMOGI 1
(‘Prosecco Decision’).
RTF format (113 KB)
Signed PDF/A format