1313807 [2015] RRTA 269 (21 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 269
(21 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Fraser Syme
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant
a Protection visa.
Statement made on 21 May 2015 at
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
Migration Act
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
applicant is a [age] year old man from Eastern province, Sri Lanka. According to
the applicant his eldest brother, Mr Y was forcibly
recruited by the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam (“LTTE”). His third eldest brother, Mr S was
wrongly accused of murder,
but later released by the Sri Lankan authorities. The
actual murderer, Mr M threatened to harm the applicant and the applicant’s
mother because Mr S informed on Mr M to the police. In addition, the
applicant’s family suffered harassment in the past from
the Karuna group.
He fears if he returns to Sri Lanka, he will be harmed by Mr M and the Karuna
group. He fears too he will be harmed
by the Sri Lankan authorities because he
is a Tamil, applied for asylum in Australia and departed Sri Lanka illegally.
applicant applied to this Tribunal on 18 September 2013 for review of a decision
made by a delegate of the Minister for Immigration
[in] September 2013 to refuse
to grant him a Protection visa under
Migration Act
applicant included a copy of the decision record of the delegate with his review
application.
review application raises the following issues for the Tribunal to
the applicant have a well-founded fear of persecution in the reasonably
foreseeable future if he returns to Sri Lanka.
there substantial grounds for believing there is a real risk the applicant will
suffer significant harm if he is removed to Sri
HISTORY OF APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
applicant who claims to be a citizen of Sri Lanka arrived in Australia as an
unauthorised maritime arrival in July 2012. He applied
to the Department of
Immigration for a protection visa [in] November 2012. The delegate conducted an
interview with the applicant
in May 2013 with the assistance of an interpreter
in the Tamil and English languages. The Tribunal has listened to a recording of
that interview. The applicant provided to the delegate an untranslated birth
certificate and school records, which the Tribunal has
had regard to. At the
hearing he explained copies of receipts and business cards on the departmental
file are of unrelated items
he happened to have in his pocket on arrival in
Australia. The Tribunal has had no further regard to those particular documents.
the decision under review, the delegate found that the applicant’s brother
was forcibly recruited in the LTTE for 3 months
in 1990 and that his family paid
bribes to avoid further harm from the LTTE and the Karuna Group. The delegate
found the applicant’s
evidence regarding Mr M was not credible and did not
accept that Mr M threatened to kill the applicant or the applicant’s
Nor did the delegate accept the Sri Lankan authorities would associate
the applicant with the LTTE because of his brother. On the
basis of country
information, the delegate was not satisfied the applicant had a well-founded
fear of persecution for reason of his
Tamil race; as a failed asylum seeker or
due to illegal departure from Sri Lanka. Nor was the delegate satisfied the
applicant would
suffer a real risk of significant harm if he was returned to Sri
applicant appeared in person before the Tribunal on 10 February 2015 to give
evidence and present arguments. The Tribunal hearing
was conducted with the
assistance of an onsite interpreter in the Tamil and English languages.
applicant was represented in relation to the review by his registered migration
agent, who also represented him before the department.
The migration agent
provided written submissions to the Tribunal on 23 December 2013 and after the
hearing, on 18 February 2015.
The Tribunal has had regard to the submissions,
which are discussed in more detail below.
RELEVANT LAW
criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa must
meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That is,
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same
36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the
Convention).
is a party to the Refugees Convention and generally speaking, has protection
obligations in respect of people who are refugees
as defined in Article 1 of the
Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a refugee as any person
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group
political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or,
owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that
country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his
former habitual residence,
is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of
a protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a real
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm: s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs
and Trade (“DFAT”) expressly for protection status
determination purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the
under consideration. There are two DFAT country information assessments
regarding Sri Lanka, to which the Tribunal has had
regard: DFAT Country Report
– Sri Lanka (“DFAT Country Report”)
and DFAT Thematic
Report – People with links to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(“DFAT Thematic Report”).
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS
AND EVIDENCE
the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the decision under review
should be affirmed.
making its findings, the Tribunal is mindful the applicant has high school level
of education and was [age] years old at the time
of the hearing. The Tribunal is
mindful too that whenever evidence is received in a language other than the
applicant’s first
language or through an interpreter there is always room
for differences in meaning and nuance. On occasions, the applicant and
interpreter
encountered difficulty understanding each other but on each occasion
they made the Tribunal aware of that and by rephrasing, were
able to communicate
effectively. The Tribunal is satisfied the standard of interpreting at the
hearings was reasonable. The Tribunal
considers the applicant was able to
communicate effectively, understood the Tribunal proceedings and participated in
a meaningful
Tribunal finds the applicant is a national of Sri Lanka. He provided a copy of
his Sri Lankan identity documents. He made no claim
to be a national of any
other country. The Tribunal accepts the applicant’s claims should be
assessed against Sri Lanka for
the purposes of the Convention in s.36(2)(a) and
as the receiving country for the purposes of the complementary protection
obligations
in s.36(2)(aa). In making the below findings, the Tribunal has
considered his home village, as the place he resided for the majority
life to be his home region in Sri Lanka.
Tribunal accepts that ‘applicants for refugee status face particular
problems of proof as an applicant may not be able to
support his or her
statements by documentary or other proof, and cases in which an applicant can
provide evidence of all his statements
will be the exception rather than the
rule.’ The Tribunal also accepts that ‘if the applicant's account
appears credible,
he should, unless there are good reasons to the contrary, be
given the benefit of the doubt. (The United Nations High Commissioner
Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee
). The Handbook further states:
The benefit of the doubt
should, however, only be given when all available evidence has been obtained and
checked and when the examiner
is satisfied as to the applicant's general
credibility. The applicant's statements must be coherent and plausible, and must
counter to generally known facts.
Tribunal acknowledges, while it may have regard to the Handbook, the Handbook is
not binding. The Tribunal must bear in mind that
if it makes an adverse finding
in relation to a material claim made by the applicant but is unable to make that
finding with confidence
it must proceed to assess the claim on the basis that it
might possibly be true (see
MIMA v Rajalingam
[1999] FCA 719
(1999) 93 FCR 220).
However, the Tribunal is not required to accept uncritically any or all of the
allegations made by an applicant. Further, the Tribunal
is not required to have
rebutting evidence available to it before it can find that a particular factual
assertion by an applicant
has not been made out, see
Randhawa v MILGEA
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437.
the hearing, the Tribunal informed the applicant it considered his credibility
was in issue.
Well-founded fear of persecution
Tribunal is mindful it must consider the applicant’s chance of harm not
only currently but into the reasonably foreseeable
future. In making its
findings, the Tribunal has considered PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Refugee
Law Guidelines as required by
Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of
Tribunal furthermore is mindful that subsequent to the date of the hearing, a
new president was elected in Sri Lanka and a change
of ruling coalition in the
national parliament. As the new government has been in power for only a short
period of time, the Tribunal
considers the change of government has not
materially affected the Tribunal’s assessment of the applicant’s
applicant has several claims for protection. He claims he was threatened in the
past by Mr M and fears Mr M will harm him in future.
He claims he will be harmed
by the Sri Lankan authorities and Karuna group because Mr Y was in the LTTE. He
will suffer discrimination
and harassment because he is a Tamil. He further
claims he will be harmed by the Sri Lankan authorities because he is a Tamil,
for asylum in Australia and departed Sri Lanka illegally. The Tribunal
discussed each of the applicant’s claims with him in
detail at the
Tribunal discussed with the applicant that it considered his fear of Mr M was
not related to a Convention reason. The migration
agent submitted the Convention
reason was that the applicant was a member of the particular social group of
family members of someone
who was witness to a crime.
meaning of the expression ‘for reasons of ... membership of a particular
social group’ was considered by the High
Applicant A’s
case and also in
Applicant S
Applicant S
Gleeson CJ,
Gummow and Kirby JJ gave the following summary of principles for the
determination of whether a group falls within the
definition of particular
social group at [36]:
... First, the group must be identifiable by a characteristic or attribute
common to all members of the group. Secondly, the characteristic
or attribute
common to all members of the group cannot be the shared fear of persecution.
Thirdly, the possession of that characteristic
or attribute must distinguish the
group from society at large. Borrowing the language of Dawson J in
, a group that fulfils the first two propositions, but not the third, is
merely a "social group" and not a "particular social group".
a supposed group is a ‘particular social group’ in a society will
depend upon all of the evidence including relevant
information regarding legal,
social, cultural and religious norms in the country. However it is not
sufficient that a person be a
member of a particular social group and also have
a well-founded fear of persecution. The persecution must be for reasons of the
person’s membership of the particular social group.
is well established that a family is capable of constituting a particular social
group within the meaning of the Convention. However,
this is subject to s.91S of
the Act, which provides that the following matters must be disregarded in
determining whether a person
has a well-founded fear of being persecuted for
reasons of membership of a particular social group that consists of the
(a) any fear of persecution, or any persecution, that any other family member
has experienced, where the fear or persecution is not
for one of the Convention
reasons; and
(b) any fear of persecution, or any persecution, that the applicant or any other
family member has experienced, where it is reasonable
to conclude that the fear
or persecution would not exist if it were assumed that the fear or persecution
mentioned in (a) above had
never existed.
a person who is pursued because he or she is a relative of a person targeted for
a non-Convention reason does not fall
within the grounds for persecution covered
in the Convention definition. In the post hearing submission, the migration
agent submitted
Mr S feared harm because of his membership of the particular
social group of ‘witnesses to a crime’. Therefore, the harm
by Mr S was for a convention reason, and thus the applicant’s fear of Mr M
in turn was outside the restriction in s.91S.
Tribunal considers the applicant’s fear of persecution from Mr M relates
to Mr M seeking personal revenge against Mr S because
Mr S provided information
to the police about Mr M using Mr S’s mobile telephone to threaten Mr Z.
Mr S did so as to explain
why Mr S was wrongly accused of the murder of Mr Z and
that Mr M was the actual murderer of Mr Z. The Tribunal finds revenge to be
essential and significant reason for Mr M targeting Mr S. Revenge is not a
convention ground. So while the applicant may be a
member of the particular
social group of the family of Mr S, on the basis of s.91S the Tribunal must
disregard the applicant’s
fear of Mr M in assessing whether the applicant
has a well-founded fear of persecution.
from non-state agents, such as Mr M may amount to persecution for a Convention
reason if the motivation of the non-State actors
is Convention-related, and the
State is unable to provide adequate protection against the harm. Where the State
is complicit in the
sense that it encourages, condones or tolerates the harm,
the attitude of the State is consistent with the possibility that there
persecution:
MIMA v Respondents S152/2003
[2004] HCA 18
CLR 1, per Gleeson
CJ, Hayne and Heydon JJ, at [23]. Where the State is willing but not able to
provide protection, the fact that the authorities,
including the police, and the
courts, may not be able to provide an assurance of safety, so as to remove any
reasonable basis for
fear, does not justify an unwillingness to seek their
protection:
MIMA v Respondents S152/2003
[2004] HCA 18
CLR 1, per Gleeson
CJ, Hayne and Heydon JJ, at [28]. In such cases, a person will not be a victim
of persecution, unless it is concluded
that the government would not or could
not provide citizens in the position of the person with the level of protection
were entitled to expect according to international standards:
v Respondents S152/2003
[2004] HCA 18
CLR 1, per Gleeson CJ, Hayne and Heydon
JJ, at [29]. Harm from non-State actors which is not motivated by a Convention
reason may also
amount to persecution for a Convention reason if the protection
of the State is withheld or denied for a Convention reason.
Tribunal notes the original incident with Mr M using the mobile phone of Mr S
occurred in 2009 and that Mr M threatened the applicant
in 2012. The applicant
believes Mr M is in hiding, still at large and is connected in some way with the
LTTE, Karuna group or Pillayan
group and is a known criminal. The evidence of
the applicant too was that Mr M was a wanted man by the police and if the police
put Mr M in jail, they would let the applicant know about that. While the
Tribunal is mindful Mr M appears to be still at large,
the Tribunal does not
consider that is because the Sri Lankan authorities are complicit in the sense
they are purposefully not seeking
to arrest Mr M, otherwise, it would not be
necessary for Mr M to be in hiding. The murder charges against Mr S were
dismissed too,
when he explained Mr M’s role in threatening Mr Z,
indicating the Sri Lankan authorities are conducting the investigation of
murder of Mr Z within the rule of law. For those reasons, the Tribunal considers
the Sri Lankan authorities would not deny the
applicant state protection in for
any convention reason in relation to any harm from Mr M.
Tribunal considers the applicant’s claims related to Mr M further below in
relation to complementary protection.
applicant claimed he would be harmed because he is a Tamil. The Tribunal accepts
the applicant is Tamil. The applicant’s
evidence was his family’s
only connection to the LTTE was the forced recruitment of Mr Y by the LTTE for 3
months in 1990.
The applicant agreed that his brother could not be described as
a supporter of the LTTE as he was forcibly recruited and then ran
away from the
LTTE after 3 months. The Tribunal notes the DFAT report refers to forced
recruitment of Tamils by the LTTE during
the Sri Lanka civil war and accepts the
applicant’s claims regarding Mr Y’s forced recruitment into the
Tribunal considers the implication in much of the applicant’s claim is he
will be harmed by the Sri Lankan authorities as
someone suspected of links with
the LTTE or opposed to the government because he is a Tamil. Regardless whether
that is considered
in terms of his ethnicity, imputed or actual political
opinion or membership of a particular social group, the Tribunal considers
issues under consideration are substantially the same.
Tribunal discussed with the applicant country information regarding the
situation for Tamils. It noted the UNHCR 2012 eligibility
guidelines for
assessing the protection needs of asylum seekers from Sri Lanka
and the UK Upper
Tribunal guidance decision of 2013
indicate Tamils are
not in need of protection unless they have other characteristics, such as ties
to the LTTE. According to the
UNHCR a risk factor exists for a Tamil with
certain actual or imputed links to the LTTE. The decision of the UK Upper
indicates that although the Sri Lankan authorities are described as
‘paranoid’ about an LTTE resurgence, simply because
a Tamil has had
LTTE connections or sympathies in the past will not now of itself cause the
Sri-Lankan government to consider that
that person is a destabilising threat.
The risk is limited to those who are or are perceived to have a significant role
in relation
to post-conflict separatism. The Upper Tribunal decision too
indicates that the Sri Lankan authorities are aware persons who lived
in areas of Sri Lanka previously controlled by the LTTE had some level of
involvement with the LTTE during the civil war,
but that would not cause the Sri
Lankan authorities to consider such a person to be a risk. The Sri Lankan
authorities collect and
maintain sophisticated intelligence gathering techniques
to identify persons with substantial links to the LTTE. The Tribunal therefore
having regard to that information does not consider all Tamils would be imputed
with a pro-LTTE political opinion just because they
applicant stated he feared to return to Sri Lanka because something would happen
to him. The explained this was a fear of discrimination
and harassment. He
referred too to the possibility as there had been a war in the past, there may
be another war or that Karuna may
seek to re-establish the LTTE. The Tribunal
commented that it had to consider the reasonably foreseeable future and that
there being
a new war or Karuna re-establishing the LTTE were too remote or
speculative for there to be a real chance these events may occur.
The applicant
discussed too his brother’s recruitment to the LTTE. The Tribunal
commented that it did not consider Mr Y being
forcibly recruited to the LTTE for
3 months in 1990 would give the applicant a profile on which the Sri Lankan
authorities would
consider the applicant a threat. The applicant replied that
based on what he had read in the media, he remained fearful of harm
returned to Sri Lanka.
Tribunal accepts that the independent evidence indicates, at least until the end
of the civil war in 2009, that Sri Lankan citizens
of Tamil ethnicity suffered
disproportionately at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities. The Tribunal also
accepts that the information
indicates that the risk was more prevalent in LTTE
dominated Northern and Eastern areas. This is consistent with the
applicant’s
claims of general persecution of Tamils. The independent
evidence supports the applicant’s claims that during the civil war
thousands of Tamils disappeared, presumed dead, and thousands of others were
killed or injured. The DFAT country report states
the situation for Tamils in
Sri Lanka has changed significantly since the cessation of the civil war between
the Sri Lankan government
and LTTE in 2009. However the Tribunal accepts on
basis of the country information provided by the migration agent that Tamils in
Sri Lanka have historically faced a degree of harassment and discrimination on
account of their ethnicity and may continue to do
so, such as difficulties in
accessing employment and disproportionate monitoring by security forces. Human
Rights Watch has reported
that there is evidence of continuing atrocities
against some Tamils who were members or supporters of the LTTE.
The Bar Human Rights
Committee of England and Wales
and Amnesty
International report on surveillance, intimidation and monitoring of former LTTE
members by the security forces.
The DFAT thematic
report refers to there a high risk of harm to high profile former members of the
LTTE. However, while the Tribunal
accepts the harassment and discrimination that
Tamils may face in Sri Lanka does give rise to some harm as indicated in the
information, the Tribunal is not satisfied when having regard to
s.91R(1)(b) and to the non-exhaustive instances of serious harm
s.91R(2) that harm amounts to serious harm.. The Tribunal accepts based on the
country information that most Tamils experience
some degree of harassment and
discrimination. Having considered the applicant’s individual
circumstances, the Tribunal is satisfied
the applicant faces a remote chance and
therefore not a real chance of serious harm because he is a Tamil.
the basis of the country information discussed above, it does not accept he will
be imputed with any anti-government or pro-LTTE
opinion because he is a Tamil or
because he lived or worked in a Tamil area or because Mr Y was a forced recruit
to the LTTE for
3 months in 1990 or from Karuna re-establishing the LTTE. The
Tribunal considers there is only a speculative and therefore not a
real chance
he will suffer serious harm from the Sri Lankan authorities or the Karuna group
because of his race, any particular social
group or political opinion or any
other Convention reason, now or in the reasonably foreseeable future if he
returns to Sri Lanka.
Returned failed asylum seeker
applicant claimed he would be harmed as a failed asylum seeker if returned to
Sri Lanka. The Tribunal accepts if the applicant
returns to Sri Lanka, he will
do so as a failed asylum seeker. There are two aspects to this claim. That the
Sri Lankan authorities
will impute him with a pro-LTTE/anti-government political
opinion because he applied for asylum and that the Sri Lankan authorities
seek to punish him because they will assume the applicant was critical of them
in his claims for asylum.
Tribunal considers the Convention ground relevant to this claim is an implied
political opinion of being against the Sri Lankan
authorities due to the
applicant’s applying for asylum overseas or his membership of the
particular social group of returned
failed asylum seekers. Interrelated to this
is his race as a Tamil and an implied political opinion of being pro-LTTE
is a Tamil and/or applied for asylum overseas. Regardless of which
Convention reason, the Tribunal considers the issues under consideration
substantially the same.
Tribunal discussed with the applicant country information that there are reports
of some Tamils being
questioned, detained and tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities upon return to
Sri Lanka as failed asylum seekers,
particularly from the UK. Freedom from
Torture and Tamils Against Genocide report on returnees with links to the LTTE
or the Tamil
diaspora being harmed on return by the Sri Lankan authorities. The
Tribunal is mindful too of reports such as that of HRW
as to the prevalence
of the use of torture by the Sri Lankan authorities when questioning or
detaining persons. The UK Home Office
noted six and the
Canadian Immigration Refugee Board
four cases of
failed asylum seekers being detained upon return, all of whom had criminal
charges outstanding in Sri Lanka. The DFAT
Country Information Report indicates
all Sri Lankan nationals are treated in the same manner with regard to entry
procedures into
Sri Lanka, the same information is reported by the British
Thousands of
asylum seekers have returned to Sri Lanka since 2009 from Australia, US, Canada,
UK and European countries but there
are relatively few allegations of
mistreatment and the DFAT country information report states many allegations of
mistreatment of
returnees have not been substantiated. The Tribunal put to the
applicant that it did not consider he had a profile as someone with
links to the
LTTE or the diaspora and that he would not be imputed targeted for harm because
he applied for asylum in Australia.
applicant stated from what he has read in the media, he feared he will be
questioned at the airport and that the Sri Lankan authorities
would torture him
to learn what he had told the Australian government. He may be investigated too
a few months later. He may disappear
at that time. He added that information
from the Sri Lankan government cannot be relied upon. The Tribunal noted that
the sources
of the country information did not rely on information from the Sri
Lankan government.
the basis of the country information set out above, the Tribunal does not accept
failed asylum seekers are imputed with anti-government or pro
LTTE political opinion by the Sri Lankan authorities, regardless whether
returnee is Tamil or not. In making that assessment the Tribunal has had placed
weight on the UNHCR guidelines and the Upper
Tribunal guidance decision noted
above which indicate that while persons with links to the LTTE may be in need of
protection, the
Sri Lankan authorities rely on sophisticated intelligence gather
in identifying persons with such links.
assessing all the evidence and the applicant’s circumstances as a whole,
the Tribunal finds that the applicant will not
be imputed with an
anti-government or pro LTTE political opinion because he will return to Sri
Lanka as a person who applied for
asylum overseas. In reaching that finding,
the Tribunal has given regard to the country information on the return of failed
seekers to Sri Lanka and has been mindful of the questioning process and
not just the outcome of any questioning the applicant may
face from the Sri
Lankan authorities as a returnee and is not satisfied that questioning when
having regard to s.91R(1)(b) and to
the non-exhaustive instances of serious harm
set out in s.91R(2) that harm amounts to serious harm. The Tribunal is not
the applicant will be tortured or disappeared. The Tribunal is not
satisfied the applicant has a real chance of serious harm because
of an implied
political opinion or membership of any particular social group however described
arising from the applicant returning
to Sri Lanka as a person who applied for
asylum in Australia if the applicant returns to Sri Lanka, now or in the
reasonably foreseeable
Illegal departure from Sri
applicant claimed he would be harmed because he departed Sri Lanka illegally.
The Tribunal accepts that the applicant departed
Sri Lanka without possession of
his Sri Lankan passport and not from an approved port. The Tribunal discussed
with him his doing
so was an offence under the Immigration and Emigration Act of
2006 (“IEA”) for illegal departure from Sri Lanka.
It discussed too
that according to information from DFAT
returnees are
generally met either by DFAT or IOM staff at the airport. Since November 2012,
all failed asylum seekers returned to
Sri Lanka from Australia who had departed
Sri Lanka illegally had been arrested upon return to the airport in Colombo. The
were then charged with offences relating to illegal departure under
the IEA and held on remand until brought before a Magistrate.
After a bail
hearing, the returnees are granted bail with a personal surety and able to
remand varies between a couple of hours
to a couple of days, depending on how soon a bail hearing can be held, but there
are reports
of it taking up to two weeks.
The Sri Lankan
authorities will investigate the background and identity of each returnee, which
can involve contacting the person’s
family and the police in their home
area. Eventually the returnee will need to return to Court to face the charges.
Although the
IEA states the penalty for illegal departure is a prison sentence
from 1 to 5 years and a fine of 50,000 LKR to 200,000 LKR, the
Magistrates are
able to use their own discretion in determining the amount of the
fine. In practice, Magistrates have been handing
out fines between
5,000 LKR and 50,000 LKR. Only returnees suspected of people smuggling offences
have been denied bail or given
a prison sentence. The most recently available
information is the above process is continuing under the new government.
applicant replied sometimes things go wrong and the Sri Lankan authorities harm
people. The Tribunal noted his earlier comment
airport and perhaps investigated a few months after being released. It may not
consider questioning
or investigation to be serious or significant harm. It was
at this time the applicant referred to the possibility of his disappearing
during any such investigation. He repeated his earlier comment too about
information released by the Sri Lankan authorities was not
reliable. The people
who are harmed by the Sri Lankan authorities may be too afraid to report that to
the Tribunal is mindful it must give regard not only to the outcome of any
interrogation or questioning, but also whether there
is a chance of harm during
the process the process involved in attaining that outcome.
The Tribunal
considers the offences under the IEA are laws of general application. On the
face of the wording of the IEA legislation
and the information regarding the
implementation of the IEA before the Tribunal, the Tribunal is not satisfied the
IEA laws are discriminatory
in there terms or enforced in a selective or
discriminatory way. The laws apply to all Sri Lankan citizens who depart Sri
in breach of the IEA laws. Any harm the applicant may suffer arising from
punishment for an offence under the IEA has no element
of persecution for the
purpose of s.91R(1)(c) and therefore is not persecution.
The Tribunal does
not accept that his prosecution for breach of Sri Lankan migration laws amounts
to persecution.
Tribunal notes the country information that bail is routinely given on the
accused’s own recognisance although a family
member is also required to
provide surety. If the arrival occurs over a weekend or on a public holiday the
returnee is placed in
the remand section of Negombo prison and may remain there
for some days until a bail hearing is available. The Tribunal has regard
decision of the Full Federal Court in
that not all
detention amount to a threat to a person’s liberty and is an instance of
serious harm. The Tribunal accepts that
conditions in Sri Lanka’s prisons
are poor, they are described so in the DFAT country report. Conditions on remand
described in media reports
overcrowded. The Tribunal has considered the available country information in
relation to the circumstances of individuals
who are held in prison in Sri Lanka
and notes the reports of torture and assault.
The DFAT country
report refers to there being unsubstantiated allegations but is unaware of
reports of mistreatment of returnees
while on remand. However it considers it is
prisoners who otherwise have a profile of being opposed to the current Sri
Lankan government
profile (such as persons affiliated to the LTTE) who are
targeted in this way. There have not been reports that returnees held awaiting
bail hearings have been subjected to torture or other forms of deliberate
mistreatment. The Tribunal considers any period the applicant
spends on remand
is as result of the application of the IEA laws, which the Tribunal found above
are laws of general application
and any period on remand would be a consequence
of those laws of general application and therefore not persecution.
Furthermore the
Tribunal is not satisfied that due to the short-term nature of the imprisonment
on remand that the applicant would
face a real chance of serious harm while held
Tribunal considers it not because the applicant is a Tamil or a failed asylum
seeker but rather because the applicant departed
Sri Lanka illegally that he
will be charged or held or remand or questioned at the airport or further
questioned upon return to his
any difficulties the applicant may face as a result of questioning, being
encountering cramped and uncomfortable and unsanitary conditions on
remand are aimed at the applicant for any Convention reason.
The Tribunal
considers that these are factors which apply generally and not specifically to
Tamils or failed asylum seekers or persons
with imputed political opinions. The
Tribunal is not satisfied, that questioning, arrest, and the poor conditions in
remand, and
the application of a penalty for illegal departure amount to
systematic and discriminatory conduct as required by s.91R(1)(c).
is also the consideration of the applicant facing a jail term for his illegal
departure. On the face of the wording of s.45(1)(o)
of the IEA states both a
a prison sentence are enforced upon conviction for illegal
departure. The information from DFAT and the Attorney General Department
Lanka is the Magistrates have discretion to suspend a sentence and that is what
is routinely done. This power is found in
s.303 of the Code of Criminal
Tribunal considers based on the available country information there is only a
remote and therefore not a real chance the applicant
will be sentenced to a term
of imprisonment for his offences under the IEA. The Tribunal considers it high
likely the applicant will
be fined not more than LKR200,000 (AUD1,850) and more
likely to be LKR50,000 (AUD460).
The Code of
Criminal Procedure provides for allowing time for payment and for the payment of
fines by instalments.
The evidence
before the Tribunal does not suggest the applicant will be unable to pay or that
fine or that payment of the fine will
cause him hardship. The evidence before
the Tribunal too does not suggest he is without any relative able to provide
surety. Therefore,
the applicant will be able to receive a suspended sentence.
As such, the Tribunal considers there is no real chance the applicant
an extended period of imprisonment arising from his illegal departure from Sri
summary, the Tribunal finds the applicant does not face a well-founded fear of
persecution due to his illegal departure from Sri
Lanka because: the laws were
not persecution due to a lack of discriminatory intent or application and there
is no real chance he
would face a term of imprisonment for the offence of
illegal departure.
assessing all the evidence and the applicant’s circumstances and being
mindful of both the process and the outcome of
the prosecution the applicant
will face from the Sri Lankan authorities arising from his illegal departure,
the Tribunal is satisfied
that the applicant does not face a real chance of
serious harm due to his illegal departure, now or in the reasonably foreseeable
future if he returns to Sri Lanka.
Tribunal has considered the claims of the applicant individually and
cumulatively. For the above reasons, the Tribunal finds the
applicant faced no
serious harm in the past. The Tribunal is not satisfied the applicant faces a
real chance of serious harm by the
Sri Lankan authorities or Karuna group due to
his race, where he worked and lived in Sri Lanka, being a failed asylum seeker,
Y’s forced recruitment to the LTTE, political opinion, membership of a
particular social group or unlawful departure from Sri
Lanka. The Tribunal is
not satisfied the applicant has a well-founded fear of persecution for any
Convention reason or combination
of reasons, now, or in the reasonably
foreseeable future if he returns to Sri Lanka. Therefore he does not satisfy the
requirements
of s.36(2)(a).
Tribunal considers his claims further below in relation to complementary
protection.
Real risk of significant harm
Tribunal has also considered the application of s.36(2)(aa) to the
applicant’s circumstances. In making its findings, the
Tribunal has
considered the Complementary Protection Guidelines as required by Ministerial
Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the
Tribunal found above there is no Convention reason for the applicant’s
claimed fear of Mr M. It therefore assesses that
part of his claims under
complementary protection.
Tribunal noted with the applicant at the hearing that the delegate’s
decision sets out a number of inconsistences in the
applicant’s evidence
regarding the events which occurred when Mr M came to the applicant’s
it had some difficulty accepting as plausible that
Mr M used the telephone of Mr S in 2009 to threaten Mr Z and Mr Z then later
found dead but Mr M then threatens the applicant in 2012. However, the
Tribunal was willing to give the applicant the benefit of
the doubts about those
inconsistencies and implausibilities.
applicant explained that after Mr M threatened him in 2012, Mr M had not again
threatened anyone in the applicant’s family.
As noted above, the applicant
believes the police would have told him if they had jailed Mr M, so the
applicant believes Mr M is
still in hiding. The Tribunal discussed with the
applicant that because Mr M had done nothing to the applicant’s family
2012, the Tribunal was unsure there was a real risk Mr M would harm the
applicant if the applicant returned to Sri Lanka. The applicant
commented that
Mr M was in hiding from 2009 to 2012. He may come out of hiding again to harm
the applicant, if the chance arose.
The Tribunal accepts the applicant has a
genuine subjective fear about that risk, but that subjective fear alone may not
is a real risk Mr M will harm the applicant. Due to the passage of
time, the minimal role of the applicant in the issues involving
Mr M and that Mr
M has not harmed or threatened anyone else, the Tribunal considers there to be
only a remote and therefore not a
real chance that Mr M will cause significant
harm to the applicant if the applicant is removed to Sri Lanka.
Discrimination
Tribunal accepted above on basis of the country information that Tamils in Sri
Lanka have historically faced a degree of harassment
and discrimination on
account of their ethnicity and may continue to do so, such as difficulties in
accessing employment and disproportionate
monitoring by security forces. The
Tribunal has had regard to whether that harassment and discrimination amounts to
significant harm.
The Tribunal considers the only relevant forms of significant
harm are torture, cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment, or degrading
treatment or punishment. On the evidence before it, the Tribunal is not
satisfied the harassment of or discrimination towards Tamils
involves severe
physical or mental pain or suffering, therefore it does not meet the definition
of torture in s.5(1). Similarly,
the harassment and discrimination cannot meet
limb (a) in the definition in s.5(1) of cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment, nor
could the harassment or discrimination be reasonably regarded in
all the circumstances as cruel or inhuman in nature for the purpose
of limb (b)
of that definition. The Tribunal accepts the harassment and discrimination may
cause some humiliation to the applicant,
but is not satisfied that the
harassment and discrimination would cause extreme humiliation which is
unreasonable. Therefore, the
Tribunal is not satisfied any harm arising from the
harassment or discrimination will amount to significant
Illegal departure
Tribunal has had regard to whether the harm the applicant may suffer arising
from his committing offences under the IEA amounts
to significant harm, in
particular, being questioned, his bail conditions, being detained for a short
period while on remand and
imposition of a fine. The Tribunal has had regard to
whether that amounts to significant harm. The Tribunal considers the only
forms of significant harm are torture, cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment, or degrading treatment or punishment. On the evidence
before it, the
Tribunal is not satisfied the applicant’s being questioned, bail
conditions, detention on remand or fine will
involve severe physical or mental
pain or suffering, therefore it does not meet the definition of torture in
s.5(1). Similarly, his
being questioned, the bail conditions, detention while on
remand and fine cannot meet limb (a) in the definition in s.5(1) of cruel
inhuman treatment or punishment, nor could his bail conditions, detention while
on remand or fine be reasonably regarded in all
the circumstances as cruel or
inhuman in nature for the purpose of limb (b) of that definition. The Tribunal
is not satisfied too
that his being questioned, the bail conditions, detention
while on remand and fine would cause extreme humiliation which is unreasonable.
Moreover, the definitions of ‘cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment’ in s.5(1) requires that pain or suffering be
‘intentionally inflicted’ on a person and the definition of
‘degrading treatment or punishment’ requires
that the relevant act
or omission be ‘intended to cause’ extreme humiliation. Mere
negligence or indifference is not
sufficient; what is required is an intention
to inflict pain or suffering or to cause extreme
humiliation.
Tribunal does not accept on the evidence before it that the pain or suffering
caused by the overcrowding and other problems
in prisons in Sri Lanka is
‘intentionally inflicted’ on prisoners as required by the definition
of ‘cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment’ in
subsection 5(1)
Migration Act
. Neither does the Tribunal accept that the overcrowding and
other problems are ‘intended to cause’ extreme humiliation
required by the definition of ‘degrading treatment or punishment’.
Therefore, the Tribunal is not satisfied any harm
arising from his being
questioned, the bail conditions, being detained while on remand or fined will
amount to significant harm.
relation to the balance of the applicant’s claims, the Tribunal found
above the applicant did not have a well-founded fear
of persecution on any
ground as he does not face a real chance of serious harm.
Section 36(2)(aa)
refers to a ‘real risk’ of an applicant suffering significant harm.
The ‘real risk’ test imposes the same
standard as the ‘real
chance’ test applicable to the assessment of ‘well-founded
fear’ in the Refugee Convention
definition:
MIAC v SZQRB.
Given the test is
the same, for the same reasons set out above in relation to real chance, the
Tribunal is not satisfied the applicant
has a real risk of significant harm.
Tribunal therefore considers there are no substantial grounds for believing
that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of
the applicant being removed
from Australia to Sri Lanka there is a real risk the applicant will suffer
significant harm, in the form
of: arbitrary deprivation of life; the death
penalty being carried out; torture; cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment, or
treatment or punishment. Therefore the named applicant does not meet
the requirements of
s.36(2)(aa).
CONCLUSIONS
the reasons given above, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicant is a
person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the
Refugees Convention. Therefore the applicant does not satisfy the criterion set
s.36(2)(a).
concluded that the applicant does not meet the refugee criterion in
the Tribunal has considered the alternative criterion in
s.36(2)(aa).
Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicant is a person in respect of whom
Australia has protection obligations under
s.36(2)(aa).
is no suggestion that the applicant satisfies
on the basis of being a
member of the same family unit as a person who satisfies
or (aa) and
who holds a protection visa. Accordingly, the applicant does not satisfy the
criterion in
Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant a Protection (Class XA)
Fraser Syme
Since the date of
the hearing, a new Country Report was issued by DFAT on 15 February 2015. The
Tribunal considers the relevant information
in the new Country Report is
materially the same as in the prior version of the Country Report that it
discussed with the applicant
during the hearing.
Commissioner for Refugees 2012,
UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing
the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka
December, pp.26-37
http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/50dla08e2.html
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) United Kingdom Country Guidance Decision in
GJ v Secretary of State for the Home Department (post-civil war: returnees)
[2013] UKUT 319
Rights Watch 2014, World Report 2014 – Sri Lanka, 21 January 2013.
(Harrison F.2013, ‘Tamils
still being raped and tortured in Sri Lanka,
British Broadcasting Corporation, 9
March 2014, ‘An Unfinished War: Torture and Sexual Violence in Sri Lanka
http://www.barhumanrights.org.uk/sites/default/files/documents/news/an_unfinihsed_war._torture_and_sexual_violence_in_sri_lanka_2009-2014_0.pdf
Amnesty International 2014,
Ensuring Justice: Protecting Human Rights for Sri
Lanka’s future
37/011/2014, September, p.
See: Freedom
From Torture 2014,
Freedom from Torture up-dated submission to the Human
Rights Committee for the 5th periodic review of Sri Lanka in October 2014
http://www.freedomfromtorture.org/sites/default/files/documents/freedom_from_torture_submission_to_the_human_rights_committee_september_2014_0.pdf
Freedom from Torture 2012, ‘Sri Lankan Tamils tortured on return from
UK’, 13 September
http://www.tamilnet.com/img/publish/2012/09/Freedom_from_Torture_briefing92012.pdf
Freedom from Torture 2011,
Out of the Silence: New Evidence of Ongoing
Torture in Sri Lanka 2009-2011
, p.23; Tamils against Genocide,
“Returnees at Risk: Detention And Torture in Sri Lanka”,
http://www.tamilsagainstgenocide.org/data/docs/tag-report-16-sep-2012-returnees-at-risk.pdf
September 2012);
We will teach
you a lesson Sexual Violence by Sri Lankan Security Forces,
26 February
http://www,hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/srilanka0213webwcover_0pdf
UK Home Office 2012,
Sri Lanka: Country of Origin Information Report
Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada 2011,
Sri Lanka: Information on the
treatment of Tamil returnees to Sri Lanka, including failed refugee applicants;
repercussions, upon
return, for not having proper government authorization to
leave the country, such as a passport
, LKA103815.E,
http://www.irb-cisr.gc.ca:8080/RIR_RDI/RIR_RDI.aspx?id=453562 & l=e
UK Home Office
Sri Lanka: Country of Origin Information Report
Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada 2011,
Sri Lanka: Information on the
treatment of Tamil returnees to Sri Lanka, including failed refugee applicants;
repercussions, upon
return, for not having proper government authorization to
leave the country, such as a passport
, LKA103815.E, 22 August
http://www.irb-cisr.gc.ca:8080/RIR_RDI/RIR_RDI.aspx?id=453562 & l=e
Sections 34
http://www.lawnet.lk/process.php?st=1981Y10V245C&hword=''&path=5
DFAT Country Information Report: Sri Lanka, 31 July 2013; (CX234989 of 14
October 2009; CX234202 of 29 September 2009; CX 249694,
CX297471 of 19 October
2012, CX304258 of 27 February 2013 and DFAT report 1479 of 4 March
‘Sri Lanka: Asylum denied, a penalty waits at home’,
Morning Herald
, 8 December 2012,
Perera, B. Doherty, S. Medhora, ‘Asylum seekers transferred at sea by
Australia to face court in Sri Lanka” (20 Feb
http://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/20/asylum-seekers-transferred-at-sea-by-australia-to-face-court-in-sri-lanka
SZQPA v MIMA
[2012] FMCA
[2015] FCAFC
denied, a penalty waits at home,’ Ben Doherty,
Sydney Morning
8 December 2012,
http://www.smh.com.au/world/asylum-denied-a-penalty-waits-at-home-20121207-2b0qi.html
ACAT-France, “When arbitrariness prevails: A study of the phenomenon of
torture in Sri Lanka”,
http://www.acatfrance.fr/public/sri_lanka_en-web-acat_report_june_2012_when_arbitrariness_prevails_a_study_of_the_phenomenon_of_torture_in_sri_lanka.pdf
(June 2012) see also DFAT country report, HRW op cit, Amnesty International op
cit, UKBA op cit, Freedom from Torture. op cit, Canadian
[2015] FCCA 96
SZSPT v MIBP
[2014] FCA 1245
http://www.lawnet.lk/sec_process.php?chapterid=1981Y2V26C&sectionno=303&title=
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE &path=5
The IEA was amended in 2006 to repeal
, which previously excluded operation of
of the Code of Criminal
http://www.refworld.org/type,LEGISLATION,,LKA,46a6015327,0.html
www.oanda.com
(accessed 22 January
Parliament of the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
[current],‘Code of Criminal Procedure. An Act to Regulate the Procedure of
the Criminal Courts’, (2 July 1979) [No.26
of 1981] (amended to Act No.7
LawNet. Government of Sri Lanka [Ministry of Justice]
291 ‘Provisions as to sentences of fine’
http://www.lawnet.lk/process.php?st=1981Y2V26C & hword='' & path=5
SZSPE v Minister for Immigration & Border Protection & Anor
[2013] FCCA 1989
, upheld on
SZSPE v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
RTF format (217 KB)
Signed PDF/A format