Keybridge Capital Limited 20 [2025] ATP 20 (10 July 2025)
Reasons for Decision
Keybridge Capital Limited 20
Catchwords:
Decline to conduct -- board control – loan facility – bid
– association – acting in concert - triggered conditions
– participating insiders
Corporations Act 2001
sections 249F
Takeovers Panel Procedural Rules 2020, Takeovers Panel Procedural
Guidelines, 1 April 2021
Guidance Note 12: Frustrating Action, Guidance Note 19: Insider
Participation in Control Transactions
Bolton v WAM Active Ltd (No 2)
[2025] NSWCA 99
, In the matter of
Keybridge Capital Limited
[2025] NSWSC 240
, Tinkerbell Enterprises Pty Limited
as Trustee for The Leanne Catelan Trust v Takeovers Panel
[2012] FCA 1272
Attorney-General (NSW) v Wentworth
[1988] NSWCA 8
(1988) 14 NSWLR 481
Excelsior Capital Limited [2020] ATP 25 at [19], Aguia Resources Limited
[2019] ATP 13, Strategic Minerals Corporation NL [2018] ATP
Immunotherapeutics Limited [2017] ATP 2, The President’s Club Limited 02
[2016] ATP 1, Celamin Holdings NL 01R [2014]
ATP 23, GoldLink IncomePlus Limited
02 [2008] ATP 19, Mount Gibson Iron Limited [2008] ATP 4, Pinnacle VRB Ltd 08
[2001] ATP 17,
Taipan Resources NL 07 [2000] ATP 18
Interim order
IO undertaking
Declaration
Final order
Undertaking
INTRODUCTION
Panel, Teresa Dyson (sitting President), Christopher Stavrianou and James
declined to conduct
proceedings on an application from Mr Nicholas Bolton in his personal capacity
in relation to the affairs of
Keybridge Capital Limited. Keybridge is the
borrower under a loan facility from WAM Active Limited and is subject to a
bid by Yowie Group Limited. Mr Bolton submitted, among other things,
that a director of Keybridge, Antony Catalano, had “[
teamed] up with
WAM to form a control block of 43.5% + 10% in Keybridge”
and further
that the WAM nominee directors of Keybridge were participating insiders in
relation to Yowie’s bid. The Panel considered
that there was no reasonable
prospect that it would declare the circumstances unacceptable.
these reasons, the following definitions
has the meaning given in paragraph
Bridge Funding Facility
has the meaning given in paragraph
Keybridge Capital Limited
Keybridge s249F Proceedings
has the meaning given in paragraph
No Control Condition
has the meaning given in paragraph
WAM Active Limited
WAM nominees
The directors of Keybridge elected pursuant to the s249F meeting on 10
February 2025, namely Geoffrey Wilson AO, Jesse Hamilton, Martyn
McCathie, and
Sulieman Ravell
Yowie Group Ltd
Yowie s249F meeting
has the meaning given in paragraph
is an ASX listed company (ASX code: KBC).
is an ASX listed company (ASX code: YOW).
is an ASX listed company (ASX code: WAA).
has a relevant interest in 43.5% of Keybridge.
Super Investments Pty Ltd as trustee for Catalano Superannuation has a relevant
interest in 10.6% of Keybridge.
holds a relevant interest in 58.07% of Yowie. Keybridge is indebted to
directors of Keybridge are Messrs Geoffrey Wilson AO, Jesse Hamilton, Martyn
McCathie, Sulieman Ravell and Antony Catalano.
relationship between the parties prior to the Yowie s249F meeting can be shown
diagrammatically as follows.
The applicant, Mr Nicholas Bolton, is a member of Keybridge and Yowie.
27 November 2024, WAM nominated Messrs Wilson, Hamilton, McCathie and Ravell to
the Keybridge board.
Catalano, a Keybridge board member, had been supportive of the previous
Keybridge board
. His relationship
with Mr Bolton soured in the following circumstances:
(a) by separate dealings, the previous board of Keybridge considered that a
company connected to Mr Catalano, Australian Community
Media, owed Keybridge
approximately $23 million in cash and shares.
(b) on 8 December 2024, Mr Catalano, emailed Mr Bolton saying “
seriously running out of patience with the lack of action in relation to the
sale of my shares and a resolution over the ACM
Unless there is an immediate resolution to these issue (sic) you will
no longer have my support at board level
(c) on 9 December 2024, Mr Bolton advised Mr Catalano that Keybridge would not
release the obligation.
9 December 2024, Mills Oakley, on behalf of WAM, gave Keybridge notice of
WAM’s intention to call a s249F meeting.
19 December 2024, WAM by notice under section 249F sought a meeting of Keybridge
shareholders to replace the previous directors
The meeting was
scheduled for 10 February 2025.
10 February 2025, the following events occurred:
(a) At 9.16am, Keybridge published on ASX an announcement dated Sunday 9
February 2025, that Yowie had formally demanded repayment
of $4.6 million by 7
February 2025.
(b) Also at 9.16am, Keybridge published an announcement dated Monday 10 February
2025 on ASX that it had appointed a voluntary administrator.
(c) Keybridge (in Administration) held a s249F meeting of shareholders. Mr
Patton sought to adjourn the meeting. Mr Hamilton took
the chair and completed
the meeting. The WAM nominees were elected to the Keybridge board to replace the
previous Keybridge board
(other than Mr Catalano).
11 February 2025, WAM and Messrs Hamilton, Wilson and McCathie commenced
proceedings in the Supreme Court of New South Wales in
relation to
Keybridge’s administration and the Keybridge s249F meeting (
s249F Proceedings
12 February 2025, WAM offered financing to Keybridge by way of a “Comfort
6 March 2025, WAM offered a “Bridge Funding Facility” term sheet to
Keybridge for bridging financing pending finalisation
of a capital raising.
21 March 2025, Nixon J of the Supreme Court of New South Wales made orders in
the Keybridge s249F Proceedings, including that:
“on 10 February 2025 at 4:30pm, Keybridge validly held a meeting of
its members convened in accordance with s 249F”
“at the Section 249F Meeting, the members of Keybridge resolved
that Mr Bolton, Mr Patton and Mr Dukes be removed as directors
of Keybridge and
that Mr Wilson, Mr Hamilton, Mr McCathie and Mr Ravell be appointed as directors
of Keybridge”
(c) following the s249F meeting, the directors of Keybridge were Messrs
Catalano, Wilson, Hamilton, McCathie and
1 April 2025, Mr Bolton presented a Deed of Company Arrangement to the
Administrator of Keybridge.
9 May 2025, Keybridge announced that the following had occurred:
(a) on 8 May 2025 the NSW Court of
had dismissed Mr
Bolton’s appeal against the orders of Nixon J in the Keybridge s249F
Proceedings and ended the administration
(b) Mr Bolton’s executive roles at Keybridge had been suspended.
9 May 2025, Yowie announced its intention to make a scrip bid for Keybridge
), on conditions including:
(a) that Keybridge not seek to change the composition of the Yowie Board
(b) that Keybridge not encumber its assets (see details in paragraph
“ASIC provides the Company an
exemption under
section 259C(2)
Corporations Act
from the operation of
section 259C(1)
for the purposes of Yowie acquiring KBC Shares pursuant to the
16 May 2025, Keybridge made an announcement on ASX that shareholders should
“take no action” in relation to the Bid.
The announcement stated
that Keybridge did not consider the Bid to be genuine, including because of
the sheer number and breadth of the 35 defeating conditions to the
‘Bid’, many of which will be breached by Keybridge
operational control of its subsidiary, Yowie.
or about 26 May 2025, Keybridge called a
meeting to seek to replace the
Yowie board (
). The calling of the Yowie
meeting for 27 June 2025 at 10:00 am was announced on ASX on 5 June 2025. The
notice of meeting was executed by Messrs Hamilton
and Ravell.
or about 29 May 2025, Australian Style Group Pty Ltd, a company connected to Mr
Bolton and a substantial shareholder of Keybridge,
Keybridge seeking to remove the WAM nominees from the Keybridge board. The
calling of the meeting for 27 June 2025 at
9:00 am was announced on ASX on 13
6 June 2025, by notice dated 5 June 2025, Keybridge announced that it had
entered a bridge funding facility with WAM (the
Bridge Funding
The announcement
The Bridge Funding Facility was negotiated with
WAM Active on an arm’s length basis by those of Keybridge’s
who are independent of the Wilson Asset Management
announcement set forth the material terms of the Bridge Funding Facility
including the following:
“A change of directors of the
Borrower such that a majority of the directors nominated by the Financiers cease
to comprise a
majority of the directors of the Borrower, or a change in
Guarantor directors without the prior written consent of the Financier
event of default.”
13 June 2025, Yowie lodged its bidder's statement with ASIC. The Bid had a
condition that:
“Prior to the end of the Offer Period Yowie
shareholders do not pass a resolution in general meeting (including any
set out in the general meeting of Yowie Shareholders purportedly
called by Keybridge under
section 249F
Corporations Act
in its notice of
meeting dated 26 May 2025) the effect of which is to change the composition of
the board of directors of Yowie.”
Bid did not include the condition relating to ASIC relief under
stated in paragraph
) but included
the following conditions instead:
‘Minimum Acceptance Condition’ (excluding any relevant interest by
reason of Keybridge controlling Yowie) and
Control Condition’ in these terms:
“By no later than the end of
the Offer Period, Keybridge does not control (within the meaning of
section 259E
Corporations Act
Bid stated that:
Neither the Minimum Acceptance Condition
nor the No Control Condition may be waived by Yowie. Despite the previous
sentence, Yowie
may fulfil the No Control Condition by issuing Yowie Shares to
those Keybridge Shareholders who have accepted the Offer if the effect
issue is that Keybridge does not control (within the meaning of
section 259E
Corporations Act
) Yowie immediately after the issue
“The satisfaction or waiver of the Minimum Acceptance Condition and
the No Control Condition are each a condition precedent
to the formation of any
contract arising from acceptance of an Offer. Yowie will not process acceptances
while either Condition has
not been fulfilled or waived. As a result, if you
accept the Offer, you will be able to revoke your acceptance at any time while
either Condition has not been fulfilled or waived. Neither such Condition can be
waived at any time while Keybridge continues to
control Yowie. However, the No
Control Condition can be fulfilled by Yowie issuing Yowie Shares to those
Keybridge Shareholders who
have accepted the Offer if the effect of the issue
would be that Keybridge no longer controls Yowie.”
APPLICATION
Declaration Sought
application dated 26 June 2025, Mr Bolton sought a declaration of unacceptable
circumstances.
Bolton submitted that WAM and Yowie were competing for control of Keybridge. He
submitted that WAM was doing so using Keybridge’s
need for funding and
Yowie was doing so through “
a s602 compliant bid
”. Mr Bolton
submitted that:
“Whether Yowie was on notice of WAM
director intentions to control Yowie is not the point. The circumstances had
changed the
moment Keybridge was released from Administration and Yowie made its
bid. The participating insiders from that point immediately
ought have become
recused, and so their opinion prior to the bid ceases to have any real relevance
as a competing potential bidder.”
other things, Mr Bolton also submitted, in effect, that:
Each of the WAM Nominees are participating
(b) WAM and Mr Catalano are associated by reason of the section 249F notice in
relation to Keybridge
(c) WAM and Keybridge (and others) are associated by reason of the condition in
the Bridge Funding Facility set forth in paragraph
(d) the Bridge Funding Facility was coercive, in order to prevent removal of the
WAM nominees from Keybridge’s board pursuant
to Australian Style’s
section 249F notice and (if removal succeeds) to put Keybridge into an
insolvency position.”
Interim orders sought
Bolton sought interim orders that:
(a) Keybridge be prevented from voting any Yowie shares at the Yowie s249F
(b) Alternatively, any vote cast at the Yowie s249F meeting influenced by the
WAM nominees is void and the WAM nominees be prohibited
from any involvement in
Keybridge’s decision as to how to vote.
(c) Alternatively, the Yowie s249F meeting be postponed until after the Panel
proceedings.
President considered the interim orders request on an urgent basis given the
application was made the day before the Yowie s249F
meeting. The President
decided not to make any orders, because (among other things):
(a) The interim orders were sought by the applicant at a very late stage, making
it difficult to assess the strength of the evidence
and likelihood of
unacceptable circumstances.
(b) Given that the material facts relevant to this matter have existed since
6 June 2025 (i.e. the announcement of the Bridge Funding
Facility), it
appears that it was open for the applicant to have made this application
(c) Keybridge would be prejudiced as the major shareholder in Yowie if any of
the interim orders were made.
(d) A sitting Panel can make subsequent orders, if necessary, to address or
remedy any outstanding issues.
consideration of interim orders by the President, on 30 June 2025 Yowie
announced on ASX that the Yowie section 249F meeting
called by Keybridge had
resulted in the remaining directors of Yowie (Messrs Schwarze and Agocs; Messrs
Patton and Bolton having
resigned) being removed and that the WAM nominees and
Mr Catalano were appointed.
Final orders sought
Bolton sought final orders to the effect that:
(a) Keybridge not vote its shares in Yowie at the Yowie s249F meeting it called
to replace the Yowie board.
(b) WAM's shares in Keybridge not be counted at the section 249F meeting called
by Australian Style in Keybridge on resolutions to
remove the WAM nominees.
(c) Any Keybridge decision affecting the Bid, that involved the WAM nominees,
between the announcement of the Bid and the date of
the order be declared
(d) The WAM nominees be prohibited from participating in any deliberations or
decision making regarding the Bid or any current or
future arrangements between
Keybridge and WAM.
(e) Keybridge must appoint two independent directors to its board, and provide
monthly reports, and for 12 months WAM must not vote
to remove them.
(f) Keybridge must “
establish an independent board committee and set of
protocols consistent with Guidance Note 19 to regulate the conduct of the
board during the Yowie takeover bid
Out of process submissions
Bolton made 2 out of process submissions, and Keybridge made one response, that
we agreed to receive:
(a) an email from Mr Bolton dated 4 July 2025
(b) a response from Keybridge dated 4 July 2025 and
(c) an email from Mr Bolton dated 7 July 2025.
4 July 2025, Mr Bolton provided the Panel with an update to his application. He
submitted (among other things) matters that Keybridge
and Yowie shareholders
would not have been aware of, namely that:
“On 27 June 2025 the WAM Nominees were removed from Keybridge at a
s249F EGM (the WAM Nominees appear to contest this outcome
and it is the subject
of [Federal Court]
proceedings).”
“The WAM Nominees contend that they were appointed to the Yowie
Board (by Keybridge) on 27 June 2025, however this looks to
be invalid and
otherwise subject to court proceedings as to whether Keybridge was eligible to
vote on those resolutions (and a matter
before the present Panel).”
Bolton submitted that “
WAM have a direct relevant interest in 58% of
Yowie shares under a security arrangement at Keybridge which gives them a direct
economic interest in Yowie shares different to their interest in Yowie
as a Keybridge shareholder (i.e. the difference between s608(1)
s608(3)). As a consequence, they hold a material economic interest in
Yowie as bidder of Keybridge of the type that prohibits
their participation at
the target under GN19 in addition to other reasons in the Application.
This step to create the security interest
and flowing circumstances (after the
announcement of the Yowie Offer) is of itself unacceptable circumstances due to
its frustrating
action under the Yowie
Bolton also submitted that the election of the new Yowie board was
likely void or invalid”
and this created uncertainty during
the bid period as to who was acting for the bidder. In our view, the validity of
the board election
is a matter for the Court, as Keybridge submitted
he submitted that the ASX waiver to facilitate WAM taking security over
Keybridge’s assets, when Keybridge was in default,
triggered a defeating
condition in Yowie’s bid, and this happened “
almost a month after
being placed on notice of the Yowie Bid and its conditions.
appears to be related to the frustrating action argument made in paragraph
submitted in the response dated 4 July 2025 that “
Mr Bolton’s out
of process email raises nothing relevant to the Panel’s deliberations on
an application almost identical
to the points raised previously in applications
by Yowie Group Limited, on which the Panel declined to conduct
proceedings
”, that (in effect) the WAM Nominees were not removed from
the Keybridge board on 27 June 2025 and further, that disputes about
meetings are matters for the Court.
this response, Mr Bolton made the further out of process submission on 7 July
2025. He submitted (among other things) that the
financing announcement on 6
June 2025 stated that the financiers were “
entities within the Wilson Asset Management Group
” (his emphasis)
and the other entities “
have gone from a 0% voting power to a 58%
voting power in Yowie without an exemption under s611 and have, accordingly,
contravened
s606 by this transaction
Bolton also identified a potential breach of confidentiality undertakings. This
will be referred to the Panel President for further
consideration.
have considered all the material and address specifically only that part of the
material we consider necessary to explain our reasoning.
our consideration of this matter, we have kept in mind the imprimatur of the
review Panel in
Pinnacle 08
“The commercial
community is seeking in the Panel, not for a second-rate court, but for a
first-rate commercial Panel. It should
not therefore fall between two stools and
attempt to replicate court processes, thereby unduly delaying fast-moving
transactions
and the bid itself.
And to what end would we conduct this inquiry? Our decision can only be
based on the existence, prevention, removal and remediation
of unacceptable
circumstances which impact on Reliable’s bid. Legal consequences of
people's behaviour can obviously be circumstances.
But even assuming such
consequences can be established fairly and reliably, they are only relevant
insofar as they impact on the
bid by creating unacceptable circumstances, or
bear upon the public
Accordingly,
we have focussed on the commercial realities of the material before us in
considering whether there is any prospect that
we would make a declaration of
unacceptable circumstances, drawing on our skills, knowledge and experience as
practitioners.
Insider participation
Note 19 sets out the policy underpinning insider
participation:
“The policy bases for this note are that
insider participation in a control transaction should not inhibit:
a. the acquisition of control over voting shares taking place in an
efficient, competitive and informed market (section 602(a)) and
b. shareholders and directors being given enough information to enable
them to assess the merits of a proposal (section
602(b)(iii).”
was made clear in
Strategic Minerals
transactions
involving insiders require an increased sensitivity and vigilance (including by
advisers) to ensure that conflicts are
avoided, full disclosure of all material
information is made and consideration by the target board and management of
their response,
is undertaken free from any actual influence (or appearance of
influence), from participating
Bolton submitted that Messrs Hamilton and Ravell “
as participating
insiders determined to call a s249F meeting of Keybridge that will, if Keybridge
are allowed to vote to pass its
own resolutions on 27 June 2025, cause the
failure of the Yowie Bid.”
Bolton submitted that each of the WAM nominees were participating insiders by,
at least, the operation of the Bridge Funding Facility
and the preceding offers
to make that finance available as a basis to end the administration of
Keybridge. He submitted that “
the result of removing conflicted
participating insiders is that the Keybridge board would not be quorate in
dealing with its defence
or proposed frustrating actions in response to the
Bolton also submitted that WAM is a bidder or potential bidder for Keybridge,
whose interests are adverse to the Bid, so the WAM
nominees were participating
insiders who could not participate in Keybridge’s board decisions on the
Bid or the Bridge Funding
our view, commercially, WAM is not competing with Yowie for control of Keybridge
as it already has practical control. Its shareholding
alone may be sufficient to
give it control for all practical purposes, but it is particularly so when its
43.5% is added to Catalano
Super’s 10.6%. These parties are, at least for
the time being, of the same mind regarding Keybridge. The Bridge Funding
supports WAM’s control position but is not a control transaction.
Accordingly, we consider that the concerns raised by Mr Bolton
in relation to
approval of the Bridge Funding Facility do not engage the policy bases
underlying the Panel’s policy on insider
participation (see paragraph
above). WAM’s contractual
arrangements with Keybridge involve potential questions of directors’
duties that are not
relation to the insider participation concerns relating to the WAM nominees
making decisions in relation to the Bid, in our view,
there is no reasonable
prospect that this would lead to unacceptable circumstances in the circumstances
of this matter and on the
materials provided.
would not impose on Keybridge a requirement for an independent board committee
because, in our view, given the unusual circumstances
of this matter, it would
be an unreasonable burden. It would be unreasonable because we are not
persuaded that the Bid has any realistic
prospect of
, for the following
reasons, among others:
(a) In our view prima facie there are disclosure deficiencies in the
bidder’s statement such that it appears not to comply
requirements in s636
example, Keybridge shareholders need to be properly informed about the value of
the scrip consideration and Yowie cannot provide
that without Yowie’s and
Keybridge’s 31 December 2024 financial statements (and their current cash
positions).
(b) The No Control Condition (which was added as a condition after the Bid was
announced), in our view, is likely to contravene the
prohibition on a bidder
including conditions in its offer that were not included in its announcement of
the offer. Under section
631, the terms and conditions of a bid must be the same
as, or not substantially less favourable than, those in the public proposal.
Accordingly, this condition should be excluded and without it there is no
certainty that the necessary legal requirement that Keybridge
cease to control
Yowie will occur.
(c) Even if the No Control Condition was allowed, it suffers from timing
problems that perhaps only a court could resolve, if they
can be resolved at
all. It relies on completion occurring before the offer period closes, which
would require that the offer becomes
unconditional before the closing date, but
it is difficult to see how this could be achieved given that the No Control
cannot be waived
would only be satisfied (if Yowie’s application of it is correct) by Yowie
issuing the consideration shares. Sequencing
of the transfers to avoid
contraventions of s259C is, at best, uncertain given that, with its current
shareholding, Keybridge controls
(d) Keybridge could simply vote against the condition of Yowie shareholder
approval (needed for WAM to be able to accept the offer).
Moreover, it is a
condition within the control of Yowie, or at least its parent company.
(e) The “no change to board composition” condition, and perhaps
others (notably the “No material litigation”
condition), has already
been breached.
follows that we do not accept Mr Bolton’s submission that minority
Keybridge shareholders will be deprived of an opportunity
to exit into a
Chapter 6 compliant bid”
are not saying that insider participation is not important. It is the
responsibility of directors to be mindful of actual and perceived
conflicts of
interest when undertaking their duties. Guidance Note 19 “
Participation in Control Transactions
” suggests in some circumstances
for the appointment of an independent board committee consisting of those
directors who are
not participating insiders.
Bolton also submitted that, by executing the Bridge Funding Facility, Keybridge
took steps that constitute coercive conduct
” to prevent
the Australian Style section 249F meeting in Keybridge succeeding and
(b) entered “
a form of impermissible poison pill
” to thwart
the Yowie Bid.
do not accept this. The default event in the Bridge Funding Facility that the
WAM nominees retain a majority of the Keybridge
board members is a facet of
WAM’s practical control and commercially reasonable in the circumstances.
It is Keybridge’s
shareholding structure, not the existence of the loan,
that was likely to prevent the success of Australian Style’s section
meeting in Keybridge. We do not consider it likely that we would find any
coercion in this regard to lead to unacceptable circumstances.
Association
Bolton also submitted that the dispute that Keybridge (under the previous board)
had with Mr Catalano was the catalyst for him
seeking to team up with
WAM to form a control block of 43.5% + 10% in Keybridge that has led to the
control situation today at Keybridge
the extent that Mr Bolton is making an association claim here, we consider that
it is not supported by evidence. Mr Bolton submitted
circumstances where WAM necessarily needed Mr Catalano’s vote to pass a
resolution, it seems apparent that the close timing
of the two above events [ie,
not releasing ACM from its obligation and Mills Oakley sending notice of a s249F
meeting] are in concert
.” We are not persuaded by the timing. It is
equally open to consider that Mr Catalano and WAM were simply of a like mind.
The fact that Mr Catalano had come around to the same view as WAM is not,
without more, evidence of association. This interpretation
is supported by Mr
Catalano saying in an email to Mr Bolton “...
This is personal and
I’m going to expose you
.” He does not suggest in any
correspondence that we have been provided with that he is going to act together
with any other
party. Moreover, the Bridge Funding Facility was conditional on
Keybridge retaining a majority of the WAM nominees on the board;
include Mr Catalano, which one might have expected if they were associates.
are not satisfied that the application meets the Mount Gibson hurdle for
conducting proceedings on the application in relation
to association, namely
“The Panel's starting point was that it was for Mount
Gibson - the applicant - to demonstrate a sufficient body of evidence
association and to convince the Panel as to that association, albeit with proper
inferences being
Bolton also submitted that by entering into the Bridge Funding Facility (with
“such a board composition condition”)
“WAM and Keybridge
became associates of each other”
“Ravell and WAM became
associates with each other in the affairs of Keybridge”
“Keybridge became associates of each of the WAM Nominees”
Mr Bolton submitted this resulted in a contravention of s606, as explained in
his out of process submission dated 7 July 2025:
in the WAM group have obtained a direct relevant interest in Yowie under s608(1)
by operation of the security instrument
(noting none of the s609 exemptions
apply). The financing announcement on 6 June 2025 (albeit it [is] dated 5 June
2025) states
that the financiers are “WAM Active and
other entities
within the Wilson Asset Management Group
” (emphasis added).
These “other” entities, whoever they may be, can only have had
(prior to the security arrangements) a voting power in
Yowie by way of
association under s12 (if at all). They now have a 58% direct relevant
interest in Yowie under s608(1). That is,
given the operation of s610(3),
they have gone from a 0% voting power to a 58% voting power in Yowie without an
exemption under s611
and have, accordingly, contravened s606 by this transaction
on 5 June 2025.”
consider that we do not need to decide whether there has been such a
contravention of s606. But even if we addressed the issue
and found a
contravention, the Panel has previously held that technical submissions pointing
to contraventions of Chapter 6 do not
necessarily result in unacceptable
circumstances.
Frustrating action
Bolton submitted that the WAM nominees seeking (through Keybridge) appointment
to the Yowie board engaged in a frustrating action
triggering the
failure of the Yowie takeover bid.
Relevantly,
the detailed conditions that Yowie announced on 9 May 2025
(8) Conduct of KBC’s business
Between the Announcement Date and the end of the offer period, none of KBC
and any body corporate which is or becomes a subsidiary
of KBC, without the
written consent of Yowie:
(b) Gives or agrees to give any encumbrance (including a Security Interest
or mortgage) over any of its assets otherwise in the ordinary
business; or
(c) Appoints any additional directors to its board of directors whether to
fill a casual vacancy or otherwise.
(9) No change to Yowie board composition
KBC, its directors, officers or associates do not:
(a) Issue a notice pursuant to section 249D, 249F or 249G for the purpose
of convening a meeting of Yowie shareholders; or
(b) Propose a resolution at a meeting of Yowie shareholders; or
(c) take any actions,
that would influence the control or composition of the Yowie board of
the issue of the bidder’s statement the conditions had changed. Condition
(8), now 10.14(h), excluded Yowie or its subsidiaries
from the list of Keybridge
subsidiaries that were subject to the restrictions. Condition (9), now
10.14(i), provided that Yowie
shareholders not pass a resolution the effect of
which was to change the composition of the board of directors of Yowie.
the Bid fails remains to be
As discussed above, we are
not persuaded that the Bid has any realistic prospect of proceeding.
addressed the issue of frustrating action in Keybridge 17. The issue was also
raised on review of our decision by the review Panel
in Keybridge
The change in condition
(assuming it does not run foul of section 631) does not change the position in
Bolton’s submissions concerning creating the security interest over
Keybridge’s assets, said to trigger a defeating
condition in the Bid, is
not a new circumstance in our view. It is not a frustrating action giving rise
to unacceptable circumstances.
a number of the submissions in the application sought to revisit, or
substantially overlapped with, matters that had already
been considered and
determined in earlier court and Panel proceedings. Yet others were highly
long ago as
, the Panel said:
“... Although
Taipan raises some new arguments in this application, we were concerned that
many of the arguments raised by Taipan
in this application were duplicated
arguments that were raised by Taipan and not accepted by the Panel in the Taipan
6 Application.
While we decided to conduct proceedings in this case, it may be
appropriate for a sitting Panel (other than a review Panel) in the
decline to conduct proceedings in relation to an application if enough of the
issues raised have been previously considered
and determined by a sitting
Other considerations
of the final orders requested by Mr Bolton have been overtaken by events. For
example, the two section 249F meetings have
been held and key aspects of the
final orders that he sought related to those meetings. While some final orders
relate to the Bid,
it is unclear whether a reconstituted Yowie board will pursue
consider it unlikely that, even if we found unacceptable circumstances, we would
make any of the remaining orders. The question
of what remedies are available is
one of the considerations a Panel takes into account when deciding whether to
conduct proceedings
and can be a
basis for not conducting
proceedings.
In our view this
is another reason not to conduct proceedings in this matter.
also considered whether it was an appropriate application on which to conduct
proceedings, given the history of Keybridge applications,
Yowie applications and
other related applications involving Mr Bolton in a corporate, rather than
personal, role. In other words,
even if the application is not vexatious or an
abuse of process, or made otherwise for a collateral purpose,
(none of which we form a concluded
view on), as a matter of public policy many of the issues have had (indeed,
continue to have)
long, sometimes tortured, ventilation – before the Panel
and the Courts - and we are not minded to require the parties to engage
consider it is not against the public interest to decline to conduct
proceedings.
the reasons above, we do not consider that there is any reasonable prospect that
we would make a declaration of unacceptable circumstances.
Accordingly, we have
decided not to conduct proceedings in relation to the application under
regulation 20
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Regulations
that we make no declaration, we make no final orders, including as to
Teresa Dyson
President of the sitting
Decision dated 10 July 2025
Reasons given to parties
Reasons published 7August 2025
Mr Nicholas Bolton
Gilbert + Tobin
There was no objection
to the same sitting Panel as in
Yowie Group Ltd 04 & 05
Keybridge Capital Limited 17
Yowie Group Ltd 06 and Keybridge
Capital Limited 19
Messrs Bolton, Patton, Dukes and
Announced by Keybridge
on 24 December 2024. It released further announcements on 10 January 2025 and 14
January 2025, referring to
WAM’s section 249F notice that was sent to
shareholders as “defective”. It appears that Keybridge did not
WAM’s actual section 249F
In the matter of
Keybridge Capital Limited
[2025] NSWSC
Bolton v WAM Active Ltd
[2025] NSWCA 99
Nixon J had ordered the end of the administration but stayed the orders, and the
Court of Appeal had granted a further stay until
the appeal had been heard and
The facility is
referred to in the application as the
although it
was not clear from his application in relation to whom, since they had board
control of the target (Keybridge) and sought,
by a section 249F meeting, board
control of the bidder (Yowie)
Mr Bolton subsequently provided a copy of a Federal Court Originating Process
filed by Australian Style Group Pty Ltd on 2 July
Pinnacle VRB Ltd
[2001] ATP 17 at [55]-[56]. See also
Excelsior Capital Limited
[2020] ATP 25 at [19]
Tinkerbell Enterprises Pty Limited as Trustee for The Leanne Catelan Trust v
Takeovers Panel
[2012] FCA 1272
Guidance Note 19:
Insider Participation in Control Transactions, Issue 3, para [4] (footnotes
Minerals Corporation NL
[2018] ATP 2 at
On 10 July 2025 (the
same day as our decision), Yowie announced that it will not proceed with
despatch of offers and the Bidder’s
Statement in relation to the Proposed
Bid, stating that following the outcome of the Section 249F Meeting, the
“no change to
Yowie Board composition” condition to the bid had been
triggered and that it is not in Yowie’s interest to proceed with
For example, noting
that if all Keybridge shareholders accepted the Bid, the number of Yowie shares
on issue would increase from
263,773,086 to 479,192,738. There is a question as
to whether the bidder’s statement properly disclosed the effect of the
offer for Yowie shares under the bid on Yowie given this potentially large
increase in Yowie’s share capital, see s636(1)(g)
The bidder’s
statement provides in paragraph 10.15:
Each of the Minimum
Acceptance Condition and the No Control Condition is a condition precedent to
the acquisition of any right or
interest in Shares by Yowie under the Offer and
will prevent a contract to sell Shares from arising until it is fulfilled or
Neither the Minimum Acceptance Condition nor
the No Control Condition may be waived by Yowie. Despite the previous sentence,
may fulfil the No Control Condition by issuing Yowie Shares to those
Keybridge Shareholders who have accepted the Offer if the effect
of the issue is
that Keybridge does not control (within the meaning of
section 259E
Corporations Act
) Yowie immediately after the
Gibson Iron Limited
[2008] ATP 4 at
GoldLink IncomePlus
[2008] ATP 19 at [11] to
10 July 2025 Yowie announced that it would not proceed with the bid for
Taipan Resources
[2000] ATP 18 at
Takeovers Panel
Procedural Guidelines, 1 April 2021, paragraph
Holdings NL 01R
[2014] ATP 23 at [25]
Immunotherapeutics Limited
[2017] ATP 2 at [26], the Panel acknowledged that
it may be appropriate
’ to decline to conduct proceedings
if the application is vexatious or frivolous or has been made for a
collateral purpose.
The President’s Club Limited 02
[2016] ATP 1 at [96], the Panel approved of the statement of Roden J in
Attorney-General (NSW) v Wentworth
[1988] NSWCA 8
(1988) 14 NSWLR 481
that proceedings
vexatious if they are brought for collateral purposes, and not for
the purpose of having the court adjudicate on the issues to which
RTF format (9.12 MB)
Signed PDF/A format