Logan v Western Australia [2000] HREOCA 35 (12 September 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS & EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION ACT 1992
KAREN JUNE LOGAN
Complainant
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA (MINISTRY OF JUSTICE)
REASONS FOR DECISION OF INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
ANDREW BEECH
Location of
Hearing: Perth
Hearing Dates: 27-31 March 2000, 17, 18 & 20 April 2000
Date of Decision: 12 September 2000
Appearances: Ms J Stevens instructed by Marks & Sands Lawyers for the
complainant
Ms C Thatcher and Ms J Pritchard instructed by the Crown Solicitor for
the State of Western Australia for the respondent
1. INTRODUCTION
This is an inquiry pursuant to s.79(1) of the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) (“the DDA”) into a
complaint by Karen June Logan against the State of Western Australia, by whom
she was employed
within the Ministry of Justice until late 1997.
By letter dated 24 February 1999 the Acting Disability Discrimination
Commissioner referred, pursuant to s.76 of the DDA, the complaint
by Ms Logan to
the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (“the Commission”)
for inquiry.
The complaint by Ms Logan (made by letter dated 16 February 1998) was, in
summary, first, that the respondent dismissed her from her
employment because
she could not restrain prisoners because of her disability, and, secondly, did
not consider her application for
employment as a stores/laundry officer because
she could not restrain prisoners because of her disability. Ms Logan had, for
years, worked as a prison officer for the respondent at Bunbury Regional
Prison (“Bunbury Prison”). In mid to late 1997
Ms Logan applied for
a newly created position of stores/laundry officer at Bunbury Prison.
It is common ground that on 20 November 1997 the complainant was dismissed
from her employment with the respondent. The respondent
also admitted that the
dismissal was on the grounds her disability. The disability referred to has been
described in medical reports
tendered into evidence as “multi-level, lower
lumbar, degenerative disc disease” (see Exhibit G, report of Dr Batalin
dated 11 September 1996).
The respondent says her disability meant that
Ms Logan was unable to restrain prisoners and that the ability to restrain
is an inherent requirement of the job of a prison officer.
The respondent also admitted that Ms Logan was not considered for the then
newly created position of stores/laundry officer for the
same reason, namely
that her disability meant that she was unable to restrain prisoners. It said
that the ability to restrain prisoners
was also an inherent requirement of the
job of stores/laundry officer.
From this skeletal outline of the facts the central issues in this inquiry
can, I think, be identified. The respondent’s conduct
dismissing the complainant and, secondly, not considering her for the
stores/laundry position amounts to disability discrimination.
In each respect,
the respondent treated Ms Logan “less favourably, in circumstances that
are the same or are not materially
different, than [it] treats or would treat a
person without the disability” because of the complainant’s
disability within
the meaning of
DDA. This was accepted by the respondent in
the course of the inquiry. In the light of that admission by the respondent, the
of indirect discrimination need not be considered. The issue is whether
the admitted discrimination was unlawful.
The respondent contends that its conduct, referred to above, was not unlawful
discrimination because Ms Logan’s disability meant
that she would be
unable to carry out one of the inherent requirements of her employment, as well
the employment for which she applied,
namely the ability to restrain prisoners.
More specifically, the respondent contended that it was an inherent requirement
employment that she could restrain prisoners without undue risk to
herself and to others and that Ms Logan could not carry out that
requirement.
Thus the issues central to this inquiry include the identification of the
“particular employment” (within
the meaning of
DDA), the identification of the inherent requirements of the particular
employment, and whether or not Ms Logan was able to
carry out those inherent
requirements.
2. THE EVIDENCE
A large volume of evidence was admitted in this
inquiry. The taking of evidence took some 7 days. In addition a large number of
statements, some quite lengthy, were admitted as exhibits. There were
also a substantial number of documentary exhibits received.
There were, on the
other hand, relatively few issues on which there was a direct conflict of oral
evidence. Few, if any, of such
issues are central to the critical issues in the
inquiry. Where there is a direct conflict of evidence on a matter of real
significance
I will identify and resolve that conflict in making the factual
findings which follow.
It is neither necessary nor desirable that a comprehensive outline of all of
this material be provided in these reasons. Rather, I
will attempt to outline
the relevant history, as it developed and identify the areas of evidence
relevant to the issues in the inquiry,
as I perceive them.
2.1 Background facts
In May 1986 Ms Logan commenced work as a trainee prison officer. For the
first 12 weeks as a trainee she undertook a prison officer
training program at
the Academy at Woorooloo. This course included a 5 day segment on
“Prisoner Management and Restraints Training”.
There was some focus,
in submissions, on the question of how substantial the training in relation to
restraints was. There was also
evidence of a range of restraint techniques.
These included both physical and non-physical methods of restraining and
involving one or several prison officers. This is something to which
I will return.
After completing 9 months on probation Ms Logan became a permanent prison
officer and worked at Canning Vale Prison.
In early 1987 Ms Logan injured her back at work. While bending down in the
kitchen in the prison she got pain across her lower back
and down her leg. She
was off work for about 9 months.
In or about late 1989 she suffered a recurrence of her back injury. This
occurred while she was bending down checking underneath some
vehicles. She was
away from work for about 2 months as a result.
By about 1993 Ms Logan moved to the Bunbury Regional Prison where she worked
as a shift prison officer.
On about 5 or 6 August 1996 Ms Logan suffered another recurrence of her back
injury. This occurred while she was getting out of her
car. After having reached
over to the glove box to get her wallet she experienced a sharp pain in her
lower back and pain radiating
into both legs.
She was then off work until about 16 December 1996 when she commenced a
On 11 September 1996, at the request of the respondent, she was seen by a
specialist orthopaedic surgeon, Mr Nick Batalin. A report
from Mr Batalin dated
11 September 1996 is part of Exhibit G. Mr Batalin had been provided with a
document entitled “Physical
Requirements of Prison Officer Duties”.
That document was annexure A to the statement of Mr Trevor Scorer. Mr Scorer has
working within the Ministry of Justice since February 1993 and is currently
the manager of the Employee Welfare and Rehabilitation
Unit of the Ministry of
Justice. He explained that the document referred to above had been created after
discussions between employees
of the Ministry of Justice in around 1993.
I will not set out the document in detail but it included, under the heading
of “Prisoner Restraints”, the following:
“Prison Officers are required to respond to emergency/prisoner
disturbance situations and physically restrain aggressive or
violent prisoners.
Physical requirements may include warding off blows, physically holding and
manoeuvring a prisoner, or application
of restraints techniques or equipment in
a way that minimizes injury to all parties involved. This is considered one of
physical tasks, and is unpredictable in its time and place”.
In his report of 11 September 1996 Mr Batalin stated that activities such as
restraining of prisoners, repetitive twisting and bending
could adversely affect
Ms Logan’s back.
From the time of the recurrence of her back injury in 1996 until this inquiry
Ms Logan has regularly seen her general practitioner
Dr Peter Rae.
In about late October 1996 the respondent referred Ms Logan to a
rehabilitation service provider named Advanced Personnel Management.
relevant officer was Ms Jennifer Wilkes, who gave evidence at the inquiry. (In
1996 Ms Wilkes was known by her maiden name of
Schurmann however I will refer to
her as Ms Wilkes throughout this decision). Ms Wilkes interviewed Ms Logan on or
1996. In the course of that interview Ms Logan stated that
among the normal work duties associated with her work as a shift prison
was “restraining prisoners where necessary”. During the interview
she told Ms Wilkes that “given her current
physical limitation she would
find difficulty with the standing and walking requirements in her normal
position”. Ms Logan
also said that she would “need to be fit to
handle any security situations before returning to her prison officer
Ms Logan agreed, in cross-examination, that she had said things to this
effect to Ms Wilkes.
During November and early December 1996 steps were taken to devise a
rehabilitation programme so as to allow Ms Logan to attempt a
gradual return to
normal work duties.
In his report dated 28 November 1996 to Ms Wilkes, Dr Rae observed that Ms
Logan had, by that date, been off work for almost 4 months
with only moderate
improvement in symptoms. He noted that she was well motivated to return to work.
I would add that Ms Logan’s
motivation to return to work emerges
consistently from the evidence of all those in contact with her during 1996 and
1997. Dr Rae
also made suggestions for appropriate physical precautions for the
proposed return to work programme. Finally, he stated that it
“reasonable to think that if [Ms Logan] is not able to return to full
duties within the next 3 months then it is unlikely
that she will ever regain
that level of fitness”.
On 12 or 13 December 1996 a meeting occurred between Ms Logan, Mr Keith
Flynn, the Superintendent of Bunbury Prison, Mr Dan Millard,
an officer of the
Employee Welfare Unit of the Ministry of Justice, Mr Stephen Sandilands, also of
the Employee Welfare Unit, and
Ms Wilkes. Mr Phillip Giblett, a prison officer
at Bunbury Prison and a representative of the Western Australian Prison
Union (“the Union”) may also have been present.
The evidence of both Mr Sandilands and Mr Millard was to the effect that the
representatives of the Ministry of Justice emphasised
to Ms Logan that her
sufficiently to enable her to carry
out her duties and, further, that a return
to work programme generally lasted only for 3 months. Although the possibility
of extensions
was discussed, it was made clear that rehabilitation programmes
were necessarily of finite duration and, if there was insufficient
improvement,
an officer might be required to be reviewed by a Medical Board. That evidence
was not challenged and I accept it.
Shortly after this meeting Ms Logan commenced a graduated return to work
rehabilitation programme. The programme involved her working
increasing number of hours per week performing limited duties assisting the
officer responsible for stores at the prison.
On the material available, the
programme appears to have been professionally devised and implemented. No
suggestion to the contrary
Ms Logan agreed, during cross-examination, that when she commenced the return
to work programme she understood that she was performing
duties which were not
part of a designated job but which had been contrived for her. As it was put by
a number of witnesses, she
was performing “supernumerary” duties.
Exhibit C is a letter from Dr Rae that, on its face, was dated either 13
January 1997 or 13 April 1997. Dr Rae said in evidence that
his notes suggested
that he had written to Ms Wilkes on 13 January 1997 and there was no note of any
letter on 13 April 1997. On
that basis I conclude that Exhibit C was most likely
dated 13 January 1997.
That letter stated that Ms Logan had mentioned the possibility of full time
employment in prison stores. Dr Rae expressed strong support
possibility noting that it gave job and task flexibility “...without the
contingency of prisoner constraint [sic
– restraint]”. On the basis
of Dr Rae’s evidence, I consider that the reference to the contingency of
restraint was one which had come from his discussions with Ms Logan. In
other words, by January 1997 Ms Logan had mentioned to Dr
Rae that the position
as a shift prison officer involved the potential need to restrain prisoners.
That is consistent with it having
also been mentioned by Ms Logan to Ms Wilkes
at their initial meeting.
There was ongoing regular contact between Ms Logan and Ms Wilkes. By around
mid-February 1997 Ms Logan told Ms Wilkes that she did
not feel she had the
physical capacity to return to her pre-injury position of prison officer. She
also told Ms Wilkes that she was
keen to pursue permanent employment in the
stores should such a position be made available.
On 13 February 1997 Dr Rae wrote to Ms Wilkes. In his letter he expressed the
view that if a permanent position in stores became available
it would be an
ideal solution to Ms Logan’s problems. He also commented that Ms Logan was
not going to be able to work again
in the full capacity of a prison officer.
On 20 February 1997 Ms Logan saw Mr Batalin again. He commented that she
should not return to work which would subject her back to
repetitive bending or
heavy lifting, but that he saw no contra-indication for work as a light store
person on a full time basis.
During this period, and independently of Ms Logan’s situation, the
staffing arrangements at the Bunbury Prison had been under
particular, a proposal for the creation of a new position developed. To put this
in context it is necessary to say something
Bunbury Prison.
2.2 Bunbury Prison
A site plan of the Bunbury Prison was tendered in evidence. From the plan it
can be seen that a number of buildings and other structures
are contained within
a razor wire perimeter fence. There are four blocks within which prisoners are
housed. These were described
as C block, self care units, minimum security and
maximum security. There is a kitchen, canteen and dining room in which meals are
prepared and taken. There is a separately fenced industrial area. That area has
a number of workshops including workshops for mechanics,
carpentry, metal work,
maintenance, grounds, vegetable preparation and a boot shop. There is also a
market garden outside the perimeter
Employees within the prison may be categorised as shift prison officers,
industrial officers and others.
2.2.1 Shift prison officers
As the name suggests, shift prison officers would work, over a period of
months, on various shifts. Some of the shifts included working
in cell blocks,
gatehouse control or sallyport as well as working as workshop disciplinary
officers. In each case, the shift prison
officer would have responsibility for
various duties within the area of his or her roster. For example, some shift
prison officers
would open up prison cells in each block each morning. A shift
prison officer who was working in the cell blocks would be responsible
supervising the prisoners in that block going to and from meals, to the workshop
area and so on. Three officers would normally
be attached to C Block, where
there might be more than 80 prisoners.
Ms Logan was a shift prison officer until her injury in August 1996.
2.2.2 Industrial officers
Evidence was led that in 1997 there were about 20 industrial officers
employed at Bunbury Prison. Of these, about half were what is
termed Group 1
industrial officers, the other half Group 2 industrial officers. Group 2
industrial officers had a trade qualification.
So, for example, a qualified
mechanic would work in that capacity in the workshop. Group 1 industrial
officers did not have any trade
qualification. These positions were
traditionally filled from the ranks of prison officers, often when a prison
officer wished to
stop working the 12 hour shifts then associated with shift
prison officer work.
Group 1 industrial officers had the primary responsibility for the discipline
of prisoners in the industrial area with assistance
provided, at times, by
workshop disciplinary officers. These were shift prison officers with the
responsibility for patrolling the
workshop area.
One industrial officer had responsibility for each of grounds, maintenance,
mechanics, metal work, the boat shop and vegetable preparation.
In the carpentry
workshop there were two industrial officers, one of whom was said by Mr Giblett
to be “disciplinary”,
the other being a qualified carpenter.
2.2.3 Other employees
The third category of employees at the prison were those appointed under the
Public Sector Management Act 1994
Public Sector
Management Act
”) pursuant to
Prisons Act 1981
Prisons Act
”). This included people in administration and
others such as nurses or those involved in forensic case management.
2.3 Stores/laundry position
Prior to 1997 the duties of the laundry officer at Bunbury Prison had been
coupled with the duties of canteen officer. The increasing
prisoner numbers led
to an increasing load on both the canteen and laundry functions. Evidence was
led that the officer who occupied
the canteen/laundry position spoke to Mr
Giblett, which led to the position being reviewed at a meeting between that
officer, Mr
Giblett, Mr Flynn and Mr Williams. Mr Flynn then applied to his
department to employ an additional industrial officer and to redistribute
duties. The idea was that the laundry duties would be removed from the canteen
officer and a new position would be created of
stores/laundry officer. That
officer would be in addition to the existing stores officer, as well as
performing the laundry duties.
The existing stores officer position was
retained, although that officer’s duties no longer included stock control.
By some time in early 1997 approval for the funding of the new position was
obtained. By 7 February 1997 Mr Millard made reference
in an internal memo to a
potential new position of stores/laundry officer which might be coming up.
By some time early in 1997 Ms Logan was aware of the proposed creation of the
new stores/laundry position. On the evidence above,
that was probably by about
January or February 1997, but undoubtedly by April 1997.
In mid April 1997 Ms Wilkes performed a work site evaluation report in
relation to the proposed new position. In the report she recorded
the outcomes
of a meeting at Bunbury Prison on 14 April 1997 between Ms Logan, Mr Flynn, Ms
Wilkes, Mr Gerry Archer, a human resources
manager of the respondent, and Mr
Juha Kuronen, the stores supervisor at Bunbury Prison.
Because the report provides a convenient summary of the new position, I set
out in full the job summary which was as follows:
JOB SUMMARY
Responsible for assisting Stores Officer in the operation of the Stores
Department to ensure appropriate stock levels are maintained
for the prison and
accurate records of goods and services received by the prison and distributed
throughout the prison are maintained.
Also responsible for supervising the
operation of the medium and minimum security laundries. Supervises prisoners
working in the
store and laundries. Required to liaise with other prison staff,
including management, as required”.
There were task breakdowns of each of the stores and laundry components as
Task 1 – Stores
Store duties to comprise 50% of work duties. Required to perform general
store keeping duties, maintain accurate records of stock
within the prison,
process requisition forms, complete ledgers and maintain necessary inventory and
data sheets. Paper work duties
are performed while seated at a desk, involving
writing and telephone liaison. Receives goods arriving into prison and delivers
to departments in prison. Check deliveries against order forms. May be
required to handle some goods (smaller boxes only), however,
supervises prisoner(s) to unload goods within the prison. Instructs and
supervises prisoner working within the Store Department,
to prepare orders and
carry out stock take. Drives flat top truck into prison to deliver stock to
various locations.
Task 2 – Laundry
Laundry duties to comprise 50% of position. Supervises and instructs
prisoners (2 to 6) working within the Medium and Minimum Security
laundries, to ensure the laundry operates appropriately and to ensure hygiene
levels of prisoner clothing. Responsible for
maintaining a tidy, clean and safe
working environment. Checks stock levels within laundry and makes stock orders
as required. Stock
is stored on open shelving. May occasionally handle goods,
although able to instruct prisoners to perform lifting and carrying of
from vehicle into laundry. Liaise with other prison staff as
By this time, an issue as to whether the new position required an ability to
restrain prisoners had already emerged. Mr Flynn and
Mr Archer stated at a
meeting on 14 April 1997 that the position of stores/laundry officer required an
ability to restrain prisoners.
The report prepared by Ms Wilkes reflects that
Ms Logan disputed this. Ms Logan said that she had discussed the issue with her
representative and was informed that industrial officers are not required
to restrain prisoners and may utilise their 2-way radios
to call for assistance
if it is necessary to restrain a prisoner.
On 10 April 1997 Mr Flynn signed a job description form for the proposed new
position. The key responsibilities were to ensure all
goods and services
required by the prison are recorded in the correct manner, and to ensure that
the medium and minimum security
section’s laundry effectively maintained
prisoner clothing hygiene levels. Included in the general duties were duties
to ensure compliance with the
Prisons Act
, Regulations, Executive
Directors Rules and other lawfully issued orders; secondly, to maintain
discipline of prisoners under the
control of the officer; and thirdly, to
account for the location of prisoners under direct control until handed over to
a relieving
2.4 Further facts
On 21 April 1997 Ms Wilkes wrote to Dr Rae, enclosing a copy of the work site
evaluation report and sought comments on Ms Logan’s
physical ability to
undertake the duties set out above in task 1 – stores and task 2 –
laundry within that report. Comments
were also sought on Ms Logan’s
ability to assist in the restraint of prisoners if required. A similar letter
was sent from
Ms Wilkes to Mr Batalin.
On 28 April 1997 Dr Rae responded to the letter. He observed that experience
had shown that Ms Logan was well motivated to work and
had managed the stores
position well, and that there was no reason that she would not also handle the
laundry position well. He commented
that he didn’t think Ms Logan should
be expected to be able to restrain a prisoner, adding that it was “highly
that in this matter the union is correct, in that the position does not
require her to”. The latter comment is a reference
to the issue which had,
by then, emerged (and which was apparent from the work site evaluation report)
as to whether the new position
had as one of its requirements an ability to
restrain prisoners. Of course, Dr Rae’s views in relation to that question
not of any real assistance. He is a medical practitioner and did not have
any firsthand knowledge of the requirements of the proposed
position. What is
more relevant is his observation that Ms Logan should not be expected to be able
to restrain a prisoner.
In re-examination, counsel for the complainant asked Dr Rae to explain his
understanding of the requirement of restraint at the time
he had written the
letter. He said that he had, at that time, understood restraint to be a
physically very demanding activity and
one which could be “a daily risk
factor”. Dr Rae was unable to say where that understanding had come from.
In particular,
he did not suggest that there was anyone other than Ms Logan who
might have been the source of such an understanding.
On 2 May 1997 Mr Batalin commented that Ms Logan’s ability to assist in
restraining prisoners would probably be impaired and
that it was inadvisable for
her to participate in any violence or scuffles. He commented that he saw no
contra-indication for performing
the duties outlined in task 1 and task 2 of the
work site evaluation report.
By late May 1997 there were a series of internal memoranda within the
Ministry of Justice on the question of whether prison industrial
officers were
required to be able to restrain prisoners. Legal advice was also sought, in this
regard, from a solicitor at the Ministry
of Justice.
An argument was put by counsel for the complainant which suggested that the
assertion by the respondent of a need for all industrial
officers to be able to
restrain prisoners was something other than a genuine position. It was to rebut
that suggestion that evidence
of the seeking and obtaining of legal advice,
referred to in the previous paragraph, was adduced and received by the
respondent.
Insofar as the complainant (by her counsel) may have been suggesting
that the Ministry of Justice, and, in particular, Mr Flynn,
asserted that the
requirement to restrain prisoners was a requirement of the position of
industrial officer only so as to preclude
Ms Logan from the stores/laundry
position, I am unable to accept such a suggestion. I am satisfied that the
position adopted in this
regard, throughout 1997, by the respondent was
genuinely held by it. The view of the Ministry, including Mr Flynn, was, and is,
industrial officers are all prison officers under the
Prisons Act
all be able to restrain prisoners to ensure they can perform their statutory
powers and obligations.
In coming to this conclusion I have taken into account Ms Logan’s
evidence that in March 1997 she had a discussion with Mr Flynn
at which he said
to her words to the effect that he wanted to get rid of her. In his evidence Mr
Flynn denied having ever said anything
to that effect, commenting that Ms Logan
was a valued and respected officer and that he would not have wanted to get rid
Resolving this conflict of evidence was not easy. Neither version of
events seems to me to be inherently improbable. On the whole,
each witness gave
their evidence in a way which gave me no reason to doubt their veracity.
However, in limited respects there were
topics in relation to which I could not
accept the evidence of each of Ms Logan and Mr Flynn. In Ms Logan’s case,
in her evidence-in-chief that by 6 months after her dismissal she was
fit to have gone back to work. In cross-examination it was
put to her that for a
time extending well past 6 months after her dismissal she continued to obtain
workers’ compensation.
It then seemed to me that Ms Logan began to
equivocate from the position she had put plainly in her evidence-in-chief.
Further, when
it was put to Ms Logan in cross-examination that for the whole
period in which she claimed workers’ compensation it was integral
receipt of that compensation that she remained medically unfit to do the job she
had most recently occupied, Ms Logan said
that she had not understood this to be
the case. In these respects, I do not accept Ms Logan’s evidence.
Mr Flynn asserted in his evidence that he was unable to recall whether his
letter requesting that Ms Logan be referred to the Medical
Board was done at his
instigation or at Ms Logan’s request. The evidence relating to the Medical
Board will be discussed later
in this decision. It seems to me quite plain from
the evidence that Ms Logan at all times stated her desire to remain employed
the Ministry of Justice, albeit in the then proposed stores/laundry
position. I find it difficult to accept that Mr Flynn was unable
whether Ms Logan had asked to be referred to the Medical Board. Such a request
would have been entirely inconsistent with
Ms Logan’s conduct throughout
However, in the end, I am unable to be satisfied that a conversation of the
kind alleged by Ms Logan, that is that Mr Flynn said to
her words to the effect
that he wanted to get rid of her, did occur. In any event, a finding of such a
conversation would, it seems
to me, be of very limited significance to the
issues in the case. In particular, it would not alter the conclusion reached
that Mr Flynn and others within the Ministry of Justice were genuinely of
the view in 1997 that all industrial officers needed to
be able to restrain
prisoners to ensure that they could perform their statutory powers and
obligations. That view was by no means
confined to Mr Flynn. Rather, it was a
view held and expressed by a number of officers in different parts of the
Ministry of Justice
(many of whom had little or no involvement with Ms Logan as
an individual) and a view on which legal advice was sought and obtained.
The Ministry’s position in regard to the need to be able to restrain
prisoners had been clarified by late June 1997. On 27 June
1997 a meeting was
held at Bunbury Prison between Ms Logan, Ms Wilkes, Mr Brian Williams, the
Deputy Superintendent of the Prison,
a Union representative and Mr Millard. At
that meeting Mr Williams advised that the Ministry’s position was that it
was necessary
for an industrial officer to be able to restrain a prisoner if
required. Mr Williams also advised that the prison would take steps
for Ms Logan
to be referred to the Medical Board with Ms Logan continuing her stores duties
in the meantime. At the meeting it was
suggested by Mr Millard that Ms Logan
should consider alternative employment and that he and Ms Wilkes could assist in
finding alternatives.
Ms Logan said that she wanted to wait for the outcome of
the Medical Board before considering alternative employment options.
On 30 June 1997 Mr Flynn wrote to the Executive Director of the Ministry of
Justice requesting that Ms Logan be referred to a Medical
Board under regulation
5 of the Prison Regulations (Annexure G to Exhibit F). On 13 August 1997 the
Ministry of Justice wrote to
the Commissioner of Health requesting the convening
of a Medical Board to examine Ms Logan. Enclosed with the letter dated 13 August
1997 was the document entitled “Physical Requirements of Prison Officer
Duties” referred to previously. By the end of
August 1997, the hearing of
the matter by the Medical Board had been scheduled for 26 September 1997.
In the meantime a further report from Mr Batalin had been obtained. In his
letter of 5 August 1997 to Mr Millard he stated that Ms
Logan’s condition,
which he described as multi-level lower lumbar degenerative disk disease, meant
that she would be unsuited
for full time duties as a “normal prison
officer” and that this was likely to be on a permanent basis.
It appears that during September 1997 Ms Logan was on annual leave for about
In the preceding months, steps had been taken to advertise the stores/laundry
position. The position was initially advertised on 30
July 1997. The initial
advertisement referred to the position as a laundry instructor. A subsequent
advertisement then occurred,
giving the position its correct title of
“laundry/stores officer”.
Subsequent to the first advertisement it was discovered that the salary
nominated in the advertisement had been incorrect and had
been lower than the
correct salary. The position was corrected by a new advertisement on 27 August
1997. Both Mr Flynn and Mr Williams
gave evidence that the new advertisement was
placed, correcting the salary, in the light of recent experience. Evidence was
not long before this advertisement was placed, a position had been
advertised at the wrong salary and a complaint had been received
from a person
who said that had he known of the correct salary he would have applied for the
position. Mr Giblett, however, sought
to suggest in his evidence that the
placement of a new advertisement (with a consequent extension of the closing
date for applications)
was unusual and that publication of a correction to the
earlier advertisement would have been sufficient. In that light, it was
on behalf of the complainant that the position had been re-advertised
because Ms Logan had been the only person that responded to
advertisement and Mr Flynn wanted somebody other than Ms Logan to get the job. I
am unable to accept that suggestion. I
accept the evidence of Mr Flynn and Mr
Williams that the position was re-advertised for the reason that they gave.
Each of the advertisements identified, as the sole essential selection
criterion, that the applicant be a permanent prison officer.
In a letter to the Medical Board dated 22 September 1997, Dr Rae outlined Ms
Logan’s medical history and described her return
to work in December 1996.
Dr Rae said that the return to work was a great success psychologically,
commenting that the position in
stores gave Ms Logan ideal employment. He also
said that “she is not fit, however to take on general prison officer
After having made reference to the issue as to whether an ability
to restrain was necessary for the position, he commented that Ms
“could assist if the need arose but it is not the sort of position she
should be in every day”. He concluded by
saying that “I would
strongly contend that Karen is fit for the job she has been doing this year in
stores but not for general
prison officer duties”.
The Medical Board met on 26 September 1997 and prepared a report that day.
The report described Ms Logan as having been unable to
continue work as a prison
officer and having been shifted to a position as a stores officer. It continued
“...she has coped
well in that position and feels she can manage all the
duties involved. After reviewing the medical evidence we accept that Ms Logan
unfit to work as a prison officer. She has proven that she is capable of
performing all her current duties”.
It is, I think, important to clarify the evidence regarding the relationship
between the duties Ms Logan was performing as part of
her rehabilitation
programme and the new stores/laundry position. Both Dr Rae and the Medical Board
appear to have held the view,
during 1997, that Ms Logan was already
substantially performing the duties required of the proposed stores/laundry
officer. Certainly
Dr Rae said in his evidence that he understood Ms Logan to be
performing a substantive actual job, as opposed to a collection of
duties which
had been devised for her. In my view, the evidence establishes quite clearly
that this was not the case. Rather, the
duties performed by Ms Logan during 1997
were supernumerary. They were “contrived” in late 1996 as part of
to work programme.
The Medical Board was not asked for its view in relation to the proposed
stores/laundry position, nor was it provided with any information
duties of that position.
This comment is not intended as a criticism of Dr Rae or the Medical Board.
Doubtless what Dr Rae and the Medical Board stated was
based upon their
understanding of the position. The point of significance is that the fact that
Ms Logan had continued to perform
the limited duties given to her was of limited
assistance in assessing her capacity to perform the more substantial duties
of the new position of stores/laundry officer.
In October 1997 a representative of the Union requested, by a letter to the
Director General of the Ministry of Justice, that the
Ministry defer any action
on the Medical Board recommendation, that is, that “...Ms Logan is unfit
to work as a prison officer”.
Following that request a meeting was held on
14 October 1997 between representatives of the Ministry of Justice at which it
was resolved
that the Ministry’s position would be maintained, that is,
the Medical Board’s recommendation should be implemented.
Ms Logan was
advised of this decision shortly afterwards. As a result, Ms Logan’s
employment terminated on 20 November 1997.
Also at around this time, Mr Williams considered the applications for the new
stores/laundry position. There were two applicants:
Ms Logan and Mr Roy Van
Leeuwin (a prison officer at Bunbury Prison). Mr Williams applied the advertised
criteria of permanent prison
officer, and by then had medical advice to the
effect that Ms Logan was unable to perform the duties of a prison officer. He
determined that there was only one applicant who met the essential
criteria. Mr Van Leeuwin’s application was successful.
Following a request from an officer of the Government Employee Superannuation
Board (“GESB”), Dr Rae wrote a report dated
8 December 1997 in
relation to Ms Logan. In that report Dr Rae commented that Ms Logan was unfit to
pursue employment as a prison
officer. He also commented that taking into
account Ms Logan’s lack of educational qualifications, her physical
impairments
and her age that the likelihood of her being able to find a job of
similar specifications anywhere else was practically non-existent
“to all intents and purposes she is totally and permanently
By letter dated 23 December 1997 the GESB advised that it had approved
payment of a disability benefit to Ms Logan.
Through most of 1998 there were ongoing efforts to investigate the
possibility of alternative employment and re-training. These efforts
successful.
In late 1998 Ms Logan’s workers’ compensation claim against the
State of Western Australia was settled.
There was some evidence that prior to the appointment of a new officer to the
stores/laundry position Mr Van Leeuwin had been placed
in the position of acting
stores/laundry officer. Mr Flynn was unable to be specific about precisely when
this occurred saying that
it was after negotiations with the Union to approve
the creation of the position. This would seem to be, at the latest, by 30 July
1997 when the first advertisement was placed.
There were other issues on which substantial evidence was led which I will
deal with later in these reasons. These include the duties,
day to day tasks and
terms and conditions of employment of a prison officer; the duties, day to day
tasks and terms and conditions
of the new stores/laundry position and of
industrial officers generally; the respondent’s systems for dealing with
prison officers and industrial officers; the training of both categories
of officers; evidence regarding a number of other prison
officers with injuries
or other disabilities, and the steps taken by the respondent in relation to
those officers.
3. THE COMPLAINANT’S CLAIMS OF DISCRIMINATION
In the amended points of claim the complainant puts
the claim of discrimination in a variety of ways. Not all of these appeared to
have been pursued at the inquiry. At least as I understood it, counsel for the
complainant put the discrimination case essentially
on the basis that each of
the following matters amounted to unlawful direct discrimination:
(a) the dismissal by the respondent of the complainant from her position as
prison officer;
(b) the refusal of the respondent to “accommodate” Ms
Logan’s disability (by putting in place alternative work arrangements
which will be spelled out later in these reasons);
(c) the refusal by the respondent to “transfer” Ms Logan from her
position as a prison officer to an industrial officer
occupying the newly
created stores/laundry position;
(d) alternatively to (c) above, the refusal by the respondent to consider Ms
Logan’s application for the newly created stores/laundry
Counsel for the complainant also argued that:
(e) the requirement of the respondent that the complainant be able to
restrain prisoners in order to occupy a position as an industrial
amounted to indirect discrimination pursuant to s.6 of the DDA and was in breach
of s.15(1)(b) of the DDA;
(f) the respondent unlawfully harassed the complainant in relation to her
disability in breach of s.35 of the DDA.
For reasons which I will explain further below, it seems to me that the
claims in paragraphs (a) and (d) above are the core claims
of discrimination in
4. DISMISSAL FROM POSITION AS A PRISON OFFICER
4.1 The law
As is mentioned earlier in these reasons, it was conceded by the respondent
that in dismissing Ms Logan from her position as a prison
officer it engaged in
disability discrimination within the meaning of s.5 of the DDA. The issue
before me is therefore whether that
discrimination was, in the circumstances of
this case, unlawful. The respondent argued that its conduct was not unlawful
discrimination,
by operation of s.15(4) of the DDA. Section 15 of the DDA
provides as follows:
“15 Discrimination in employment
(1) It is unlawful for an employer or a person acting or purporting to act on
behalf of an employer to discriminate against a person
on the ground of the
other person’s disability or a disability of any of that other
person’s associates:
(a) in the arrangements made for the purpose of determining who should be
offered employment; or
(b) in determining who should be offered employment; or
(c) in the terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
(2) It is unlawful for an employer or a person acting or purporting to act
on behalf of an employer to discriminate against an employee
on the ground of
the employee’s disability or a disability of any of that employee’s
associates:
(a) in the terms or conditions of employment that the employer affords the
employee; or
(b) by denying the employee access, or limiting the employee’s access,
to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training,
or to any other benefits
associated with employment; or
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by subjecting the employee to any other detriment.
(3) Neither paragraph (1)(a) nor (b) renders it unlawful for a person to
discriminate against another person, on the ground of the
other person’s
disability, in connection with employment to perform domestic duties on the
premises on which the first-mentioned
person resides.
(4) Neither paragraph (1)(b) nor (2)(c) renders unlawful discrimination by
an employer against a person on the ground of the person’s
disability, if
taking into account the person’s past training, qualifications and
experience relevant to the particular employment
and, if the person is already
employed by the employer, the person’s performance as an employee, and all
other relevant factors
that it is reasonable to take into account, the person
because of his or her disability:
(a) would be unable to carry out the inherent requirements of the particular
employment; or
(b) would, in order to carry out those requirements, require services or
facilities that are not required by persons without the
disability and the
provision of which would impose an unjustifiable hardship on the
It can be seen at once that s.15(4) operates only in relation to s.15(1)(b)
and s.15(2)(c). In other words, it operates in relation
to the question of to
whom employment is offered and to dismissal of employees. Thus it potentially
applies to the discrimination
alleged by the complainant referred to in
paragraphs (a) and (d) above.
The respondent accepted that it bore the onus of satisfying me that its
discrimination had lost its prima facie unlawfulness by operation
X v Commonwealth
[1999] HCA 63
(1999) 167 ALR 529
, at [19] and [30]).
X v Commonwealth
the applicant had been discharged from the army
after a blood test showed that he was HIV positive. The Commissioner who heard
inquiry into his complaint of discrimination rejected the
Commonwealth’s contentions based upon s15(4) of the DDA. The Commissioner
drew a distinction between “the tasks or skills for which a soldier is
specifically prepared” and all other features
of employment which were
mere “incidents of it”. In particular, in the Commissioner’s
view, deployment of a solider
to a specific location or in particular
circumstances was an incident of the employment and not one of its inherent
requirements.
The majority of the High Court found that the approach of the Commissioner
involved an unduly narrow construction of the notion of
inherent requirements in
Gummow and Hayne JJ explained (at [101]) that s.15(4)(a) applies only
“if the person would be
to carry out [the inherent]
requirements. No doubt inability must be assessed in a practical way but it is
inability, not difficulty,
that must be demonstrated”. The reference to
inherent requirements “invites attention to what are the characteristic
essential requirements of the employment as opposed to those requirements that
might be described as peripheral” (at [102]).
Their Honours explained that in considering the application of s.15(4)(a) the
reference both to inherent requirements and to the particular
employment make it
necessary to identify not only the terms and conditions which stipulate what the
employee is to do or be trained
for, but also:
“... those terms and conditions which identify the circumstances in
which the particular employment will be carried on. Those
circumstances will
often include the place or places at which the employment is to be performed and
may also encompass other considerations.
For example, it may be necessary to
consider whether the employee is to work with others in some particular way. It
may also be necessary
to consider the dangers to which the employee may be
exposed and the dangers to which the employee make expose others” (at
Thus, their Honours continued, the inquiry that was required:
“... was an inquiry about what were the requirements of the particular
employment. As we have said, that would begin by identifying
the terms and
conditions of service which revealed what the army required of the appellant,
not only in terms of tasks and skills,
but also the circumstances in which those
tasks were to be done and skills used. From there the inquiry would move to
identify which
of those requirements were inherent requirements of the
particular employment” (at [105]).
At [109] their Honours explained that an employee must be able to perform the
inherent requirements of particular employment “with
reasonable safety to
the individual concerned and to others with whom that individual will come in
Deciding what is a reasonable degree
of risk to others involves difficult questions of fact and degree which their
Honours could
not resolve (in the light of the way the matter had been
approached at first instance).
McHugh J delivered a separate judgment which is, with respect, also very
His Honour suggested (at [32]) that “carrying out the employment
without endangering the safety of other employees is an inherent
requirement of
any employment”. He goes on to state (at [33]) that “employment is
not a mere physical activity in which
the employee participates as an automaton.
It takes place in a social, legal and economic context... It is therefore always
permissible
to have regard to this context when determining the inherent
requirements of a particular employment.”
His Honour explained the approach to determining the inherent requirements of
the particular employment (at [37]) as follows:
“Unless the employer’s undertaking has been organised so as to
permit discriminatory conduct, the terms of the employment
contract, the nature
of the business and the manner of its organisation will be determinative of
whether a requirement is inherent
in the particular employment. But only those
requirements that are essential in a business sense (including where appropriate
administration) or in a legal sense can be regarded as inhering in the
particular employment. The Commission must give appropriate
recognition to the
business judgement of the employer in organising its undertaking and in
regarding this or that requirement as
essential to the particular employment.
Qantas had no obligation to restructure the
roster and bidding system which it utilised for allocating flights to its pilots
to accommodate Mr Christie. In the end, however, it is for the
Commission, and not for the employer, to determine whether or not
a requirement
is inherent in a particular employment”.
His Honour then went on to explain the relationship between ss.15(4)(a) and
(b). Section 15(4)(a) is not, alone, a defence in isolation
from s.15(4)(b).
Rather, for s.15(4) to apply the employee:
“...must have been discriminated against because he or she was:
(a) not only unable to carry out the inherent requirements of the particular
employment without assistance; but was also
(b) able to do so only with assistance that it would be unjustifiably harsh
to expect the employer to provide.”
(McHugh J at [38-39], Gummow and Hayne JJ agreeing at [104]).
X v Commonwealth
was a case where the employer alleged risk to other
employees arising from the appellant’s disability. In that context, McHugh
J set out (at [43]) the issues that will ordinarily arise in determining whether
the disability prevents the employee from carrying
out the inherent requirements
of the particular employment:
“1. By reason of some essential feature or defining characteristic of
the particular employment, does the disability pose a
real risk to the safety or
health of other persons or the preservation of the property of the employer? In
determining whether there
is relevantly a real risk, the Commissioner will have
to consider:
(a) the degree of the risk;
(b) the consequences of the risk being realised;
(c) the employer’s legal obligations to co-employees and others,
whether arising from a common law duty of care, occupational
health and safety
statutes, or other aspects of the employment regulatory regime;
(d) the function which the employee performs as part of the employer’s
undertaking;
(e) the organisation of the employer’s undertaking.
the answer to question 1 is no, then the disability does not prevent the
employee carrying out any inherent requirement of the
particular employment. If
the answer to question 1 is yes, however, it will be necessary to determine
under s15(4)(b) whether the
employee could carry out the work safely with the
assistance of “services or facilities” which the employer could
without unjustifiable hardship”.
It was accepted by
counsel for the complainant that
X v Commonwealth
establishes that the
ability to perform the duties of a particular employment without unreasonable or
undue risk to the safety of
others is an inherent requirement of every
employment. However it was argued that the same cannot be said of the ability to
the duties of the employment without undue risk to oneself. In my view,
that submission must be rejected. It seems to me that the
reasoning of the High
Court in explaining the need for an employee to be able to perform the duties of
a job without undue risk to
the safety of others applies equally to the need for
an employee to be able to do so without undue risk to himself or herself. Both
are, in the language used by McHugh J (at [37]), essential in a legal sense.
Moreover, Gummow and Hayne JJ expressed the proposition
with reference to a need
for reasonable safety “to the individual concerned and to others with whom
that individual will come
in contact” (at [109]).
In determining whether an employee poses an unreasonable risk to her own
safety one must have regard to the employer’s legal
obligations to the
employee, arising both under the common law duty of care in tort and under the
occupational health and safety
statutes. That, it seems to me, follows from
paragraph [43] of McHugh J’s judgment quoted above, when applied to the
context in which there are said to be risks not only to fellow employees
but to the employee herself. (See also per Callinan J at
[172]). It is, in this
context, relevant to note that the common law demands in practical terms a high
standard of care from an employer
(see, for example,
Council of the Shire of
Wyong v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
(1981) 146 CLR 40
Hamilton v Nuroof (WA) Pty Ltd
[1956] HCA 42
(1956) 96 CLR 18).
In this sense I accept the submission put on behalf of the respondent that
the question of whether an employee poses an unreasonable
or undue risk to
herself or others, in the context of s.15(4), must “dovetail” with
the employer’s common law and
statutory duties to provide a safe system of
work and to take reasonable precautions to avoid hazards to employees. Section
ought not be construed so that an employer is found to have unlawfully
discriminated by failing to allow an employee to continue
(notwithstanding a disability) when to allow her to so continue leaves the
employer open to being liable for damages for
having negligently placed the
employee at risk of injury (because of the disability).
4.2 Is the ability to restrain prisoners an inherent requirement of the
position of prison officer?
In my view it is an essential feature or defining characteristic of the
employment of a prison officer that she be able to restrain
prisoners without
undue risk to herself and fellow employees. I set out below a number of matters
which I have taken into account
in coming to that conclusion.
Section 15(4) requires the identification of the inherent requirements of the
employment. Logically, therefore, the first step is to
identify the relevant “particular employment”. Employment as a
prison officer plainly encompasses being, at least, a disciplinary or shift
prison officer. In this context, it is either employment
as a prison officer in
Western Australia or employment as a prison officer at Bunbury Prison. However,
it is unnecessary to decide
that question in that, on either view, I have come
to the conclusion that it is an inherent requirement of the particular
that a prison officer be able to restrain prisoners.
The judgment of McHugh J in
X v Commonwealth
at [37], set out above,
suggests that, in identifying the inherent requirements of the particular
employment, one ought have regard
to the terms of the employment contract, the
nature of the business and the manner of its organisation.
The evidence suggests, and both counsel agreed, that a prison officer’s
terms of employment are to be found in the
Prisons Act
and the Gaol Officers
Award of 1968 (“the Award”) (annexure A to Mr Flynn’s
statement – Exhibit F). The Award
itself says nothing of assistance for
present purposes.
A prison officer is engaged in accordance with
Prisons Act
officer is required to take an oath of engagement which includes promises to
“do my utmost in the performance of my duty
as a prison officer to
maintain the security of every prison in which I serve and the security of the
prisoners and the officers
employed at the prison” (see
s.13(2)(b))
“uphold the
Prisons Act 1981
... and the regulations, rules and
standing orders made under that Act from time to time” (see
s.13(2)(c)).
Ms Logan took an oath of engagement in 1986.
A prison officer has the powers and duties set out in
, which provides that every prison officer:
“(a) has a responsibility to maintain the security of the prison where
he is ordered to serve;
(b) is liable to answer for the escape of a prisoner placed in his charge or
for whom when on duty he has a responsibility;
(d) may issue to a prisoner such orders as are necessary for the purposes of
this Act, including the security, good order or management
of a prison, and may
use such force as he believes on reasonable grounds to be necessary to ensure
that his or other lawful orders
are complied with”.
The express power for a prison officer to use force to ensure
compliance by prisoners with lawful orders of prison officers was a
emphasised by counsel for the respondent. Certainly, it is, at the least, a
strong factor in favour of a finding that the
ability to restrain prisoners is
an inherent requirement of the position of a prison officer. A number of other
matters seem to me
to point in the same direction.
Regulation 3(3)
Prisons Regulations 1982
(WA) provides that a prison
officer is engaged to the prison service generally, and not to any particular
The “business” of the employer in this case is the administration
of prisons in accordance with the
Prisons Act
Prisons Regulations
officers are the persons charged with the primary duty of maintaining security
and order in the prisons.
The way in which Bunbury Prison is organised also supports the conclusion
that an ability to restrain prisoners, where necessary,
is an inherent
requirement of the position of prison officer. Without attempting to recount all
of the evidence I would observe that
there is a relatively small number of
prison officers on duty at a given time and many occasions arise in which one or
officers may be alone with a number of prisoners.
The shift system at Bunbury Prison requires all prison officers to be
available for the full range of shifts. There was evidence of
accommodation of injured prison officers by allocating to them shifts, with
union concurrence, which minimised prison contact.
It was clear on the evidence
that such arrangements were temporary only. As McHugh J observed in
Commonwealth
(in [37] quoted above), in
Qantas Airways Limited v
(1998) 193 CLR 280
”), Qantas had no
obligation to restructure the roster and bidding system which it utilised for
allocating flights to its pilots
in order to accommodate Mr Christie. For
similar reasons, in my view, a superintendent of a prison is not obliged to
restructure
the shift system in order to accommodate a prison officer who is
unable to restrain prisoners without undue risk to the safety to
fellow employees. This conclusion is also relevant to the claim that the failure
to “accommodate” Ms Logan
was unlawful discrimination. I will deal
with that claim below.
Allen v State of Western Australia
[2000] WASCA 221
, a claim by a
prison officer of negligence by his employer was dismissed at trial. That
decision was affirmed on appeal. The following
conclusions, upheld on appeal (at
[13]), are equally apposite to the evidence regarding shift prison officers at
this inquiry:
“The employer is in the prison business: without prisoners there is no
business. It is almost impossible to provide work with
no prisoner contact.
Furthermore, those jobs with minimal prisoner contact are highly sought after as
‘time out’ positions
by all prisoner officers. Plainly, prison
officers doing shifts with prisoners would fairly expect not to be excluded from
such positions
and indeed, it is obviously essential for their good health that
they have time out and that is the arrangement which has been made
relevant union”.
Counsel for the complainant laid considerable emphasis on the fact that the
training and culture of prison officers was that force
was only to be used as a
last resort, that prison officers should not engage in physical confrontation
when alone with prisoners
and that physical violence was rarely experienced at
Bunbury Prison. In that context the particular profile of many of the prisoners
at Bunbury Prison, as sex offenders, was said to make violent confrontation less
likely. It was also said that training in the use
of physical restraints
occupied only a relatively small part of the training course for prison
In my view, those matters are not sufficient to undermine the conclusion that
the ability to restrain prisoners is an inherent requirement
of being a prison
officer. The potential for conflict to escalate into violence is ever present.
To my mind, it inheres in the notion
of a prison. It cannot be predicted when
occasions will arise where a need to physically restrain a prisoner will be
required. Nor
can such occasions always be limited to situations where other
prison officers can attend in time to remove the need for a particular
officer to be involved. For disciplinary prison officers at least, the ability
to deal with situations where a need arises
to physically restrain a prisoner is
essential to being able to fulfil the inherent requirements of the particular
employment.
I have also taken into account the evidence that both the complainant and
respondent appear to have considered that the need to restrain
prisoners was a
requirement of being a prison officer. The document entitled “Physical
Requirements of Prison Officer Duties”
with its reference to prison
restraints was outlined earlier in these reasons. It has been used within the
Ministry of Justice since
and Dr Rae that restraining prisoners where necessary was part of her duties
a prison officer.
4.3 Was Ms Logan able to restrain prisoners without undue risk to herself
and others?
Having found that the ability to restrain prisoners is an inherent
requirement of the duties of a prison officer, it is necessary
to consider
whether Ms Logan was unable to carry out that inherent requirement. As Gummow
and Hayne JJ made clear in
X v Commonwealth
, “inability must be
assessed in a practical way but it is inability, not difficulty, that must be
demonstrated” (at [101]).
I have already found that the ability to perform duties without undue risk to
other employees or to oneself is an inherent requirement
of every employment.
In my view, the evidence compels the conclusion that Ms Logan was, in 1997,
unable to restrain prisoners without undue or unreasonable
risk to herself and
other employees.
In a number of reports and letters during 1997 Dr Rae expressed the view that
Ms Logan should not be expected to restrain prisoners.
These include his letters
of 28 April 1997 and 22 September 1997 (Exhibit 8 and Exhibit A). Counsel for Ms
Logan suggested that these
letters must be viewed in the light of Dr Rae’s
evidence (referred to above) as to his understanding of the nature and extent
the restraint required.
Against this, the respondent pointed to the simple fact that Dr Rae never
certified Ms Logan as being fit to return to normal prison
officer duties.
Dr Rae agreed, in cross-examination, that Ms Logan’s symptoms and
history meant that she was at a greater risk than the ordinary
person of having
a significant exacerbation of severe pain arising from physically restraining a
Mr Batalin’s views were to the same effect. The Medical Board also
reached the conclusion that Ms Logan was not fit for duties
as a prison officer.
In the light of all the evidence I am satisfied that the need to physically
restrain a prisoner would have involved Ms Logan in a
significantly greater risk
of exacerbating her back problem than would be the case for the ordinary person.
It was argued on behalf of the complainant that, nonetheless, the risk posed
to Ms Logan by the potential need to restrain prisoners
was not an unreasonable
or undue one. It was said that age related degenerative problems in the back
affects a significant proportion
of the population and so everyone faces various
degrees of risks of back problems. Further, it was submitted that, on the
evidence, an exacerbation arising from the need to restrain a prisoner
would not have “crippled” Ms Logan, but merely
produced substantial
pain and a significant period off work. Finally, it was said that there was no
medical evidence to suggest that
she would have been unable to complete any
necessary restraint of prisoners, thus suggesting that her back problems in no
way endangered
fellow employees.
I am unable to accept these submissions. In my view, an employer who is aware
that a particular employee has an existing medical condition
which makes that
employee particularly vulnerable to exacerbating that condition by performing
what I have found to be an inherent
requirement of the position is entitled to
view the prospect of the employee suffering substantial pain and a significant
off work as amounting to an undue, unreasonable or unacceptable level of
risk. It seems to me that to come to any other conclusion
would be to require
the employer to expose itself to the prospect of a claim in negligence by the
employee. For example, it might
later be said that the employer was negligent in
selecting for the vulnerable employee a shift which gave rise to an increased
of the need for physical confrontation. The risks to the vulnerable
employee of injury or aggravation of a pre-existing problem are
‘real and not far-fetched or fanciful’ (cf
Council of the Shire
of Wyong v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
(1981) 146 CLR 40).
Further, a person with a known vulnerability to injury in the event of
physical confrontation might be expected to be inclined to
hold back if a
confrontation occurs. An employer who is aware of a special vulnerability on the
part of a particular employee might
later be subject to a claim by a fellow
employee in such circumstances, and is entitled to take that prospect into
account in determining
whether the risk arising from an employee’s
disability is an undue or unreasonable risk.
Although it is by no means decisive, it may be worth noting that Ms Logan
herself expressed the view to Ms Wilkes that she did not
feel she had the
physical capacity to return to the position of prison officer. Counsel for Ms
Logan suggested that this evidence
should be viewed as possibly involving an
attempt by Ms Logan to increase her prospects of obtaining the stores/laundry
which was a more attractive position to her. If I accepted that
argument, questions might well arise as to what effect that might
have upon any
relief claimed by Ms Logan. However it is unnecessary to make a finding in this
regard because, quite apart from the
evidence of what Ms Logan said about the
topic, for the reasons set out above I have reached the view that Ms Logan was
restrain prisoners without an undue risk to herself or other prison
4.4 Other prison officers
In support of the argument that any risk arising from Ms Logan having to
restrain prisoners was not an undue or unreasonable one,
counsel for the
complainant led considerable evidence regarding illness or injury on the part of
other prison officers. For reasons
to which I now turn, that evidence seems to
me to be of very limited assistance in determining this case.
A large volume of material in the nature of medical reports and certificates
relating to more than 20 other prison officers and industrial
officers was
tendered on behalf of the complainant. Questions were asked of Dr Rae, Mr
Batalin and Mr Flynn regarding the medical
conditions of these officers. The
medical reports and certificates were tendered and received on the basis that
they constituted
material in the possession of the respondent, rather than as
being evidence of the truth of their contents.
It is convenient to begin by considering how such evidence may be relevant to
the issues in this inquiry. Counsel for the complainant
sought to use this
evidence in a number of ways. First, she argued that discrimination against Ms
Logan could be demonstrated by
showing that Ms Logan had been less favourably
treated than people with objectively similar (or not materially different)
disabilities.
of the DDA does not call for a comparison between
people with like disabilities. Rather, it requires a comparison of the treatment
of a person with a disability and persons without the disability. In any event,
the fact that discrimination occurred is not in issue.
The issue for this
inquiry is whether the discrimination was unlawful.
Secondly, in the context of
, counsel for the complainant argued that
a consideration of the medical information available regarding other prison
officers was
relevant to assessing whether any risk of injury to Ms Logan
arising from the potential need for her to engage in prisoner restraint
undue or unacceptable degree of risk. In effect, counsel invited me to take
account of the medical information in the possession
of the respondent regarding
various officers, and combine that with expert opinions received in this inquiry
from Mr Batalin or Dr
Rae, to conclude that a certain degree of risk was
acceptable to the respondent. She submitted that the respondent is deemed to
accepted whatever risks emerge from the material in its possession, even if
the respondent had not realised the significance of material
in its possession.
In support of these submissions it was also said that discrimination need not be
intentional or knowing.
I am unable to accept these submissions. The issue in this case is the
operation of
of the DDA. There is, it seems to me, a distinction between
accepting different levels of risk for different people (which is what
for the complainant invites me to conclude has happened here) and the respondent
simply having made different assessments
as to the level of risk of each
relevant individual, which seems to me to be the appropriate conclusion on the
evidence before me.
This is not to suggest that material relating to the medical condition of
other prison officers could not be relevant at all. It may
be relevant in a
number of ways. First, if it were demonstrated that a number of people were
engaged in a particular employment and
were not able to comply with what an
employer said was an inherent requirement of that employment, plainly this would
undermine the
employer’s contention. No argument of this kind was made in
the inquiry. Nor is there any evidence to support such an argument,
the material was tendered only for the purpose of demonstrating that it was in
the possession of the respondent, and not
as evidence of the truth of its
contents. In any event, the material tendered does not seem to me to support any
conclusion that
a number of people would be unable to comply with the
requirement of being able to restrain prisoners.
There are two other ways in which the material may be relevant. If the
information in an employer’s possession suggested that
a number of people
could not comply with what it says to be an inherent requirement, but the
employer did nothing about it, the employer’s
contention as to what is an
inherent requirement would be significantly undermined. Further, if an employer
took no or no adequate
steps to see whether employees were able to comply with
what it said was an inherent requirement of a position, again the
contention would be undermined.
I have considered the substantial material tendered by the complainant
regarding other officers at Bunbury Prison. In my opinion the
evidence does not
undermine the respondent’s assertion that the ability to restrain
prisoners is an inherent requirement of
the position of a prison officer. At the
most, from the perspective of the complainant’s arguments, there may have
or, perhaps, two instances where arguably the respondent ought to have
obtained, but did not obtain, definitive medical advice on
whether an officer
was physically capable of restraining prisoners without undue risk. However,
even on that view I do not consider
these to have been such clear cases as to
undermine the consistently held position of the respondent, supported by the
evidence referred
to earlier in these reasons, that prison officers are required
to be capable of restraining prisoners. The relevance of this evidence
industrial officers (as distinct from shift or disciplinary prison officers)
will be dealt with later in these reasons.
The evidence before me also established that an initial medical examination
takes place when a person becomes a prison officer. After
that, the respondent
does not have any ongoing system of medical examination of prison officers to
ensure that they remain physically
capable of doing the job, including being
able to restrain prisoners. In this regard, the respondent relies substantially
reporting” by officers. Mr Flynn suggested in his
evidence that an officer’s duty under
Prisons Act
“report to the superintendent every matter coming to his notice which may
jeopardize the security of the prison” requires
prison officers to advise
him of any medical condition which jeopardises a prison officer’s ability
to perform his role. Mr
Giblett expressed a similar view.
Throughout 1997 the respondent had received consistent medical advice that Ms
Logan was unable to perform her duties as a prison officer.
That cannot be said
of any of the other prison officers in respect of whom medical material has been
tendered by the complainant.
None of the records of any of those officers
included medical advice that the prison officer was permanently unable to carry
their duties as a prison officer.
For the reasons set out above, I have come to the view that Ms Logan was
unable to carry out the inherent requirement of being able
to restrain prisoners
without undue risk to herself or other employees.
Section 15(4)(b)
- services or facilities
The next question which arises is whether there were services or facilities,
not required by persons without a disability, the provision
of which would
enable the complainant to carry out that inherent requirement and the provision
of which would not impose an unjustifiable
hardship on the employer
(s.15(4)(b)
of the DDA).
The complainant suggested, through her counsel, that relevant “services
or facilities” which might have been provided
to her included placing her
in an area of the prison where it was known that there would be less likelihood
of a requirement for
restraint and not requiring her to rotate through the
normal roster of a prison officer. In my view, however, that does not constitute
“services or facilities” for the purpose of
s.15(4)(b).
obliges an employer to provide services or facilities which enable an
employee with the disability to carry out the inherent requirements
particular employment so long as the provision of those services or facilities
does not impose an unjustifiable hardship on
the employer. The re-arrangement of
employment arrangements of the sort contended by the complainant would not have
enabled Ms Logan
to carry out the inherent requirement of restraining prisoners.
It would have in fact avoided the need for her to comply with that
requirement.
That is not what is contemplated by
s.15(4)(b).
As Gummow and Hayne JJ put it in
X v Commonwealth
(at [102]) the “requirements that are to be
considered are the requirements of the
employment, not the
requirements of employment of some identified type or some different employment
modified to meet the needs of
a disabled employee or applicant for work”.
The analogy with the bidding system in
, explained earlier in
these reasons, is apposite again here.
Other matters suggested on behalf of the complainant would not, in my view,
so diminish the risk involved in Ms Logan having to restrain
prisoners that it
could no longer be said to be an undue or unreasonable risk. The provision of a
personal alarm and a hand held
radio would not eliminate the real risk that
circumstances may arise in which Ms Logan was required to restrain a prisoner
(or prisoners)
and that she or fellow officers could be put at risk.
For these reasons, I find that the respondent’s dismissal of the
complainant from her employment as a prison officer was, by
the operation of
, not unlawful discrimination.
TO “ACCOMMODATE” MS LOGAN’S DISABILITY OR REFUSAL TO TRANSFER
In my view these arguments can be dealt with very briefly. The
essence of the argument put on behalf of the complainant suggested
respondent should have “accommodated” Ms Logan’s disability by
putting in place alternative work arrangements.
These arrangements have been
identified previously. It was suggested that the respondent should have taken
account of the complainant’s
disability in allocating her shifts as a
prison officer, or in giving her additional support of other prison officers.
For reasons
which have already been articulated, it seems to me that the
respondent was under no obligation to do these things. The comments
and Hayne JJ in
X v Commonwealth
(at [102] quoted above) seem to me to
dispose of any such argument. Further, the analogy with the bidding system in
seems again to apply here.
Next, it cannot be argued that the respondent discriminated against Ms Logan
by refusing to “transfer” her from her position
as a prison officer
to the newly created stores/laundry position. It was not a question of a
transfer. The evidence makes it quite
clear that the newly created
stores/laundry position, like all other positions within the prisons system, was
to be advertised and
filled on merit. No prison officer had any right to be
transferred to the position. The position was advertised, applications received
and then considered.
In that light the real ground of complaint, if there be ground for complaint,
by Ms Logan is in the refusal by the respondent to consider
her application for
the newly created stores/laundry position. It is to that that I now turn. In
doing so it is convenient to begin
by considering in more detail some aspects of
the employment of industrial officers within the prison system in Western
TO CONSIDER APPLICATION FOR STORES/LAUNDRY
6.1 The role and status of industrial officers
Prisons Act
contemplates two kinds of officers
working within a prison: prison officers engaged under
and officers
appointed, pursuant to
Prisons Act
, under the
Public Sector
Management Act
. An issue emerged in this inquiry as to where, during 1997,
industrial officers fitted into that scheme.
Section 6(3)
Prisons Act
provides as follows:
“There may be appointed under and subject to
Sector Management Act
such officers, other than prison officers engaged under
section 13, as are required for the purpose of this Act”.
In my view the evidence establishes beyond any real doubt that industrial
officers were, as at 1997 and for some time earlier, prison
officers engaged
under s.13. My reasons for coming to this conclusion are as follows.
A number of witnesses called by the respondent gave evidence that the
respondent has for many years considered industrial officers
to be prison
officers who are engaged under
Prisons Act
. It was argued on behalf
of the complainant that the evidence of Mr David Seal, Manager of Workplace
Reform in Prisons within the
Ministry of Justice, together with a letter dated
29 June 1998 from Mr John McColl, the Associate Director of Prison Operations
the Ministry of Justice (Eexhibit 10), supported a conclusion that
industrial officers had not been engaged under
but, rather, were appointed
Public Sector Management Act
pursuant to
Prisons Act
do not accept the complainant’s submission. In my view, the evidence
referred to suggests that industrial officers were
engaged under
there had been some cases where no oath of engagement (as required by
actually been taken. Contrary to submissions on behalf of the complainant, that
fact would not thereby have converted an industrial
officer to having been
appointed under
Prisons Act
. There was no evidence of industrial
officers having been so appointed. It simply meant that there had been a failure
to comply with
a statutory formality. What legal consequences, if any, would
flow from that does not need to be considered in this context.
As was explained above, not all industrial officers were former shift prison
officers or qualified as such. Grade 2 industrial officers
were people with
trade qualifications.
Mr Flynn said in his evidence that the position regarding the qualification
of, and criteria for, industrial officers changed over
time. He gave evidence
that the respondent sought to avoid the duplication of resources arising from
the need to have prison officers
to maintain security and safety in the
industrial areas. Thus, over time, industrial officers were appointed who, as an
requirement of their positions, were appointed as prison officers
qualified to also carry out the duties and responsibilities of
prison officers.
The timing of these suggested changes was not entirely clear, but Mr
Flynn’s evidence seemed to suggest that
the change had occurred by 1996.
However, in about 1995 or 1996 Mr Gerry Jackson was employed as an industrial
relief officer. This
position did not require, as an essential criteria, that Mr
Jackson be a permanent prison officer.
Mr Seal said in his evidence (as did Mr Giblett) that during 1997 there was a
review of industrial officer classifications pursuant
to the Enterprise
Bargaining Agreement (“EBA”) entered into between the respondent and
the Union. The EBA was registered
on 5 May 1997. That review is ongoing and has
continued since 1998.
In 1998 the respondent proposed, and the Union accepted, that industrial
officers should have the same training as prison officers.
Up until that time
the training for industrial officers had been significantly different from the
training for prison officers.
Mr Williams gave evidence that a prison officer employed in 1996 to work at
Bunbury Prison would have undertaken a nine month probationary
officer training
course initially at Wooroloo or Canning Vale Prison. The first three months
consisted of residential training and
then the next six months was done on the
job. Detailed evidence was adduced by the respondent as to the contents of this
Against this, evidence was given that a Group 2 carpentry shop
instructor would have had one week’s orientation at Bunbury
Prison. That
would have included some training in security, some training in the standard
orders in what to bring and not to bring
into prisons and orientation through
the industrial area involved.
Mr Flynn explained the development of training for industrial officers. In
around 1992, while he was at Roebourne Prison, he caused
a pilot program to be
introduced enabling industrial officers to become trained as prison officers,
thereby improving their prospects
of promotion. When he went to Bunbury Prison
he encouraged his industrial officers to do the same although it was not
This led to increased flexibility in the workforce.
Mr Flynn said that the reason that such training was not mandatory for
industrial officers was largely based on the convenience of
the Ministry of
Justice. He explained that shift officers can be employed in batches of 20
people and trained in such groups. On
the other hand, the industrial positions
tend to arise on an individual basis so training one individual would be more
Mr Flynn further explained that some aspects of a shift prison
officer’s training would never be used by an industrial officer.
he said, have been a waste of training time and money to provide industrial
officers with training for things they would
not normally encounter because in
reality their jobs were different day to day.
Mr Flynn identified Mr Kuronen, a stores officer, as the only industrial
officer at Group 1 or Level 1 who had not previously been
a shift officer.
Before coming to Bunbury Prison Mr Kuronen had occupied a stores type position
at Casuarina Prison and was employed
Public Sector Management Act
its predecessor.
A number of witnesses called by the respondent gave evidence to the effect
that being able to restrain prisoners is an inherent requirement
of employment
as an industrial officer within the prison.
Mr Flynn said in his statement (Exhibit F) that he considers it an essential
requirement of being a prison officer to be able to restrain
prisoners when and
if the need arises and that that requirement exists irrespective of whether or
not the prison officer is occupying
a position as an industrial officer. He went
on to state that in managing the Bunbury Prison he relies on the ability of all
officers, including industrial officers, to be able to restrain prisoners
and manage them in accordance with the
Prisons Act
and Regulations. If he could
not rely on industrial officers to carry out the duties of prison officers when
and if the need arises
it would be necessary to engage a considerable number of
extra prison officers to ensure prison security and safety.
Mr Williams expressed the view in his written statement (Exhibit E) that it
is very important that both prison officers and industrial
officers be
physically capable of restraining prisoners because in their every day work they
come into contact with prisoners. Industrial
officers work closely with
prisoners and are responsible for giving them orders with which they must ensure
compliance. Further,
industrial officers often work in environments where there
are tools or equipment available which could be used as weapons. If a
officer or industrial officer was unable to restrain prisoners this would
ultimately pose a security risk for the prison.
In addition, both the officer
concerned, other officers, staff and members of the community working in the
prison, and other prisoners
would be at risk of injury if a prison officer or
industrial officer was not physically able to restrain prisoners. If possible,
officers seek to avoid confrontation. However this is not always possible.
Mr Seal also expressed the view that industrial officers generally work very
closely on a day to day basis with prisoners and often
in an environment where
there are tools and equipment which could be used as weapons. In that light it
is important that industrial
officers are able to deal with prisoners and to
respond effectively to resolve a conflict. He said that an industrial officer
the physical ability to restrain prisoners as well as a knowledge of
and training in how to deal with prisoners in ways that avoid
the need to resort
to a physical response.
6.2 What is the “particular employment”?
For reasons which I will develop below, the
identification of the “particular employment” in the context of
seems to me to be critical to the question of whether unlawful
discrimination occurred in this case.
If, as the respondent argued, the “particular employment” is
employment as a prison officer in Western Australia (or employment
as a prison
officer at Bunbury Prison) then the complainant was unable to carry out an
inherent requirement of that employment. I
have already so found in coming to
the conclusion that dismissal of the complainant as a prison officer was not
unlawful discrimination.
However, if the “particular employment” is
more narrowly delineated it is then necessary to identify the inherent
requirements
of that particular employment.
The respondent’s submission was that because an industrial officer was
a prison officer under the
Prisons Act
the position of industrial officer
has the same inherent requirements. A premise of that
submission is that the “particular employment” of all shift prison
officers and industrial officers is engagement under
Prisons Act
have already found that industrial officers were engaged under
that finding does not, in my view, determine the question of what the particular
employment is for the purposes of
It is possible that two employees may
have common statutory obligations in performing their contract of employment,
but nonetheless
have different contracts of employment with different duties and
tasks to be performed. It could not then be said, necessarily, that
employees had the same “particular employment”. In other words, in
my view it is necessary to have regard to
all of the terms of a contract of
employment, not solely those arising from an applicable statute, to identify the
“particular
employment” for the purposes of
the question was whether Mr Christie’s employment
with Qantas had been terminated for a reason proscribed by s170DF of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
(Cth). Sub-section (1) of that section
prohibited termination for reasons including the employee’s age. However
sub-section
(2) provided that sub-section (1) did not prevent age from being a
reason for terminating employment if the reason was based on the
requirements of the particular position”.
Thus the statutory context in
was substantially similar,
although not identical, to
of the DDA. In
J commented that “the ‘particular position’ emphasises that
the sub-section is directed to the precise case
in question, not to a general
class of persons of which the employee comprises one member” (at [101]).
It seems to me that the same reasoning applies, possibly with more force, to
the reference in
DDA to the “particular employment”.
That approach to the identification of the “particular
employment”, for the purposes of
, seems to me to be consistent
with the approach taken in
X v Commonwealth
. The passage from the
judgment of Gummow and Hayne JJ at [105], quoted above, supports that approach.
So too, in my view, does McHugh
J’s analysis of the scope of the
appellant’s employment (at [62] – [67]). In that part of his
judgment, his Honour
identified the scope of the appellant’s employment,
present and future, as a critical factor for determination, but found that
Commission had not undertaken the necessary factual analysis. Because no
allocation to any particular branch or unit had occurred
by the time of the
appellant’s discharge, the scope of his employment could not be narrowed
in that way. His Honour found that
the precise content of the particular
employment was a question for the Commission to determine and that this had not
Thus, it seems to me, I must identify the scope of the contract of employment
of the successful applicant for the position of stores/laundry
officer in order
to determine what the “particular employment” is.
The evidence available in order to perform that task is quite limited. The
contractual relationship between the successful applicant
for that job and the
respondent was not the subject of any direct evidence. Nor, indeed, was there
evidence of the precise content
of the contractual relationship between a shift
prison officer and the respondent. It was simply accepted by both counsel that,
the latter case at least, the contract of employment was simply to the effect
that a prison officer, upon taking oath of engagement,
becomes employed to
perform the duties of a prison officer in accordance with the
Prisons Act
with the rights and obligations created by the Award. Can that be equally said
of the terms and conditions of employment of
the successful applicant for the
position of stores/laundry officer? If it can, then the “particular
employment” is the
same as has already been considered.
The respondent argued that all officers engaged under
, whether in positions as shift prison officers or industrial officers, are
employed on the basis that they will work as prison officers
whatever capacity they are commanded and anywhere within Western Australia. The
respondent therefore contended that an industrial
officer with a trade
qualification in, for example, carpentry, working as an industrial officer in
the carpentry workshop at Bunbury
Prison could be commanded, as a matter of
contract between employer and employee, by his employer to work as a shift
prison officer.
The respondent relied upon
regulation 3(3)
Prisons Regulations
context. However I do not consider that
regulation 3(3)
determines the question.
It may well mean that an officer can be ordered to move from one prison to
another. However in my view it
does not mean that the employer can order a
carpenter employed in the carpentry workshop to work as a prison officer. There
air of unreality about such a proposition. Many industrial officers are
not qualified to work as shift prison officers (for example,
Mr Kuronen and the
trade qualified Group 2 industrial officers). Counsel for the respondent
suggested that industrial relations and
other realities would probably preclude
such conduct from ever occurring. However, there seems to me to be a real
question as to
whether the contractual relationship between employer and
employee would permit such an occurrence (quite apart from any industrial
relations constraints on the employer’s orders to the employee).
The answer to that question would turn, in large measure at least, upon the
precise communications which constituted the contract
of employment of the
relevant industrial officer. There is, in that regard, very little evidence.
The precise content of discussions or documents constituting the employment
contract of the successful applicant for the stores/laundry
position is not at
all clear from the evidence. The advertisement of the position describes it as a
position as “stores/laundry
officer at Bunbury Regional Prison”. The
duties are stated to be the carrying out of all duties associated with the
running of the laundry and stores. The job description form also
described the office and its responsibilities and is summarised
earlier in these
In the absence of clear evidence, it seems to me reasonable to conclude that
these documents would constitute part of the contract
of employment of the
successful applicant for the position of stores/laundry officer.
I am unable to identify anything in the content of those documents which
would be sufficient to empower the respondent, as the employer
of the successful
applicant for the stores/laundry position, to direct that person to work as a
shift prison officer or indeed as
an industrial officer outside of the
stores/laundry position. Nor am I able to be satisfied from any other evidence
at the inquiry
that the respondent is so empowered.
For these reasons I conclude that the “particular employment”,
for the purposes of
, is employment as the stores/laundry officer at
Bunbury Prison.
That conclusion by no means removes the significance of the fact that the
successful applicant for the stores/laundry position would
be engaged as a
prison officer with the duties set out in
Prisons Act
fact is relevant to the identification of the inherent requirements of the
position, to which I now turn.
6.3 What are the inherent requirements of the particular employment of
stores/laundry officer?
The day to day tasks contractually provided for are, I think, summarised
reasonably accurately in Ms Wilkes’ work site evaluation
report which is
quoted at length above. It can be seen at once that the contractual tasks of a
stores officer are different from
that of a disciplinary or shift prison officer
in that, in the latter situation, one of if not the primary focus of the day to
duties is the management of prisoners per se.
However, that is by no means the end of the matter. It is plain from the High
Court’s decision in
X v Commonwealth
that one must have regard to
where, when, in what circumstances and with whom those tasks are to be performed
(at [106]). Both the
stores and laundry roles require a degree of prisoner
The laundry component of the position involves day to day regular supervision
of up to six prisoners. The evidence is that these prisoners
would be medium or
minimum security prisoners. The prisoners selected for the laundry would, on the
evidence, be chosen bearing in
mind the likelihood that they would be working on
their own for a lot of the time. As at 1997 there would have been prisoners
seven days a week in the laundry. The stores/laundry position was for
Monday to Friday. Thus it was contemplated that on weekends
the prisoners in the
stores/laundry position would not have any direct supervision. A degree of
supervision would come from occasional
visits from roving disciplinary prison
officers. Further, the stores/laundry officer was, by definition, only spending
of her or his time in the laundry. So while the officer was engaged
in stores duties, the prisoners in the laundry would also be
unsupervised (apart
from roving prison officers).
Mr Flynn’s evidence was to the effect that the need for the
stores/laundry officer to be able to restrain prisoners arose from
the general
view (held by him and upon which he had obtained advice from the Ministry of
Justice) that all industrial officers were
prison officers under the
Prisons Act
and therefore must be able to restrain prisoners. He did not suggest that he had
specifically analysed the position of stores/laundry
officer to come to the view
that it required an ability to restrain prisoners.
The respondent led evidence to the effect that all industrial officers must
be able to restrain prisoners, and as to the reasons that
that is important
(outlined above). That position is undermined, to some degree, by several
matters. As was acknowledged, such has
not always been the position. There
remains within the prison system a number of industrial officers who are not
qualified prison
officers. Group 2 industrial officers are not, generally,
qualified prison officers, but have a trade qualification. In each of the
shop and metal shop there was, in 1997, a single Group 2 industrial officer
with, respectively, 17 and 12 prisoners under his
supervision. Each was entirely
on his own apart from roving officers dropping in from time to time. A phone or
radio could be used
to call for help if necessary.
Mr Jackson was employed as an industrial relief officer not long before 1997.
He was not required to be qualified or trained as a
prison officer. Mr Kuronen
was the stores officer. He was not a qualified prison officer, nor did he have a
trade qualification.
There was substantial evidence regarding an injury he
received to his shoulder. Counsel for the respondent appeared to accept that
there was nothing in the material put before the inquiry to establish that the
respondent took any steps to satisfy itself, when
Mr Kuronen returned to work,
that Mr Kuronen was capable of restraining prisoners. This is not a matter on
which I put substantial
weight, however it may be seen as not coincidental that
the position Mr Kuronen occupied was one which, in reality, involved little
prisoner contact.
The differences in training of industrial officers and prison officers, as at
1997 and prior to that, reflected, at least in part,
a recognition of the
difference in the reality of the day to day tasks involved in those jobs.
The duties set out in the job description form are summarised above. These
duties included, as point 2, a duty to maintain discipline
of prisoners. This
was suggested by Mr Giblett to be unusual. He contrasted the position, in this
regard, with the job description
for an industrial officer in the market garden
(Exhibit D). I note, in that context, what appears to be an earlier draft of the
description form provided to Ms Wilkes (annexure KK to Exhibit N) which
omitted point 2 – the duty to maintain discipline of
prisoners. In any
event, as was suggested in a question by counsel for the respondent, the
inclusion of the duty to maintain discipline
of prisoners seems to add nothing
of substance to the duty at point 1 (common to all industrial officer positions)
of ensuring compliance
Prisons Act
and Regulations and other lawfully
issued orders. In that light, the successful applicant for the stores/laundry
position did not
have materially different duties, as regards the control of
prisoners, than other industrial officers, including Mr Jackson, Mr Kuronen
the officers in the boot shop and metal shop referred to above.
While engaged in duties in the laundry, the stores/laundry officer had duties
Prisons Act
as well as having taken an oath in terms
summarised earlier in these reasons. That fact, combined with contact with
prisoners is,
the respondent argued, sufficient to compel the conclusion that
the ability to restrain prisoners is an inherent requirement of the
as stores/laundry officer.
I am not persuaded that that is so. I do not doubt that it would be desirable
for anyone whose employment involved regular contact
with prisoners to have a
physical capacity to restrain prisoners if the need arose. That desirability is
reinforced if the employee
has a statutory duty to do her utmost in the
performance of her duties to maintain the security of the prison and has the
power to use such force as she believes on reasonable grounds to be
necessary to ensure that her lawful orders are complied with.
Similarly, as Mr
Giblett said, it is desirable that all industrial officers be trained to
restrain prisoners because it is possible
that the need may arise.
However, in my view it is a question of degree whether there is, in a
particular employment, sufficient prospect of a need arising
for the exercise of
the statutory power to use reasonable force so that it can be said to be an
requirement of the employment that the person be able to
restrain prisoners. The existence of the statutory powers and duties does
necessity, without more, compel the conclusion that ability to restrain is an
inherent requirement. An employee may have such
statutory power and duties but
be in an employment which means the occasion for exercise of such power is, in
practical terms, nil.
I do not suggest that that is so in this case. The point
is made to explain my view that questions of degree are involved.
That questions of degree are involved seems to me to be supported, albeit by
analogy, by the analysis of McHugh J in
X v Commonwealth
at [42], where
there is reference to the relevance of the degree and circumstances of contact
between the employee and others.
The evidence suggests that employment as the stores/laundry officer involves
in nature, extent and
circumstances, than that entailed by employment as a shift prison officer. In
the laundry part of the job,
in a particular environment, that is, the laundry. The prisoners are, for
mentioned earlier, unlikely to be the most difficult to manage and
supervise. The stores role involves contact with prisoners which
is even more
The prospect of circumstances arising where the stores/laundry officer needed
to physically restrain a prisoner seems to me to be
very substantially lower
than for a shift prison officer.
On the evidence before me, I am not satisfied that physical capacity to
restrain prisoners is truly “essential” or “necessary
ensure the adequate performance of the employment” (per McHugh J in
at 310) of the stores/laundry officer.
In coming to this view I have taken into account the evidence of the
respondent’s witnesses regarding the reasons why it is
important that all
industrial officers be able to restrain prison officers. I have sought to give
(as McHugh J said ought be done,
X v Commonwealth
at [37]) appropriate
recognition to the business judgment of the respondent in organising its
undertaking and in regarding this or
that requirement as essential to the
particular employment. However, as McHugh J said, in the end, it is for the
Commission, not
the employer, to determine whether or not a requirement is
inherent in a particular employment.
Consistent with that, the fact that the advertisement itself stated, as an
essential criterion, that a person be a permanent prison
officer is not, in my
view, determinative of the inherent requirements of the employment. In
, Brennan CJ, Gaudron J and McHugh J all held that a stipulation
within the contract between employer and employee is not conclusive
of whether a
requirement is inherent in the employment (at 284, 294-5 and 310). I am unable
to identify any compelling reason for
that requirement when, in 1997, there were
industrial officers who were not qualified prison officers (and, indeed, not
trained in restraining prisoners) occupying the positions of
industrial officers in stores, the boot shop and the metal shop, and
latter two cases with more prisoners than were working in the stores or laundry.
For the reasons set out above I conclude that the respondent has not
discharged its onus of proving that it was an inherent requirement
position of stores/laundry officer that the holder of that position be
physically able to restrain prisoners. In that light,
the respondent’s
discrimination in refusing to consider the complainant for that position
amounted to unlawful discrimination.
In light of this finding there is no need to consider the claim of indirect
discrimination.
7. CLAIM OF HARASSMENT
The remaining part of the complainant’s claim
is harassment. The complainant complains that the respondent has contravened
of the DDA in a variety of ways particularised in paragraph 15 of the
amended points of claim.
Section 35(2)
provides as follows:
“35 Harassment
in employment
(2) It is unlawful for a person to harass another person who:
(a) is an employee of a person by whom the first-mentioned person is
employed; and
(b) has a disability;
in relation to the disability.”
The complainant says that the respondent, through Mr Flynn, harassed her in
relation to her disability in various ways which may be
summarised as
(a) Mr Flynn informing the complainant that he would ensure that she would be
dismissed as a result of a forced attendance to the
Medical Board;
(b) by insisting that she work outside the stores office and telling her that
if she didn’t like it she could leave;
(c) by requesting that she take leave so that they could arrange the position
without her presence;
(d) by placing Mr Van Leeuwin in the position of acting stores/laundry
officer before the position was advertised.
One or two additional matters, not included in the points of claim, were
raised in closing submissions as constituting harassment.
I will dispose of
those very briefly. The additional matters relied upon either did not, on my
earlier findings, occur or in my view
are plainly incapable of constituting
harassment.
A number of arguments were raised on the part of the respondent as to why the
harassment claim must fail. However, in the light of
my factual findings, it is
not necessary to deal with all of those arguments.
Of the conduct alleged by the complainant to constitute harassment, in my
view, only the final allegation, of placing Mr Van Leeuwin
in the position of
acting stores/laundry officer was conduct which actually occurred.
I do not need to decide whether a single discrete act of this kind could
constitute harassment. The ordinary meaning of the word “harass”
would seem to involve persisting or repeated conduct. In any event, the conduct
of placing Mr Van Leewuin in the position of acting
stores/laundry officer
cannot, on the evidence I have heard, be said to amount to harassment.
For these reasons I find that there has been no contravention by the
respondent of
of the DDA.
I move now to consider the consequences of my
earlier finding of unlawful discrimination by the respondent in refusing to
the complainant’s application for the stores/laundry position.
Section 103(1)
of the DDA provides that after holding an inquiry the
Commission may:
(b) if it finds the complaint substantiated – so find and make a
determination which, if appropriate, may include any one or
more of the
(i) a declaration that the respondent had engaged in conduct, or committed an
act, that is unlawful under a provision of
of this Act and should not
repeat or continue such unlawful conduct;
(iv) a declaration that the respondent should pay to the complainant damages
by way of compensation for any loss or damage suffered
because of the conduct of
the respondent”.
The complainant submitted that substantial damages should be awarded.
Guidance as to the approach to be taken in quantifying damages is provided by
the decision of the Full Federal Court in
Hall v Sheiban Pty Ltd
[1989] FCA 72
85 ALR 503.
In that case (which was a sex discrimination case, with the relevant
legislation providing corresponding powers as apply here) Wilcox
J explained
that tort provides the closest analogy and will often be a useful test although
it is not to be applied slavishly. Generally
speaking, his Honour said that the
correct way to approach the assessment of damages is to compare the position in
which the complainant
might have been expected to be if the discriminatory
conduct had not occurred with the situation in which she was placed by reason
the conduct of the respondent.
As French J said in the same case, the focus should be on the requirement of
the legislation that the loss or damage be “by
reason of” the
conduct complained of. The same point applies here, although the legislation
requires that the loss or damage
be suffered “because of” the
conduct complained of.
In that way, it seems to me that the matter is to be approached similarly to
issues of causation in a claim by a person who suffers
damage by the misleading
conduct of another in contravention of
Trade Practices Act 1974
(as to which see
Wardley Australia v State of Western
[1992] HCA 55
(1992) 175 CLR 514).
In summary, therefore, my task is to apply a commonsense concept of causation
to determine what loss and damage was caused by the
respondent’s unlawful
discrimination.
In the revised particulars of detriment filed in March 2000 the complainant
claims damages for components including:
(a) past loss of income;
(b) future loss of income, and superannuation benefits;
(c) damages for stress, depression and loss of enjoyment of life.
The particulars of detriment claim on the alternative bases of loss of income
as a prison officer or as an industrial officer. On
my findings, it is, of
course, only the latter which is relevant.
In the course of the parties’ presentation of final submissions I
invited them to provide supplementary written submissions
in relation to the
particulars of detriment and damages issues generally. The parties did not file
any further submissions. In that
light, I will proceed on the basis that the net
figures referred to in the particulars of detriment provided to me are supported
by the evidence. That was a specific topic on which supplementary submissions
were invited.
The particulars of detriment accept that the effect of workers’
compensation payments received by the complainant was that she
suffered no loss
of income up to about April 1999. The particulars then suggest past income to
have been lost in an amount of approximately
$16,000.00 with a claim for future
income of about $240,000.00, and an additional amount of $22,000.00 for lost
superannuation benefits.
Those claims are put on the basis that the complainant lost, as a result of
the unlawful discrimination of the respondent, all of
the income she would have
earned as an industrial officer occupying the stores/laundry position.
On the findings I have made above, that cannot be said to be the case. The
unlawful discrimination, as I have found it, was constituted
respondent’s failure to consider Ms Logan’s application for the
position of stores/laundry officer. Plainly, in
that light, it cannot be said
that the discrimination caused her to lose the entirety of the income to be
derived from that job.
The DDA imposes a statutory duty not to discriminate unlawfully when
considering an application for employment. The applicant thereby
correlative right to have the application considered without unlawful
discrimination.
Thus, what must be valued for present purposes is the opportunity to have
been considered for the stores/laundry position without
unlawful discrimination.
That exercise is, necessarily, a difficult one involving a degree of
speculation. A number of factors must
be taken into account, including the
probability that it would have been realised and value of the opportunity had it
been realised.
The approach to be taken to the assessment of the value of a lost chance or
opportunity has been considered in cases in the High Court,
Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54
(1991) 174 CLR 64
Adelaide Petroleum NL
[1994] HCA 4
(1994) 179 CLR 332.
I will apply the approach taken in
those cases to the present issues. For a recent example of the application of
these principles
in a discrimination case, see
Commonwealth v HREOC and
[2000] FCA 1150
, at para [54] and following.
There is very little evidence to assist in the process of assessing the
probability that Ms Logan’s application for the stores/laundry
would have been successful. The respondent led no evidence as to how two
competing applications would have been dealt with.
The only stated essential
criterion was “permanent prison officer”. I have already found that
that criterion incorporated
matters which I have found not to be inherent
requirements of the position of stores/laundry officer. Other criteria are
as desirable in the advertisement. There is nothing of substance in
the evidence to assist me in how those criteria might have been
between the two competing applicants.
Another foundation of the way the complainant’s damages claim is
formulated is that it assumes that the complainant would have
continued working
through to 65. That appears to have been her stated intention. However, that, in
itself, can be only of limited
weight. It is difficult for anyone to predict
with confidence what will occur over the next 15 years. The respondent tendered
Exhibit W) some information demonstrating the age at which a number of
female employees at the prison have resigned or had their
contract expired. That
evidence supports the conclusion that it is unusual for an officer to remain in
employment at the prison through
to an age of 65.
Further, the evidence suggests that there is some danger of a recurrence of
Ms Logan’s back problems and that such recurrence
might anyway have
prevented her to continue to work through to the age of 65.
A third foundation of the formulation of the complainant’s damages
claim is that all of the income which would have been earned
through the
stores/laundry position has been “lost” as a result of the
discrimination because the complainant is and
will remain unable to get any
other paid work. Evidence was led of some attempts by Ms Logan to find other
work or to develop other
skills (with assistance from Ms Wilkes and others).
Unfortunately, there is support in that evidence for a suggestion that Ms Logan
may be unlikely to obtain any substantial other work. However, that is a long
way from being able to conclude that she should be
given damages on the
assumption that she will not obtain any further paid work through to the year
Taking all these matters into account, and doing the best I can with the
limited material available, I would award damages of $35,000.00
as compensation
for the value of the lost opportunity to be properly considered for the
stores/laundry position.
There was evidence that Ms Logan suffered stress and some depression as a
result of the events in late 1997. It is, of course, difficult
to dissect the
dismissal from the position as prison officer (which I have found to be not
unlawful) from the consequences of the
refusal to be considered for the
stores/laundry position.
Section 103(4)
expressly allows for relevant damages to include humiliation
and injury to a complainant’s feelings.
I would award an amount of $3,000.00 for this head of damage.
There was some suggestion that costs should be awarded against the
respondent. Legal expenses are not specifically provided for in
the DDA. In
s.103(1)(iv)
of the DDA does not extend to legal costs incurred by a
complainant (
AMC v Wilson
(1996) 68 FCR 46
per Heerey J at 66 in relation
to analogous provisions in the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Accordingly I make no award for costs.
DETERMINATION
to s.103 of the DDA I make the following declarations:
(a) the respondent unlawfully discriminated against the complainant in breach
of the DDA in failing to consider the complainant’s
application for the position of stores/laundry officer on the basis of
disability;
(b) that within 28 days of the date of this decision the respondent pay to
the complainant:
(i) the sum of $35,000.00 compensation for the lost opportunity to be
properly considered for the stores/laundry position; and
(ii) the sum of $3,000.00 compensation for humiliation and injury to
I certify that this and the preceding fifty-one pages (51) pages are a
true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Inquiry Commissioner
Hearing Solicitor:
Date: 12 September 2000
RTF format (178 KB)
Signed PDF/A format