MDP v The King [2025] HCA 24 (18 June 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, STEWARD, GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH‑JONES JJ
MDP APPELLANT
THE KING RESPONDENT
MDP v The King
[2025] HCA 24
Date of Hearing:
Date of Judgment: 18 June
special leave to appeal to raise grounds 2 to 4 of the amended notice of appeal
filed on 14 June 2024.
aside the order made by the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of Queensland
on 27 June 2023 and, in its place, the appellant's
appeal to the Court of Appeal
be allowed, his convictions set aside, and a new trial
On appeal from the Supreme Court of
Representation
S C Holt KC with S J Hedge
for the appellant (instructed by Jasper Fogerty Lawyers)
G J Cummings
with S J Muir for the respondent (instructed by Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (Qld))
R J Sharp KC with T M Wood for the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions, intervening (instructed by Office of the Director
Prosecutions (Cth))
B A Hatfield SC with E R Nicholson for the Director
of Public Prosecutions (NSW), intervening (instructed by Solicitor for Public
Prosecutions
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
MDP v The King
Criminal practice
– Appeal – Wrong decision on question of law – Where appellant
convicted of sexual offences –
Where Crown led evidence of appellant
smacking complainant's backside as evidence of sexual interest – Where
direction to jury
permitted use of that evidence as propensity evidence –
Where appellant's trial counsel did not object to admission of evidence
direction – Whether admission of evidence wrong decision on question of
law – Whether direction wrong decision
on question of law – Whether
wrong decision on question of law has materiality threshold – Whether
direction material
– Whether substantial miscarriage of justice.
Words and phrases – "appeal", "common form criminal appeal
provision", "conduct of counsel", "context evidence", "could realistically
affected the reasoning of the jury to a verdict of guilty", "decision",
"decision over objection", "direction to the jury",
"error or irregularity",
"evidence of sexual interest", "failure to object", "fundamental", "inadmissible
evidence", "materiality",
"misdirection", "
direction",
test", "propensity direction", "propensity evidence",
"propensity reasoning", "proviso", "question of law", "relationship evidence",
", "second limb", "sexual interest", "sexual offence",
"substantial miscarriage of justice", "trial counsel", "wrong decision", "wrong
decision on a question of law".
Criminal Code
(Qld), s 668E.
GAGELER CJ.
This appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of
Queensland in
was heard contiguously with the appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal
of the Supreme Court of South Australia in
Brawn v The
in order to
facilitate consideration of issues unresolved in
Weiss v The
concerning the
"common form" criminal appeal provision which governs the determination of
appeals against convictions on indictments
in most Australian
determination of each appeal was assisted by submissions on legal principle made
during and after the hearings by the parties
to both appeals and by the
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions and the New South Wales Director of
Public Prosecutions,
who were granted leave to intervene in both appeals.
reasons for judgment are to be read with the unanimous reasons for judgment in
Whereas those
dealt principally with the "third limb" of the common form criminal appeal
provision, which provides for an appeal
against conviction to be allowed on the
ground of a miscarriage of justice, these deal principally with the "second
limb" of the
common form criminal appeal provision, which provides for an appeal
against conviction to be allowed on the ground of a wrong decision
question of law.
issues of legal principle concerning the second limb of the common form criminal
appeal provision resolved in this appeal are
those addressed by Gleeson, Jagot
and Beech-Jones JJ under the headings "The meaning and operation of the
second limb" and "The second
limb and the conduct of
Together with
Gordon and Steward JJ
and Edelman J,
with the statement of the applicable legal principles there set out. The result
is that the Court is unanimous in holding
that: (1) a wrong decision on a
question of law within the meaning of the second limb involves a wrong
determination or response
to a question of law by the trial judge that has legal
effect in the trial;
a wrong decision on a question of law, other than one that amounts to a "failure
to observe the requirements of the criminal
process in a fundamental
cannot result
in an appeal against conviction being allowed on the second limb unless the
appellant can establish that the wrong
decision could realistically have
affected the reasoning of the jury to the verdict of guilty that was returned in
the trial that
relation to the application of those principles in the circumstances of the
appeal, I agree with Gordon and Steward JJ, as in
relevant substance does
outcome is that the Court is unanimous in finding that no decision on a question
of law within the meaning of the second limb
occurred when evidence of witness
"K", inadmissible according to
Pfennig v The
admitted in the trial of MDP without objection. The Court is also unanimous in
finding that the trial judge made a wrong decision
on a question of law in
directing, contrary to
, that it was open to the jury to treat
that evidence of witness "K" as evidence of MDP having a propensity to have a
sexual interest
in the complainant. The direction amounted to a wrong decision
on a question of law notwithstanding the failure of counsel for MDP
the giving of the direction or to seek a redirection and irrespective of the
accuracy of the inference drawn by the Court
of Appeal that the conduct of
counsel for MDP was calculated to take "forensic
direction, in that counsel considered that the evidence was "weak in support of
an inference of sexual interest" and was "content
to encourage the prosecution
into clutching at such a weak argument in support of its case to give foundation
to ... arguments about
the weaknesses of the prosecution
sole issue on which the Court is divided is whether MDP has demonstrated that
the erroneous direction could realistically have
affected the reasoning of the
jury to the verdicts of guilty that were returned in the trial. The majority,
comprising Gordon and
Steward JJ, Edelman J and me, concludes that the direction
could realistically have had that effect. For my part, I consider that
attempting to discharge its sworn duty to find facts relevant to guilt applying
the law as stated by the trial judge, could
realistically have treated the
evidence of witness "K" in the manner the trial judge directed was open –
as evidence of MDP
having a propensity to have a sexual interest in the
complainant – in their reasoning to the verdicts of guilty that were
in the trial of MDP that occurred.
consequence of the second limb of the common form criminal appeal provision
being found to be engaged, by the conclusion that
a wrong decision on a question
of law was made that could realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury
to the verdicts of
guilty, is that this Court exercising the powers of the Court
of Appeal must allow MDP's appeal to that Court and set aside his convictions
unless persuaded by the Crown, in terms of the proviso to the common form
criminal appeal provision, that "no substantial miscarriage
of justice has
actually occurred"
accordance with the principles set out in
. Although the Crown filed
a Notice of Contention under r 42.08.5 of the
High Court Rules 2004
(Cth) relying on the proviso, the argument presented by the Crown in support of
the application of the proviso was insufficient to
overcome the "negative
proposition" in
in that the argument failed to demonstrate that
"the evidence properly admitted at trial proved, beyond reasonable doubt,
[MDP's] guilt of the offence[s] on which the jury returned
its verdict[s] of
Steward JJ conclude that the proviso has not been demonstrated to be
engaged. I agree, as does Edelman J.
orders to be made by majority in the disposition of the appeal are accordingly
those proposed by Gordon and Steward JJ.
AND STEWARD JJ. This appeal turns on the second limb of the "common form"
appeal provision for appeals from a conviction
on indictment in s 668E(1)
Criminal Code
which requires
the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of Queensland to allow an appeal
against conviction if it is of the opinion
"that the judgment of the court of
trial should be set aside on the ground of the wrong decision of any question of
law". If there
is a wrong decision on a question of law, then the
conviction is set aside if that wrong decision was
fundamental
to the trial,
or, subject to the application of the
if that wrong
decision was material, in the sense that it could realistically have affected
the reasoning of the tribunal of fact
to verdict in the trial that was had.
The applicable principles in relation to the second limb are set out in the
reasons of Gleeson,
Jagot and Beech-Jones
a trial by jury in the District Court of Queensland, the appellant, MDP, was
convicted of 16 counts on an indictment alleging
he committed sexual offences
against his stepdaughter between 2014 and 2019, when she was between 7 and 12
years of age. Relevantly,
by an amended notice of appeal, MDP contended that his
convictions should be set aside on the basis of a wrong decision on
of law by the trial judge to give a propensity direction in
relation to "evidence inadmissible as propensity evidence" (ground 2).
inadmissible evidence, given by the complainant's sister ("K"), was that MDP
smacked the complainant's backside. That evidence
was led as evidence
demonstrating that MDP had a sexual interest in the complainant and was prepared
to act on it ("the impugned
propensity evidence").
this case, there was a wrong decision by the trial judge on a question of
That wrong decision
was embodied in a direction to the jury that permitted their use of the impugned
propensity evidence. That wrong
decision was not fundamental, as that term is
understood,
but, as will
be explained, in the trial that was had, the only available conclusion is that
that wrong decision on a question of
law – a direction that should not
have been given about the use of the impugned propensity evidence – could
realistically
have affected the reasoning of the jury.
sum, the direction was a wrong decision on a question of law given by the trial
judge which the Court must assume that the jury
followed. It followed that, as a
result of that wrong direction, everything that had gone before in the trial in
relation to the
impugned propensity evidence – the Crown opening,
K's evidence, the defence opening, MDP's evidence, the defence closing,
Crown closing – had to be, and we must assume that it was, taken
into account by the jury in reasoning to verdicts of guilt.
That wrong decision
on a question of law satisfied the materiality threshold and this Court cannot
conclude "that no substantial
miscarriage of justice has actually
That is, we do
not consider that the proviso to s 668E(1) applies. The appeal should
be allowed, MDP's convictions set aside, and
a new trial ordered.
is necessary to describe the trial that was had.
The alleged
offending and the trial
offending allegedly commenced after MDP began living with the complainant's
mother and sisters in 2014 and occurred at their
various residences between 2014
and 2019. The final episode allegedly occurred about a month before a
complaint was made to
night of 28 October 2019, the complainant's mother awoke and noticed MDP was not
in bed. She found him in the complainant's
bedroom with the lights off and
looking under the doona. She asked him what he was doing. He said he was
looking for his watch. He
purported to look for it and eventually returned
to the bedroom. The complainant's mother continued to ask him what he had
been doing.
He responded by asking, "What, do you think I'm touching the
next morning, on 29 October 2019, the complainant's mother told
the complainant of what she had seen, which prompted the complainant
disclose to her mother what MDP had been doing to her. A complaint was made to
the police within days. On 31 October 2019, the
complainant participated in
a video recorded interview with
On 1 November
2019, her sister, K, also did so. During K's interview, K told the police that
MDP "smacks [the complainant] on the
bum ... [r]andomly" when "[w]e weren't
doing anything wrong".
was a short trial before a jury which commenced on 2 August 2021. The jury
retired to consider their verdicts at 2.49 pm on
5 August 2021.
In the Crown's opening address at the start of MDP's trial, the
prosecutor said, "you're going to hear [K] talk about
having witnessed [MDP]
smack [the complainant] on the bottom, and she'll describe that that
occurred when they weren't doing anything
wrong; so a non-disciplinary way".
Although this did not expressly indicate that the Crown would lead
that evidence as evidence of
MDP's sexual interest, there was an
implication underlying the "non-disciplinary" comment such that it is possible
that that comment
was a reference to the evidence being used as sexual interest
evidence. Defence counsel understood the evidence to be deployed by
the Crown as sexual interest evidence.
the prosecutor's opening, the complainant gave evidence by her recorded
interview with police being played to the
and then by her
pre‑recorded oral evidence being
in which she
confirmed that what she had told police was correct. The complainant described
sexual offending by MDP against her.
She did not refer to being smacked on the
backside. The complainant was cross-examined by MDP's trial counsel and
re‑examined
by the prosecutor.
The complainant was not asked any
questions about the smacking.
same approach was adopted for the giving of K's evidence.
Her pre‑recorded evidence was shown to the jury as part of the
case. There was no objection to the admission of K's evidence.
K's video recorded interview with police, K gave evidence that there had been
occasions when she had seen MDP smack the complainant
"on the bum", apparently
randomly, and not in the context of her having done something naughty and
getting a smack:
But he, he, he like smacks [the complainant] on the bum.
[Detective:]
Smacks her? What do you mean by that?
[Detective:]
Yeah. Like if she's naughty or you know if you do, sometimes
if you do the wrong thing you might get a smack?
[Detective:]
Not like that?
We weren't doing anything wrong."
The sole evidence of bottom slapping was from
the Crown case closed, MDP's trial counsel opened the defence case on 4 August
2021. Defence counsel said that MDP would be
called as a witness and then
"To provide a context for [MDP's] evidence, you have heard from [K] that there
was a mention of touching of [the complainant] on
the bottom in
the interview. [MDP] will say in his evidence that, yes, he did do that.
In fact, he did that on more than one occasions
[sic], not only to
[the complainant], but also to [K] on many occasions. He will say that he
would discipline them, smack them on
the backside. He would play with them and
during the course of that he accepts that there would have been some times that
them on the backside, not only on the single occasions [sic]
mentioned by [K], but on many. He will say that there was never a sexual
to that. He was their father."
gave evidence at trial.
He denied committing any of the offences.
MDP gave evidence-in-chief about the impugned
propensity evidence:
And how often would that happen in relation to
[the complainant]?
I smacked all of them on the bottom, it was just a ... regular
thing, you know. Just like, 'get' – you know, 'Get on', and,
'Get out of here', or, you know, like, 'Don't do that', you know. Like, I didn't
– yeah, I did – didn't like
flogging my kids.
Yep. Okay. And in terms – whenever you touched –
you used the word bum – [the complainant's] bum, was there any
No, it was never in a sexual nature, it was just, you know, like,
'Get on', 'Get out of here', or, you know, 'Get out of the way.'"
was then cross-examined on the topic:
But you gave evidence earlier that you used to smack them to
discipline them?
Yeah, it was like a playful smack.
When you say playful, was it discipline?
So you were involved in the discipline of them?
You'd smack her on the bottom, though, wouldn't you?
Yeah. Disciplinary.
You'd do that even when she hadn't been naughty?
Yeah. Like, when she was in the way, you know. Like, 'Get out
– get out of the way.' You know?
And you'd actually smack her on the bottom?
Yeah. I'd smack them all on the bottom."
The Crown did not put to MDP that the bottom
slapping evidence was motivated by sexual interest.
to the closing addresses, the prosecutor raised with the trial judge that he
proposed to address the jury "on evidence of sexual
interests", specifically
K's evidence "of [MDP] smacking [the complainant] on the bottom in
circumstances where it was not for discipline".
The prosecutor told the trial
judge that he had raised the issue with defence counsel but thought that he
should raise it with the
trial judge before he addressed on it in case the
trial judge had a different view about whether the evidence amounted to evidence
of sexual interest. The trial judge said the evidence was "pretty tenuous". The
prosecutor said he accepted "the smacking is at the
very low end of the
spectrum of evidence of sexual interest", but that, subject to the view of the
trial judge, he proposed to address
on it briefly. The prosecutor submitted that
it did amount to evidence of sexual interest.
counsel agreed to a direction, saying:
"Yes, the Crown Prosecutor, my learned friend, did open that evidence in his
opening address about [K's] evidence about sexual interest.
In my submission,
tactically, I was going to use that in my favour in the closing address.
So if your Honour wanted to give a sexual
interest direction as contended
for by my learned friend, I don't have a difficulty with it. I'll be using it in
a way that will
become clear in my closing address."
The trial judge ultimately said, "At this stage I'm inclined to permit it
because the direction to the jury includes that they have
to consider
whether or not it reaches the bar."
addresses commenced at 3.29 pm on 4 August 2021 and were completed that
afternoon. Defence counsel addressed the jury
In relation
to the bottom slapping evidence, the defence said that "[a]part from the one
incident of his touching [the complainant]
... on the backside" no one had said
"anything about anything untoward being witnessed". On the issue of "sexual
interest", defence
counsel said:
"Sexual interest. Imagine if you were a grandparent or you did that to your
child and you touched them on the backside and some other
child at the time
said that seemed a little bit weird or strange. [The prosecutor] will stand up
three or four years later and say
that's just simply evidence of sexual
misconduct. That you can use that against [MDP] as per his opening to say you
can more safely
act upon the evidence to say that this is just a witnessed
event. How plausible is it? Well, again, [MDP] gave evidence and said
quickly that he not only did that once, but he did that on many occasions to
both [sisters]. Once again, not only did he accept
it. He came into it and
expanded it quite significantly."
the Crown's address to the
the Crown confirmed
it relied upon the impugned propensity evidence as sexual interest
"Now, [K] also recalled how [MDP] would smack [the complainant] on the bum.
She described that this would occur when they weren't
doing anything wrong.
That wasn't challenged in cross-examination. In fact, [MDP] admitted it. But
clearly, members of the jury,
it was more than just an innocent 'get out of
the way' slap. It wasn't a disciplinary slap. Because [K] remembered it.
it unusual. [She] didn't say [MDP] was doing this to all the other
kids. It was just [the complainant]. The Crown says that demonstrates
sexual interest in her, and it also demonstrates there isn't some concoction
between the two girls, because [the complainant]
didn't actually mention that.
[K] did witness it, and it wasn't challenged. Maybe [the complainant]
didn't mention it because it
pales in comparison to everything else that
happened to her. But it does prove independently from [the complainant], in my
to you, that he did have a sexual interest in her, and he was
prepared to act on it, and that's what he did on those other occasions."
As the last sentence of that passage records, the
Crown's case was that, independently of the complainant's evidence, the impugned
propensity evidence demonstrated MDP's sexual interest in the complainant and
that MDP was prepared to act on it, and that that is
what MDP did on the
occasions in respect of which he was charged.
summing up, the trial judge told the jury that the Crown relied on
the complainant's evidence of the charged acts as evidence
that MDP "had a
sexual interest in the complainant and was willing to give effect to that
interest". The jury were instructed that,
if they accepted evidence of
particular conduct making up the charged acts beyond reasonable doubt,
"then you may use that finding
in considering whether [MDP] committed the other
offences charged". The trial judge warned the jury that the evidence of the
acts must not be used in any other way, such as concluding that MDP was
"generally a person of bad character", and that even if,
based on a conclusion
that MDP was guilty of a particular offence, the jury were satisfied that MDP
had a sexual interest in the
complainant, it would not inevitably follow that
the jury would find MDP guilty of another count on the indictment.
trial judge then addressed the "evidence of other alleged incidents" that were
not the subject of charges on the indictment,
which were said to demonstrate a
sexual interest on the part of MDP towards the complainant – specifically,
the impugned propensity
evidence. The trial judge reminded the jury that
the Crown relied on K's evidence of MDP smacking the complainant's backside
as demonstrating
MDP's sexual interest in the complainant and that he was
prepared to act upon it. The trial judge also told the jury that the Crown
"argues that this evidence makes it more likely that [MDP] committed the charged
offences, as against that particular complainant".
The trial judge then
directed the jury in these terms:
"But you can only use this other evidence, if you are satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that [MDP] did act as the evidence suggests,
and that that
conduct does demonstrate that he had a sexual interest in the complainant and
was willing to pursue it.
[I]f you are not satisfied about that smacking on the bottom, as going to
a sexual interest, then you simply put that to one side
... [I]t is not
something that ... the complainant has given evidence about, but rather her
sister, [K]. So it may impact upon your
assessment of [K's] evidence.
do not accept that this other evidence proves to your satisfaction that [MDP]
had a sexual interest in the complainant, then
you must not use the evidence in
some other way.
For example, to find that [MDP] is guilty of the charged
If you do accept that this uncharged allegation occurred and that the conduct
does demonstrate a sexual interest of [MDP] [in] the
complainant, bear in mind
it does not automatically follow that [MDP] is guilty of any of
the offences charged. You cannot infer
only from the fact that this other
conduct occurred, that [MDP] did the things which he is charged with.
You must still go back and
decide whether you have been satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt of all of the essential facts based upon the whole of
the evidence
that has been placed before you." (emphasis added)
sum, the trial judge gave the jury a direction which (a) noted the Crown's
reliance on evidence demonstrating sexual interest;
(b) directed that, if
the jury accepted that evidence beyond reasonable doubt, the jury could use that
evidence in finding that MDP
committed the offences charged; (c) directed
that, specifically in relation to the impugned propensity evidence, "you
can only use
this other evidence, if you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that [MDP] did act as the evidence suggests, and that that conduct
demonstrate that he had a sexual interest in the complainant and was
willing to pursue it"; (d) directed that, if the jury were
satisfied as to the impugned propensity evidence, the jury must put it to one
side; (e) noted that the fact the evidence was
given by K may affect the
jury's assessment of the evidence; and (f) said, "If you do not accept that
this other evidence proves
to your satisfaction that [MDP] had a sexual interest
in the complainant, then you must not use the evidence in some other way.
example, to find that [MDP] is guilty of the charged offences."
was no application for a redirection.
Second limb
first step in the analysis is to identify the "decision" on a "question of
The giving of the
direction was a decision on a question of
This is particularly
so given that the trial judge weighed whether to give the direction and said:
"Yes, well, it was a matter raised with [K] as an unusual feature of their
dynamic. At this stage I'm inclined to permit it because
the direction to
the jury includes that they have to consider whether or not it reaches
That is, the judge weighed whether to give the direction and decided whether
to do so. The fact that both parties favoured the giving
of the direction does
not change that characterisation.
next step in the analysis requires MDP to demonstrate that the decision was
It was wrong. In
Roach v The Queen
this Court addressed the "rule in
]". The concern
was the highly prejudicial effect that similar fact evidence
of propensity may have for an accused and, "[m]ore to the point, the
possibility
that a jury might reason to guilt, when such a conclusion is not compelled,
[which] might be productive of
unfairness".
The rule in
addresses that problem of
unfairness.
It is applied
in order to resolve "the tension between probative force and prejudicial
What then is the
? Accepting the probative force of evidence of propensity,
the rule's "focus is upon the propensity evidence
and it requires a
trial judge, when determining whether the propensity evidence is to be admitted
before a jury, to apply the standard
which the jury must eventually
"The judge must
ask whether there is a rational view of the propensity evidence, seen in
the setting of the prosecution case, which
is consistent with the accused's
innocence" and, if so, the evidence ought not be
the Crown properly accepted in this Court, the impugned propensity evidence
"would never have passed the
That is because
there is a rational view of the evidence which is consistent with a
non-sexual interest, and which is thus consistent
with the innocence of
MDP. The evidence should not have been admitted for a propensity purpose and yet
the trial judge's sexual interest
direction invited the jury to engage in
propensity reasoning in relation to that specific evidence. It directed the jury
was open to them to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
evidence could demonstrate a propensity for having sexual interest
complainant. That was impermissible. The common law principles regarding
propensity evidence did not permit that evidence
being admitted, let alone being
left to the jury with the direction that they could use it as propensity
evidence. The trial judge
directed the jury that they could use
the impugned propensity evidence as propensity evidence. That was a wrong
decision on a question
third step is whether that wrong
decision on a question of law,
which was not "fundamental" to the trial that was
That is, could
the wrong decision realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury to
the verdict of guilt in the trial that
The only conclusion
open is yes.
Crown accepted, as it must, that the jury would not disregard
the direction.
It did not matter that the impugned propensity
evidence bore no resemblance to the charged conduct.
The impugned
propensity evidence was capable of being interpreted as sexual in nature as that
was the basis on which the Crown relied
upon it in its closing, which was
reflected in the trial judge's direction to the jury. The prejudicial nature of
propensity evidence
is widely understood, hence the restrictive approach in
wrong decision was to tell the jury that it was open to them to consider that
the bottom slapping (if they accepted that it had
happened) showed a sexual
interest on which MDP was prepared to act. That direction could have led the
jury down a wrong path if,
consistent with what the trial judge had left open to
them, the jury concluded that the bottom slapping did show sexual interest.
that the trial judge said the jury had to be persuaded beyond reasonable doubt
that the bottom slapping did show sexual interest
neither permits nor requires a
different conclusion. The trial judge, by telling the jury to consider whether
it did show sexual
interest, necessarily told the jury that it could do so and
thereby left sexual interest open as a pathway for them to decide. That
direction could have had that result is enough to show that it was
trial judge's direction that the jury could only use the impugned propensity
evidence if satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
it evidenced MDP's sexual
interest in the complainant necessarily directed the jury to consider
the impugned propensity evidence
and thereby left open to the jury a
pathway of impermissible propensity reasoning in circumstances where the
impugned propensity
evidence itself could not possibly rise to that standard. In
following the trial judge's direction to assess whether they were satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the impugned propensity evidence established MDP's
sexual interest in the complainant, the jury had
to consider the impugned
propensity evidence and did so in the context of the trial that was had. In a
trial that lasted only a few
days, the impugned propensity evidence was the
subject of the Crown opening, K's evidence, the defence opening, MDP's
evidence, the
defence closing, the Crown closing, and then the trial
judge's wrong direction.
The impugned propensity
evidence could realistically have influenced the jury's perception of MDP's
Weiss v The Queen
, this Court explained that "in applying the proviso,
the task is to decide whether a 'substantial miscarriage of justice has actually
occurred'".
This requires
the court to make its own independent assessment of the evidence and
determine whether, "making due allowance for the
'natural limitations' that
exist in the case of an appellate court proceeding wholly or substantially on
the record, the accused
was proved beyond reasonable doubt to be guilty of the
offence on which the jury returned its verdict of
The question is "whether a guilty verdict was
whether a guilty verdict was
In other words, the pivot in
from an "effect‑on‑the‑jury" concept of the appellate function
to a "determination‑of‑guilt"
this case, even accepting that the Crown had a compelling case, the proviso
cannot be applied. This Court cannot make an independent
assessment of the
evidence and determine whether, "making due allowance for the 'natural
limitations' that exist in the case of an
appellate court proceeding wholly or
substantially on the record, the accused was proved beyond reasonable doubt to
be guilty of
the offence on which the jury returned its verdict of
cannot make an independent assessment of whether each guilty verdict was
inevitable.
case involved contested issues of credit in relation to MDP and the complainant,
which "prevent the appellate court from
being able to assess whether guilt was
proved to the criminal
does not have the entire record before it. It cannot be said that no
substantial miscarriage of justice has actually
Conclusion and orders
those reasons, MDP should be granted special leave to appeal to raise grounds 2
to 4 of the amended notice of appeal filed 14
June 2024. The appeal should be
allowed. The order of the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of Queensland of
27 June 2023 should
be set aside and, in its place, the appeal should be
allowed, MDP's convictions set aside, and a new trial
Introduction
668E(1) of the
Criminal Code
(Qld) is in a common form. It relevantly
provides that on an appeal against conviction, the court "shall allow the appeal
of opinion that the verdict of the jury should be set aside on the
"[(i)] that [the verdict] is unreasonable, or can not be supported having regard
to the evidence, or
[(ii)] that the judgment of the court of trial should be set aside on the ground
of the wrong decision of any question of law, or
[(iii)] that on any ground whatsoever there was a miscarriage of justice".
These three "limbs" are then followed by a proviso that the court may
nevertheless "dismiss the appeal if it considers that no substantial
miscarriage
of justice has actually
overarching principle in relation to each of the three limbs is that each is
concerned with a miscarriage of
Although the
third limb "speaks of miscarriage of justice
specifically",
catch-all provision to ensure that every instance of miscarriage of justice that
is not included within the first two limbs
is nevertheless captured within the
appeal provision. Hence, it has been said that the "principles concerning the
approach to a misdirection
of law apply in the same way whether the misdirection
is characterised as an 'error of law', as a 'miscarriage of justice', or as
'wrong decision of any question of
three limbs and the proviso have been the subject of an enormous amount of
jurisprudence over the last century. For some periods,
uncertainty has lingered
as competing views within this Court clamoured for acceptance. During other
periods, there has been clarity
following a decision in which this Court, by
majority or unanimously, has expressed a clear view with a strong degree of
as to the operation of one or other of the limbs or of the proviso.
Nevertheless, sometimes, perhaps even many years later, those
clear views are
replaced by another clear view expressed with the same degree of certainty.
this appeal, and the companion appeal in
Brawn v The
this Court has
again attempted to provide clarity in this area, this time in relation to issues
concerning the latter two of the
three limbs. I agree with the statements of
principle in the reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and Beech‑Jones JJ. As
those statements
of legal principle are adopted by all four members of the
majority of this Court, they form part of the ratio decidendi of this
The difference
between the majority and the minority concerns the manner in which those
statements of principle are to be applied.
this appeal, there was a wrong decision on a question of law at trial. The trial
judge erred in directing the jury that the "bottom
slapping evidence", as that
evidence was described by the parties, could be used as propensity evidence if
the jury were satisfied
that the evidence demonstrated that MDP had a sexual
interest in the complainant. The central issue is whether that wrong decision
was material so that the appellate court should have been "of [the] opinion that
the verdict of the jury should be set aside". The
central issue in this appeal,
Brawn v The
thus concerns
the application of the requirement that an error or irregularity must be
material before a miscarriage of justice can
arise. The application of that
requirement has caused considerable difficulty in applications for judicial
review, as well as in
civil appeals, because "materiality" has been used to
describe at least three different concepts. The same is true in criminal
are two basic points that must be borne in mind, at least in criminal appeals.
First, where the error or irregularity is not
fundamental, the appellant must
establish only that the error or irregularity could "realistically have affected
the reasoning of
the jury to a verdict of guilty that was returned by the jury
in the criminal trial that
Secondly, this
test for materiality presents a very low bar to the identification of a
miscarriage of justice. In the circumstances
of this case, the direction of the
trial judge required the jury to consider the bottom slapping evidence in an
erroneous manner.
Once it is accepted that the jury might have considered the
bottom slapping evidence, that error, almost by definition, could realistically
have affected the reasoning of the jury to the verdicts of guilty that were
returned by the jury. It was a material error.
this appeal, the Crown relied upon the proviso, asserting that the appeal should
nevertheless be dismissed because there was no
substantial miscarriage of
justice. That would require this Court to conclude, upon its independent
assessment of the trial record,
that absent the erroneous direction a verdict of
guilty was, or is, inevitable. Even apart from the absence of the complete
of the trial in this Court, such a conclusion is impossible in respect of
a trial in which the central issues concerned the credibility
of the complainant
and MDP and which proceeded on the basis that the inadmissible bottom slapping
evidence could assist the jury
in their resolution of the case.
The bottom slapping evidence and the direction
ground, and proposed grounds, of appeal in this Court asserted that a
miscarriage of justice had occurred in two ways. One
way was by the admission of
the bottom slapping evidence. The other way was by the trial judge's direction
to the jury that they
could use propensity reasoning in respect of uncharged
sexual conduct by MDP. MDP submitted that each of these two asserted
miscarriages
of justice was both an error of law (the second limb of
s 668E(1) of the
Criminal Code
) and a miscarriage of justice
generally (the third limb of s 668E(1) of the
Criminal Code
bottom slapping evidence and the trial judge's direction are fully set out in
the reasons of Gordon and Steward JJ. It suffices
to explain why this
appeal can be decided on the ground concerning the trial judge's erroneous
direction constituting a wrong decision
on a question of law rather than by
reference to the erroneous admission of the bottom slapping evidence.
was common ground in this Court that the Court of Appeal erred in so far as it
concluded that the evidence was admissible under
(Qld) (as in force at the time of the trial and subsequently
That section was not concerned with evidence in relation to the offences with
which MDP was charged.
There was also no suggestion that the bottom slapping evidence was admitted by
consent. In this Court, the only ground upon which
the Crown asserted that the
bottom slapping evidence was admissible was on the basis that it was
relationship evidence.
can be admissible as relevant relationship evidence, subject to grounds for
exclusion, if the evidence can provide relevant
context for other evidence. For
instance, relationship evidence might "place the offence in context in
circumstances in which evidence
of the offence might otherwise present as
inexplicable" or it might explain the complainant's "failure to complain or to
accused" or the "accused's confidence to act" as they
prosecution made no suggestion to the jury, in opening or closing submissions,
that the bottom slapping evidence from the complainant's
sister provided context
to any aspect of the relationship between the complainant and MDP. In this
Court, however, the Crown asserted
that the bottom slapping evidence provided
some context to assist the defence submission which was described by the Crown
Court as follows:
"no one saw anything. The highest the prosecution can point to is [that] the
sister saw something that struck her as a bit odd, and
[MDP] slapped her on the
bottom slapping evidence, as set out in the reasons of Gordon and
Steward JJ, was not so anodyne and was not suggested by the
prosecution at
trial to be so anodyne. In particular, the complainant's sister's evidence was
that MDP would "smack[] [the complainant]
on the bum" and would do so
"[r]andomly" and when "[w]e weren't doing anything wrong". These comments were
made shortly prior to
the sister describing how the complainant had told her
that "sometimes [MDP] kisses [the complainant] and he puts his tongue in her
mouth". In any event, even apart from the serious questions raised by the bottom
slapping evidence, that evidence did not provide
any relevant context such that
the bottom slapping evidence could be described as "relationship evidence".
only remaining basis for the admissibility of the bottom slapping evidence was
the basis upon which it was relied at trial by
the prosecution; namely, to
demonstrate that MDP "had a sexual interest in [the complainant]". In this
Court, it finally (and properly)
became common ground that the evidence was not
admissible for that propensity purpose. The bottom slapping evidence was
inadmissible.
circumstances in which the inadmissible bottom slapping evidence had already
been admitted and relied upon by the prosecution
as propensity evidence, the
direction that the trial judge should have given to the jury was that the jury
should disregard that
evidence entirely. That was not what happened. Not only
did the trial judge direct the jury that they
have regard to the
bottom slapping evidence but, in the propensity direction, the trial judge
explained to the jury the manner in
which they should have regard to it if they
were satisfied that the conduct demonstrated a sexual interest by MDP in the
complainant.
A decision on a question of law
Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ explain, "the natural and ordinary
meaning of a decision on a question of law involves some
determination or
response to a question of law by a trial judge that has legal effect in the
order to determine whether there is a decision on a question of law, the focus
is therefore upon actions taken by the trial judge
with legal effect (namely,
determinations and responses). There is no utility in an attempt to divine any
thought process of the
trial judge. Nor is there any utility in an attempt to
identify whether any question of law had been raised by the parties expressly
by implication. Although the absence of any determination or response by a trial
judge to the admission of inadmissible evidence
will not constitute a "decision"
(hence the admission of the bottom slapping evidence in this case involved no
decision), an error
made by the trial judge in their directions to the jury can
constitute a wrong decision on a question of law even without any request
particular direction or for a
re-direction.
failure by a trial judge to give a particular direction, by itself, will not
ordinarily involve any determination or response
to a question of law by the
trial judge that has a legal effect in the trial. But such a failure might mean
that a direction that
was actually given by the trial judge, or facts that were
summarised by the trial judge, involved an error of law in that the jury
permitted the liberty to engage in impermissible reasoning.
this case, the direction given by the trial judge in relation to the bottom
slapping evidence involved a wrong decision on a question
of law. The question
of law might be expressed as whether a propensity direction should have been
given. Alternatively, the question
of law might be expressed as whether the
trial judge should have directed the jury to disregard the bottom slapping
evidence. However
the question is expressed, it was a wrong decision on a
question of law by the trial judge to give the propensity direction.
Three senses of materiality
concept of materiality has been used in at least three different senses by this
Court. In administrative
and sometimes on
civil appeals,
been confusion in the cases caused by the conflation of different senses of
materiality.
In criminal
law, the distinction between three of the senses of materiality is more widely
appreciated but the lack of a clear delineation
between the different meanings
is capable of leading to confusion.
"materiality" is sometimes used by reference only to the error or irregularity
itself. Such material errors have often been
described as "fundamental", or as
sufficient irrespective of whether a properly conducted hearing could not
possibly have produced
a different
descriptions include referring to the error as "such a departure from the
essential requirements of the law that it goes to
the root of the
proceedings",
This use of
materiality is best expressed by asking whether the error or irregularity was of
a fundamental nature to, relevantly,
an administrative hearing, a civil trial,
or a criminal trial. If an appellant demonstrates materiality in this sense in a
appeal, a new trial (or entry of an acquittal) must be ordered.
"materiality" is sometimes used by reference to the process of reaching a
decision. In this context the question is sometimes
put in terms that ask
whether there was "practical
injustice",
the error had any "significance in determining the
realistically have resulted in a different
Another common
formulation is whether the error or irregularity was "
affecting the result", or had the "capacity for practical
injustice".
the context of applications for judicial review, civil appeals, or criminal
appeals, the reference to a "capacity" to
affect a result directs attention to
the effect that the error or irregularity had on the process by which the
decision was made,
irrespective of whether the actual result might have been
different. Hence, subject to the third sense of materiality, the admission
inadmissible "material" evidence in a civil or criminal trial is a sufficient
basis to order a new trial irrespective of "the
effect [in the sense of the
'conclusion'] which the evidence if admitted would produce upon the Court if the
Court were the tribunal
this context, the question is best expressed by asking whether the applicant or
appellant has demonstrated that the error or irregularity
could realistically
have affected the reasoning of the decision-maker to a conclusion. In criminal
appeals this requires asking whether
the error or irregularity could
realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury to a verdict of guilty
that was returned by
the jury in the criminal trial that
The error or
irregularity need not be a link in the chain of reasoning to the
decision-maker's conclusion. Indeed, the error or irregularity
need not even be
a strand in the rope of reasoning to the decision-maker's conclusion if two
paths to that conclusion were open.
It is enough that the decision-maker's
reasoning process to the conclusion that was reached could realistically have
been affected.
If an applicant or appellant demonstrates materiality in this
sense, it is prima facie sufficient for a new trial, subject to the
third use of
materiality.
materiality is sometimes used to describe a conclusion that, even where an
applicant for judicial review or an appellant
has established that an error or
irregularity is one that could realistically have affected the reasoning of the
decision-maker,
the application for judicial review or appeal might nevertheless
be dismissed if the result would inevitably have been the same because
was, or is, no possibility of any different conclusion in a properly conducted
hearing. In applications for judicial review,
the test is expressed as whether
the "facts before the Court provided a basis to consider that the outcome would
inevitably have
been the same had the error not been
In civil appeals,
the test is expressed as whether there was a "substantial wrong or
miscarriage",
a properly conducted proceeding "could not possibly have produced a different
In criminal law,
in the common form proviso, this is expressed as whether there was a
"substantial miscarriage of
regardless of the error or irregularity, "the evidence properly admitted at
trial proved, beyond reasonable doubt, the
accused's guilt of the offence on
which the jury returned its verdict of
This has also
been expressed in criminal appeals as asking whether conviction was
inevitable.
Rationally,
there is no difference between these
formulations.
principle, the approach to whether an error is material ought to be the same
whether the question is being asked for the purposes
of a criminal appeal, a
civil appeal, or an application for judicial review. At least in relation to
criminal appeals the approach
required in this country is now clear. The
materiality threshold (whether the error or irregularity could realistically
have affected
the reasoning of the jury to a verdict of guilty that was returned
by the jury in the criminal trial that occurred) is the same no
matter which
limb of the common form appeal provision is being applied. Although some earlier
authorities appear to have rejected
that materiality threshold in relation to
the second or third limbs, many of those cases did so in the context of
rejecting a different
concept of materiality which focuses instead upon whether
the error might have affected the
each case the enquiry is as follows. If the error or irregularity was
fundamental then the error will be material and the appeal
will be allowed.
Otherwise, an error or irregularity will, prima facie, be material and the
appeal will be allowed if the appellant
satisfies the low bar of establishing
that the error or irregularity was something that could realistically have
affected the reasoning
of the jury to a verdict of guilty that was returned by
the jury in the criminal trial that occurred. Nevertheless, for these
non-fundamental
irregularities or errors, the appeal will be dismissed if the
respondent establishes that the error or irregularity was not material
sense that there was no substantial miscarriage of justice.
separation of the second and third senses of materiality is clearest in criminal
appeals, where the third sense is (helpfully)
rarely described as "materiality"
and usually referred to only as the "proviso". It is also well established, at
least for criminal
appeals, that the proviso does not subsume the second
category of materiality because the onus of proving that there has been no
substantial miscarriage of justice is upon the
respondent.
Since it is
for the respondent to prove that any miscarriage of justice is not substantial,
the appellant's onus of proof can be
satisfied by showing an insubstantial or
miscarriage of
justice. That is a low bar. Unless it were a low bar the concept of materiality,
as a tool of analysis in discerning
miscarriages and substantial miscarriages of
justice, could itself be productive of injustice.
materiality issue on this appeal
was, properly, no submission by MDP in this Court that the trial judge's
propensity direction to the jury was wrong in such
a fundamental way that the
error was, in and of itself, material. Thus, in order to establish that the
trial judge's propensity direction
was material, MDP was required to satisfy the
Court of Appeal that the direction could realistically have affected the
of the jury to a verdict of guilty that was returned by the jury in
the criminal trial that occurred.
MDP established that the
propensity direction was material
bottom slapping evidence featured in the opening addresses of the prosecution
and the defence. It was the subject of examination-in-chief
cross-examination of MDP. The evidence featured in the closing addresses of the
prosecution and the defence. The evidence was
the subject of a direction by the
trial judge. It is impossible rationally to contend that the bottom slapping
evidence must have
been ignored by the jury. There is, at the very least, a real
possibility that the bottom slapping evidence was considered by the
propensity direction by the trial judge was an erroneous instruction to the jury
as to how the jury should use the inadmissible
bottom slapping evidence. The
propensity direction required that, before the jury could rely on the bottom
slapping evidence, the
jury must consider whether the bottom slapping evidence
showed a sexual interest by MDP in the complainant. The jury were required
apply that direction in their
In the real
possibility that the jury considered the bottom slapping evidence, the direction
by the trial judge necessarily had the
effect of requiring the jury to engage in
a process of reasoning that should not have been undertaken. As Gordon and
Steward JJ observe,
that is enough to show that the direction by the trial
judge was material.
direction could realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury to the
verdicts of guilty.
The proviso should not be applied
was long ago established in civil appeals from jury decisions that, in deciding
whether a "substantial wrong or miscarriage" had
occurred, the appellate court
"cannot substitute its judgment for that of the
The same has long
been true in criminal appeals: "the court is not substituting trial by a court
of appeal for trial by
An appellate court
faces natural limitations, when compared with a jury, because the appellate
court proceeds only from the record.
This means that there will be cases,
"perhaps many cases, where [the] natural limitations [of an appellate court]
require the appellate
court to conclude that it cannot reach the necessary
degree of satisfaction" that conviction was
inevitable.
I agree with
contested issues of credit at trial preclude the application of the proviso in
is not possible for an appellate court to resolve the issues of credit that
arose at MDP's trial by reasoning that the verdicts
of guilt by the jury
necessarily required the acceptance of the essential aspects of the
complainant's evidence beyond reasonable
doubt, independent of the bottom
slapping evidence. The resolution by the jury of any contested issues of credit
may not have occurred
independently of the bottom slapping evidence. Indeed, the
potential importance of the role of the bottom slapping evidence was
consistently
reinforced throughout the trial.
prosecutor opened the Crown case by referring to "a couple of things" about
which the complainant's sister would give recorded
evidence. One of those was
the bottom slapping evidence. MDP was cross-examined about the bottom slapping
evidence. In closing, the
prosecutor relied upon the bottom slapping evidence as
evidence, independent of the complainant's evidence, that confirmed MDP's
interest in the complainant.
counsel for MDP opened MDP's case by responding to the bottom slapping evidence.
Trial counsel for MDP also led evidence from
MDP to respond to the bottom
slapping evidence, with MDP saying that he would smack all the children on the
bottom, not merely the
complainant, either in a disciplinary way or to move them
out of the way. And trial counsel for MDP addressed the bottom slapping
in his closing address to the jury, seeking to minimise its significance.
bottom slapping evidence was also the subject of the propensity direction given
by the trial judge. The trial judge emphasised
the nature of the bottom slapping
evidence as evidence given by the complainant's sister, independent of the
complainant's evidence:
"[i]t is not something that [the complainant] has given
evidence about, but rather her sister".
short, the bottom slapping evidence played a significant role throughout the
trial. It was evidence upon which the jury might
place weight in the process of
reaching its verdicts of guilty. It is not open to an appellate court, years
later and divorced from
the atmosphere of the trial, to conclude that, despite
this role of the bottom slapping evidence, the conviction of MDP on each count
was nevertheless inevitable.
leave to appeal in relation to the proposed grounds set out in the appellant's
amended notice of appeal should be granted
and the appeal must be allowed.
Orders should be made as proposed by Gordon and Steward JJ.
JAGOT AND BEECH-JONES JJ. Section 668E(1) and (1A) of the
Criminal Code
(Qld) enact the "common form" appeal provision for
appeals from a conviction on
indictment.
so‑called "second limb" of the common form appeal
is expressed in
s 668E(1) as requiring the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of
Queensland to allow an appeal against conviction
if it is of the opinion "that
the judgment of the court of trial should be set aside on the ground of the
wrong decision of any question
of law". The so‑called "third limb" is
expressed in s 668E(1) as requiring that the appeal be allowed if the Court
is of the opinion "that on any ground whatsoever there was a
miscarriage of justice". Section 668E(1) is subject to s 668E(1A),
provides that "the Court [of Appeal] may, notwithstanding that it is of
the opinion that the point or points raised by the appeal
might be decided in
favour of the appellant, dismiss the appeal if it considers that no substantial
miscarriage of justice has actually
occurred" ("the proviso").
"decision" by a trial judge on a question of law for the purpose of the second
limb is not confined to decisions on such questions
that are made over the
objection of a party. Instead, it is sufficient that the trial judge made some
determination or gave some
response to a question of law in a manner that has
legal effect in the trial. If there is a decision, if it is "on a question of
law" and if it is wrong, then the conviction "should be set aside" if the wrong
decision was in respect of a question of law that
was fundamental to the
or if, subject to
the application of the proviso, the wrong decision could realistically have
affected the reasoning of the judge
or jury to the verdict of the trial that was
this case, there was a wrong decision by the trial judge on a question of law.
The decision was embodied in the trial judge's
direction to the jury that
permitted the use of evidence given by the complainant's sister ("K") that the
appellant smacked the complainant's
backside as evidence demonstrating that the
appellant had a sexual interest in the complainant and was prepared to act on
it. However,
as will be explained, that decision was not in respect of a
question of law that was material in that it was not fundamental to the
and could not realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury to the
verdict in the trial that was had. Accordingly,
the second limb is not
satisfied. For the same reasons, the admission of that evidence, and the giving
of that direction, do not
satisfy the materiality threshold to establish a
miscarriage of justice within the meaning of the third
Accordingly, the
appeal must be dismissed.
a trial in the District Court of Queensland, the appellant was convicted by a
jury of all 16 counts of an indictment alleging
he committed sexual
offences against his stepdaughter between 2014 and 2019 when she was between
7 and 12 years of age. The complainant
gave direct evidence of the
commission of those offences. The prosecution also adduced evidence from K to
the effect that she observed
the appellant smack the complainant's backside in
circumstances that did not suggest that any administration of discipline was
("K's evidence"). K's evidence was admitted without objection. The
appellant gave evidence denying the charges. He said that he smacked
children, including the complainant, not for any sexual purpose but for the
purpose of disciplining them or moving them out
of the way. In the circumstances
described below, the prosecution sought, and the trial judge gave the jury, a
propensity direction
in respect of the complainant's evidence of the charged
acts and K's evidence.
appellant appealed his convictions to the Court of Appeal (Mullins P,
Morrison JA and Henry J). One of the appellant's grounds
before the Court of Appeal was that the trial judge's propensity direction in
respect of K's evidence occasioned a miscarriage
of justice.
Court of Appeal observed that the admissibility of K's evidence did not turn
upon its capacity to support a finding that the
appellant had a sexual interest
in the complainant because it was otherwise admissible under the former
Evidence Act 1977
(Qld) as evidence of the degree
of familiarity of the domestic relationship between the appellant and the
complainant. In this Court,
it was accepted that
was not engaged
because the trial of the appellant was not a criminal proceeding for an offence
defined in Chapters 28 to 30 of the
far as propensity reasoning was concerned, the Court of Appeal considered that
K's evidence was "obviously not strong
to meet the test
specified in
Pfennig v The
because it was
incapable of excluding any inference that, in smacking the complainant, the
appellant was not demonstrating or giving
effect to any sexual interest in her.
The Court queried whether
established a test for admissibility in
respect of evidence relied on for propensity reasoning which was not otherwise
evidence of
conduct but, in
any event, found that the trial judge's direction in respect of the use of K's
evidence as propensity evidence (the
"propensity direction") did not occasion a
miscarriage of justice for two reasons.
first reason was that, reflecting the terms of the direction given by the trial
judge, there was no realistic prospect of the
jury concluding beyond reasonable
doubt that the smacking of the complainant's backside described by K was
motivated by a sexual
interest and the evidence was not so inherently
prejudicial that there was a real risk of the jury not correctly applying the
judge's directions. The second reason was that the appellant's trial
counsel consented to the giving of the propensity direction
for the tactical
reason of seeking to persuade the jury to conclude that the prosecution was
"over-reaching in its futile reliance
upon the bottom slapping as sexual
interest" and trial counsel's consent to the giving of the direction was "an
important indication
that [the] appellant suffered no miscarriage of
appeal to this Court
appellant was granted special leave to appeal to this
Initially, the
sole ground of appeal was that the Court of Appeal erred in holding that no
miscarriage of justice occurred when evidence
inadmissible as propensity
evidence, namely K's evidence, was left to the jury to be used as propensity
evidence. In its written
submissions, the respondent sought to rely on the
an amended notice of appeal, the appellant sought to expand the grant of special
leave to appeal to raise three further grounds
of appeal. Proposed ground 2
contends that the trial judge made a wrong decision on a question of law in
deciding to direct the jury
that they could employ propensity reasoning in
relation to K's evidence. Proposed ground 3 contends that the admission at
of K's evidence resulted in a miscarriage of justice. Proposed
ground 4 contends that the trial judge made a wrong decision on a
of law in permitting that evidence to be led. The respondent filed a notice of
contention, expanding its reliance on the
proviso. However, it did not oppose
the expansion of the grant of special leave to appeal or reliance on the amended
grounds of appeal.
Court will only grant a party special leave to appeal to raise grounds of appeal
that were not raised at trial or in the Court
of Appeal in exceptional
However, we
would grant the appellant special leave to appeal to raise the proposed
additional grounds in the circumstances, because:
(1) the proposed
additional grounds are very closely related to the ground raised in the Court of
Appeal the subject of the initial
grant of special leave to appeal to this
Court; (2) the proposed additional grounds were the subject of detailed
submissions from
a number of parties in this Court as part of a wider
consideration of the common form appeal provision; (3) no relevant
would be occasioned to the respondent by the further grant of special
leave to appeal, provided that the respondent is permitted
to expand its
reliance on the proviso; and (4) proposed ground 2 has persuaded a majority
of this Court to set aside the appellant's
conviction.
limb of the common form appeal provision
appeal was heard immediately before the appeal in
Brawn v The
the parties in this proceeding, as well as the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions ("the CDPP") and the New South Wales
Director of Public
Prosecutions ("the NSW DPP"), who each intervened in both appeals, made
extensive submissions concerning the construction
and operation of the second
and third limbs of the common form appeal provisions.
question of principle addressed in
was whether, in the case of an
error or irregularity affecting a criminal trial, an appellate court must be
satisfied that the error
or irregularity was material before it can be concluded
that there was a miscarriage of justice within the meaning of the third limb
and, if so, how the question of materiality is to be
determined.
held that, leaving aside errors or irregularities that are "fundamental" in the
sense discussed in the
authorities,
establish a miscarriage of justice the appellant must demonstrate that the error
or irregularity was material in the sense that
the error or irregularity could
realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury to the verdict of guilty
that was returned
by the jury in the criminal trial that
issue that was not addressed in
as it did not arise, but which does
arise in this case, is whether, before a verdict of guilty should be set aside
on the ground
of a wrong decision on any question of law within the meaning of
the second limb, it must be demonstrated that the wrong decision
involved an
error that was in any sense "material". Another issue in this case arises from
the CDPP's submission that, unless a trial
judge was expressly required to
resolve a contest between the parties at trial, there is not a "decision" on a
question of law; a
submission that, if accepted, would bear upon the disposition
of this appeal.
The parties' submissions on the second
parties' submissions in relation to the second limb addressed both what
constitutes a "decision" and whether a wrong decision
on a question of law must
be material to establish the second limb.
appellant contended that "decision" within the second limb had a wide meaning so
that it included not only a misdirection of
law by the trial judge but also a
circumstance where evidence is adduced without objection or any ruling by the
trial judge, at least
where the trial judge was aware in advance that evidence
of uncharged acts was to be led at trial and does not intervene.
CDPP contended for a narrow meaning of "decision" within the second limb. Given
the adversarial nature of criminal trials and
the necessity for such a decision
to be of or on a "question" of law, the CDPP submitted that there is only such a
decision for the
purposes of the second limb where the trial judge has made a
"ruling" after a contest between the parties on a particular issue.
CDPP contended that the admission of inadmissible evidence can amount to a
"wrong decision" only if that evidence is admitted
over the objection of a party
and a misdirection or non‑direction on a matter of law may constitute a
"wrong decision" only
if the direction (or the failure to make a direction)
follows a request by a party. The respondent supported the CDPP's submission
to the meaning of "decision". The NSW DPP also contended for a narrow meaning of
"decision", which excludes a misdirection not
given at the request of a party
and which did not involve any ruling or decision by a trial judge.
"Materiality"
appellant submitted that no materiality threshold is applicable to the second
limb so that any wrong "decision" on a question
of law would result in the
appeal being allowed subject only to the application of the proviso. To prevent
appeals that seek to set
aside convictions based on innocuous or irrelevant
errors of law, the appellant submitted that this Court should hold that the
proposition" stated in
Weiss v The Queen
, namely that "[i]t
cannot be said that no substantial miscarriage of justice has actually occurred
unless the appellate court is
persuaded that the evidence properly admitted at
trial proved, beyond reasonable doubt, the accused's
necessary condition for the satisfaction of the
CDPP did not submit that the second limb included any materiality threshold. The
NSW DPP, however, submitted that there is a
materiality threshold for the second
limb in that it must be shown that the error was productive of a miscarriage of
The meaning and operation of the second limb
appellant's submissions depart from previous decisions of this Court concerning
the meaning of a "decision" for the purposes
of the second limb. The appellant's
submission to the effect that the adducing of evidence without objection
constitutes a "decision"
is contrary to
other statements of this
contention that a decision is only made following an objection or opposition
would preclude errors of law in reasons for
judgment following a trial without a
jury falling within the second limb, contrary to
Filippou v The
Fleming v The
contention would also exclude a misdirection on matters of law falling within
the second limb unless the direction was
the subject of a dispute before and
resolved by the trial
is a conflict in the authorities as to whether, to satisfy the second limb, it
must be shown that the wrong decision on a question
of law was in some way
Even so, the
resolution of that conflict should not create any potential uncertainty by
revisiting the meaning of "decision" or the
operation of the proviso. The
preferable approach is to have regard to previous decisions and apply the
statutory language in the
context of the duties and functions of the trial judge
and counsel in a criminal trial.
in respect of the third limb of the common form appeal provision considered in
, we confirm that there is a materiality threshold for the second
limb of the common form appeal provision. The materiality threshold
applied within the context of the following four steps.
first step in engaging the second limb of the common form appeal provision is
for the appellant to identify a "decision" by the
trial judge on a "question of
a decision is not confined to decisions of a trial judge that are made over the
objection of a party. Instead, the natural and
ordinary meaning of a decision on
a question of law involves some determination or response to a question of law
by a trial judge
that has legal effect in the trial. Whether a trial judge has
made a decision is to be considered in the context of the duties and
obligations
of a trial judge at a criminal trial.
is for the parties, consistent with their obligations to the court, to determine
what evidence will be adduced at a trial. Ordinarily,
the trial judge will only
make a "decision" in relation to the admission or use of evidence if one party
objects to that admission
or use or at least seeks a ruling to that effect
(although the admission of inadmissible evidence or the impermissible use of
admissible evidence may give rise to a miscarriage of justice under
the third limb). Whether there is a decision in a particular
case will involve
consideration of at least the significance of the evidence and whether there was
a request for a ruling on, or
objection to, the admission of the evidence.
contrast, the responsibility to deliver a summing up that correctly states the
relevant principles of law rests with the trial
as does the responsibility to deliver reasons for judgment at a
judge‑alone trial in those jurisdictions that permit such
trial judge misdirects the jury on a matter of law or includes a wrong decision
on a question of law in their reasons
for verdict following a trial without a
jury there will be a wrong decision on a question of law for the purposes of the
second limb
is so whether or not those decisions were the subject of submissions or counsel
caused or contributed to the decision).
Although a mere failure by a trial judge
to give a particular direction will not ordinarily involve the making of a
decision on a
question of law unless a party has requested such a
two further
points should be made. First, the failure to give a direction that was not
requested may nevertheless amount to a miscarriage
Second, the
word "ordinarily" is important. Given the context of the duties and obligations
of a trial judge in a criminal trial,
there may be circumstances in which a
trial judge's failure to give a direction that has not been requested that has
legal effect
in a trial gives rise to a decision on a question of
second step in engaging the second limb of the common form appeal provision
arises if there is a decision on a question of law.
If there is a decision on a
question of law, the appellant must then establish that the decision was
third step in engaging the second limb of the common form appeal provision
arises if it is shown there was a wrong decision on
a question of law, in which
case the appellant must show that the wrong decision involved an error that was
either fundamental to
the trial or, if not fundamental, material in the relevant
expressed in s 668E(1) of the
Criminal Code
, the second limb of the
common form appeal provision provides that the Court of Appeal hearing an appeal
against conviction "shall
allow the appeal if it is of opinion that ... the
judgment of the court of trial
should be set aside
on the ground of the
wrong decision of any question of law" (emphasis added). The common form appeal
provisions refer either to the
appellate court forming an
"consider[ing]",
"think[ing]",
verdict "should be set
on the ground
of a wrong decision on a question of law. These provisions accommodate an
approach to the significance and materiality
of the wrong decision for the
purpose of the second limb of the common form appeal provision that corresponds
with that applying
to the third limb as explained in
if the wrong decision was in respect of a question of law that was "fundamental"
to the trial in the sense discussed in the
authorities concerning the third
then the guilty
verdict must be set aside; the proviso is necessarily inapplicable. In that
circumstance it is unnecessary to undertake
any further assessment of whether
the wrong decision could have had any effect on the verdict and whether no
substantial miscarriage
of justice has occurred. The appeal must be allowed in
to demonstrate that the verdict should be set aside on the basis of the second
limb, an appellant must establish that
the wrong decision involved an error that
could realistically have affected the reasoning of the judge or jury to the
guilty in the trial that was
That is so, for the following reasons:
(1) The consideration of whether an appeal "should be allowed" on the basis of a
wrong decision on a question of law would not include
truly innocuous or
irrelevant wrong decisions.
(2) The fact that the second limb requires a decision that reflects an error of
law (as opposed to a mere
irregularity)
shows that, if the second limb is applied, the error might more readily be
considered to be material.
(3) As with the third limb, the materiality threshold does not collapse into the
inquiry undertaken in applying the proviso. The
question posed looks to the
possible effect of the wrong decision on a question of law on the trial that was
fourth step in engaging the second limb of the common form appeal provision
arises if the wrong decision on a question of law
does not concern a question
that was fundamental to the trial but is nevertheless found to be material. In
such cases, the appeal
must be allowed unless the prosecution establishes that
no "substantial miscarriage of justice" occurred (ie, by applying the
The second limb and the conduct of counsel
the evidence the subject of a particular decision on a question of law was
admitted over objection or the direction the subject
of a decision was sought
but refused or given over opposition, then no question of the conduct of counsel
who made the objection
or sought the direction contributing to any wrong
decision will arise. Further, while the decisions of counsel will often provide
the context in which a trial judge may make a decision on a question of law, for
example, to admit evidence or to give a
whether the
conduct of counsel caused or contributed to the decision by the trial judge
being wrong is irrelevant to whether there
is a wrong decision on a question of
law. The trial judge has a responsibility to "be astute to secure for the
accused a fair trial
according to law" and this extends to "an adequate
direction ... as to the
even allowing for any conduct of counsel which caused, contributed to or even
encouraged a wrong decision by the trial
judge on a question of law, if it is
nevertheless concluded that there is a wrong decision on a question of law which
could realistically
have affected the reasoning of the judge or jury to the
verdict of guilty then, subject to the application of the proviso, the appeal
should be allowed and the verdict should be set aside.
the second limb in this case
noted, by the amended notice of appeal the appellant contended that his
convictions should be set aside on the basis of a wrong
decision on a question
of law by the trial judge to give a propensity direction in relation to
"evidence inadmissible as propensity
evidence" (ground 2) and to "permit[]
the prosecution to lead inadmissible evidence of uncharged sexual conduct" (ie,
K's evidence)
as propensity evidence (ground 4). To address these grounds,
it is necessary to describe the course of the trial in further detail.
the complainant and K were interviewed by the police prior to the appellant
being charged. During her interview, K told the
police that the appellant
"smacks [the complainant] on the bum ... [r]andomly" when "[w]e weren't doing
anything wrong". The complainant
described sexual offending by the appellant
against her. She made no reference to being smacked on the backside and was not
any questions as to whether it occurred.
evidence of both K and the complainant was recorded prior to the
pre‑recorded evidence each of them confirmed that what they told police
was correct. Both were cross‑examined
by the appellant's trial counsel
(and re-examined by the crown prosecutor). None of the questions concerned
whether the appellant
ever smacked the complainant's
The prosecution and defence cases
opening the prosecution
prosecutor told the jury that they would hear evidence from K that she witnessed
the appellant "smack" the complainant
"on the bottom" and that that occurred
"when they weren't doing anything wrong".
the crown prosecutor's opening, the pre‑recorded evidence, including the
interviews with police of both the complainant
and K tendered pursuant to
Evidence Act
, was shown to the jury as part of the
prosecution case. The appellant's trial counsel did not object to the admission
of K's evidence.
the prosecution case closed, the appellant's trial counsel opened the
appellant's case to the
The appellant's
trial counsel told the jury that the appellant would be called as a witness and
that he would say he smacked both
K and the complainant on many occasions but
that it never had any "sexual aspect".
his evidence‑in‑chief the appellant denied committing any of the
offences. The effect of his evidence, including the
denial that his actions in
disciplining the complainant and K were of a sexual nature, has already been
There was no
cross‑examination specifically directed to the appellant smacking the
complainant on the backside, but he was
asked briefly about disciplining the
complainant. In response, the appellant said he gave the complainant a "playful
smack" to discipline
Closing addresses
to closing addresses, the crown prosecutor raised with the trial judge that he
proposed to address the jury "on evidence of
sexual interests", specifically K's
evidence. The crown prosecutor stated that he had already raised the issue with
the appellant's
trial counsel. The crown prosecutor accepted that the "smacking
is at the very low end of the spectrum of evidence of sexual interest
normally be captured" but added that "subject to your Honour's view, I propose
to just address on it briefly".
trial judge then called on the appellant's trial counsel, who stated:
"[Appellant's trial counsel]: Yes, the [c]rown [p]rosecutor, my learned friend,
did open that evidence in his opening address about
[K's] evidence about sexual
interest. In my submission,
tactically, I was going to use that in my favour
in the closing address.
So if your Honour wanted to give a sexual
interest direction as contended for by my learned friend, I don't have a
difficulty with
. I'll be using it in a way that will become clear in my
closing address. Thank you.
HIS HONOUR: Yes, well, it was a matter raised with the other child as an
unusual feature of their dynamic. At this stage
I'm inclined to permit it
because the direction to the jury includes that they have to consider whether or
not it reaches the bar." (emphasis added)
evidence was adduced on behalf of the appellant, the appellant's trial counsel
addressed the jury before the crown
prosecutor.
closing address, the appellant's trial counsel noted that apart from the "one
incident of [the appellant] touching" the complainant
on the backside, "no one
has said anything about anything untoward being witnessed". The appellant's
trial counsel noted that the
crown prosecutor opened on the touching of the
complainant's backside as evidence of "sexual interest". The appellant's trial
belittled the prosecution case for having to rely on that as evidence of
"sexual interest" and reminded the jury of the appellant's
evidence on that
his closing address,
the crown prosecutor referred to K's evidence and contended that, independently
of the complainant's evidence, it demonstrated the
appellant's sexual interest
in the complainant and that "he was prepared to act on it, and that's what he
did on those other occasions".
The summing up
summing up, the trial judge told the jury that the prosecution relied on the
complainant's evidence of the charged acts as evidence
that the appellant "had a
sexual interest in the complainant and was willing to give effect to that
interest". The jury were instructed
that, if they accepted evidence of
particular conduct making up the charged acts beyond reasonable doubt, "then you
may use that
finding in considering whether [the appellant] committed the other
offences charged". The trial judge warned the jury that the evidence
charged acts must not be used in any other way, such as concluding that the
appellant was "generally a person of bad character",
and that even if, based on
a conclusion that the appellant was guilty of a particular offence, the jury
were satisfied that the appellant
had a sexual interest in the complainant, it
would not inevitably follow that the jury would find the appellant guilty of
count on the indictment.
trial judge then addressed the "evidence of other alleged incidents" that was
not the subject of a charge on the indictment,
which was said to demonstrate a
sexual interest on the part of the appellant towards the complainant (ie, K's
evidence). The trial
judge reminded the jury that the prosecution relied on K's
evidence of the appellant smacking the complainant's backside as demonstrating
the appellant's sexual interest in the complainant and that he was prepared to
act upon it. The trial judge also told the jury that
the prosecution "argues
that this evidence makes it more likely that the [appellant] committed the
charged offences, as against that
particular complainant". The trial judge then
instructed the jury as follows:
But you can only use this other evidence, if you are satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the [appellant] did act as the evidence
suggests, and that
that conduct does demonstrate that he had a sexual interest in the complainant
and was willing to pursue it.
[I]f you are not satisfied about that smacking on the bottom, as going to
a sexual interest, then you simply put that to one side
... [I]t is not
something that ... the complainant has given evidence about, but rather her
sister, [K]. So it may impact upon your
assessment of [K's] evidence.
do not accept that this other evidence proves to your satisfaction that the
[appellant] had a sexual interest in the complainant,
then you must not use the
evidence in some other way.
For example, to find that the [appellant] is
guilty of the charged offences.
If you do accept that this uncharged allegation occurred and that the conduct
does demonstrate a sexual interest of the [appellant]
[in] the complainant, bear
in mind it does not automatically follow that the [appellant] is guilty of any
of the offences charged.
You cannot infer only from the fact that this other
conduct occurred, that the [appellant] did the things which he is charged with.
You must still go back and decide whether you have been satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt of all of the essential facts based upon
the whole of the
evidence that has been placed before you.
" (emphasis added)
appellant's trial counsel did not apply for a redirection.
Ground 4: "permitt[ing] the prosecution to lead inadmissible
with the above analysis, the first step in addressing this ground of appeal is
to identify whether there was a decision
by the trial judge on a question of
law. The appellant contended that, having heard the crown prosecutor's opening
address, the trial
judge "should be taken to have decided" that K's evidence
could be led. That submission should be rejected. The course of the events
the trial reveals that there was no "decision" or determination on the part of
the trial judge to admit K's evidence or permit
the evidence to be led or
Accordingly,
the second limb of the common form appeal provision cannot be engaged.
Ground 4 of the amended notice of appeal should
Ground 2: misdirecting the jury in relation to
propensity reasoning
exchanges that led to the giving of the propensity direction in relation to K's
evidence reveal that the appellant's trial counsel
did not oppose the giving of
the direction ("I don't have a difficulty with it"). In fact, the appellant's
trial counsel accepted
that the giving of the propensity direction was the price
to be paid for the tactical use he sought to make of that evidence, and
prosecution's reliance on it, in his closing address (that is, that the crown
prosecutor's reliance on this aspect of K's evidence
exposed the weakness of the
prosecution's case overall).
Nevertheless,
as the parties accepted, the giving of the propensity direction involved a
"decision" by the trial judge. As noted,
regardless of the assistance or
encouragement that a trial judge may receive from counsel, it is the trial
judge's responsibility
to deliver a summing up that correctly states the
relevant principles of
The trial judge
decided to give the propensity direction and formulated its content.
addressing the first step in applying the second limb it is necessary to
identify the relevant decision "on a question of law".
The proposed ground of
appeal characterises the trial judge as having decided to direct the jury that
they could employ propensity
reasoning in relation to evidence inadmissible as
propensity evidence. That is an incomplete description of the trial judge's
"decision".
The relevant decision is embodied in that part of the summing up
which extended the propensity direction in respect of the complainant's
of the charged acts to K's evidence. That latter part of the summing up also
contained elements protective against misuse
of K's evidence, namely, that the
jury must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that: (1) the appellant did act
as the evidence
suggested, by smacking the complainant on the backside randomly
when she and her sister were not doing anything wrong; (2) this conduct
demonstrated that the appellant had a sexual interest in the complainant; and
(3) this conduct demonstrated that the appellant was
willing to act on his
sexual interest in the complainant. The trial judge did not explicitly state
that K's evidence could be used
to support a sexual interest. Nevertheless, it
was implicit in the propensity direction that K's evidence could be used in that
In that respect the decision was a decision on a question of law.
second step in applying the second limb requires the appellant to demonstrate
that the decision was
responding to this and the other proposed grounds of appeal, the respondent
contended that K's evidence was initially adduced
by the prosecution as
"context" evidence; that is, evidence capable of placing the complainant's
relationship with the appellant
in context and rebutting any suggestion that her
complaints came "out of the
The respondent
noted that the appellant made a concession to that effect in the Court of
Appeal. As noted, the Court of Appeal relied
as a basis for the admission of K's evidence as admissible "context" or
"relationship"
respondent further submitted that the potential use of K's evidence as
demonstrating the appellant's sexual interest in the complainant
only arose in
response to a suggestion made by the appellant to the complainant that she had
recently invented her allegations and,
as that use only concerned the
appellant's motive to act, it did not involve propensity
is doubtful whether the respondent's submissions accurately describe the course
of the trial. However, to resolve this proposed
ground of appeal it is not
necessary to determine whether this aspect of K's evidence was admissible on
some basis other than to
show the appellant's sexual interest in the complainant
and his preparedness to act upon it. That was the only use that was sought
made of K's evidence in the crown prosecutor's closing address and that was the
only use reflected in the trial judge's directions,
which is the focus of
ground 2 of the amended notice of appeal. That form of use involved
propensity reasoning.
this Court, the respondent accepted that this aspect of K's evidence "would
never have passed the
test". The "
test" is applied
to exclude otherwise relevant evidence that is capable of supporting the
existence of the alleged
propensity.
requires a trial judge, when determining whether the evidence of propensity is
to be admitted, to apply the standard which the
jury must eventually apply,
namely whether there is a rational or reasonable view of the propensity
evidence, considered in the context
of the prosecution case, which is consistent
with the accused's innocence. If so, and leaving other bases for its admission,
evidence should not be
the respondent submitted that, in the absence of any objection to K's evidence,
there was no ruling in respect of its admission
no application as to its use as propensity evidence. The respondent relied on
the approach of Hayne J in
evidence relied on to demonstrate the appellant's sexual interest in his
daughter (his purchase of underwear for her) was described
as "equivocal" and
therefore inadmissible for that
nevertheless admitted without objection.
His Honour reviewed the
directions given by the trial judge in respect of that evidence and concluded
that no miscarriage of justice
respondent also submitted that the trial judge's direction in this case did not
involve any wrong decision on a question of law
because the issue which arose
before the trial judge was not whether a propensity direction should be given
but the form of the direction,
and the propensity direction that was given was
protective of the appellant's interests.
respondent's submissions should not be accepted. The Court of Appeal's concern
as to the applicability of the
test to the admission of evidence
relied on to support propensity reasoning, which is not otherwise prejudicial,
is not relevant
to this proposed ground of appeal, which concerns the trial
judge's direction as to the use the jury could make of evidence relied
support propensity reasoning. The
test is an expression of "the
standard which the jury must eventually apply" in engaging in propensity
It embodies
the use the jury can make of such
unless there is no rational or reasonable view of the evidence that is
consistent with the accused's innocence, the jury
cannot use the evidence to
support propensity reasoning.
while the evidence concerning the purchase of underwear in
admitted without objection, Hayne J concluded that its admission did not
give rise to a miscarriage of justice because the directions
given to the jury
that evidence from being used to support propensity
case, however, the trial judge's direction (implicitly)
evidence to be used to support propensity reasoning (provided the jury were
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the matters
identified). Further, it is not
correct that the trial judge was called on to consider only the content of any
propensity direction.
Although the giving of the propensity direction was not
opposed, the trial judge determined that he would "permit" the prosecution
rely on K's evidence as propensity evidence ("inclined to permit") and directed
the jury accordingly.
the extent that the trial judge's propensity direction implicitly permitted the
jury to use K's evidence as propensity evidence,
it was wrong in law. If that
evidence was accepted, then, as the respondent conceded, that evidence,
considered alone or with the
evidence of the charged acts, was too equivocal as
to the existence of any sexual interest on the part of the appellant in the
complainant
and his preparedness to act upon it to warrant its use by the jury
to support propensity reasoning. That is, there were several obvious
and reasonable explanations for the appellant's conduct in smacking the
complainant on the backside as described in K's
evidence having nothing to do
with the appellant having a sexual interest in the complainant including, for
example, that K was wrong,
that the smacks were not "random", and that they were
by way of disciplining the complainant, moving the complainant out of the way,
or were in mere play in common with the treatment of K herself.
third step in engaging the second limb of the common form appeal provision is to
determine whether the trial judge's wrong decision
on a question of law was
fundamental or
propensity direction in this case did not concern a question that was
fundamental to the
However, could
the decision realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury to the
verdict of guilty in the trial that
aspects of that inquiry in the context of this trial should be noted.
the application of the test of materiality requires a comparison with a trial
that was otherwise the same but in which the
correct decision of law was made.
In this case, as no other permissible use of K's evidence was sought to be
relied on, the application
of the test of materiality involves a comparison of
the trial that was had with the same trial but one where the jury were directed
that K's evidence should be put
the test does not involve consideration of a trial where K's evidence was not
opened on by the prosecution, adduced by the
prosecution without objection,
responded to by the appellant's trial counsel and the subject of addresses by
both the crown prosecutor
and the appellant's trial counsel. Those events were
part of the trial that occurred and preceded the wrong decision on a question
as noted, the decision of the trial judge reflected in the relevant part of the
summing up contains several protective elements
which had to be satisfied before
K's evidence could be used as evidence of the appellant's sexual interest in the
complainant. Those
protective elements required the evidence to be "put ... to
one side" if the jury were not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
"random" backside smacking took place as described by K and if the jury were not
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that such
conduct by the appellant
demonstrated a sexual interest in the complainant and his willingness to act on
that sexual interest. The
direction given by the trial judge can be contrasted
with a direction given in relation to tendency evidence in jurisdictions
by the Uniform Evidence Acts. Those jurisdictions either
being directed that they have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the
evidence said to support the propensity or
the propensity itself, or
significantly limit the circumstances in which that may
was 11 years old when she gave her police interview. The effect of her evidence
was that the appellant smacked her sister on the
backside at "random" even when
she and her sister were not doing anything wrong. This evidence is vague and
describes conduct that
is trivial when compared to the continuous and grave
sexual misconduct of the appellant described by the complainant. As noted, the
conduct described by K was clearly explicable as being unrelated to any sexual
interest of the appellant in the complainant. The
offending conduct described by
the complainant took place when no‑one else was present or awake other
than an eight‑month‑old
child, whereas K described the complainant
being smacked by the appellant in her presence without any suggestion of
subterfuge or
these circumstances, there was no realistic possibility of the jury relying on
K's evidence to support any finding of a sexual
interest on the part of the
appellant in the complainant and thus no such possibility of the jury's
reasoning process being affected.
Further, unlike, for example, evidence of the
commission by the appellant of unambiguously sexual acts towards the
complainant, K's
evidence did not carry any appreciable risk of prejudice by the
jury using the evidence in a manner contrary to the trial judge's
direction. The
position may have been different had the propensity direction not included the
protective elements to which we have
referred (consistent with what might
usually be given in the Uniform
Evidence Act
assessment does not lose any force when compared with a direction precluding the
jury from relying on K's evidence to find any
sexual interest on the part of the
appellant in the complainant. On both approaches there was no realistic
possibility that the jury
could have treated K's evidence as demonstrating
beyond reasonable doubt a sexual interest in the complainant on the part of the
appellant that he was prepared to act upon and no realistic possibility of the
jury deploying it for some other impermissible use.
It follows that the
appellant has not demonstrated that the decision of the trial judge to give the
propensity direction could realistically
have affected the reasoning of the jury
to a verdict of guilty.
Accordingly,
we would reject ground 4 in the amended notice of appeal and no question of
applying the proviso arises.
Remaining grounds –
miscarriage of justice
our conclusions in relation to the immateriality of the propensity direction for
the purposes of the second limb, it follows
that ground 1 in the amended
notice of appeal, which makes the same complaint about the trial judge's
directions under the third
limb, does not satisfy the materiality threshold
described in
. Further, our conclusions about the effect of the
propensity direction mean that the same result follows for ground 3 of the
notice of appeal, which complains about the admission of K's evidence
under the third limb.
would grant special leave to appeal to raise grounds 2 to 4 of the amended
notice of appeal filed 14 June 2024 but dismiss the
(2023) 309 A Crim R 63.
(2022) 141 SASR 465.
[2005] HCA 81
; (2005) 224 CLR 300.
See reasons of Gordon and Steward
JJ at [9]; reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ at [77].
[2025] HCA 20.
Reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech-Jones JJ at [96]-[110].
Reasons of Gordon and Steward JJ
Reasons of Edelman J at [44].
Reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech-Jones JJ at [99]-[103]; reasons of Gordon and Steward JJ at [30]-[31];
reasons of Edelman J
Maher v The Queen
[1987] HCA 31
163 CLR 221 at 234, quoted and applied in
Katsuno v The Queen
[1999] HCA 50
; (1999) 199
CLR 40 at 60
Lee v The Queen
[2014] HCA 20
; (2014) 253 CLR 455 at 472
Reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech-Jones JJ at [106]-[107]; reasons of Gordon and Steward JJ at [33]; reasons
of Edelman J at [44],
[1995] HCA 7
; (1995) 182 CLR 461.
(2023) 309 A Crim R 63 at 73
(2023) 309 A Crim R 63 at 74
Section 668E(1A) of the
Criminal Code
[2005] HCA 81
; (2005) 224 CLR 300 at 317
Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976
Criminal Appeal
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Appeals Act
Criminal Code
s 402(1) and (2);
Criminal Code
(NT), s 411(1) and (2);
Supreme Court Act 1933
Wilde v The
[1988] HCA 6
; (1988) 164 CLR 365 at 373;
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
; (2005) 224 CLR 300
v The Queen
[2012] HCA 59
; (2012) 246 CLR 469 at 479
v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
; (2021) 274 CLR 351 at 391-392
Criminal Code
s 668E(1A).
Reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech‑Jones JJ at [88]-[110].
Reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech‑Jones JJ at [126]-[136].
[1988] HCA 6
164 CLR 365 at 373;
[2005] HCA 81
; (2005) 224 CLR 300
at 317‑318 [46];
[2012] HCA 59
; (2012) 246 CLR 469 at 479
[2021] HCA 36
; (2021) 274 CLR 351 at 391-392
Criminal Code
s 668E(1A).
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act
Evidence Act
Criminal Code
s 619(3) and (4).
Criminal Code
s 619(3) and (4).
Reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech‑Jones JJ at [99].
Reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech‑Jones JJ at [127].
Reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech‑Jones JJ at [129]‑[136].
[2011] HCA 12
; (2011) 242 CLR 610.
[1995] HCA 7
; (1995) 182 CLR 461.
[2011] HCA 12
; (2011) 242 CLR 610
[2011] HCA 12
; (2011) 242 CLR 610
[2011] HCA 12
; (2011) 242 CLR 610
[1995] HCA 7
; (1995) 182 CLR 461 at 483.
[2011] HCA 12
; (2011) 242 CLR 610
[2011] HCA 12
; (2011) 242 CLR 610
[2011] HCA 12
; (2011) 242 CLR 610
[1995] HCA 7
; (1995) 182 CLR 461 at 485.
[1995] HCA 7
; (1995) 182
CLR 461 at 483, 485.
Reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech‑Jones JJ at [104]-[106].
Reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech‑Jones JJ at [104].
Reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech‑Jones JJ at [107], citing
Brawn v The King
[2025] HCA 20
[2005] HCA 81
; (2005) 224 CLR 300 at 314
[2005] HCA 81
; (2005) 224 CLR 300
(footnote omitted).
[2012] HCA 59
; (2012) 246 CLR 469
(emphasis in original). See also
Lindsay v The Queen
255 CLR 272 at 301-302 [86].
[2021] HCA 36
; (2021) 274 CLR 351
[2005] HCA 81
; (2005) 224 CLR 300
(footnote omitted).
[2012] HCA 59
; (2012) 246 CLR 469
Kalbasi v Western Australia
[2018] HCA 7
; (2018) 264 CLR 62 at 71
Criminal Code
Whitehorn v The Queen
[1983] HCA 42
; (1983) 152 CLR 657 at 685. See also
Festa v The Queen
(2001) 208 CLR
593 at 653 [199];
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
; (2007) 230 CLR 559 at 589
Filippou v The Queen
[2015] HCA 29
; (2015) 256 CLR 47 at 54
Whitehorn v The Queen
[1983] HCA 42
; (1983) 152 CLR 657 at 685.
Huxley v The Queen
[2023] HCA 40
; (2023) 98 ALJR 62 at 72
[2023] HCA 40
; 416 ALR 359 at 371 (footnote omitted).
[2025] HCA 20.
O'Toole v Charles David Pty
(1990) 171 CLR 232 at 267;
The Commonwealth v Yunupingu
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99
ALJR 519 at 533
, 564 [177], 585 [263]-[264].
[2025] HCA 20.
Brawn v The King
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection (Combating Coercive Control) and Other Legislation Amendment
Evidence Act 1977
(2023) 309 A
Crim R 63 at 69-70 [29].
Criminal Code
210, 229B, 349. See
Evidence Act 1977
Johnson v The Queen
[2018] HCA 48
; (2018) 266 CLR 106 at 116
Gassy v The Queen
[2008] HCA 18
236 CLR 293 at 312-313
Papakosmas v The Queen
196 CLR 297 at 319 [72];
Dhanhoa v The Queen
[2003] HCA 40
; (2003) 217 CLR 1 at 12-13
Nathanson v Minister for
[2022] HCA 26
; (2022) 276 CLR 80
MZAPC v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
(2021) 273 CLR 506 at 525-526 [42]-[43],
546 [106], 574-577 [188]-[194], referring to
Balenzuela v De Gail
[1959] HCA 1
; (1959) 101 CLR 226
CNY17 v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] HCA 50
; (2019) 268 CLR 76 at 116-117
referring to Daly, "A Typology of Materiality" (2019) 26
Australian Journal
of Administrative Law
Criminal appeals
Quartermaine v The Queen
[1980] HCA 29
; (1980) 143 CLR 595 at 600-601;
Wilde v The
[1988] HCA 6
; (1988) 164 CLR 365 at 373.
Judicial review
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] HCA 34
; (2018) 264 CLR 123 at 137
, 147-148 [72];
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration and Border
(2021) 273 CLR 506 at 565 [164];
Nathanson v Minister for Home
[2022] HCA 26
; (2022) 276 CLR 80
(Osborn) v Parole Board
[2013] UKSC 61
; [2014] AC 1115 at 1149
Civil appeals
DWN042 v Republic of Nauru
[2017] HCA 56
; (2017) 92 ALJR 146 at 151
[2017] HCA 56
; 350 ALR 582 at
Wilde v The Queen
[1988] HCA 6
164 CLR 365 at 373.
Wilde v The Queen
[1988] HCA 6
164 CLR 365 at 373;
Kalbasi v Western Australia
[2018] HCA 7
; (2018) 264 CLR 62 at 119
BVD17 v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] HCA 34
; (2019) 268 CLR 29 at 54
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2021) 273 CLR 506 at 564
[162], citing
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
; (2005) 224 CLR 300 at 308
Edwards v The Queen
[2021] HCA 28
; (2021) 273 CLR 585 at 609
Nathanson v
Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 26
; (2022) 276 CLR 80
[2023] HCA 35
; (2023) 97 ALJR 978 at 995
[2023] HCA 35
; 415 ALR 190 at 210.
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
224 CLR 300 at 317
MZAPC v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
(2021) 273 CLR 506 at 538 [85] (emphasis
in original).
Criminal appeals
Edwards v The Queen
[2021] HCA 28
; (2021) 273 CLR 585 at 609
[2009] NZSC 18
; [2009] 3 NZLR 145 at 158
(emphasis in original);
[2023] HCA 35
; (2023) 97 ALJR 978 at 995
[2023] HCA 35
; 415 ALR 190 at 210. See also
v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
; (2005) 224 CLR 300 at 308
Cesan v The Queen
[2008] HCA 52
236 CLR 358 at 392-393
Judicial review
MZAPC v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
(2021) 273 CLR 506 at 564 [162],
R v Matenga
[2009] NZSC 18
; [2009] 3 NZLR 145 at 158
(emphasis in
Nathanson v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 26
; (2022) 276 CLR 80
Civil appeals
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
(2021) 273 CLR 506 at 564 [161], referring to
Piddington v Bennett and Wood Pty Ltd
[1940] HCA 2
; (1940) 63 CLR 533 at 554.
Balenzuela v
[1959] HCA 1
; (1959) 101 CLR 226 at 236.
Brawn v The King
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
98 ALJR 610
[2024] HCA 12
; 418 ALR 152 at 161.
Nobarani v Mariconte
[2018] HCA 36
; (2018) 265 CLR 236 at 247
Balenzuela v De Gail
[1959] HCA 1
101 CLR 226.
Stead v State Government
Insurance Commission
(1986) 161 CLR 141 at 147.
Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976
Criminal Appeal Act
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
Criminal Code
(Qld), s 668E(1) and (1A);
Criminal Appeals Act 2004
Criminal Code
(Tas), s 402(1) and (2);
Criminal Code
(NT), s 411(1) and
Supreme Court Act 1933
and (3). cf
Procedure Act 2009
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
224 CLR 300 at 317
Kalbasi v Western Australia
[2018] HCA 7
; (2018) 264
CLR 62 at 120-121
Darkan v The Queen
(2006) 227 CLR 373 at 402 [95], 407 [117];
Baini v The Queen
[2012] HCA 59
; (2012) 246
CLR 469 at 481-482
, 484 [40];
Lindsay v The Queen
(2015) 255 CLR 272
at 276 [4], 301-302 [86];
Castle v The Queen
[2016] HCA 46
; (2016) 259 CLR 449 at 472
, 477 [81];
R v Dickman
(2017) 261 CLR 601 at 605 [4]-[5], 620 [63];
Lane v The Queen
[2018] HCA 28
; (2018) 265 CLR 196 at 212
, 213 [59];
Western Australia
[2019] HCA 10
; (2019) 265 CLR 268 at 282-283
Awad v The Queen
[2022] HCA 36
; (2022) 275 CLR 421 at 445
Pollock v The Queen
242 CLR 233 at 252 [70];
Baiada Poultry Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2012] HCA 14
; (2012) 246
CLR 92 at 106-107
Filippou v The Queen
[2015] HCA 29
; (2015) 256 CLR 47 at
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
273 CLR 506 at 571-572 [179].
Ratten v The Queen
[1974] HCA 35
; (1974) 131 CLR 510 at 516;
Chamberlain v The Queen [No 2]
[1984] HCA 7
; (1984) 153
CLR 521 at 532;
Carr v The Queen
[1988] HCA 47
; (1988) 165 CLR 314 at 332;
[1991] HCA 4
; (1991) 171 CLR 432 at 443;
Nudd v The Queen
[2006] HCA 9
; (2006) 80 ALJR
; 225 ALR 161 at 162-163;
R v Hillier
[2007] HCA 13
; (2007) 228 CLR 618 at
Collins v The Queen
[2018] HCA 18
; (2018) 265 CLR 178 at 194-195
. But compare
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
; (2021) 274 CLR 351 at 380-381
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
224 CLR 300 at 307-308
, considering
[1887] UKLawRpKQB 27
; (1887) 18 QBD
537 at 540-541; compare 307 [14], citing
Bray v Ford
[1895] UKLawRpAC 54
; [1896] AC 44 at 52:
no entitlement to a new trial as of right where misdirection "upon a wholly
immaterial point". See also
Simic v The Queen
[1980] HCA 25
; (1980) 144 CLR 319 at 328;
Hembury v Chief of the General Staff
(1998) 193 CLR 641 at 655-656
Mraz v The Queen
[1955] HCA 59
93 CLR 493 at 514;
KBT v The Queen
[1997] HCA 54
; (1997) 191 CLR 417 at 434;
[2002] HCA 46
; (2002) 212 CLR 124 at 143
Lindsay v The
(2015) 255 CLR 272 at 294 [64];
GBF v The Queen
[2020] HCA 40
; (2020) 271 CLR 537 at
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
; (2021) 274 CLR 351 at 394
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
; (2005) 224 CLR 300 at 316
Awad v The Queen
[2022] HCA 36
; (2022) 275 CLR 421 at 445
HCF v The Queen
[2023] HCA 35
; (2023) 97 ALJR 978 at
[2023] HCA 35
; 415 ALR 190 at 217-218. See also
Balenzuela v De Gail
[1959] HCA 1
; (1959) 101 CLR 226 at 233-235;
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection
(2021) 273 CLR 506 at 547 [110].
Hembury v Chief of the
General Staff
(1998) 193 CLR 641 at 671 [74].
Simic v The Queen
[1980] HCA 25
144 CLR 319 at 331-332.
Reasons of Gordon and Steward
JJ at [36].
Balenzuela v De Gail
[1959] HCA 1
; (1959) 101 CLR 226 at 235
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
; (1994) 181
CLR 487 at 494.
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
224 CLR 300 at 316
Reasons of Gordon and Steward
JJ at [39].
Supreme Court Act
Federal Court of Australia Act
Criminal Appeal Act
Criminal Code
(NT), s 411(1),
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(Tas), s 402(1), (2);
Criminal Appeals Act
Filippou v The Queen
[2015] HCA 29
; (2015) 256 CLR 47 at 54
Wilde v The Queen
[1988] HCA 6
164 CLR 365 at 373;
Katsuno v The Queen
[1999] HCA 50
; (1999) 199 CLR 40 at 60
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
; (2005) 224 CLR 300 at 317-318
[2021] HCA 36
; (2021) 274 CLR 351 at 391-392
, referring to
Maher v The
[1987] HCA 31
; (1987) 163 CLR 221 at 234;
Hoang v The Queen
(2022) 276 CLR 252
at 268 [42];
v The Queen
[2023] HCA 40
; (2023) 98 ALJR 62 at 72-73
[2023] HCA 40
; 416 ALR 359 at 371. See
Brawn v The King
[2025] HCA 20
[2025] HCA 20
Evidence Act
The appellant was convicted of four counts
under s 349(1) (Chapter 32) of the
Criminal Code
one count under s 210(1)(b) (Chapter 22), one count under
s 229B(1) (Chapter 22) and ten counts under s 210(1)(a)
Roach v The Queen
[2011] HCA 12
; (2011) 242 CLR 610.
(2023) 309 A
Crim R 63 at 72 [37].
[1995] HCA 7
; (1995) 182 CLR 461.
(2023) 309 A Crim R
63 at 73 [40].
(2023) 309 A Crim
R 63 at 75 [47], citing
Gateley v The Queen
[2007] HCA 55
; (2007) 232 CLR 208 at
MDP v The King
Crampton v The Queen
(2000) 206 CLR 161.
[2025] HCA 20.
[2025] HCA 20
[2025] HCA 20
[1988] HCA 6
164 CLR 365 at 373. See
[2025] HCA 20
[2005] HCA 81
; (2005) 224 CLR 300 at 317
Kalbasi v Western
[2018] HCA 7
; (2018) 264 CLR 62 at 87-88
, 120 [158];
Baiada Poultry Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2012] HCA 14
; (2012) 246 CLR 92 at 104
[2003] HCA 13
; (2003) 212 CLR 299 at
[2018] HCA 48
; (2018) 266 CLR 106 at 125
[2008] HCA 16
; (2008) 235 CLR 334 at 400
[2015] HCA 29
; (2015) 256 CLR 47 at 64-65
(1998) 197 CLR 250 at 262
Simic v The Queen
[1980] HCA 25
; (1980) 144 CLR 319 at 327;
Gassy v The Queen
[2008] HCA 18
; (2008) 236 CLR 293 at
[2015] HCA 29
; (2015) 256 CLR 47 at 54
(1909) 2 Cr
App R 197 at 207;
[2015] HCA 29
; (2015) 256 CLR 47 at 54
[2021] HCA 36
; (2021) 274 CLR 351 at 393
RPS v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
; (2000) 199 CLR 620
Fingleton v The Queen
[2005] HCA 34
227 CLR 166 at 198-199
McKell v The Queen
[2019] HCA 5
; (2019) 264 CLR 307 at
, 322-323 [45];
Hamilton (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2021] HCA 33
; (2021) 274
CLR 531 at 548
, 549-550 [30], 556 [52], 557-558 [57], 563
Supreme Court Act
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Code
(Qld), s 615C;
Criminal Code
(Tas), s 383(6);
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
(1998) 197 CLR 250;
AK v Western Australia
[2008] HCA 8
; (2008) 232 CLR
, 467-468 [85];
(2018) 84 MVR 19 at 25-27
[25]-[29], 43 [90].
See fn 116 and fn 117.
[2021] HCA 33
; (2021) 274
CLR 531 at 548-549
BRS v The Queen
[1997] HCA 47
; (1997) 191 CLR 275 at 302, 306, 328.
See above at
[100]-[101].
Criminal Appeal Act
Criminal Code
(NT), s 411(1);
Criminal Code
(Qld), s 668E(1);
(Tas), s 402(1);
Criminal Appeals Act 2004
s 30(3)(b).
Supreme Court Act
s 37O(2)(a)(ii).
Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976
s 30AJ(1)(b).
Criminal Procedure Act
s 158(1)(b).
Supreme Court Act
s 37O(2)(a)(ii)
Federal Court of Australia Act
s 30AJ(1)(b)
Criminal Appeal Act
Criminal Code
(NT), s 411(1);
Criminal Code
(Qld), s 668E(1);
Criminal Procedure Act
s 158(1)(b)
Criminal Code
(Tas), s 402(1);
Criminal Appeals Act 2004
s 30(3)(b).
[2025] HCA 20
[2006] HCA 9
; (2006) 80 ALJR 614 at 617-619
; 225 ALR 161 at
[2025] HCA 20
Doggett v The Queen
(2001) 208 CLR 343 at 346 [2];
Huynh v The Queen
(2013) 87 ALJR 434 at
441 [31]; 295 ALR 624 at 631-632.
Pemble v The Queen
[1971] HCA 20
; (1971) 124 CLR 107 at 117. See above fn 129 and fn 131.
Evidence Act
ss 21AB(a)(i)
On 2 August 2021: see
Criminal Code
, s 619(1).
On 4 August 2021: see
Criminal Code
, s 619(3).
See above at [80].
Criminal Code
s 619(3), (4).
Criminal Code
s 619(4), (6).
See above at
[100]-[101].
See fn 117.
See above at [103].
[2011] HCA 12
242 CLR 610 at 624
Qd R 184 at 189 [28].
[2008] HCA 16
; (2008) 235
CLR 334 at 426
[2008] HCA 16
; (2008) 235 CLR
, 358 [26], 382 [103], 384 [111], 395 [155], 502 [512];
[2012] HCA 9
; (2012) 245 CLR 499 at 519
, 546 [152], 557-558
[196]-[197].
[2012] HCA 9
; (2012) 245 CLR
, 557 [196].
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
; (1995) 182 CLR 461 at 485;
[2011] HCA 12
; (2011) 242 CLR 610 at 622
[2008] HCA 16
; (2008) 235 CLR 334.
[2008] HCA 16
; (2008) 235 CLR 334 at 400
[2008] HCA 16
; (2008) 235 CLR 334 at 407
[1995] HCA 7
; (1995) 182
CLR 461 at 483, 485;
[2011] HCA 12
; (2011) 242 CLR 610 at 622
[2008] HCA 16
; (2008) 235 CLR
, 498-499 [502]-[503], 502 [512];
[2011] HCA 12
; (2011) 242 CLR 610
[2012] HCA 9
; (2012) 245 CLR 499 at 546
[2008] HCA 16
; (2008) 235 CLR 334 at 407
See above at [104].
See above at [106].
See above at [107].
[2008] HCA 16
; (2008) 235
CLR 334 at 358
, 489 [471], 498-499 [502]-[503];
[1997] HCA 47
; (1997) 191 CLR
275 at 305.
For example, Victoria. See
Director of Public Prosecutions v Roder (a pseudonym)
[2024] HCA 15
; (2024) 98 ALJR 644
; 418 ALR 190 at 191.
Criminal Procedure Act
R v Bauer (a pseudonym)
[2018] HCA 40
266 CLR 56 at 98
[2024] HCA 15
; (2024) 98 ALJR 644 at 652
; 418 ALR 190
at 198-199.
RTF format (563 KB)
Signed PDF/A format