Pact Group Holdings Ltd 02 & 03 [2025] ATP 13 (21 May 2025)
Reasons for Decision
Pact Group Holdings Ltd 02 &
[2025] ATP 13
Catchwords:
Decline to conduct proceedings – delisting –
Corporations Act 2001
sections 602
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Regulations 2001
regulation 16
Takeovers Panel Procedural Rules 2020, rules 16(2), 16(3) and
Takeovers Panel Procedural Guidelines 2020, 4.5 and 4.6(c)
Guidance Note 1: Unacceptable Circumstances
ASX Listing Rules Guidance Note 33: Removal of Entities from the ASX
Official List
Vmoto Limited 02R [2025] ATP 9, Pact Group Holdings Ltd [2024] ATP 4,
Flinders Mines Limited 02 and 03 [2019] ATP 2
Interim order
IO undertaking
Declaration
Final order
Undertaking
INTRODUCTION
Panel, Timothy Longstaff, Rory Moriarty (sitting President) and Erin Tinker,
declined to conduct proceedings on two applications
by shareholders of Pact
Group Holdings Ltd in relation to the affairs of Pact. The applications, heard
together, concerned the proposed
delisting of Pact. The Panel was not satisfied
that the circumstances had or were likely to have an effect on the control, or
control of Pact or the acquisition, or proposed acquisition, by a
person of a substantial interest in Pact or were otherwise inconsistent
purposes of section 602.
Therefore, the Panel was not satisfied that these matters fell within its
reasonable prospect that
it would declare the circumstances unacceptable.
these reasons, the following definitions
Bennamon Industries Pty Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of Kin Group Pty
Bennamon Share Acquisitions
has the meaning given in paragraph
has the meaning given in paragraph
Business Update
has the meaning given in paragraph
has the meaning given in paragraph
Bennamon Industries Pty Ltd, Salvage Pty Ltd and Kin Group Pty Ltd
Manipur Nominees Pty. Ltd., Shriar Consolidated Pty Ltd, Stanningfield
Proprietary Limited and Gandur Superannuation No. 3 Pty Ltd
has the meaning given in paragraph
Pact Group Holdings Ltd
Proposed Delisting
has the meaning given in paragraph
has the meaning given in paragraph
is an ASX listed company (ASX code: PGH).
13 September 2023, Kin Group Pty Ltd announced its intention to make an
off‑market unconditional takeover offer to purchase
all of the shares in
) for $0.68 per share. It said that the offer would be made by
25 September 2023, Bennamon lodged a replacement bidder’s statement
which stated (among other things) that:
“Kin Group intends to have Pact removed from the official list of
ASX as soon as it is able to do so (subject to the level of
acceptances,
compliance with the requirements of the ASX Listing Rules and legal, tax and any
other considerations at the relevant
“ASX may approve an application for Pact to be removed from the
official list of ASX with Pact Shareholder approval. Where
such removal is
sought later than 12 months after the end of the Offer Period, Bennamon
Industries, Kin Group and their Associates
would be entitled to vote on the
resolution approving the removal.”
“If Pact is removed from the official list of ASX, there may be
risks related to remaining as a minority shareholder in Pact.
These include
significantly reduced liquidity if Pact Shareholders wish to sell their Pact
“If Pact is not removed from the official list of ASX, Kin Group
may seek to continue to increase its Relevant Interest in Pact
“3% creep” exception in item 9 of
section 611
Corporations
13 October 2023, Pact released its target’s statement, in which the
independent directors of Pact unanimously recommended
that shareholders reject
11 December 2023, Bennamon increased the offer price under the Bid to $0.84 per
on 11 December 2023, Pact released a supplementary target’s statement,
which stated (among other things) that following
the price increase under the
Bid, Pact’s Independent Board Committee unanimously recommended that Pact
shareholders accept
the revised offer.
5 April 2024, in compliance with undertakings given to the Panel, Bennamon
released its eleventh supplementary bidder’s statement
providing further
disclosure to clarify the key conditions required to be satisfied for Pact to be
removed from the ASX if Kin Group
did not reach the compulsory acquisition level
of 90% of Pact shares.
30 April 2024, Bennamon released its thirteenth supplementary bidder’s
statement, declaring that the Bid would close on 7
June 2024 and would not be
extended and stating that “
even if Bennamon does not reach the
compulsory acquisition level of 90% of Pact Shares, Pact may seek the approval
of the ASX and
Pact Shareholders to delist. Kin Group expects that, consistent
with ASX guidance, it would be permitted to vote on any resolution
Pact proposed more than 12 months after the Closing Date.
Therefore, from
that time (8 June 2025 or later), Kin Group would be able to pass any resolution
to delist Pact without the support
of other shareholders.
(original emphasis)
31 May 2024, Bennamon released its fourteenth and last supplementary
bidder’s statement in relation to the Bid, stating (among
other things)
that as at that date Bennamon held a controlling stake in Pact of over 87.6% and
that all minority shareholders should
consider Bennamon’s
intentions as a controlling shareholder, as provided in its Bidder’s
Statement, as amended and supplemented
(copies located on the Offer website and
7 June 2024, the Bid closed.
29 April 2025, Pact announced its intention to delist from the ASX (
) subject to obtaining the required shareholder approval by way of
a special resolution to be put forward at an extraordinary general
meeting to be
held on 12 June 2025 (
). The announcement also stated (among other
things) that:
(a) the delisting was expected to be effective on 16 July 2025
(b) ASX had given in-principle advice that it would agree to Pact’s
(c) the Pact board considered the Proposed Delisting to be in the best interests
of shareholders in light of the very concentrated
nature of Pact’s
register, the low level of trading of Pact shares on ASX, the cost of
maintaining an ASX listing relative
to the benefits associated with such ASX
listing and
the burden associated with compliance with the regulatory
regime applying to listed companies and
(d) remedies were available to shareholders:
(i) in Court, should a shareholder consider that the Proposed Delisting was
contrary to the interests of the shareholders of the
company as a whole, or
oppressive to, unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against a
shareholder or shareholders and
(ii) with the Panel, should a shareholder consider that the Proposed Delisting
involved unacceptable circumstances (
on 29 April 2025, Pact released an announcement in which it provided a business
Business Update
) in relation to (among other things):
(a) its provisional Q3 FY25 trading, concluding with a statement that
“[e]arly signals of Q4 demand are soft...
(b) debt refinancing, noting that it had commenced a refinance of its debt
facilities and
(c) the strategic review of its business portfolio, noting that Pact had
appointed an advisor to consider the potential divestment
of one of its
businesses.
5 May 2025, Pact announced that ASX had approved the Proposed Delisting.
6 May 2025, one of the directors of Pact, also a director of Bennamon, disclosed
in an Appendix 3Y that Bennamon had acquired 309,963
Pact shares between 30
April 2025 and 6 May 2025 via on-market trades and off-market transfers
Bennamon Share Acquisitions
APPLICATIONS
Pact Group Holdings Ltd 02
application dated 8 May 2025, Mr Jeremy Machet and Scrap Invest Pty Ltd
) sought a declaration of unacceptable circumstances.
Mr Machet submitted (among other things) that:
(a) the low liquidity of Pact shares and the short window to sell prior to the
suspension from quotation on 14 July 2025 pressured
shareholders to sell at
depressed prices or hold illiquid unlisted shares
(b) the Notice of Meeting
may lack balanced information
” and would allow Kin Group to
vote for the Proposed Delisting while also being in a beneficial position to
acquire additional
(c) Pact continued to frame the company’s position negatively while
downplaying positive developments and that this selective
disclosure may mislead
shareholders about Pact’s fair value and prospects, influencing their
decision on the Proposed Delisting.
Machet submitted that these circumstances were unacceptable because they
affected the control of Pact by facilitating the major
shareholder’s
consolidation of ownership in a way that contravened the purposes of Chapter 6
and they undermined an efficient,
competitive, and informed market.
Interim orders sought
Machet sought interim orders to stay the delisting process until the Panel made
a determination on the application.
Final orders sought
Machet sought final orders including that:
(a) Kin Group be restrained from voting on the Proposed Delisting at the EGM
(b) Pact provide certain disclosures in the Notice of Meeting
(c) the timetable for suspension of trading be extended by at least 60 days (if
the delisting resolution was approved)
(d) an independent third party be appointed to oversee the delisting process
(e) post delisting, Pact be required to offer a facility to allow shareholders
to sell their shares to Pact at an independently assessed
fair value.
Pact Group Holdings Ltd 03
12 May 2025, Pact released a notice of meeting in relation to the EGM (
). The Notice of Meeting provided (among other things):
(a) that Kin Group held 88% of Pact shares, that it would be permitted to vote
on the resolution and that it intended to vote in
favour of the resolution
(b) the reasons for seeking removal from the ASX list
(c) the advantages of the Proposed Delisting
(d) the disadvantages of the Proposed Delisting
(e) remedies available to shareholders, in the same form as the Remedies and
(f) that the Pact board unanimously recommended that shareholders vote in favour
of the Proposed Delisting.
application dated 12 May 2025, Mr Jeremy Raper sought a declaration of
unacceptable circumstances. Mr Raper submitted (among other
things) that:
(a) the reasons disclosed for the Proposed Delisting were false and
(b) the Board was not acting in the best interests of shareholders in endorsing
the Proposed Delisting and
(c) the Proposed Delisting had a substantial coercive effect upon minority
shareholders.
Raper submitted that the circumstances were contrary to the principles
underpinning Chapter 6.
Interim orders sought
Raper sought interim orders to:
(a) stay the occurrence of the EGM until the Panel made a determination on the
application and
(b) restrain Bennamon and its related parties from acquiring further Pact
Final orders sought
Raper sought final orders preventing Kin Group from voting its shares at the
have considered all the material, but address specifically only that part of the
material we consider necessary to explain our
support of his application, Mr Machet submitted that:
(a) First, the low liquidity of Pact shares and the short window to sell before
the trading suspension on 14 July 2025, created a
coercive environment that
pressured minority shareholders to sell at depressed prices, unfairly benefiting
Bennamon while prejudicing
shareholders like the applicant.
(b) Second, disclosure in relation to the Proposed Delisting lacked balanced
information with a focus on benefits and no adequate
disclosure of the risks for
minority shareholders, noting that “
voting power
renders the EGM a formality, denying minority shareholders a fair opportunity to
influence the outcome and protect their
(c) Third, in the Business Update released on the day the Proposed Delisting was
announced, Pact negatively framed the company’s
Q4 trading while
downplaying positive developments such as the debt refinancing and potential
divestment of one of its businesses,
which as a result could mislead
shareholders and influence their decision on the Proposed Delisting.
(d) Fourth, the lack of a transparent mechanism for price discovery
post-delisting would prevent minority shareholders from achieving
fair value for
their investment, including in a scenario where Kin Group was to launch a bid
post delisting.
(e) Fifth, Bennamon took advantage, with the Bennamon Share Acquisitions, of
Pact’s depressed share price after the announcement
of the Proposed
Delisting, therefore “
consolidating control while prejudicing
minorities.
(f) Sixth, Pact overstated the costs savings associated with the Proposed
Delisting given it would still incur significant costs
as an unlisted disclosing
entity and, in any event, the costs of maintaining an ASX listing for a company
of Pact’s size are
immaterial.
Raper submitted that the reasons listed by Pact when announcing the Proposed
Delisting were all false and misleading and that the
independent directors were
not, and had not been, acting impartially and in the best interests of
shareholders. Mr Raper described
the Proposed Delisting as coercive, referring
to ASX Guidance Note 33 which provides that an unacceptable reason for an entity
seek delisting is “
to deny minority security holders a market for
their securities in order to coerce them into accepting a current or planned
from a controlling security holder to buy their securities at an
also submitted that the difficulties and cost associated with holding shares in
an unlisted entity would influence minority
shareholders to sell before the
Proposed Delisting, permanently impairing minority value.
Raper made the Pact Group Holdings Ltd 03 application days after the Pact Group
Holdings Ltd 02 application was made. Given the
overlap in the subject matter
and the Panel’s aim of resolving disputes consistently and in a timely
manner, we made a direction
that the applications be heard
important factor in deciding whether to conduct is, naturally, whether the Panel
has jurisdiction.
At the outset,
we had concerns as to whether the applications related to circumstances within
our jurisdiction.
Panel has considered delisting and unacceptable circumstances in the previous
Panel decision of
Flinders Mines Limited 02 & 03
. The Panel stated
in that matter:
The decision of a company’s board to seek
to de-list involves the exercise of business or commercial judgement, and may be
to (among other things) requirements of the applicable listing rules,
the discretions and policy of the relevant listing authority,
duties and minority shareholders remedies. It is not the Panel’s role, in
the ordinary course, to opine on
such judgements or enforce requirements for
which other regulators or the courts have primary responsibility. However, the
of such requirements does not prevent the Panel exercising its
role. In our view, where de-listing has or is likely to have an effect on
control or the acquisition of a substantial interest
in a listed company, and
appears inconsistent with the purposes in
section 602
, it is appropriate for us
to consider whether it gives rise to unacceptable
circumstances...
the circumstances of that matter involving a proposed delisting and buy-back,
the Panel considered that the effects of the proposal
were likely to result in
the acquisition of a substantial interest in the company (by the company itself
and a substantial shareholder)
in a manner that was inconsistent with the
purposes in
section 602.
decided to ask preliminary questions of the
asked whether the issues raised in the applications were a matter for the Panel
given its limited and clearly defined jurisdiction,
having regard to
, ASX’s primary responsibility in the administration of the listing
rules (including in respect of delistings) and the remedies
available to
minority shareholders under the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) with respect
to oppressive actions or in the event of any buy out of minority shareholders
through compulsory acquisition that
may eventuate.
also asked whether the Proposed Delisting denied minority shareholders a market
for their securities in order to coerce them into
accepting an offer from the
controlling shareholder to buy their securities at an undervalue, referring to
ASX Guidance Note 33.
considering the submissions from the parties, we were still not satisfied that
the circumstances set out in the applications
were within our jurisdiction, for
the reasons we address below.
No effect on control or acquisition of a substantial
Panel does not have a general oversight role over listed entities.
empowers the Panel to make a declaration of unacceptable circumstances.
The first ground for a declaration under
section 657A(2)(a)
requires the Panel
to consider the effect of the circumstances and whether the effect appears to
the Panel to be
unacceptable:
(a) having regard to control or potential control of a company or
(b) having regard to the acquisition or proposed acquisition of a substantial
interest in a company.
submitted that the Proposed Delisting would not have any effect on the control
or potential control of the company and was not
coupled with any transaction
which would involve the acquisition or proposed acquisition of a substantial
interest in the company,
noting that the Bennamon Share Acquisitions represented
0.09% of Pact’s issued shares.
Group submitted that “
[t]here is no takeover offer. There is no control
proposal. There has been no breach of chapter 6 of the
Corporations Act
Kin's prior takeover offer closed in June 2024, there has been no acquisition of
a substantial interest in Pact. There is
no conduct breaching the principles set
out in section 602 of the Corporation[s] Act. There has been no conduct which
involves unacceptable
circumstances...
Group also submitted that the Bennamon Share Acquisitions fully complied with
law under Kin Group’s 3% creep limit and did
not represent the acquisition
of a substantial interest.
the Bennamon Share Acquisitions could conceivably be within our jurisdiction, no
further acquisitions were made by Kin Group
during the proceedings and Kin Group
provided evidence that it was not the only buyer in the
In the circumstances,
we do not consider the acquisition of 0.09% of Pact to represent a substantial
submitted by Pact and Kin Group, the Proposed Delisting was not coupled with any
transaction. In and of itself, the Proposed Delisting
has no control
implication nor does it involve the acquisition of a substantial interest and
therefore it did not appear to enliven
our jurisdiction under section
657A(2)(a).
Raper submitted that the Proposed Delisting
“concerns the likely
control of a substantial interest in the company – being the minority
shares, many of which have
been, and will continue to be, acquired by the
controlling shareholder should the Delisting be allowed
submitted that Kin Group had made it clear that it wished to acquire 100% of the
shares in Pact during the Bid and
that the recent Bennamon Share Acquisitions
evidenced an intent regarding a future offer.
Group submitted that “
there is no Kin takeover offer, no control
proposal or no other offer to acquire shares at this time
submitted that “
[t]here is no ‘current or planned’ offer.
Whatever may or may not happened (sic) in the future is pure speculation and
cannot be a basis for any action by the Panel.
Panel’s concerns, when considering an application, relate more to the
effect or likely effect of a proposal than the intention
or purpose behind it.
The Panel looks at the effect or likely effect of existing circumstances, not
hypothetical scenarios. We
note that the acquisition of a substantial interest
post the Proposed Delisting would be a new circumstance, whether or not it is
within the 3% creep limit, and in particular if it would allow Kin Group to hold
90% or more of the shares in Pact.
No other grounds for unacceptability under section
657A(2)(b) and 657A(2)(c) are the two additional grounds upon which the Panel
can make a declaration of unacceptable circumstances.
That is, if the
circumstances are unacceptable:
(a) having regard to the section 602 principles (section 657A(2)(b)) or
(b) because of a contravention of Chapters 6-6C (section 657A(2)(c)).
Machet submitted that the Proposed Delisting involved unacceptable circumstances
contrary to sections 602(a).
Raper submitted that the Proposed Delisting was “
concerned with the
fundamental principles of s602, in that the specific delisting mechanism here
is being promulgated under false and misleading circumstances,
disorderly and unfair market environment for minorities – one that leads
to their coerced expropriation
submitted that “
[t]he compulsory acquisition provisions are essentially
predicated on a bidder achieving a 90% shareholding. To permit a bidder to
many holders out by pursuing or threatening to pursue a delisting once it
reaches 75%, is a material and fundamental change
to the policy behind section
“[s]uch a process may also be inconsistent
with section 602(c) as a number of holders will be denied “a reasonable
equal opportunity to participate in any benefits accruing to the
holders” by virtue of participating in the ‘mop up’
various reasons they are unable or unwilling to remain in a delisted
submitted that the likelihood of Pact being delisted, as well as the steps
involved including that Kin Group would be entitled
to vote, had been spelt out
repeatedly in great detail on a number of occasions since Bennamon launched its
takeover bid in September
2023. Pact submitted that the market was therefore
very well informed and that the Proposed Delisting was compliant with section
602. Kin Group made similar submissions.
Group also submitted that the Bennamon Share Acquisitions represented only circa
19.8% of all on market trades undertaken on the
ASX between the announcement of
the Proposed Delisting and close of trading on the date of the application. Kin
Group submitted
that this evidenced that there were other buyers of Pact shares
on the market, which was therefore not that illiquid, and that the
Share Acquisitions added demand and liquidity to the market, assisting in upward
pricing pressure and providing an opportunity
for those shareholders who wanted
was not alleged that there had been a breach of Chapter 6, therefore section
657A(2)(c) does not apply.
602 sets out the purposes of Chapter 6. They are principles to ensure
(a) the acquisition of control over voting shares takes place in an efficient,
competitive and informed market (section 602(a))
(b) the holders of shares and the directors know the identity of a person who
proposes to acquire a substantial interest, have a
reasonable time to consider
the proposal and are given enough information to enable them to assess the
merits of the proposal (section
(c) as far as practicable, the holders of shares in the relevant class all have
a reasonable and equal opportunity to participate
in any benefits accruing to
holders through any proposal under which a person would acquire a substantial
interest (section 602(c))
(d) an appropriate procedure is followed as a preliminary to compulsory
acquisition following a takeover bid (section 602(d)).
discussed above, the Proposed Delisting did not involve the acquisition of a
substantial interest and therefore, sections 602(b)
and 602(c) do not apply.
602(d) relates to compulsory acquisition following a takeover bid. Given the
Bid already closed, any compulsory acquisition
that would occur would be under
the general compulsory acquisition regime, therefore section 602(d) does not
602(a) ensures that the market trades on an efficient, competitive and informed
Flinders Mines Limited 02 and
the fact that the
delisting had not been clearly contemplated or flagged was one of the factors
the Panel took into account when
making its declaration of unacceptable
circumstances.
we were satisfied that Kin Group’s intentions with regards to Pact’s
delisting had been sufficiently clear so that
the Proposed Delisting was not
contrary to the efficient, competitive and informed market principle under
section 602(a).
Awareness of intention to delist
submitted that both Mr Machet and Mr Raper had purchased most of (and all of, in
the case of Mr Raper) their shares in Pact on
or after March 2024, when
Bennamon’s disclosed voting power was already 86.98% and its intention
with regards to the delisting
of Pact had been spelt out in detail on many
Group submitted that Mr Raper was a sophisticated investor and made a calculated
investment decision to invest in Pact, fully
aware of the stated intentions to
considered the effect of the circumstances generally, not just in relation to
the applicants and their investments. However, we
did consider it relevant that
any shareholders dealing in Pact shares over the last 12 months or so would have
done so with the knowledge
of the likelihood of a delisting of Pact.
ASX’s approval of a decision made by Pact
Group submitted that the Panel “
should not allow itself to be used as a
forum for ventilating grievances outside the scope of the Panel's remit, or for
challenging
legitimate decisions of other regulators (ie the ASX), directors and
shareholders that the Applicant happens not to like.
submitted that ASX had given its approval for the Proposed Delisting and that
the Panel should not second guess the ASX when
it permits an action under its
listing rules and in accordance with its guidance.
Machet submitted that ASX does not ensure compliance with section 602 and
therefore a delisting approved by ASX may still involve
unacceptable
circumstances under the Panel’s jurisdiction. Mr Raper similarly
submitted that ASX has responsibility in the
administration of the delisting but
that does not remove the Panel’s jurisdiction when circumstances around a
delisting are
unacceptable.
ASX listing rules are designed to ensure market integrity, fairness and investor
confidence. They do govern, among other things,
the delisting process of
entities. We agree that it is not our role, in the ordinary course, to
intervene in relation to circumstances
that fall within ASX’s remit
especially where an intention has been clearly stated and time has elapsed.
Nevertheless, there
is clearly potential for overlap with our jurisdiction as
described by the Panel in
Flinders Mines Limited 02 and
do not make any comments about the Panel’s jurisdiction with regards to
delisting generally, but only with respect to the
circumstances in the
applications. As stated in
Flinders Mines Limited 02 and
the manner and
circumstances in which a delisting occurs may vary greatly and our decision is
based on the particular facts involved.
We maintain that, in circumstances
where a delisting is coupled with a transaction which has a control effect or
which involves
the acquisition or proposed acquisition of a substantial interest
in the company, a delisting may very well involve unacceptable
circumstances.
Here, it was not the case.
the disclosure around the Proposed Delisting in the Notice of Meeting and the
fact that there is no current or planned offer
from Kin Group to buy out the
minority shareholders, we do not consider that the reasons why Pact sought the
Proposed Delisting were
unacceptable, including having regard to ASX Guidance
Raper submitted that a Panel application was one of the Remedies listed in the
announcement regarding the Proposed Delisting and
the Notice of Meeting and that
therefore it could not be argued that the Proposed Delisting was a matter
outside of the Panel’s
similar nature.
submitted that the Remedies had been included in the Notice of Meeting to
address a specific disclosure requirement from the
ASX in Guidance Note
Group submitted that the Panel “
should not allow itself to in effect be
a small claims tribunal for a shareholder to challenge or second guess
legitimate decisions
of directors which the shareholder does not like. Even more
so when it involves matters which are the domain of the ASX and the
” Kin Group also submitted that if, at some future time, Kin
Group was to acquire a further 1.9% and satisfied the tests for
acquisition, the acquisition of minority shares would be subject to the
safeguards in Chapter 6A which protect minority
interests, including the
provision of an independent expert’s report under the general compulsory
acquisition power and various
procedural steps including the right to apply to
the courts in certain circumstances.
Raper submitted that there were no real remedies available to minority
shareholders alleging oppression in the court, given how
prohibitively expensive
and time consuming the process would be. Manipur made submissions to the same
Raper also submitted that any future compulsory acquisition would be at a price
which would be difficult to assess given
“any ultimate valuation would
not benefit from public-market comparables (which invariably trade at much
higher multiples and
thus imply higher value for minorities)”
would be at a large illiquidity discount. He submitted that the protection of
minority interests under Chapter 6A would be insufficient
in light of these
consider that there are other remedies available to shareholders in relation to
the Proposed Delisting, including with the Panel
should unacceptable
circumstances occur at a later stage. This informed our decision not to conduct
proceedings.
Out of time allegations
Raper alleged a lack of disclosure from the independent directors of Pact during
the Bid period and submitted that the Proposed
Delisting was the project of a
partial board.
submitted that any allegations from the applicants regarding the independence of
the Pact board in relation to the Bid were unsupported
by evidence and in any
event were out of time under section 657C(3).
agree that the allegation made with respect to the Bid was not timely and the
material in support of the allegations more generally
was not sufficient to
justify further enquiry.
Procedural matters
received a Notice to Become a Party in both proceedings from Manipur who
submitted that it held approximately 6.7% of the currently
issued shares in Pact
and would therefore directly be affected by, and have a significant interest in,
the Proposed Delisting the
subject matter of the
applications.
We noted that
Manipur’s interest as a minority shareholder may not be substantially
different from that of the applicants.
Although we note that Manipur’s
shareholding alone would be sufficient to trigger the objection right under
section 664E(4)
in relation to any compulsory acquisition (if undertaken
immediately), it was the applicant in
Holdings Ltd
reason and the fact it was represented by a law firm when the applicants were
individuals without legal representation,
we considered that Manipur may be able
to assist us and we accepted its Notice to Become a
number of Pact shareholders wrote to the Panel executive in support of the
submissions made by the applicants. Two of these shareholders
also submitted a
Notice to Become a Party.
sought submissions from the parties as to whether we should accept the two
Notices to Become a Party.
submitted that we should not accept them, that the interests of minority
shareholders was already represented by the applicants
and Manipur (which was
represented by a law firm) and that, therefore, accepting these Notices to
Become a Party would not add anything
relevant that had not already been covered
by the parties.
agreed and decided not to accept the Notices to Become a Party from the two
minority shareholders. However, we decided to receive
their submissions, after
they consented to the parties also being provided with their submissions.
did not receive submissions from other non-party shareholders. As noted in
Vmoto Limited 02R
accept that a proposed delisting attracts considerable market interest, however
the Panel has discretion to receive, or not to
receive, submissions from
non-parties.
the reasons above, we do not consider that there is any reasonable prospect that
we would make a declaration of unacceptable circumstances.
Accordingly, we have
decided not to conduct proceedings in relation to the application under
regulation 20
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Regulations
that we have decided not to conduct proceedings, we do not (and do not need to)
consider whether to make any interim or final
President of the sitting Panel
Decision dated 21
Reasons given to parties 21 July 2025
published 24 July 2025
Mr Jeremy Machet and Scrap Invest Pty Ltd
Mr Jeremy Raper
Pact Group Holdings Ltd
Herbert Smith Freehills
Bennamon Industries Pty Ltd and Kin Group Pty Ltd
Manipur Nominees Pty. Ltd., Shriar Consolidated Pty Ltd, Stanningfield
Proprietary Limited and Gandur Superannuation No. 3 Pty Ltd
Mills Oakley
Unless otherwise indicated, all
statutory references are to the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and all terms
used in Chapter 6 or 6C have the meaning given in the relevant Chapter (as
modified by ASIC)
Group Holdings Ltd
[2024] ATP 4. Bennamon was also required to provide
withdrawal rights to a small number of Pact shareholders who had accepted the
The Notice of Meeting was
yet to be issued at the time of the
application
ASX Listing Rules
Guidance Note 33: Removal of Entities from the ASX Official List at
regulation 16
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Regulations
Takeovers Panel Procedural Guidelines 2020 at
[2019] ATP 2 at [20]
See Takeovers Panel Procedural
Guidelines 2020 at
See also Guidance Note
1: Unacceptable
Circumstances
See paragraph
See paragraph
[2019] ATP 2 at [22]
[2019] ATP 2 at [20]
Listing Rules Guidance Note 33: Removal of Entities from the ASX Official List
See Takeovers Panel
Procedural Guidelines 2020 at
Manipur was identified
as an interested person in Mr Machet’s application (
Pact Group Holdings
) but not in Mr Raper’s application (
Pact Group Holdings Ltd
See Takeovers Panel
Procedural Rules 2020, rules 16(2) and
See Takeovers Panel
Procedural Rules 2020, rule 20 and Takeovers Panel Procedural Guidelines
RTF format (7.15 MB)
Signed PDF/A format