URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/FCAFC/2023/50.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited v Williams [2023] FCAFC 50 (27 March 2023)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia
Limited v Williams
[2023] FCAFC 50
Appeal from:
Williams v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited (Initial
[2022] FCA 344
File number:
NSD 462 of 2022
Judgment of:
MOSHINSKY, COLVIN AND STEWART JJ
Date of judgment:
27 March 2023
Catchwords:
CONSUMER LAW
– representative
proceedings – alleged defect in motor vehicle by reason of defective
exhaust system – where primary
judge found breach of guarantee of
acceptable quality pursuant to s 54 Australian Consumer Law –
consideration of proper construction
of s 54 – where appellant claims
statute requires regard to subjective circumstances of claimant – where
appellant submits
there is heterogeneity of group members – where
s 54 references a reasonable consumer – appeal ground
unsuccessful
CONSUMER LAW
– where appellant contends defect
only in a component system and not in vehicle – where appellant alleges
error by the
primary judge in finding defect in vehicle – where defect
rendered vehicles to be of unacceptable quality – appeal grounds
unsuccessful
– representative proceedings –
where primary judge found reduction in value damages on an aggregate basis
appellant submits primary judge’s construction of
ss 271 and 272 was incorrect – where appellant submits primary judge
erred by assessing reduction in value damages at time of supply rather than at
later date when loss was alleged to crystallise –
where appellant alleged
this error resulted in failure take into account certain evidence and matters
relevant to the assessment
of damages – where fix available for defect by
time of trial at no cost to vehicle owner – where experts agree that fix
restores value to vehicle prospectively – consideration of proper
conceptual approach to reduction in value damages –
consideration of
appropriate time to assess reduction in value damages – consideration of
whether information available at
a later date can be taken into account –
consideration of proper approach to assessment of reduction in value damages
a defect may be able to be remedied – matter remitted for
re-assessment of reduction in value damages under ss 271(1) and 272(1)(a)
and damages for excess GST under ss 271(1) and 272(1)(b) in accordance with
reasoning of Court
– representative proceedings
– where appellant submits primary judge erred in use of expert evidence as
to willingness
to pay to assess the reduction in value damages – where
appellant submits expert evidence as to resale market price for vehicles
defect flawed – where appellant submits expert evidence provided an
insufficient foundation to undertake a common sense
assessment of the reduction
in value of the goods – where alleged insufficiency of foundation for
primary judge’s common
sense assessment – where appellant contends
in alternative that damages should be assessed taking account of resale
information
and cost of fix – some grounds upheld – revised common
sense assessment undertaken by Court subject to further adjustment
on remitter
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
, Schedule 2 (Australian Consumer Law),
260, 271, 272, 273,
Cases cited:
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty
[2021] FCA 715
154 ACSR 235
Dwyer v Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWSC 715
Ethicon Sàrl v Gill
[2021] FCAFC 29
288 FCR 338
Fernando v Commonwealth of Australia
[2014] FCAFC 181
Henville v Walker
[2001] HCA 52
206 CLR 459
HTW Valuers (Central Qld) Pty Ltd v Astonland Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 54
217 CLR 640
Johnson v Perez
[1988] HCA 64
166 CLR 351
Kizbeau Pty Ltd v WG & B Pty Ltd
[1995] HCA 4
184 CLR 281
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
; 130 FCR 18
Merck Sharp & Dohme (Australia) Pty Ltd v Peterson
[2011] FCAFC
196 FCR 145
Murphy v Overton Investments Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 3
216 CLR 388
Owners – Strata Plan No 87231 v 3A Composites GmbH (No 5)
[2020] FCA 1576
148 ACSR 445
R v Carroll
[2010] NSWCCA 55
77 NSWLR 45
Vautin v By Winddown, Inc (formerly Bertram Yachts) (No 4)
[2018] FCA 426
362 ALR 702
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
Regulator and Consumer Protection
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
14 March 2023
Date of hearing:
14, 15 and 16 November 2022
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr R Dick SC with Mr A d’Arville and Ms X
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for the Respondents:
Mr S Free SC with Mr P Meagher and Mr P Strickland
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Gilbert + Tobin
NSD 462 of 2022
TOYOTA MOTOR CORPORATION AUSTRALIA LIMITED
(ACN 009 686 097)
KENNETH JOHN WILLIAMS
DIRECT CLAIM SERVICES QLD PTY LTD
(ACN 167 519 968)
Second Respondent
MOSHINSKY, COLVIN AND STEWART JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
27 MARCH 2023
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal be allowed.
1 to 5 of the orders made by the primary judge on 16 May 2022 be set aside.
matter be remitted for re-assessment of reduction in value damages under
ss 271(1) and 272(1)(a) of the Australian Consumer Law
Sch 2 to the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), and damages
for excess GST under ss 271(1) and 272(1)(b) of the ACL, in accordance with
the reasons of the Full Court.
14 days, each party file a written submission on consequential orders and
28 days, each party file any responding written submission on consequential
orders and costs.
to further order, the issues of consequential orders and costs be determined on
the papers.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
THE STATUTORY SCHEME
ISSUES RELATING TO
Ground 1: can s 54 liability be
determined on a common basis?
The substance of ground
The primary judge’s
submissions
Consideration
Grounds 2 and 3: was there a
defect in the vehicles?
The substance of grounds 2 and
The primary judge’s
Consideration
ISSUES CONCERNING CONSTRUCTION AND
CONCEPTUAL APPROACH
The nature of the damages claim at
the initial trial
The primary judge’s
construction and conceptual approach
The parties’ submissions on
Sections 271 and 272 and general
principles concerning damages
The notion of reduction in value in
relation to consumer goods
The proper conceptual approach in
the circumstances of this case
ISSUES CONCERNING ASSESSMENT OF
REDUCTION IN VALUE
General observations concerning the
assessment of reduction in value damages in relation to consumer
Replacement
Repair is not
Resale price as a measure of
loss of value
Market expertise as a basis for
assessing reduction in value
Some possible further
complexities
The evidence of Mr
The evidence of Mr
The evidence of Mr
The extent to which the market
became informed
The extent to which the market
needed to be informed
The evidence concerning print
and online media
Use of information concerning
sales in the used car market
The nature of the
Conclusion on the extent to
which the market became informed
Consideration of Toyota’s
propositions
Proposition (1): Alleged error
in using ‘willingness to pay’ evidence (ground 5)
Proposition (2): Alleged error
in failing to have regard to the data that formed part of the evidence of Mr
Proposition (3): Alleged
insufficiency of the foundation for the common sense assessment by the primary
Proposition (4): Alternatively
to (3), the common sense assessment should have taken account of Mr
Stockton’s resale figures
and repair cost analysis
Conclusion on appeal
Re-assessment of the reduction in
CONCLUSION AND ORDERS
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
1 October 2015 and 23 April 2020 (referred to as the
), 264,170 Toyota motor vehicles in the Prado, Fortuner and HiLux
ranges and fitted one of two particular models of diesel combustion
engine were
supplied to consumers in Australia. Each of the vehicles was supplied with a
diesel exhaust after-treatment system (
). The DPF system was
defective because it was not designed to function effectively during all
reasonably expected conditions of
normal operation and use of the vehicle.
Motor Corporation Australia Pty Ltd, is the
“manufacturer” of the vehicles for the purpose of s 7(1)(e) of
Australian Consumer Law
), being Sch 2 to the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
). Toyota also
marketed the vehicles in Australia, and in doing so made representations about
the quality and characteristics of
those vehicles and the DPF system to
prospective consumers.
respondents in the appeal, Mr Williams and Direct Claim Services Qld Pty
), are the cited applicants in a representative proceeding
against Toyota arising from the supply of the vehicles with the defect.
Mr Williams is the sole director of DCS through which he conducts his
business as a motor vehicle accidents assessor. DCS acquired
a Prado during the
relevant period and paid the associated tax, financing and fuel costs. The
Prado suffered problems associated
with the defective DPF system. The parties
accept that DCS is the proper claimant in respect of the vehicle which may be
to as Mr Williams’s Prado.
group members whom Mr Williams and DCS represent are consumers who, during
the relevant period: (1) acquired a relevant vehicle
from a dealer or
other retailer (including a used car dealer) other than by auction or for the
purpose of re-supply, and (2) those
who acquired a relevant vehicle from
such a consumer other than for the purpose of re-supply.
claims made by DCS on its own behalf, and by both Mr Williams and DCS on
behalf of group members, are, in summary, that:
(1) the relevant vehicles as supplied were not of “acceptable
quality” and therefore failed to comply with the consumer
guarantee in
s 54 of the ACL; and
(2) Toyota made misleading representations and omissions about the vehicles, in
contravention of
(1)(a) and (g), and
of the ACL.
is sought in the representative proceeding under
, Div 2 of the
ACL, which provides for remedies relating to the acceptable quality guarantee
(including an action for damages against
manufacturers of goods), and
, Div 3 of the ACL, which provides for an action for damages
(relevantly because of a contravention of the general protections in
of the ACL).
particularly, “damages” are sought by Mr Williams and DCS for
themselves and on behalf of group members pursuant
(1) ACL s 272(1)(a), for “any reduction in the value of the [relevant
vehicles], resulting from the failure to comply with
the guarantee”,
calculated pursuant to the statutory formula prescribed in that provision;
(2) ACL s 272(1)(b), for “any loss or damage suffered by the [group
member] because of the failure to comply with the guarantee
... if it was
reasonably foreseeable that the [group member] would suffer such loss or damage
as a result of such a failure”,
which was said to include excess taxes,
excess financing costs, excess fuel costs and costs incurred in having the
relevant vehicle
serviced or repaired on account of the defect; and
(3) ACL s 236, for loss and damage suffered “because of”
Toyota’s conduct in contravention of ACL
initial trial of the representative proceeding was relevantly limited to, in
summary, the following issues:
(1) whether there was a failure to comply with the s 54 acceptable quality
guarantee and whether that could be determined on a common
(2) whether there was a contravention of
and/or 33 and whether
that could be determined on a common basis;
(3) whether, if there was a finding of a failure to comply with the s 54
acceptable quality guarantee on a common basis, there could
be a quantification
of s 272(1)(a) damages, i.e., reduction in value damages, on a common basis
– the respondents sought an
award of aggregate damages, whether in the
form of a total aggregate amount or a specified formula applicable to each group
for any reduction in value resulting from the failure of the vehicles to
comply with the consumer guarantee;
(4) whether group members had suffered damages in paying excess GST on the
purchase of their vehicles and whether such damages pursuant
to s 272(1)(b)
could be awarded on a common basis – again, the applicants sought an award
of aggregate damages; and
(5) what damages were suffered by DCS.
be clear, because any damages available under ACL s 272(1)(b) (other than
for excess GST) would depend on the particular circumstances
of each group
member, the claims for an assessment of such damages for all group members other
than DCS was not to be determined
at the initial trial. It was recognised that
those claims would have to be determined on an individual basis. Also, other
for DCS, no damages could be determined under ACL s 236 in respect of
any breaches of
because questions of reliance, causation
and damage would have to be determined on an individual basis.
the adoption of two reports of a referee and the parties’ agreement on a
detailed statement of facts, the primary
judge made a number of factual findings
Williams v Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Limited (Initial Trial)
[2022] FCA 344
Save where indicated, none of these is challenged in the appeal. For present
purposes they can be summarised as follows.
diesel combustion engines in the vehicles generate pollutant emissions. The DPF
system is designed to capture and convert the
pollutant emissions into carbon
dioxide and water vapour through a combination of filtration, combustion (i.e.,
oxidation) and chemical
reactions. The DPF system is necessary because the
vehicles are required to comply with national emissions standards.
DPF system has two core components, the diesel particulate filter (
and the diesel oxidation catalyst (
), which sit together in the DPF
assembly. The DPF is designed to capture diesel particulate matter in the
exhaust gas prior to its
release, and to store it. The DPFs have a finite
capacity to capture and store particulate matter. The particulate matter
by and stored in the DPF must therefore be burned off periodically in a
process called regeneration. Regeneration requires the exhaust
temperatures to
increase to the level required for the particulate matter to oxidise.
referee described the
core defect
to be that the DPF system was not
designed to function effectively during all reasonably expected conditions of
normal operation
and use in the Australian market. In particular, under certain
conditions deposits and/or coking of the DOC prevented the DPF from
automatic or manual regeneration.
regeneration does not occur, or is ineffective, the DPF becomes blocked with
particulate matter, and the vehicle experiences
a range of problems. These
include excessive white smoke and foul-smelling exhaust gas during regeneration
and/or indications from
the engine’s on‑board diagnostic system that
the DPF is “full”. The defect was inherent in the design of
system. The design defect comprised both mechanical defects and defective
control logic and associated software calibrations.
key occurrence which caused the core defect to manifest was the exposure of the
vehicle to regular continuous driving at approximately
100 km/h, referred to as
high-speed driving pattern
. The effects of the core defect, when
experienced, included excessive white smoke and foul-smelling exhaust gas being
emitted from
the vehicle’s exhaust during regeneration, and DPF
notifications displaying on an excessive number of occasions or for an excessive
period of time.
February 2016, Toyota was aware that some relevant vehicles were being presented
to dealers by customers who reported concerns
with, among other things, the
emission of excessive white smoke during regeneration and the illumination of
DPF notifications.
attempted a series of countermeasures to fix the problem. Ultimately, only one
such countermeasure was effective. It was
introduced from May 2020 (
). The 2020 field fix was effective and will continue to be
effective in remedying the core defect and its consequences in all the
From June 2020, i.e., a month or so after the end of the relevant period, all
new vehicles of the relevant type were supplied
with the countermeasure which
prevented the core defect from manifesting.
a relevant vehicle was exposed to the high-speed driving pattern, it would
experience one or more of the following consequences
by reason of the core
defect (referred to as the
defect consequences
(1) damage to the DOC;
(2) the flow of unoxidised fuel through the DPF and the emission of white smoke
from the vehicle’s exhaust during and immediately
regeneration;
(3) the emission of excessive white smoke and foul-smelling exhaust from the
vehicle’s exhaust during regeneration;
(4) partial or complete blockage of the DPF;
(5) the emission of foul-smelling exhaust from the exhaust pipe when the engine
was on during and immediately following automatic
regeneration;
(6) the need to have the vehicle inspected, serviced and/or repaired by a
service engineer for the purpose of cleaning, repairing
or replacing the DPF or
DPF system (or components thereof);
(7) the need to have the vehicle inspected, serviced and/or repaired more
regularly than would be required absent the core defect;
(8) the need to program the engine control module (ECM) more often than would be
required absent the core defect;
(9) the display of DPF notifications on an excessive number of occasions and/or
for an excessive period of time;
(10) blockage of the fifth fuel injector in the relevant vehicles (the
additional injector) due to carbon deposits on its tip;
(11) the additional injector causing deposits to form on the face of the DOC,
causing white smoke; and
(12) an increase in fuel consumption and decrease in fuel economy.
primary judge found that although the defect consequences had not
in all of the relevant vehicles, they all had the
to suffer those consequences if exposed to the identified
high-speed driving pattern. On that basis, his Honour found that all of
vehicles suffered from the defect.
the initial trial the applicants did not seek relief under ACL s 272(1)(a)
on behalf of those group members who received the 2020
field fix (referred to as
2020 field fix group members
). That was because in respect of those
group members there was a live issue, to be resolved at a later date, as to the
application
of s 271(6). That section provides that an affected person is
not entitled to commence an action to recover damages under s 272(1)(a)
they had, in accordance with an express warranty given or made by the
manufacturer, required the manufacturer to remedy a failure
to comply with a
guarantee by repairing or replacing the goods, unless the manufacturer refused
or failed to remedy the failure or
failed to remedy the failure within a
reasonable time.
the claims to reduction in value damages by any group member who bought and/or
sold a relevant vehicle on the secondary market
(referred to as
period group members
), were excluded from assessment in the initial trial.
That was because of the complexity of determining how an award in respect
particular vehicle might be allocated between different group members who owned
the vehicle at different times during the relevant
summary, the primary judge found as follows:
(1) all the relevant vehicles, even those in respect of which the defect had not
manifested, were supplied in breach of the acceptable
quality guarantee, which
issue can and should be decided on a common basis;
(2) on a common basis, Toyota made representations with regard to the vehicles
being free of defects which were misleading, deceptive
and false within the
meaning of ACL
, but given that questions of reliance and
causation still have to be determined on an individual basis it is not possible
stage of the initial trial to deal with any damages resulting from the
contravention of those sections;
(3) the failure to comply with the guarantee of acceptable quality resulted in a
reduction in value of all relevant vehicles of 17.5%,
meaning that their true
value was 82.5% of their average retail price, and that should be decided on a
common basis;
(4) group members:
(a) who had not opted out;
(b) whose vehicle had not previously been supplied to a consumer;
(c) whose vehicle had not received the 2020 field fix prior to 15 May 2022
(i.e., 2020 field fix group members were excluded);
(d) who had not disposed of their vehicle during the relevant period (i.e.,
partial period group members were excluded); and
(e) whose vehicle had not been returned, after the relevant period, to Toyota or
a dealer in exchange for a replacement vehicle or
as part of a redress program
conducted by Toyota,
are entitled to recover reduction in value damages;
(5) how reduction in value damages should be assessed or distributed in respect
of the vehicles excluded from the reduction in value
damages referred to above
should be left for later determination;
(6) damages be awarded to each group member who had not opted out for excess GST
paid by the group member in connection with acquiring
any vehicle to which the
group member’s claim relates in an amount equal to 10% of the amount
calculated as set out in (3)
(7) there be judgment for DCS for its damages in the sum of $18,401.76.
notice of appeal identifies 16 grounds of appeal, of which the last was not
pressed. The remaining 15 grounds of appeal can be
grouped and summarised as
(1) Grounds 1 to 3 challenge the primary judge’s findings on liability,
and in particular contend that the primary judge erred
in finding that ACL
s 54 had been contravened in respect of all the relevant vehicles because
such a finding depends on the circumstances
of supply specific to each group
member, and that the defect was a defect in the DPF system and not in the
(2) Grounds 4, 8 and 9 contend that the primary judge incorrectly construed and
applied the statutory test under ACL ss 271(1) and
272(1)(a), in particular
by finding that reduction in value damages must be determined with reference to
the date of supply of the
relevant vehicle and not with reference to the date on
which any loss crystallises, and in particular without reference to the
availability
of the 2020 field fix. These grounds of appeal concern the primary
judge’s construction of the relevant provisions and his
approach to reduction in value damages.
(3) The remaining grounds concern the primary judge’s approach to the
of the reduction in value of the relevant vehicles. They deal
with the evidence in support of the primary judge’s finding
that there was
a reduction in value of all relevant vehicles of 17.5%.
outlining the statutory scheme, the balance of these reasons will be structured
around these three groups of appeal grounds.
the reasons that follow, we have concluded that the appeal fails in relation to
the liability issues, but that it succeeds on
the question of the proper
construction and conceptual approach to the assessment of reduction in value
damages, and in relation
to the primary judge’s assessment of the
reduction in value damages.
THE STATUTORY SCHEME
specifics of ACL
are not pertinent to the issues raised by
the appeal. In broad outline, those sections prohibit conduct that is
misleading or deceptive
or is likely to mislead or deceive, or which is false,
regarding, amongst other things, the nature, quality and characteristics of
goods supplied in trade and commerce.
, Div 1 (the consumer guarantees, including s 54) and
(the remedy
provisions, including ss 271 and 272) were introduced when the ACL was
first enacted in 2010: see
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer
Law) Bill (No 2) 2010
(Cth). The explanatory memorandum to that Bill
indicates that the
, Div 1 provisions were couched in terms broadly
similar to the
Consumer Guarantees Act 1993
(NZ): see the explanatory
memorandum at [7.9].
as the acceptable quality guarantee claim is concerned, s 54 provides for
one of several guarantees relating to the supply
of goods (in ACL Pt 3-2, Div 1,
Sub-div A). Relevantly for present purposes, s 54 provides as
54 Guarantee as to acceptable quality
(a) a person supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by auction;
there is a guarantee that the goods are of acceptable quality.
(2) Goods are of
acceptable quality
if they are as:
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly supplied;
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods),
would regard as acceptable
having regard to the matters in subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2) are:
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the goods;
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or manufacturer of
the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the goods.
271 and 272 are relevantly in the following terms:
271 Action for damages against manufacturers of goods
(a) the guarantee under section 54 applies to a supply of goods to a consumer;
(b) the guarantee is not complied with;
an affected person in relation to the goods may, by action against the
manufacturer of the goods, recover damages from the manufacturer.
(6) If an affected person in relation to goods has, in accordance with an
express warranty given or made by the manufacturer of the
goods, required the
manufacturer to remedy a failure to comply with a guarantee referred to in
subsection (1), (3) or (5):
(a) by repairing the goods; or
(b) by replacing the goods with goods of an identical type;
then, despite that subsection, the affected person is not entitled to commence
an action under that subsection to recover damages
of a kind referred to in
section 272(1)(a) unless the manufacturer has refused or failed to remedy the
failure, or has failed to
remedy the failure within a reasonable time.
Damages that may be recovered by action
against manufacturers of goods
(1) In an action for damages under this Division, an affected person in relation
to goods is entitled to recover damages for:
(a) any reduction in the value of the goods, resulting from the failure to
comply with the guarantee to which the action relates,
below whichever of the
following prices is lower:
(i) the price paid or payable by
the consumer for the goods;
(ii) the average retail price of the goods at the time of supply; and
(b) any loss or damage suffered by the affected person because of the failure to
comply with the guarantee to which the action relates
if it was reasonably
foreseeable that the affected person would suffer such loss or damage as a
result of such a failure.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1)(b), the cost of inspecting and repairing the
goods to the manufacturer is taken to be a reasonably
foreseeable loss suffered
by the affected person as a result of the failure to comply with the
(3) Subsection (1)(b) does not apply to loss or damage suffered through a
reduction in the value of the goods.
271(1) provides that an “affected person” in relation to the goods
may recover damages from the “manufacturer”.
person” in relation to goods is defined in s 2 as meaning a consumer
who acquires the goods, or a person who
acquires the goods from the consumer
(other than for the purpose of re-supply), or a person who derives title to the
goods through
or under the consumer. It is by the operation of this definition
that purchasers of relevant vehicles from other consumers are also
7 deals with the meaning of “manufacturer”. As mentioned, it is
uncontroversial that Toyota is a manufacturer
within the meaning of
s 7(1)(e), i.e., a person who imports goods into Australia who is not
themselves the manufacturer of the goods
and, at the time of importation, the
manufacturer of the goods does not have a place of business in
ISSUES RELATING TO LIABILITY
Ground 1: can s 54 liability be determined on a common
The substance of ground 1
appeal ground 1, Toyota contends that the primary judge erred in finding that he
could determine whether s 54 had been breached
with respect to each and
every group member on a common basis. Toyota contends that the primary judge
should have found that whether
s 54 has been contravened in the context of
the supply of a vehicle is not capable of being determined as a common question
it depends on the circumstances of supply specific to each group
the heart of this ground of appeal is s 54(3)(c)-(e) which provides that
among the matters to which regard must be had in determining
whether the goods
are of acceptable quality are any statements made about the goods on any
packaging or label on the goods, any representation
made about the goods by the
supplier or manufacturer of the goods and any other relevant circumstances
relating to the supply of
the goods. Toyota contends that those mandatory
considerations direct attention to the particular circumstances of
supply in each case, and those circumstances could differ from
one incident of supply to the next.
The primary judge’s reasoning
primary judge first considered the factors identified in s 54(2) and
concluded on the basis of them that the relevant vehicles
did not comply with
the guarantee as to acceptable quality (J[189]). His Honour then turned to the
s 54(3) matters.
reference to s 54(3)(d) and the statement of agreed facts, his Honour found
that Toyota marketed all of the relevant vehicles
throughout the relevant period
as non-defective, good quality, reliable and durable vehicles that were suitable
for all conditions
of normal operation and use in the Australian market.
Further, Toyota marketed the relevant vehicles as having a DPF system that
non-defective, of good quality, reliable, durable, without a propensity to fail
and was sufficient to prevent the DPF from becoming
partially or completely
blocked (J[191]).
noting a “superficial attraction” to Toyota’s submission that
the Court cannot determine the question of
acceptable quality on a common basis
because it is required to inquire into the individual circumstances of each
instance of supply,
his Honour identified two reasons pointing against that
conclusion (J[208]).
his Honour identified that the relevant inquiry is objective, to be assessed by
reference to the reasonable consumer who is
taken to be “fully acquainted
with the state and condition of the goods (including any hidden defects of the
s 54(2) (J[209]).
his Honour reasoned that in circumstances where: (1) it is alleged that
the goods are not of acceptable quality by reason
of a common characteristic of
the goods; and (2) there is no evidence of some material difference between
characteristics such as
the price of the goods, the packaging or labelling of
the goods, representations made about the goods by the manufacturer or supplier
of the goods, or the circumstances relating to the supply of the goods, nothing
in s 54 prevents the Court from assessing the quality
of the goods, having
regard to the matters in s 54(3), on a common basis. His Honour noted that
Toyota led no evidence of, or pleaded,
any material difference that is capable
of bearing upon the question of whether a reasonable consumer would regard a
relevant vehicle
as being of acceptable quality (J[210]).
Toyota’s submissions
submits that there is a heterogeneity of group members, including individuals
who made a one-off purchase and fleet purchasers
who bought scores of relevant
vehicles over the relevant period. It submits that in any particular case a
purchaser may have been
provided with specific information about Toyota’s
warranty scheme and the fact that any defects are covered by that scheme,
fleet purchaser may have been content to purchase its 500th vehicle with the
knowledge that the DPF system defect in the previous
499 vehicles had not caused
it any real difficulty. With reference to
Owners – Strata
No 87231 v 3A Composites GmbH (No 5)
[2020] FCA 1576
148 ACSR 445
, it submits that it is necessary to focus on the
circumstances of each specific supply.
regard to the primary judge placing some reliance on the fact that Toyota had
not led evidence of any “material difference”
between the supply of
different vehicles with reference to the characteristics referred to in s
54(2)(d)-(e), Toyota submits that
the primary judge was in error because there
was such evidence and because it reflects an incorrect approach to the
determination
of common questions. In the latter regard, Toyota submits that it
is simply not realistic, and would defeat the purpose of a representative
proceeding, to expect Toyota to adduce evidence about the individual
circumstances of the purchase of a quarter of a million vehicles.
emphasises that this ground of appeal is not merely a question of statutory
construction. It accepts that it is not a consequence
of s 54 that a
breach of the acceptable quality guarantee can never be decided on a common
basis. It says that it is the statutory
requirement that the relevant
circumstances of “the supply” must be considered, taken together
with the circumstances
of this case – in particular, the very substantial
number of supplies over a long period of time to consumers in potentially
different circumstances who may be subject to different information and who
might have different levels of tolerance for any
defect – that has the
result that breach of s 54 cannot be decided on a common basis
Consideration
can be no doubt that the assessment of whether goods are of acceptable quality
within the meaning of s 54(2) is to be conducted
objectively, not
subjectively. That arises inescapably from the statutory inquiry being whether
“a reasonable consumer fully
acquainted with the state and condition of
the goods (including any hidden defects of the goods)” would regard the
of the goods as acceptable. Thus, the inquiry is made with reference to
a hypothetical reasonable consumer and not with reference
to the particular
individual consumer to whom the goods are supplied in any particular case.
Consideration
of the matters in s 54(3), each of which is required to be considered by
the injunction in s 54(2), is necessarily also
undertaken from the
perspective of a hypothetical reasonable consumer. That means that any
idiosyncratic subjective understanding
of the state and condition of the goods
in issue or any idiosyncratic attitude to what is or is not acceptable, is
irrelevant to
the assessment required by s 54(2). As the primary judge
correctly recognised, “the statutory test does not operate by reference
what a particular individual consumer knew or
subjectively
believed about
the condition of the goods” (J[209]). Since, by the wording of
s 54(3), the hypothetical reasonable consumer
is taken to be fully
acquainted with the state and condition of the goods including any hidden
defects of the goods, it is equally
of no moment whether one or other consumer
amongst the group members was aware to one degree or another about the defect in
the vehicles.
also bears emphasising that by s 54(3)(e), it is “any other relevant
circumstances relating to the supply of the goods”
that must be
considered. There are two implications from that wording. First, it is only
circumstances relating to the supply of
that are relevant to the
question at hand
, namely whether a hypothetical reasonable consumer as
described in s 54(2) would regard the goods to be of acceptable quality,
are required to be considered. Thus, it is not
or known at or about the time of supply that must be considered. Secondly, from
the word “other”, the matters
for consideration set out in
s 54(3)(a)‑(d) are subject to the same relevance requirement.
those circumstances, the examples provided by Toyota do not advance the
argument. The first, which postulates a purchaser having
been provided with
specific information about Toyota’s warranty scheme and the fact that any
defects were covered by the scheme,
is not a circumstance relevant to whether a
reasonable consumer who had knowledge of the defect would regard the vehicle as
of acceptable quality. That is because during the relevant period there
was no fix for the defect, so the postulated information
cannot be a statement
to the effect that the defect would be fixed under the warranty. It can only be
some broader statement about
the warranty which is not relevant.
second example, being the fleet-owner purchaser who was indifferent to the
defect, is not relevant because, as explained, the
idiosyncratic attitude of
what is or is not acceptable is not to the point. The inquiry is
principal difficulty with Toyota’s argument on this ground of appeal is
that it allows for a situation where two identical
vehicles are subject to
different conclusions with regard to their being of acceptable quality based on
what the particular purchaser
in each case knew or did not know, or cared about
or did not care about. That form of subjectivity is exactly what s 54
regard to the authorities, it is to be noted, as it was by the primary judge
(J[207]), that in several cases the question of
acceptable quality has been
decided on a common basis:
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
130 FCR 18;
Ethicon Sàrl v Gill
[2021] FCAFC 29
288 FCR 338
v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd
154 ACSR 235.
As acknowledged by the primary judge (J[201]-[202]), there
are also cases in which the question of acceptable quality has been held
be susceptible to determination on a common basis.
Owners – Strata
, particularly relied on by Toyota, is one.
Merck Sharp & Dohme
(Australia) Pty Ltd v Peterson
[2011] FCAFC 128
196 FCR 145
is another. It
is not necessary to consider those cases in detail because even accepting that
on the facts of those cases there
may have been circumstances particular to an
individual group member that was relevant to the question at hand, that has not
shown to be the case in the present matter.
takes us to the outstanding matter to consider, which is Toyota’s
submission that the primary judge was wrong to have held
that the onus lay on
Toyota to adduce evidence of any relevant circumstances peculiar to one or other
group member in order to establish
a foundation for its argument that the
question of acceptable quality cannot be decided on a common basis. His Honour
that Toyota had not pleaded or otherwise raised any relevant,
material difference between the circumstances of any given instance
of supply of
a relevant vehicle capable of bearing upon the question of whether a reasonable
consumer would regard the vehicle as
acceptable (J[211]). Toyota does not cavil
with that characterisation of how the case was run. Clearly enough, the issue
the relevant vehicles were of acceptable quality could and should be
determined on a common basis was one of the issues squarely
identified by the
parties as arising for determination at the initial trial, and it was identified
by the primary judge as such (J[199]).
submitted on behalf of the respondents, if Toyota wished to demonstrate through
evidence, as opposed to mere speculation, that
there was a sound basis in fact
for the Court to refrain from determining the issue on a common basis, it could
and should have led
relevant evidence. As identified by the primary judge
(J[193]), that need not have been of the circumstances of every one of the
quarter of a million supplies; evidence of materially different relevant
circumstances of even one supply may have been sufficient,
but not even that was
done. In the absence of that, and in light of the compelling generalised
evidence in support of a finding
that the vehicles were not of acceptable
quality (canvassed at J[15], [32]-[86], [173]-[198]), there was no error in the
judge’s approach to, and conclusion on, the question of
commonality.
follows that ground 1 fails.
Grounds 2 and 3: was there a defect in the vehicles?
The substance of grounds 2 and 3
these grounds of appeal, Toyota contends that the primary judge erred in finding
that there was no distinction between a defect
in the DPF system and a defect in
the vehicles. It is said that the primary judge erred in his treatment of the
evidence on this
question. It is also said that a consequence of the primary
judge’s error on this question is that the primary judge erred
concluding that Toyota had made representations about the vehicles in
contravention of ACL ss 18, 29 and 33, i.e., the representations
vehicles were not in contravention of those provisions because there was nothing
wrong with the vehicles – the problem
was with the DPF system.
The primary judge’s reasoning
primary judge reasoned that Toyota’s efforts to divorce issues with the
DPF system from the relevant vehicles is entirely
superficial. The DPF system
is in the vehicles in order to ensure that the vehicles comply with Australian
emissions rules, and
is therefore a critically important component of the
vehicles, the proper functioning of which is likely to be of concern to a
consumer. His Honour found that even though the vehicles could still
be driven from A to B, the consequences of the core defect
are such as to
substantially interfere with the normal use and operation of the vehicles
(J[80], [81]).
Honour identified the warning notifications to the driver in the event of the
DPF becoming full or blocked, directing the driver
to take the vehicle to an
authorised dealership, failing which if the vehicle continued to be operated it
would go into “limp
mode”. Also, his Honour reasoned that plumes of
dense white smoke being emitted from the vehicle are not conducive to a safe
driving environment. His Honour also referenced tens of thousands of customer
complaints that illustrate the obvious point that
the defect consequences are
not trivial and have a significant impact upon consumers’ use and
enjoyment of the vehicles (J[81]-[85]).
the primary judge reasoned that Toyota’s attempt to downplay the
significance of the core defect is inconsistent with
its contemporaneous conduct
and internal communications. Those showed that Toyota had significant concerns
experienced by the vehicles would impact on
Toyota’s brand and reputation, and it apprehended that the issues with the
were of a serious nature and materially affected consumers’ use
and enjoyment of them (J[86]).
Consideration
submits that the primary judge’s “key error” was to hold that
although the DPF system was in the vehicles
to ensure compliance with emissions
rules, it “does not matter” whether the respondents sought to prove
that the vehicles
in fact failed to comply with those rules. The answer to that
is that his Honour’s finding about the reason for the DPF system
the vehicles is about the DPF system being “a critically important
component” of the vehicles, and hence a defect
in the DPF system is
properly regarded as a defect in the vehicles. Because of the need for the
vehicles to comply with emissions
rules for them to be supplied in Australia,
and that the DPF system was designed to ensure such compliance, the DPF system
inherent and incorporated component of the vehicle – it is not an
accessory. It can have a defect of such a nature as to render
the vehicles not
of acceptable quality within the meaning of s 54 whether or not the defect
affected the vehicles’ compliance
with the emissions rules.
the respondents submit, complex goods such as motor vehicles are manufactured
from innumerable components. It is conceptually
flawed, and would render
s 54 essentially inoperative in respect of most consumer goods, if a
failure of a component could not as
a matter of construction be regarded as a
defect in the vehicle. The question has to be approached by asking whether the
is such as to cause the relevant goods to be of an unacceptable quality
within the meaning of s 54. It cannot be directed at the
individual components which were not supplied separately or individually but
rather form an inherent part of the goods as
statutory standard embodied in s 54 accommodates the situation of minor
defects in goods through the element of degree, which
is the appropriate way to
analyse a scenario where the defect affects only minor component parts such that
it would be of limited
significance to the hypothetical reasonable consumer.
The present case is far removed from that. As mentioned, the presence of
defect in the DPF system in the vehicles meant that a vehicle could not be
exposed to regular highway driving without malfunctioning
and triggering serious
consequences. It is hard to conceive of a scenario in which the hypothetical
reasonable consumer would not
regard such consequences as unacceptable.
submits that the evidence does not support the primary judge’s finding
that the core defect “substantially interfered”
with the normal use
and operation of the vehicles. That is because the consequence of the defect,
if it manifested, was that the
vehicle would provide warnings that it required
“unscheduled maintenance” and it was only if the user did not have
maintenance undertaken that the vehicle would go into limp mode. On that
basis, Toyota submits that the vehicle going into limp
mode is a consequence
that is remote from the occurrence of the defect in the DPF system which means
that it is not a defect in the
vehicle that a reasonable consumer is likely to
regard as unacceptable.
focus on the limp mode ignores the myriad other defect consequences found by the
referee and agreed by the parties
which, when they manifest, substantially
interfere with the use and enjoyment of the vehicle. These include the defect
consequences
identified above at [
Toyota submits that the primary judge erred (at J[84]) in relying on
Mr Williams’s evidence about white smoke being
“dangerous”
when the respondents had not mounted any case that the
defect gave rise to any safety issue and Mr Williams could not provide
evidence of that nature. However, although his Honour referred to
Mr Williams’s evidence that white smoke entering the cabin
vehicle was “dangerous”, the finding was that “plumes of dense
white smoke are hardly conducive to a safe
driving environment”. There is
no error in that finding – the primary judge was plainly in a position to
make that assessment
based on the evidence that was adduced. In any event, his
Honour recorded that he placed “minimal weight on this factor”
reaching his conclusion on the s 54 question.
submits that the primary judge was wrong (at J[85]) to rely on “tens of
thousands of customer complaints” and Mr
Williams’s evidence to
conclude that the consequences of the defect in the DPF system were “not
trivial”. Although
accepting that tens of thousands of customers had
difficulties with the consequences of the defect and they made complaints or had
repairs carried out under Toyota’s warranty program, Toyota submits that
without analysing each complaint or warranty claim
individually it is not
possible to conclude that they all related to vehicles with the DPF system
defect. For example, it is said
that a large number of complaints related to
the fact that the DPF system was not able to automatically regenerate if the
is driven consistently at low speeds or for short trips – which
was not a design defect. Also, some white smoke was a consequence
ordinary operation of the DPF system. Toyota submits that it is not possible to
disentangle which customer complaints or
warranty repairs were carried out
because of the low-speed driving pattern or the vehicle’s ordinary
submitted on behalf of the respondents, the primary judge relied on the customer
complaints as probative of the fact that, when
vehicles experience issues
consistent with the defect consequences (for example, the emission of excessive
white smoke, malodorous
exhaust and irregular servicing), those issues tend to
impact significantly on the owners’ use and enjoyment of the vehicles
(J[183]). The probative value of the evidence was not dependent on proof that
the issues the subject of the customer complaints
were caused by the defect in
the DPF system. Rather, it was sufficient that the issues complained of were
consistent with the defect
consequences, regardless of the cause.
it was not necessary for the primary judge to review each of the tens of
thousands of customer complaints, the records of which
were produced on
discovery by Toyota, to conclude that the defect consequences impact
significantly on the owners’ use and
enjoyment of the vehicles. If
Toyota’s contention had been that the complaints did not arise from the
defect in the DPF system,
as it apparently contends on appeal, then it was open
to it to analyse the records of the complaints and identify complaints that
says were unrelated to the core defect or inconsistent with the defect
consequences. It failed to do that.
is no error in the primary judge’s findings and reasoning to the
conclusion that the defect in the DPF system amounted
to a defect in the
vehicles which rendered the vehicles of unacceptable quality and their supply to
thus be in contravention of the
acceptable quality guarantee in s 54.
Grounds 2 and 3 in the appeal accordingly fail.
ISSUES CONCERNING CONSTRUCTION AND CONCEPTUAL APPROACH
this section of these reasons, we deal with grounds 4, 8 and 9 of the notice of
appeal, which challenge the primary judge’s
construction of ss 271
and 272 and his conceptual approach to reduction in value damages.
by these grounds, Toyota raises the following contentions:
(1) that the primary judge erred in applying the test under ss 271(1) and
272(1)(a) by finding that damages for any reduction in
value must be assessed by
reference to the
time of supply
, rather than by reference to the date on
which any loss
crystallises
(including by reference to any later events)
(ground 4);
(2) because the primary judge did not assess damages by reference to the date on
which any loss crystallises, his Honour erred in
not taking into account certain
evidence demonstrating that affected persons had not suffered any damage (the
matters relied on by
Toyota include the referee’s finding that the 2020
field fix was effective) (ground 8); and
(3) in light of these errors, the primary judge erred by failing to take into
account matters relevant to the assessment of damages
for any reduction in value
in the relevant vehicles, including the secondary market data analysed by
Mr Stockton, the existence of
the 2020 field fix, whether and to what
extent and when the defect consequences manifested in a relevant vehicle, the
resale value
of the relevant vehicles compared to comparable vehicles and
whether group members had sold their vehicles and the prices achieved
such sales (ground 9).
Evidentiary
issues raised by these grounds, such as issues relating to the secondary market
data analysed by Mr Stockton, are considered
later in these reasons under
the third group of appeal grounds.
The nature of the damages claim at the initial trial
we have noted, Mr Williams and DCS as representative applicants sought
aggregate damages for reduction in value resulting from
the failure by Toyota to
comply with the consumer guarantee. However, no such award was sought in
respect of those group members
who had taken advantage of the 2020 field fix.
Further, the proper approach to those group members who bought and/or sold a
vehicle on the secondary market (i.e., partial period group members),
including whether an award of damages for reduction in value
could be made in
their favour on an aggregate basis, was reserved for later consideration.
Accordingly,
when it came to aggregate damages, the focus of the primary judge was on the
claim for reduction in value made in respect
of those group members who had
bought their vehicle from a Toyota dealer and who still owned the vehicle when
the 2020 field fix
was made available at no cost (the
claim by the representative applicants that an assessment could be made that
covered all group members in the relevant cohort
was founded on the premise
that, for all of them, the reduction in value was the same. For reasons that
have been given, to the
extent that the premise was based upon the proposition
that the relevant value was to be determined objectively and not by reference
the particular sensibilities of individual owners when it came to the defect and
its consequences, the premise was correct. However,
there remain issues in the
appeal as to whether, on the correct conceptual approach, the objective
assessment of damages for reduction
in value is the same for all members of the
relevant cohort and, if so, whether the primary judge was correct in concluding
a loss of 17.5% of the relevant retail price had been proven.
The primary judge’s construction and conceptual
primary judge reasoned by the following steps in determining what his Honour
described as “reduction in value damages”.
the primary judge conceptualised “reduction in value” as the price
that would need to have been offered in order
to sell all of the relevant
vehicles assuming that the buyers were aware of the defect: J[273]-[276].
the primary judge considered whether (a) the willingness to pay of the
marginal consumer; or (b) the repair cost to remedy
the defect may be used
as a measure of the “reduction in value”. His Honour reached the
following conclusion at J[297]:
To my mind, it is erroneous to shoehorn any conception of “reduction in
value” as only being able to be derived by comparison
to market value.
Concepts such as repair cost and [willingness to pay] are useful indicators in
ascertaining any reduction in value.
The reference to the “marginal consumer” is to the last buyer who
had to be persuaded to enter the market to buy a vehicle
in order to clear the
available supply. The price had to be low enough for that buyer to be willing
to pay for the vehicle. Inherent
in the concept is the notion that many buyers
may have been willing to pay a higher price but the market price needs to be set
a level that is low enough for a buyer to be found for each of the defective
the course of reasoning to that conclusion, his Honour dealt with criticisms as
to the use of the notion of the consumer’s
willingness to pay to ascertain
the “reduction in value”. He did so in the following way at
The criticism that a consumer still recovers damages notwithstanding that the
level of their reduced individual [willingness to pay]
may exceed the level at
which a supplier wishes to supply is somewhat of a false issue. The reduction
in value loss arises because
the vehicle’s true value at the time of
purchase (which is objectively assessed) was less than the purchase price, not
the individual consumer’s true [willingness to pay] was less than
the purchase price. In this regard, Mr Boedeker calculated
the reduced
[willingness to pay] for the
consumer, which approximates the
price decrease that would have been required in order for [Toyota] to sell the
same number of Relevant
Vehicles with the defect disclosed. This represents the
true value, because it is the price that would need to have prevailed in
marketplace in order for the same volume of vehicles to have been sold in the
light of market knowledge of the [defect].
can be seen that the evidence as to willingness to pay was viewed by the primary
judge as a means by which to ascertain the price
at which the defective vehicles
would need to have been offered in order to clear the market.
the primary judge accepted the contention advanced by the representative
applicants to the effect that the reduction in value
was to be assessed by
reference to the time at which the vehicle was supplied without reference to
events which occurred subsequently
information
which bears upon
the assessment of the value of the goods at the time of supply can be taken into
account): J[299]-[301].
Significantly,
this aspect of the reasoning was part of the foundation for his Honour’s
conclusion that reduction in value damages
could be assessed for all members of
the relevant cohort on a common basis. In that regard, his Honour observed at
The reduction in value damages sought by group members are referable to that
common propensity inherent in the Relevant Vehicles
. This fortifies the view that this loss also can be assessed on a
common basis, because it is based on a propensity common to all
the Relevant
Vehicles at the time of acquisition.
as to the relevance of evidence concerning matters which occurred after the date
of purchase, his Honour concluded that
such evidence could be adduced to
demonstrate “what in fact the nature of the defect was” and to
demonstrate the extent
of any fall in the market price for the vehicles at a
time when the market became fully informed of the defect because that evidence
“may provide information relevant to assessing the true value at the time
of acquisition”: J[328].
the focus upon the need to demonstrate evidentiary significance for establishing
the factual position as at the date of purchase
led his Honour to disregard the
availability of the 2020 field fix in assessing damages. As to the lack of
relevance of that fact
to assessing the reduction in value damages, his Honour
reasoned as follows at J[328]:
... if a repair became available four years after the date of acquisition and
was implemented more than a reasonable time after being
requested, this would
not be relevant to the true value at the time of acquisition. The repair was
not expected at the time of acquisition,
so it is an extraneous event,
irrelevant to the true value at that time.
may be noted that the references to the repair becoming available four years
after acquisition and the repair not being implemented
within a reasonable time
after being requested, reflect the terms of evidence given by Mr Williams
as to his own experience. It
does not reflect the position for all members of
the relevant cohort some of whom bought their vehicle just before the 2020 field
fix was available and may have been able to secure a prompt repair. Of
significance for present purposes is the fact that the reasoning
by the primary
judge treated the possibility of repair as an extraneous event throughout the
whole of the period when members of
the relevant cohort purchased their
vehicles. The primary judge approached all members of the relevant cohort on
the same basis
without any allowance for the different circumstances that may
have pertained to them as time went on. Nor did his Honour make any
for the prospective restoration of value that was made possible by the
availability of the 2020 field fix at no cost to
the owner of the vehicle.
Honour’s approach meant that a consumer may recover reduction in value
damages on the basis that the vehicle as purchased
was defective as well as
ultimately receive the benefit of the 2020 field fix (at no further cost)
thereby restoring the value at
that point in time. The submissions for Toyota
concerning the grounds relating to the assessment of damages emphasised this
anomalous outcome.
the primary judge’s approach to
of the reduction in
value of the relevant vehicles is the subject of the third group of appeal
grounds (considered later in these
reasons), it is convenient to outline his
Honour’s approach to, and conclusions about, assessment at this stage.
The primary
judge began the quantification task by emphasising statements in the
authorities to the effect that undertaking a valuation process
does not admit of
a single precise answer especially where it is being undertaken on the basis of
a hypothetical: J[340]. His Honour
referred to authority to the effect that it
is a “commonsense endeavour” to be undertaken as a matter of
judgment based
upon the available evidence rather than as an arithmetical
exercise: J[342]-[343], see also J[391]-[392]. No issue arises in the
as to this approach in terms of legal principle. Rather, the contentions
advanced by Toyota (by the third group of appeal
grounds) concern the extent to
which there was sufficient (or any) material upon which to base such an
assessment.
Ultimately,
after a critical consideration of the expert evidence exposing the deficiencies
in the various approaches adopted by the
experts, his Honour reached his
conclusion as to quantification in the following way: J[393]:
The applicants advocate for a reduction in value of 25 per cent. There is
always a difficulty in settling upon a pin-point figure
in cases of this type.
Doing so, although necessary, tends to lend a patina of precision to what in
truth is an evaluative and imprecise
exercise upon which, at least at the
margins, reasonable minds may differ. I am inclined, however, to consider the
figure fastened
upon by the applicants as being simply too high. My reasons for
this conclusion have been addressed in relation to my findings as
to the expert
evidence, which has led me to conclude that although the evidence of
Mr Boedeker and Mr Cuthbert has some force, a
number of the criticisms
directed to its accuracy and reliability also have merit. But the conclusion
that a reduction in value
must still be a figure of significance not only aligns
with common sense, but more specifically, my perception of the evidence of
Mr Williams and the effect of the Defect Consequences more generally, as
borne out by the customer complaints (as to which see [183]).
Doing the best I
can, a reduction in value in the range of 15 per cent to 20 per cent is
appropriate having regard to all the evidence.
Given the need to land on an
exact figure, I should settle in the middle of this range, that is, a reduction
of 17.5 per cent.
above conclusion was said by the primary judge to be reached by giving weight
“to the entirety of the expert evidence and
the submissions advanced by
the parties in respect of that evidence”: J[392]. It was expressed as a
form of evaluative synthesis
of the evidence recognising its problems and
shortcomings to derive a single value. It was reached in circumstances where
evidence adduced by Toyota was in the form of criticisms of the
evidence led in support of the claim rather than in the form of providing
real analysis as to a different methodology: J[394]. In short, Toyota’s
case before the primary judge was that it maintained
that no loss had been
demonstrated. It did not present expert evidence as to an appropriate value
that might be determined if the
Court was of the view that there was a relevant
reduction in value.
has been noted, for all group members in the relevant cohort, his Honour made
orders to give effect to his assessment that the
reduction in value was
The parties’ submissions on appeal
challenges the primary judge’s construction of ss 271(1) and
272(1)(a) and his conceptual approach to reduction in value
damages. Toyota
submits that the correct conclusion is that the time of assessment is when such
crystallises
, for example, upon a sale of the vehicle. Toyota
submits that, in the absence of a sale, damages are to be assessed at the
time of the trial
, based on all the available information at that
emphasises that, in May 2020, it developed a field fix (namely, the 2020 field
fix), which was wholly effective in remedying
the defect and was available, free
of charge, to everyone who had purchased the vehicles in the relevant period.
Toyota submits
that, despite this, the primary judge found that purchasers of
the vehicles who continued to hold the vehicles at the end of the
period remain entitled to damages equal to a 17.5% reduction in the applicable
price of the vehicles.
submits that, in order to calculate the “damages” for reduction in
value, s 272(1)(a) requires the reduction in
value to be calculated at the
time that any damage to the affected person crystallises. Toyota makes the
following submissions:
(1) First, the overarching enquiry required by s 272(1) is whether the
consumer has suffered loss or damage for which they should
“damages”. If s 272(1)(a) was intended to operate by reference
to the value of the vehicle at the time of
purchase only, the section could
easily have said so. It does not. Rather, it directs attention, in the
chapeau, to whether damages
should be awarded (implicitly, for loss or
(2) Secondly, s 272(1)(a) provides for calculation of “any
reduction” in value. Unlike the latter parts of the subsection,
reduction in value is not linked to any particular time period.
(3) Thirdly, as identified by the reference to “damages” in both
ss 271 and 272, the purpose of the section is an award
of damages.
Accordingly, the compensatory principle applies: see
HTW Valuers
(Central Qld) Pty Ltd v Astonland Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 54
. Damages should be assessed so as to compensate the injured
party for the wrong done. The primary judge recognised this fundamental
principle but did not apply it. Requiring reduction in value to be assessed, in
every case, at the time of purchase does not reflect
that principle. It pays no
attention to whether the consumer has suffered any damage in any real sense.
(4) Fourthly, the affected person must suffer a reduction in the value of the
goods “resulting from the failure to comply with
the guarantee”.
This also indicates a notion of actual loss or damage by reference to the
failure to comply, rather than a
hypothetical calculation at the time of
purchase, regardless of circumstances.
(5) Fifthly, s 271(6) expressly contemplates that events subsequent to the
supply of the goods must be taken into account and does
not require those events
to be within any particular time after the purchase of the goods: it
contemplates the manufacturer repairing
the goods within a “reasonable
time” of being requested to do so. There is nothing in either s 271
or 272 to suggest
that consideration of later events is limited to
(6) Sixthly, s 272(3) provides that s 272(1)(b) does not apply to loss
or damage suffered through a reduction in the value of the
goods. The emphasis
is on loss or damage “suffered through” a reduction in value, which
is a further indication that
the purpose of the section is to compensate for
actual loss or damage.
respondents support the approach adopted by the primary judge. The respondents
submit that Toyota’s construction is wrong,
and the primary judge was
right to reject it. The respondents submit that it is contrary to the statutory
text, context and purpose.
respondents submit that: much of Toyota’s argument implicitly treats
motor vehicles as if they are financial assets like
shares or income producing
assets like a shopping centre, the value of which may be ascertained by the
trading value of the asset
from time to time; the value of durable consumer
goods like motor vehicles is substantially different, and the impaired expected
functional utility of a new vehicle has an impact on value that does not depend
upon some subsequent event, such as resale, to “crystallise”
loss; nor is the resale value of a vehicle on the second-hand market a direct
proxy for the diminished value at the time of the
original supply; it is at most
a potential source of useful data; this has implications for the proper
construction of s 272(1)(a),
appreciating that the provision should be
construed in a way that serves the remedial purposes of the ACL (see
[2001] HCA 52
206 CLR 459
); if that subsection were
construed as focusing on the time when the goods are resold, or on what the
goods could be sold for in
a relevant market at the time of trial, it would
treat all “goods” to which the section applies as mere financial
whose value derives solely from the fact they can be resold for a price;
however, such a construction is impossible to reconcile
with the context of a
consumer law provision concerned with the supply of goods to consumers.
respondents make submissions about the consumer-protection purpose of the ACL.
The respondents submit that: the particular goods
to which an action under
ss 271(1) and 272 applies are goods acquired as a “consumer”
(see ACL s 54(1)(a)); these are
defined relevantly by ACL s 3 as goods
that are of a kind “ordinarily acquired for personal, domestic or
household use or consumption”
and not those acquired for re-supply; the
relevant Part of the ACL expressly does not apply to financial services or
financial products
(see s 131A(1) of the CCA); the “goods” to
which s 272(1)(a) applies are therefore consumer goods the value of which
principally derives not from their resale value, but from their expected use or
enjoyment by the consumer; it cannot even be said
that consumer goods are
routinely resold; it is improbable in this context that the legislature intended
the reference to the “value”
of goods in s 272 to be tied to an
actual or notional resale value of goods in the second-hand market.
respondents submit that: informed by this purpose and context, it is plain that
the ability to recover reduction in value damages
under s 272(1)(a) for
non-compliance with the guarantee of acceptable quality is directed to the
problem of consumers bargaining
for non-defective goods but receiving instead
defective goods which, by reason of their true nature and condition, have lower
use and enjoyment; such a consumer has overpaid at the point of supply,
because they received a good worth less than they bargained
constitutes an immediate loss (see
HTW Valuers
at [33]); the ACL confers
statutory redress for that loss.
respondents submit that the primary judge gave six cogent reasons for construing
s 272(1)(a) as requiring reduction in value to
be assessed at the time of
supply (J[301]-[325]). The respondents submit that all of them were correct.
The respondents’
submissions include the following:
(1) Paragraph (a) of s 272(1) is a composite provision that calls for a
comparison between the lower of the prices mentioned in s
272(1)(a)(i) and
(ii), which are prices necessarily pertaining to the time of supply, and the
value of the goods. It plainly indicates
an “apples with apples”
comparison that necessarily requires the reduced value arising from
non-compliance with the guarantee
to be assessed at the same time as the
comparator prices. This is also logical because it means reduction in value is
assessed at
the same time as non-compliance with s 54.
(2) By directing attention to the reduction in value below the purchase price or
average retail price, s 272(1)(a) reflects a legislative
intention to
compensate the consumer for having purchased goods for more than they were worth
and to compensate the overpayment.
“Reduction” in this context is
not used to describe a process of reduction in value occurring over time. It is
a reference
to the true value of the defective goods being less than, and thus a
reduction from, the wrongly assumed value reflected in the purchase
(whether actual or averaged). This is reinforced by the contrast with
s 272(1)(b), which provides for recovery of reasonably
foreseeable loss or
damage after supply. Toyota wrongly submits in response that the loss in value
at the time of supply due to
the defect is “entirely theoretical”.
This is to ignore the fundamental consumer protection object of the CCA, and the
fact that s 272(1)(a) applies to consumer goods whose value lies
principally in their expected use and enjoyment. Once it is appreciated
the loss is having acquired goods at an artificially inflated price, there is no
basis to describe the loss at the time of supply
as being merely
“theoretical”. It is also erroneous to say that no loss has
“crystallised”. It is the overpayment
at the time of supply that
causes immediate loss:
HTW Valuers
(3) By reading the reduction in value as a matter to be assessed at the time of
supply, s 271(1)(a) can be read harmoniously with
s 271(6). Toyota
submits there is no lack of harmony on its construction, because s 271(6)
expressly contemplates that events subsequent
to the supply of the goods must be
taken into account. However, no such contextual indication arises from
s 271(6). That subsection
does not “take into account”
subsequent events (like a repair) in assessing whether there was a reduction in
Section 271(6) simply denies relief altogether when a repair is
provided within a reasonable time of a request under an express warranty.
Toyota’s construction were adopted, s 271(6) would be otiose, because
on its view of s 272, a repair (or even the mere
availability of a repair)
reduces any reduction in value to nil, regardless of whether or not it was
provided within a reasonable
(4) The primary judge’s approach was consistent with the decisions in
v By Winddown, Inc (formerly Bertram
Yachts) (No 4)
[2018] FCA 426
362 ALR 702.
Although the Full Court is not
bound by those decisions, they illuminate why the time of supply is the correct
reference point.
Both decisions make clear that s 272(1)(a) connects
reduction in value with failure to comply with the guarantee, which arises from
the inherent propensity for adverse consequences that existed at the time of
the appeal was reserved, the Court wrote to the parties seeking submissions on a
possible alternative approach to reduction
in value damages that had not been
the subject of submissions at the hearing. The Court’s letter stated in
Grounds 4, 8 and 9 of the notice of appeal raise an issue as to whether the
primary judge erred in his construction or approach to
the assessment of damages
for reduction in value under s 272(1)(a) of the ACL. ... For present
purposes, it is assumed that grounds
1 to 3 of the notice of appeal are not made
out. It is also assumed that upon a proper construction of s 272 of the
ACL, in any
action for damages under the provision, the Court may assess the
reduction in value at the time of supply or at some other appropriate
in any case, for the purpose of ensuring that any award of damages fairly
compensates the claimant, the Court may assess
the quantum of damages to be
awarded having regard to the known circumstances at the time when the assessment
is being undertaken.
If the Court were to form the view that, in the circumstances of the case, in
order to fairly compensate the relevant group members
(that is, the group
members covered by the primary judge’s aggregate damages award) for any
reduction in value resulting from
the failure to comply with the acceptable
quality guarantee, it is appropriate to have regard not only to any reduction in
at the time of supply, but also to subsequent events, a possible approach
to the assessment of damages is as follows. As this possible
approach was not
the subject of submissions at the hearing, the Court wishes to raise it with the
parties and give them the opportunity
to make submissions about it.
The approach involves taking into account not only any reduction in the value of
the vehicle at the time of supply, but also the
availability of the 2020 field
fix, the period of time that the consumer owned the vehicle before the fix
became available, and the
effective life of the vehicle. The approach is as
(a) First, calculate any reduction in the value of the vehicle as at the time of
supply (in dollars) on the basis of a percentage
reduction in value applicable
to all relevant vehicles. The percentage assumes that the defect will remain in
place for the whole
of the effective life of the vehicle.
(b) Second, calculate the period of time (in months) that the group member held
the vehicle before the 2020 field fix became available
(i.e. the period of
months from the date of supply to May 2020).
(c) Third, determine the effective life of the defective vehicle (in months).
This may be able to be determined on a general basis
for all relevant vehicles,
or all relevant vehicles of a particular type.
On this approach, any damages to be awarded for reduction in value under s
272(1)(a) would be:
The approach can be illustrated by the following example. Assume that the price
paid or payable by the consumer for the vehicle
(and the average retail price of
the vehicle) is $50,000. Assume that the percentage reduction in value for all
relevant vehicles
(assuming the defect remains in place for the whole of the
effective life is the vehicle) is 10% and that, accordingly, the reduction
the value of the vehicle as at the time of supply is $5,000. Assume that the
consumer purchased the vehicle in May 2018, and
thus held the vehicle for 24
months before the 2020 field fix became available. Assume that the effective
life of the defective
vehicle is 15 years (i.e. 180 months). The damages under
s 272(1)(a) would be:
While the above formula would need to be applied on a
case-by-case basis to each relevant vehicle, additional individual circumstances
(such as whether and the extent to which the defect consequences were
experienced) would not be taken into account for the purposes
of assessing
damages for reduction in value.
parties filed submissions, and responding submissions, in relation to the
possible approach set out in the letter from the Court.
Ultimately, as set out
later in these reasons, we do not adopt the possible approach set out in the
letter. We have concluded that
matters of that kind should be considered on
remitter (see below).
Sections 271 and 272 and general principles concerning
271 and 272 create a right of action for damages against the manufacturer where
there has been a failure to comply with (relevantly)
the acceptable quality
guarantee. It is uncontroversial that the word “damages” in
ss 271 and 272 is used in the sense
statutory compensation
is implicit in the notion of compensation that the claimant needs to establish
that they have suffered
loss or damage
. Section 272(1)(a) provides for
compensation for a particular kind of loss or damage, namely a reduction in the
value of the goods.
That s 272(1)(a) is dealing with a particular kind of
loss or damage
is apparent from s 272(3), which provides that
s 272(1)(b) “does not apply to loss or damage suffered through a
reduction in
the value of the goods”; that is, loss or damage of the kind
covered by s 272(1)(a).
text and structure of s 272(1)(a) indicate that, at least generally, the
point in time for assessing damages for any reduction
in the value of the goods
time of supply
. The provision refers to a reduction in the value
of the goods (resulting from the failure to comply with the consumer guarantee)
below the lower of “the price paid or payable by the consumer for the
goods” and “the average retail price of the
at the time of
”. Each of those integers is a price referable to the time of
as already noted, the use of the word “damages” makes clear that the
provision is concerned with compensation
for loss or damage. It is necessary,
therefore, for the Court to assess whether or not the applicant has suffered
loss or damage
(resulting from the failure to comply with the consumer
guarantee). This may require, depending on the circumstances of the case,
departure from the time of supply or an adjustment to avoid over-compensation.
We do not consider that the explicit and implicit
references to the time of
supply in s 272(1)(a)(i) and (ii) require the assessment of damages to be
based on the time of supply in
all cases. The overarching consideration is that
the amount of compensation for any reduction in value be appropriate.
that regard, we observe that the separate provision concerning reduction in
value damages and the references to “price paid
or payable” and
“average retail price” were included to protect manufacturers. The
evident purpose is to ensure
that manufacturers do not have to compensate
consumers for amounts paid by way of a higher retail margin to the supplier when
to the average retail margin. Otherwise, s 272(1)(a) and (b)
broadly reflect, as may be expected, the statutory rights of action
compensation or damages against the supplier of goods (if the failure to comply
with a consumer guarantee cannot be remedied
or is a major failure): see
s 259(3)(b) and (4). In both instances, the statutory rights of action are
to recover compensation or
damages, that is, compensation for actual damage
suffered. Therefore, the statutory language should not be seen as requiring an
assessment as at the time of purchase irrespective of the particular
circumstances (though in most cases that will be the appropriate
approach). In
the case of a claim against a manufacturer, assessment of reduction in value
damages may still be undertaken by reference
to the price paid (or the average
retail price) at the time of supply, but taking into account subsequent events
if considered appropriate.
The references to the price paid or payable and the
average retail price do not preclude such an approach. An assessment at a later
time may be a more appropriate way to reflect the actual damage resulting from
the value differential between the price paid (or
average retail price) and the
value of the goods.
the authorities on statutory remedy provisions establish that it is wrong to
approach such provisions by beginning with general
law analogies (such as
damages for breach of contract). For example, in
Murphy v Overton
Investments Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 3
216 CLR 388
, in the context of remedies
under Pt VI of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), Gleeson CJ,
McHugh, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon JJ stated at
This Court has now said more than once that it is wrong to approach the
operation of those provisions of
of the Act which deal with remedies for
contravention of the Act by beginning the inquiry with an attempt to draw some
analogy with
any particular form of claim under the general law. No doubt
analogies may be helpful, but it would be wrong to argue from the content
general law that has developed in connection, for example, with the tort of
deceit, to a conclusion about the construction
or application of provisions of
Pt VI of the Act. To do so distracts attention from the primary task of
construing the relevant
provisions of the Act. In the present case, analogies
with the tort of deceit appear to have led to an assumption, at least at trial,
that a person can suffer only one form of loss or damage as a result of a
contravention of Pt V of the Act.
(Footnote omitted.)
any event, general principles regarding the assessment of damages (including for
breach of contract) emphasise that it may be necessary
to depart from general
rules in the circumstances of a particular case, if this is necessary to ensure
the appropriate amount of
compensation is awarded.
Johnson v Perez
[1988] HCA 64
166 CLR 351
, which concerned the
assessment of damages in a claim for negligence brought by a client against a
solicitor, Mason CJ stated at
The guiding principle in the assessment of damages is compensatory. The object
is to award the plaintiff an amount of money that
will, as nearly as money can,
put him in the same position as if he had not been injured by the defendant:
Todorovic v Waller
[1981] HCA 72
150 CLR 402
at 412] per Gibbs CJ and Wilson J.
However, the time as at which damages are assessed can significantly affect the
amount actually
awarded. This aspect of the assessment of compensation is
particularly noticeable in the present era of inflation, with its fluctuating
economic values. This is because in times of inflation the amount awarded is
likely to be larger if it is assessed at a later rather
than an earlier
There is a general rule that damages for torts or breach of contract are
assessed as at the date of breach or when the cause of action
this rule is not universal; it must give way in particular cases to solutions
best adapted to giving an injured plaintiff that
amount in damages which will
most fairly compensate him for the wrong he has suffered
[[1980] AC 367 at 400-401];
Miliangos v Frank (Textiles) Ltd
[[1976] AC 443 at 468];
Dodd Properties Ltd v Canterbury City Council
[[1980] 1 WLR 433 at 450-451, 454-455, 457];
County Personnel Ltd v Alan R.
Pulver & Co
[[1987] 1 WLR 916 at 925-926].
The general rule that damages are assessed as at the date of breach or when the
cause of action arose has been applied more uniformly
in contract than in tort
and for good reason.
But even in contract cases courts depart from the
general rule whenever it is necessary to do so in the interests of justice
(Emphasis added.)
the same case, Wilson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ stated at 367:
As a general rule, “damages for tort or for breach of contract are
assessed as at the date of the breach” (Lord Wilberforce
Miliangos v
Frank (Textiles) Ltd
[[1976] AC 443 at 468]).
The rule will yield if, in
the particular circumstances, some other date is necessary to provide adequate
compensation
: see, for example,
Wenham v Ella
[1972] HCA 43
127 CLR 454]
Dodd Properties Ltd v Canterbury County Council
[[1980] 1 WLR 433];
County Personnel Ltd v Alan R. Pulver & Co
[[1987] 1 WLR 916].
(Emphasis added.)
at 386, Dawson J stated:
Clearly enough there are some cases, particularly in contract, where the
appropriate time at which to assess damages is the date
of breach. For example,
where goods are sold and in breach of the contract there is a failure to deliver
them, the damages are prima
facie the difference between the contract price and
the market price at the date of breach. This principle is embodied in the
Sale of Goods Acts. But as Lord Wilberforce observed in
[[1980] AC 367 at 400-401],
even here the rule is not absolute and
fairness may require departure from the date of breach
Ogle v Earl
[(1867) LR 2 QB 275].
(Emphasis added.)
also at 370-371 per Brennan J and 380 per Deane J. Although
dissenting in the result of the case, their Honours’ statements
principle were substantially similar to those quoted above.
is also relevant to note that, as the primary judge recognised, in many fields
of law, assessments of compensation made as at one
date are commonly made taking
into account all matters known at a later date when the court’s assessment
is being carried out:
HTW Valuers
at [39] (Gleeson CJ, McHugh,
Gummow, Kirby and Heydon JJ), citing
Kizbeau Pty Ltd v WG & B Pty
[1995] HCA 4
184 CLR 281
at 291-296 (Brennan, Deane, Dawson, Gaudron
and McHugh JJ).
The notion of reduction in value in relation to consumer
noted above, s 272 applies if there has been a failure to comply with the
consumer guarantee (as described in s 54). Therefore,
the nature and
extent of that guarantee indicates the circumstances in which s 272 will
apply. This is an important contextual consideration
when it comes to
understanding the nature of the reduction in value that may be the subject of
the statutory right of action to recover
damages that is conferred by
guarantee applies only to the supply of goods to a consumer. Goods are defined
to include, amongst other things, “ships,
aircraft and other
vehicles” and “animals, including fish”: s 2. The term
otherwise has its ordinary meaning.
the purposes of the ACL, a person is taken to have acquired particular goods as
a consumer if, and only if (a) the amount paid
did not exceed $40,000 (or a
greater prescribed amount); (b) they were “of a kind ordinarily
acquired for personal, domestic
or household use or consumption”; or
(c) they consisted of a vehicle or trailer for use on public roads:
s 3(1). Instances
where the goods are acquired “for the purpose of
re-supply” and for the purpose of “using them up or transforming
them ... in the course of a process of production or manufacture [or] in the
course of repairing or treating other goods or fixtures
on land” are
excluded: s 3(2). These provisions confine the application of the
consumer guarantee to what may be described
as consumer goods. In most
instances, they will be goods that are acquired to be utilised or consumed.
This is expressly the case
for those that meet the requirement in
s 3(1)(b). In other instances, the monetary limit together with the terms
of the exclusions
will confine the application of the guarantee to consumer
goods. Motor vehicles are also of that character.
in most instances, the intrinsic value of consumer goods to a retail buyer will
lie in their utility rather than the price
at which they may be on-sold. In
this respect, consumer goods may be contrasted with commodities or securities
where it is the commercial
profit or return on disposal that is a significant
(often sole) purpose of the transaction. It is the market value of commodities
or securities when they are on-sold that assumes significance for their buyers.
This is a consequence of the fact that buyers do
not purchase commodities or
securities for personal use or consumption. They purchase them so that they may
be traded for profit.
It means that there are ready markets in which prices for
commodities and securities may be observed. Further, the prices in those
markets provide a measure of the true value of commodities or securities in the
hands of the buyer.
course, many consumer goods may be on-sold by retail buyers in second-hand
markets. In that sense, and to that extent, they have
value as tradable
commodities. However, most consumer goods are not purchased to be traded. They
are purchased to be used for a
time (and then sold in second-hand markets) or
kept until the end of their useful life. Accordingly, the value to a buyer of a
good may not be captured by its second-hand market value at the time of
purchase or soon thereafter.
are a number of reasons why the price of second-hand consumer goods does not
reflect their value in the hands of the original
consumer who purchased the
goods. Second-hand buyers are a different group of buyers to those who buy new
consumer goods. They
are willing to undertake the search costs involved in
examining goods with different histories of use or wear and tear. They are
willing to pay the retail price at which the consumer goods may be purchased
new. They are willing to trade off the assurance
of purchasing new goods from a
retailer who, amongst other things, will be required to conform to the consumer
guarantee. Therefore,
the profile of buyers in second-hand markets together
with factors such as transactional costs and the risk to the buyer in purchasing
used consumer goods without knowing the circumstances of their past use, may be
expected to affect the prices that are observed in
such markets.
the case of motor vehicles, these and other factors manifest in the notorious
fact that a new vehicle will suffer a significant
immediate loss in tradable
value as soon as it is driven from the showroom. However, the utility to
consumers who continue to hold
their vehicles remains unaffected by this
phenomenon and the value, in the sense of the utility of the new vehicle in the
of the original buyer, remains the same.
those reasons, the value of consumer goods at the time of purchase is indicated
by the price that a consumer would pay to acquire
those goods and not by the
price that may be paid by a buyer to the consumer if those goods were
immediately on-sold. Significantly,
s 272(1) refers to “the value of
the goods”, not the market value of the goods. Of course, the retail
price at which
the consumer purchases the goods is a market price. It is an
objective measure of the value of the goods to consumers in general.
the point is that it is not to be equated with the price that may be obtained
upon resale of consumer goods. That price
is likely to be considerably lower
than the value to the consumer that is indicated by the purchase price.
consumer goods in general, motor vehicles are purchased to be utilised, at least
for a material period of time. They have a
limited life over which they can be
utilised and the purchase price that is paid for such goods can be understood as
a payment for
their utilisation value. Put another way, the market price for
new consumer goods represents the value of their usefulness to buyers.
value that may be enhanced by brand reputation in respect of matters such as
reliability and availability of repairs. In
some cases, it may be enhanced by
the cachet associated with a brand. Indeed, for some consumer goods, much of
the utilisation value
lies in the perception, respectability or assurance that
comes with having a particular brand of consumer good.
the value of many consumer goods to a buyer is more accurately understood to lie
in their utilisation value (or life-of-use
value) as reflected in the purchase
price. If, at some point, the goods are on-sold willingly by a consumer then
the value of the
goods may be said to be represented by the worth of their
utilisation up until their sale plus their second-hand market value. However,
if instead the goods are kept by the retail buyer until the end of their normal
useful life then the whole of the value will have
been the utilisation value.
In such a case, the use of the goods will have exhausted their value over time.
For such a buyer, the
availability of a second-hand market price will not equate
with the utilisation value. The buyer prefers to utilise the consumer
entirely, rather than on-sell into a second-market where, for reasons that have
been given, the price will be discounted for
various factors including
transactional costs and risks arising from prior use.
when it comes to assessing the extent to which a failure to comply with the
consumer guarantee at the time of supply resulted
in a reduction in value, the
approach that the general law has developed in assessing loss in cases
concerning the defective supply
of valuable assets (such as land, leasehold,
resource interests, intellectual property, goodwill or commercial equipment) or
in tradable
commodities is not apposite. In such cases, there is available to
the buyer the opportunity to re-sell into a market that measures
the objective
value of the defective asset or commodity in the hands of the party who has
suffered the loss. For reasons that have
been given, the resale value of a
consumer good is unlikely to provide such a measure. The buyer of second-hand
consumer goods will
not attribute to them the same value as a buyer of new
consumer goods. Therefore, in the case of consumer goods it will usually
necessary to focus upon the price that would have been paid if the consumer had
known of the defect when purchasing the goods
rather than on the price that may
prevail on the resale of the defective goods. It will also be necessary to have
regard to whether
replacement or repair is available as a means of remedying the
defect and restoring the value of the consumer goods in the hands
are a number of different possibilities depending upon the circumstances. These
are discussed later in these reasons in connection
with the third group of
appeal grounds.
The proper conceptual approach in the circumstances of this
present case is complex because of the position in relation to repair. This is
not a case where it might be said with certainty
at the time of purchase by each
member of the relevant cohort that there was no possibility that the defect
would be able to be repaired.
It was not suggested, for example, that Toyota
abandoned its warranty obligations such that there could never be any
expectation
that a repair for the defect might be found. There was evidence to
the effect that as the defect consequences manifested and were
reported by
Toyota dealers, steps were taken by Toyota to find a fix for the defect and once
it did, it made that fix available for
free. In that regard, it should be noted
that the unchallenged findings of the primary judge are to the effect that, for
a considerable
period, Toyota maintained publicly that there was no defect or
that the defect was of a kind that Toyota was addressing under warranty
it did so at a time that it was aware that there was a defect that it was unable
to repair. Nevertheless, the evidence
also showed that Toyota undertook
considerable work to find a fix, it expected that it would do so and it
eventually did find a fix
and made it available for free.
the result, finding the fix took a number of years from when the defective
vehicles were first supplied. Once the fix was found,
there remained the
logistics of making the fix available. They meant that it would take some time
until the fix could be applied
to every vehicle. In consequence, some consumers
had to wait a long time for a remedy to be found and even then faced the
possibility
of further delay in securing the repair. The length of time
depended upon how close to the availability of the 2020 field fix the
consumer made their purchase.
this was not a case where there was no possibility of repair. The most that
could be said was that there was a risk that
the defect would not be able to be
repaired. Expressed in positive terms, there was a possibility that there would
be a fix although
there would be a delay of uncertain duration in finding the
fix. If a fix was found it would likely be available at no cost, but
take some time before it was made available to a particular consumer. All of
this in circumstances where the defect did
not mean that the vehicle could not
be used and most of its attributes could be utilised despite the defect. Which
is not to understate
the significance of the defect, but merely to seek to be
specific about the circumstances that would determine the extent of the
reduction in the value of the vehicle resulting from the failure to comply with
the guarantee and also to demonstrate the significance
of when the vehicle was
purchased for assessing whether a fix might be found and provided (and, if so,
our view, in the particular circumstances, an assessment of the reduction in
value of the relevant vehicles assessed at the time
of purchase requires
appropriate allowance for those future possibilities. It also requires due
regard to the considerable utility
afforded to the consumer by the vehicle
notwithstanding the defect. In short, although there was a defect, for each
consumer who
purchased one of the defective Toyota vehicles there was a
possibility that the defect could be remedied at no cost and the value
vehicle prospectively restored, and there was also the ability to use the
vehicle (though compromised by the defect consequences
which, on the
unchallenged findings of the primary judge, manifested in relatively common
driving conditions). This means that it
is wrong to assess the value of the
vehicle without regard to those matters. Their significance is exposed by the
fact that, by
the time of the initial trial, it was known that the 2020 field
fix was available and the experts agreed that, in consequence, there
ongoing reduction in value. It may be observed that the prospective
reinstatement of value reflected the fact that the fix
would restore the utility
of the vehicle, noting that for some buyers there remained a considerable period
when the utility of the
vehicle had been diminished.
before the primary judge and on appeal, Mr Williams and DCS claimed that
the loss should be assessed at the date of purchase
of the vehicle. On their
approach the subsequent availability of the 2020 field fix was irrelevant. It
was treated as a supervening
event. Therefore, it treated each Toyota vehicle
as supplied as being burdened with the defect and the defect as being of a kind
that could not be remedied at any time. Further, it did not matter whether the
vehicle was supplied four years before the fix was
available or in the weeks
beforehand. The loss was the same in each case. On their case the loss should
be measured by reference
to the price that would be paid on resale for a vehicle
that was known to have the defect. Alternatively, it should be determined
the willingness to pay of the marginal buyer in a market for the defective
position of Toyota before the primary judge and on appeal was that there had
been no loss demonstrated. The availability of the
2020 field fix was said to
restore all value to those who had continued to hold their vehicles. Any loss
in value would only be
crystallised at the time of resale. Therefore, on its
case, those purchasers who had not sold their Toyota vehicle by the time the
was available had never crystallised any loss in value. It was said that up
until that point those who had purchased the defective
vehicles had not suffered
reduction in value damage “in any real sense”.
a considerable degree this position was based upon Toyota’s claim that,
upon a proper construction of s 272(1), the appropriate
point in time at
which to assess the reduction in value was the time when damages were said to
crystallise (noting that at times
its position was put in terms of a requirement
that the damages compensate for actual loss or damage – a proposition that
to focus upon a notion of realised loss of the kind that might be
measured by reference to an actual resale). It also placed considerable
reliance upon the agreed position as between the experts that there was no
reduction in the value of the vehicles if assessed at
trial because of the
availability of the 2020 field fix at no cost to the owner of the vehicle.
our view, the competing approaches fail to have due regard to the fact that the
value of consumer goods lies in their utility over
their useful life rather than
in any resale price. The purchase price is an objective measure of that value.
For reasons that have
been given, it is a price that depends upon expectations
as to the useful life of the goods rather than upon their resale value.
Therefore, the correct approach is to ascertain the component of the price
actually paid that could be said to be attributable to
the loss in utility
arising from the defect. This requires regard to reasonable expectations as to
the availability and timing of
a repair that would restore the utility; that is
an assessment as at the time of purchase as to the period of time for which the
defect was expected to affect the vehicle (before a repair could be found and
carried out on the vehicle). It also requires regard
to any use to which the
goods may be put despite the defect.
our view, had a fix not been available at the time of trial, the proper
conceptual approach would have been to factor in the possibility
availability of a fix when determining the reduction in the value of the
relevant vehicles at the time of purchase. This
is because it would overstate
the reduction in value if it was assessed on the basis that the defect would
definitely exist for the
whole of the life of the vehicle. In factoring in the
possibility of the availability of a fix, it would have been necessary to
into account two types of uncertainty that existed at the time of purchase:
first, uncertainty as to whether there would be
a fix; and, secondly, even if a
fix became available, uncertainty as to how long it might take for the fix to be
designed, tested
and made available.
in circumstances where those uncertainties had resolved by the time of trial, in
our view the proper conceptual approach
in the circumstances of this case is to
factor in the availability of the 2020 field fix when determining the reduction
of the relevant vehicles at the time of purchase. On this approach,
the period of time that the particular consumer held the vehicle
before the fix
became available is taken into account. This approach is appropriate for the
following two reasons.
first reason is that it is appropriate to use the known information as to the
availability of a fix at the time of trial to reach
a conclusion as to the
reduction in value (noting that, on the facts of the present case, at the time
of purchase, the possibility
of a fix being found and applied to the vehicle
within a reasonable period of time was not so remote as to be irrelevant to a
consumer). Rather than try to assess the reduction in value based
upon expectations at the time of purchase as to what might occur
in the future,
it is appropriate to use the known information at the time of trial. The
information available at trial concerning
repair of the defect established that
a fix did become available at no cost and (subject to an argument raised by the
respondents
established when that fix was available. It enabled an assessment to be made as
to how long the defect applied to the vehicle
of the particular consumer and to
use that information to assess the reduction in value damages as at the time of
purchase by that
second reason for the above approach is that, consistently with the authorities
discussed above, it is necessary to ensure that
there is no over-compensation
given the circumstances known at the time of trial. For completeness, we note
that we do not see any
inconsistency between the approach outlined above and
s 271(6), which deals with a particular scenario in a particular way.
assessment involved in the approach that we have outlined need not be undertaken
on a strict arithmetical basis. On the basis
of the authorities relied upon by
the primary judge, informed by the proper conceptual approach (as outlined
above), reduction in
value damages can still be determined doing the best that
can be done with the available evidence (assuming there is enough evidence
available to do so).
our opinion, the conceptual approach adopted by the primary judge was in error
because it did not factor in the fact that a fix
had become available (or even
the possibility that a fix might become available). It treated the defect as
one that would remain
for the whole life of the vehicle despite the possibility
that a fix might be developed and in the face of evidence at trial that
field fix was available and could be availed of by buyers to completely fix the
defect. This produced an amount that was
more than was necessary to fairly
compensate the relevant consumers for the failure to comply with the consumer
guarantee. We therefore
uphold appeal grounds 4, 8 and 9.
the Court’s letter to the parties (set out above), the Court raised a
possible approach to the assessment of reduction in
value damages involving a
formula that took into account the effective life of the vehicle and the
proportion of time that the defect
applied to the vehicle before the fix became
available. In the parties’ submissions in response to the letter,
submissions
were made by the respondents to the effect that it was not
established that the 2020 field fix was in fact available to consumers
2020. This is not a matter that we propose to resolve in these reasons. This
is a matter that can be the subject of further
submissions before the primary
judge upon remittal (see below). On the conceptual approach that we consider
should be taken, as
outlined above, the relevant date will be the date when the
2020 field fix in fact became practically available.
in the respondents’ submissions in response to the Court’s letter,
they contended that if (contrary to their
primary position) an apportionment
approach (over the effective life of the vehicle) were to be adopted, the
apportionment should
not be conducted on a linear basis; rather, it should take
into account that value in vehicles declines more quickly at the beginning
their effective life. Again, this is not something that we need to resolve in
these reasons. This is a matter than can be the
subject of submissions and, if
considered appropriate, evidence before the primary judge on remittal.
follows from the above that the aggregate damages award made by the primary
judge pursuant to ss 271(1) and 272(1)(a) needs to
be set aside. It also
follows that the aggregate damages award for excess GST needs to be set aside,
as it incorporates the formula
adopted by the primary judge for reduction in
value damages. It also follows that the damages award in favour of DCS must be
aside, as it relies on the primary judge’s approach to reduction in
value damages. Further, the award of interest on damages
needs to be set aside.
Therefore, paragraphs 1 to 5 of the orders made by the primary judge on
16 May 2022 are to be set aside.
In the concluding section of these
reasons, we discuss the question whether the matter should be remitted for
reassessment of damages.
It is convenient to discuss this after considering the
third group of appeal grounds.
ISSUES CONCERNING ASSESSMENT OF REDUCTION IN VALUE
now turn to consider the remaining grounds of appeal (and grounds 4, 8 and 9 to
the extent not already covered), which concern
the primary judge’s
of the reduction in value of the relevant vehicles; that is,
his assessment of 17.5% as the reduction in value of the vehicles.
Honour’s conclusion in this regard has been set out earlier in these
reasons (see [
summarising Toyota’s contentions on appeal, we note that there were three
main sources of expert evidence before his
Honour. These were summarised at
J[344] in the following terms (there being no issue as to the accuracy of the
(1) Mr Cuthbert’s valuation evidence indicates that the reduction in
value resulting from the [defect], measured by reference
Mr Cuthbert’s expert opinion as to the value of the Relevant Prado at
the time of supply, is in the range of 23 per cent
to 27.5 per cent;
(2) Mr Boedeker’s survey evidence indicates that, on average, the
reduction in value resulting from the [defect], as measured
by the change in
consumers’ [willingness to pay] for a defective vehicle compared to an
identical, non-defective vehicle, is
above 10 per cent but below 40 per cent,
and most likely in the range of approximately 20 per cent to 30 per cent;
(3) Mr Stockton’s evidence indicates that the “minimum”
reduction in value resulting from the [defect], as measured
by reference to the
cost of repairing it, is in the range of approximately 2.9 per cent to 7.3 per
cent. This is an inherently conservative
Honour undertook a detailed analysis of the main criticisms and limitations of
the expert evidence (J[346]-[390]). It is evident
from that analysis that his
Honour was of the view that there was too much emphasis upon expert evidence
when the task that was required
to be undertaken involved a much more practical
and common sense approach informed by an understanding of the nature of the
and its consequences.
its written submissions, Toyota grouped its grounds of appeal concerning the
approach adopted by the primary judge to the assessment
of the reduction in
value into three propositions. They were to the following effect:
(1) In reaching an overall conclusion as to the extent of any reduction in the
value of the vehicles resulting from the failure to
comply with the consumer
guarantee, the primary judge erred in using expert evidence as to the extent of
the reduction in the price
which a reasonable consumer would be willing to pay
for Toyota vehicles with the defect (ground 5);
(2) The primary judge erred in failing to have regard to evidence given by
Mr Stockton concerning prices in the resale market which
submitted) indicated that there was no real effect upon those prices as more
information came into the market about the
defect (ground 7);
(3) The primary judge erred in failing to find that the valuation evidence was
so flawed that each of the three sources relied upon
(the evidence of
Mr Cuthbert, Mr Boedeker and Mr Stockton) provided an
insufficient foundation upon which to undertake a common sense
assessment of the
reduction in value of the goods and therefore no such loss had been proven
(grounds 6 and 10-15).
regard to the way in which the submissions were presented orally, Toyota
advanced the following further proposition namely:
(4) In the alternative to (3), the primary judge ought to have undertaken a
common sense assessment of the reduction in value of
the goods by reference to
evidence of the repair costs and by taking account of the evidence of
Mr Stockton of observed prices in
the resale market to reach a much lower
value for any reduction in the value of the goods, and erred in not doing so.
will first make some general observations concerning the assessment of reduction
in value damages in relation to consumer goods.
We will then consider the
evidence of the experts, addressing Toyota’s submissions about that
evidence. Then we will consider
the extent to which the market become informed
and Toyota’s submissions in that regard. We will then consider
four propositions.
General observations concerning the assessment of reduction in
value damages in relation to consumer goods
considering the quantification of a reduction in value in relation to consumer
goods, there are a number of possibilities depending
on the circumstances. Some
of these possibilities are as follows.
Replacement
and foremost there is the possibility of replacement, an outcome which the
statutory provisions expressly contemplate and appear
to encourage. In such
cases, replacement will ensure there is no reduction in the value of the
there is the possibility that the damaged or defective goods are completely
useless and incapable of repair but are not replaced.
In such cases, the
reduction in value will be complete. Subject to the terms of
s 272(1)(a)(ii), the reduction in value will be
the whole of the purchase
price (with an allowance for any scrap value – that is, a value for the
goods’ materials rather
than any value that might be said to be the
goods’ value qua their character as consumer goods).
Repair is possible
there is the possibility that the goods are not replaced but there is, at the
time of supply, an available means of repairing
the goods. Repair may reinstate
the utility of the goods wholly or partially. Where the repair would wholly
reinstate the utility
of the goods, the cost of repair may be a measure of the
reduction in the value of the goods that resulted from the defect. This
because it is a measure of what is required in order to restore the utility of
if the repair will only partially reinstate utility then it may be necessary to
allow an amount for repair costs and, in
addition, assess the residual reduction
in value associated with the ongoing diminished utility (see consideration below
of instances
where repair is not possible).
Repair is not possible
other cases, repair may not be possible, but the defect will be of a kind where
the goods retain diminished utility (such that
they should not be written-off).
In such instances, the goods will retain the defect over the whole of their life
during which they
will have diminished utility compared to equivalent goods
without the defect (assuming they are not replaced by goods without the
Understanding the extent to which that utility is diminished will require a
comparison between the lifetime of use of goods
with and without the defect. In
most cases that comparison will be appropriately undertaken by making an
objective assessment of
the order of magnitude or significance of the defect.
How much of the utility of the goods does it affect? Is it a substantial
that compromises the use of the goods? Will the defect reduce the useful life
of the goods? Does it compromise the cachet
of the goods? In all likelihood,
judgments will be required to be made informed by an understanding of the nature
and extent of
the defect together with its consequences for the utilisation of
the goods. The answer will be likely to be most aptly expressed
in percentage
terms. The percentage can then be applied to the purchase price to determine an
amount of damages for the reduction
in the value of the goods. In such cases,
it may also be relevant to consider some form of survey evidence to assist in
understanding
the significance of the defect for the kind of consumers who
purchase the goods.
Significantly
for present purposes, the assessment requires a focus upon the nature of the
defect and the magnitude or significance
of its effect upon the utility of the
goods in the hands of the consumer.
should be observed that there will be instances where the defect results in
diminished utility and a repair is physically possible
but the cost of carrying
out the repair exceeds any reduction in value of the goods determined in the
manner just described. In
such cases, the methodology just described will be an
appropriate way to assess the reduction in value for the purposes of
s 272(1)(a).
In effect, the prohibitive cost of the repair means that
there is, as a matter of commercial reality, no repair available.
Resale price as a measure of loss of value
there is the prospect of resale. In rare instances, there may be a market in
which goods with the defect are sold second-hand.
In such instances, an
observable market price may be used to assess the reduction in value of the
goods. However, any such market
price will still need to allow for the
considerations that have been discussed, including the transactional costs and
discount for
risk that are factored into the prices that may be observed in
second-hand markets for consumer goods. If no such allowance is made
of the resale price as a measure of the reduction in the value of the goods in
the hands of the consumer will be likely
to over-compensate. It will include in
the damages those discounts which arise in any case where consumer goods are
sold second-hand.
Market expertise as a basis for assessing reduction in
more likely, is the availability of more general market information as to the
effect of defects on second-hand prices that is
of a kind that provides a
sufficient basis for an expert to express an opinion as to the reduction in
value of the goods in the hands
of the original consumer that may be properly
attributed to the type of defect in a particular case. Without intending to be
as to the types of expertise that may be relevant, expertise may
arise from observing market behaviour or analysing data in markets
where parties
are pricing discounts for various types of defects in goods of a similar kind to
that in issue. Alternatively, expertise
as to the way in which retail prices
are established for goods like those in issue may provide a sufficient basis for
an expert to
express an opinion as to the value of the component of the price
that relates to the attribute of the good that is defective.
any assessment by reference to such market prices will require the demonstration
of a meaningful basis upon which to reason
from market observation or
understanding to a particular value. Expertise in observing or understanding
markets for the goods in
question or second-hand markets for those goods may not
provide a sufficient foundation with which to form an opinion concerning
in which the market would price the defect in question. This is simply a
function of the fact that most markets are for
goods that conform to the
requirements of the consumer guarantee. A rare or peculiar defect may be
sufficiently unusual that it
is not possible to draw meaningful conclusions
based upon observation or understanding of markets where, by definition, no
defect has occurred.
concept of a clearing price has possible relevance in the context of using other
market information as a basis for assessing the
quantum of any reduction in the
value of goods resulting from a failure to comply with the guarantee. It may be
accepted that the
price at which any goods (including goods with a particular
defect) will be bought and sold depends upon the willingness of sellers
supply at different prices and the willingness of buyers to acquire at different
prices. The higher the price, the greater the
volume of supply. The lower the
price, the greater the volume of demand. Markets establish an equilibrium or
market price at which
the volume traded means that supply meets demand. This is
the clearing price, the price at which all available supply is purchased.
to the notion of a clearing price, is the understanding that buyers and sellers
are willing participants who can come and
go in the market. Conceivably, the
market price that might prevail in a market for goods with a particular defect
might be the subject
of expert analysis and opinion based upon an informed
understanding of the willingness to supply and the willingness to acquire.
Buyers who would otherwise buy certain goods without the defect might be
surveyed as to the discount that would need to be offered
if they were to be
persuaded to purchase the same goods with an identified defect. Much would
depend upon the reliability of the
survey which in turn would depend upon many
matters including the quality of the survey design, securing appropriate
respondents
to the survey (those who might be in the market), how seriously
participants took the survey and whether participants really understood
nature of the defect. Assuming that such a survey could be conducted with
accuracy, it would then be necessary to identify the
willingness to pay of the
marginal buyer. It is possible that some participants in the survey may have a
willingness to pay that
is so low that they would simply not buy the defective
goods. Instead, all the available goods with the defect would be purchased
buyers with a higher willingness to pay. In short, in order to determine the
willingness to pay of the marginal buyer (and hence
the clearing price) it is
necessary to form a view about the willingness to supply.
to willingness to supply, one approach is to simply assume that the market price
is the price that must be established in a market
in which the same number of
defective goods must be sold as were actually sold. However, to make that
assumption is to deprive the
market of an important characteristic, namely the
ability of a supplier to choose not to sell – to stand out of the market
if the price gets to a point where it is too low for the supplier to be willing
to supply. In effect, an assumption of that kind
treats the supplier as being
willing to sell no matter how low the price has to go in order to clear the
may be argued that it is appropriate to make an assumption of that kind in
circumstances where the analysis is being undertaken
to determine the reduction
in value that results from a failure to conform to the requirements of the
consumer guarantee. However,
the problem remains of identifying from the
results of a survey the willingness to pay of the marginal consumer.
use of any form of average or median value for willingness to pay based upon the
survey results will significantly overstate any
reduction in value. In any
market, individual buyers may be willing to pay more (in some cases much more)
than the purchase price.
However, none of this value has been lost. It is only
the difference in value between the clearing price in a market for non-defective
goods compared to defective goods that has been lost.
of these aspects make the use of the concept of willingness to pay in order to
derive a clearing price both highly speculative
and conceptually questionable as
a means of establishing a form of market price for the defective goods.
Nevertheless, provided
the problems are acknowledged, in cases where assessment
of the reduction in value is difficult, a willingness to pay analysis may
some assistance. Although it may be criticised as not providing an accurate
indication of the price that would prevail in
a hypothetical market for the
defective goods (because it requires supply at any price), it may provide
information as to the price
significance (large or small) that most buyers
attach to the defect. For the purposes of assessing the reduction in the value
consumer goods that have been purchased (the buyer being burdened with the
defect by reason of the failure to conform to the consumer
guarantee), a
willingness to pay analysis may provide evidence which may be used, with due
allowance for its limitations, in undertaking
an assessment of the percentage of
the purchase price paid that may be attributed to the utility that would have
been available if
the defect had not existed.
similar reasons, survey evidence designed to elicit the order of magnitude of
the price effect of a particular defect on the price
that a buyer who is in the
market for an equivalent non-defective good may have some relevance to the
making of an evaluative judgment
as to the percentage reduction in value to
consumers that may be attributed to the defect. However, it is unlikely to
afford a meaningful
basis for reaching a conclusion as to the actual market
price that would prevail in a hypothetical market for goods with the
issue arises as to whether willingness to pay may be a relevant measure in
determining value for the purposes of assessing damages.
Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWSC 715
‑[244], Stevenson J declined to accept the proposition
that willingness to pay can be a proxy for market value. So much may
accepted. Markets set prices at the margin. Consequently, the market price
will be well below the willingness to pay of most
buyers. However, for reasons
that have been given, that does not mean that evidence of willingness to pay is
irrelevant. It can
still provide evidence of the relative significance of the
difference between goods with and without the defect. It may be possible
extrapolate from that evidence that the defect was of minor importance or of
great importance.
Some possible further complexities
above analysis assumes that the defect is one which will compromise the utility
of all the goods in all cases. Further complexities
arise where the defect is
known to be present in some but not all of the goods and it is difficult to
discern which are the defective
goods by simple examination. The risk of the
defect being present and the risk, if present, of the defect producing serious
consequences
are matters that may affect the significance of the defect.
such instances, the risk of the existence of the defect is itself a form of
defect in all of the goods. It may be appropriate
to approach the question of
whether there is any reduction in the value of the goods and the assessment of
that reduction on the
basis that the presence of the risk itself is what results
from the failure to comply with the guarantee. If there is a means of
to see whether the defect is present then the cost of that test may be an
appropriate measure of the reduction in value of
the goods in those cases,
subject to an assessment of a greater reduction in those cases where the test
uncovers the defect.
to these matters, it may be observed that the consumer guarantee is expressed in
terms that apply to defects even though they may
not be known to the consumer.
It does so by defining the state of “acceptable quality” in respect
of the goods by reference
to “a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with
the state and condition of the goods”: s 54(2). In effect, the
legislation
assumes that the defect is known at the time of supply to the
other instances, the defect may be of a kind that manifests only in certain
conditions of use. In consequence, some consumers
may not be burdened by the
consequences of the defect because of the particular circumstances of their use.
For reasons that have
been expressed, the legislative provisions concerning the
guarantee require an objective approach that does not take into account
particular circumstances of the consumer when determining whether there has been
a failure to comply with the guarantee. So,
even a consumer who does not use
the goods in a way that will manifest the defect will have purchased goods that
fail to comply with
the guarantee. The statutory language in s 272(1)(a)
does not refer to the reduction in value of the goods to the particular
Consistently with the terms of the guarantee, it provides for a
statutory action for damages “for ... any reduction in the
value of the
goods, resulting from the failure to comply with the guarantee”. There
will be a reduction in the value of the
goods for all consumers because the
goods supplied lack utility, albeit in a respect that may not have any
significance for the consumer.
The consumer still has a good with less value as
a consumer good than goods without the defect.
The evidence of Mr Cuthbert
now turn to consider the expert evidence that was before the primary judge,
including some of Toyota’s contentions on appeal.
Mr Cuthbert
has worked in the automotive industry for over 50 years. He is a qualified
motor mechanic, has been a licensed second
hand dealer in motor vehicles and for
a number of years was a licensed vehicle tester. He estimates that he has
conducted over 10,000
valuations of motor vehicles. He has provided valuations
for a number of different purposes, including court proceedings, vehicle
insurance and vehicle financing.
his report dated 23 July 2021, Mr Cuthbert explained how he would
undertake vehicle valuations. He explained that in his experience
and opinion,
“valuing vehicles is an impressionistic exercise in which a number of
factors are considered, with these factors
taking on different levels of
importance depending on the kind of vehicle being valued and the context in
which it is being valued”
(para 53). The report goes on to say:
My typical practice is to consider a range of factors as I describe in this
report, assess them together to form a view about the
value of the vehicle, and
then use them to “sense-check” my valuation.
process he then described involves considering attributes of the particular
vehicle, undertaking his assessment of the general
popularity and desirability
of the vehicle and bringing to account the available market data for comparable
vehicles. As to his
approach to problems with a vehicle, he provided the
following evidence in his report (paras 69 to 71):
In my experience, it is not unusual to identify issues or problems of some
description with a vehicle I am valuing. In particular,
there are often minor
cosmetic issues in used vehicles.
When I identify an issue or problem with a vehicle I am valuing, I consider the
nature of the issue or problem and
whether I should reduce the value
the vehicle to reflect the impact of the issue or problem. As I explained ...
above, when I value a vehicle, I also consider
the nature of the vehicle and the
way in which that type of vehicle is generally used, as this is relevant to the
significance of
any issue or problem that I identify.
It is not my usual practice to reduce the value of a vehicle for a minor or
trivial issue such as minor wear and tear on a used vehicle,
deviation from regular recommended servicing requirements if the vehicle
otherwise has no issues.
(Emphasis added.)
referred to the types of mechanical issues or problems that would generally
cause him to reduce the value of a vehicle. He said
that they included (para
(a) problems with the vehicle’s engine, including engine noises indicating
wear, sensor issues, oil leaks, temperature issues
and pressure issues; and
(b) problems with other important mechanical parts of the vehicle, including
problems with the transmission, the exhaust system,
power steering operation and
suspension, to name a few.
Mr Cuthbert
then identified factors that he typically considered in deciding how to reduce
the value of a vehicle due to a mechanical
issue or problem with the
circumstances in which Mr Cuthbert said he would apply a discount, based
upon the factors he identified, may be summarised as
(1) whether a repair is available and the cost of repair (noting that typically
he would not apply a reduction for repair costs if
such a repair is available at
the time and will be carried out under the vehicle’s factory warranty, but
may reduce the value
due to the inconvenience associated with obtaining the
(2) whether the vehicle is likely to require additional servicing, maintenance
or repairs outside of regular servicing;
(3) whether there was a risk that the resale value would be reduced because of
the issue or problem;
(4) whether there are likely to be safety implications that cannot be addressed
by repair (in which case Mr Cuthbert’s evidence
consider that the vehicle is not fit for use and therefore will reduce the value
of the vehicle to its “salvage
value”, which is the price that I
would expect a salvage auction house to pay for a vehicle”);
(5) whether the issue or problem may result in discomfort or embarrassment to
the owner; and
(6) whether the defect was of a kind such that there should be a
“desirability reduction”.
Mr Cuthbert
then reported upon his assessment of the attributes of Mr Williams’s
Prado. He referred to his instructions to
the effect that the vehicle suffered
from the defect at the time of purchase by DCS. He described his instructions
as to the consequences
of the defect. He expressed the opinion that he
considered the defect to be “a serious mechanical problem ... which
reduces [its] value” (para 99). He also expressed the opinion
that he considered the defect consequences “to be serious
and the risk of
experiencing them a factor which materially reduces the value” of the
vehicle (para 103).
Mr Cuthbert’s
evidence was as to the
of Mr Williams’s Prado with the
defect; his view as to the
seriousness
of the defect was properly treated
at the initial trial as an assumption on which his evidence was based (being a
matter to be established
by other evidence). Ultimately, the findings by the
primary judge as to the defect consequences were unchallenged. Those findings
were based upon a referee report. Also unchallenged were the findings by the
primary judge rejecting submissions by Toyota that
sought to downplay the
significance of the defect and the defect consequences: J[79]-[86].
His Honour found that the consequences
were “not trivial” and
“they impact significantly upon consumers’ use and enjoyment”
of the vehicles:
J[183]. Notably, there was no finding to the effect that the
defect was so serious that without repair the vehicles were only able
for salvage. Nor did the primary judge find in terms that the defect was a
“serious mechanical problem” (terminology
which suggests that the
vehicle was prone to breaking down, which was not the state of the
Mr Cuthbert
was asked to assume that there was no effective fix for the defect at the time
of purchase of the vehicle in April 2016.
As to that aspect, he said in his
report (para 104):
... if no repair is available which will fix the issue or problem at the time I
am valuing the vehicle, depending on the severity
of the issue or problem, I
will typically reduce the value of the vehicle more than if such a repair
expressed the opinion that on account of the defect and its consequences
“which did not have an effective fix at the time
of purchase” he
considered it appropriate to reduce the value of the vehicle at the time of
purchase “significantly”
on account of the defect and its
consequences (para 104).
may be observed that the whole of the methodology described by Mr Cuthbert
up until this point explained how he would undertake
the task of assessing the
appropriate reduction in value to account for the defect (para 110).
Mr Cuthbert
then turned to the quantification of the reduction in value. He began as
follows (para 109):
In my opinion, the value of the [vehicle] as at April 2016 was significantly
reduced as a result of the [defect] and the risk of
the vehicle experiencing the
[defect consequences].
then stated that he assessed the value of the vehicle at the time of purchase to
be an amount which was 23.5% to 27% below his
assessment of its retail market
these statements are consistent with Mr Cuthbert undertaking an assessment
of the appropriate reduction in value to account for
the defect. They reflect
his earlier indication that the process is impressionistic and requires regard
to the various factors that
he identified.
Mr Cuthbert
then expressed the basis for his view as to the extent of the reduction in the
following terms in his report (para 111):
I have formed this view drawing on my experience as a motor vehicle dealer,
broker and valuer over the last 50 years and having regard
(a) the seriousness of the [defect and defect consequences];
(b) there not being any effective fix to the [defect] available as at April
(c) the salvage value of the [vehicle] as at April 2016, with a reduction to
this level being the maximum reduction I would expect
to apply to a vehicle with
a defect which does not have an effective fix at the time of purchase; and
(d) the price at which I consider [Mr Williams and DCS] may have been able
to sell the [vehicle] to a purchaser, other than a salvage
auction house, in
April 2016 (assuming it had not been driven).
Mr Cuthbert
went on to explain that he had considered the salvage value and the price at
which the vehicle might have been sold to
a buyer other than a salvage auction
house. He estimated the salvage value of the vehicle to have been
“approximately 60%
to 63%” of his assessed retail market price (para
116). He gave the basis for that estimate.
Mr Cuthbert
then explained that he considered the salvage value “to be the floor
value” (para 121). He then expressed
the following view
(para 123):
In assessing the price within this range at which [Mr Williams and DCS]
would likely have been able to sell the [vehicle] in April
2016, I consider that
purchasers would have existed in the market who would have been willing to pay a
further amount on top of the
salvage value of the [vehicle], in the hope that
they would be able to find someone to fix the [defect] at a reasonable price,
the absence of a known effective fix at the time. In my experience,
including in interacting with them at vehicle auctions, purchasers
of this kind
take into account the types of considerations that I address above when
determining a vehicle’s value.
the initial trial and on appeal, Toyota was critical of this reasoning. Toyota
contended that it had the consequence that the
analysis undertaken by
Mr Cuthbert was anchored in the salvage value and, in the result, did not
bring to account the factors that
he said were involved in undertaking his
assessment.
number of points should be made concerning this submission insofar as it
concerned the report itself. First, Mr Cuthbert described
his approach as
impressionistic and involved bringing the factors that he had described into a
single assessment based upon experience.
Secondly, having regard to the terms
of the whole of the report and the detail provided concerning the factors that
Mr Cuthbert
considered as a matter of usual practice, it is unlikely that
at the point of assessing the relevant amount Mr Cuthbert simply put
those matters to one side. Thirdly, in the final sentence of the paragraph
quoted above, Mr Cuthbert made express reference
to purchasers of the kind
he had described taking into account “the types of considerations that I
address above when determining
a vehicle’s value”. In effect, he is
attributing to those buyers a consideration of the same factors as those that he
would take into account.
Nevertheless,
it appears from the terms of the report that at the point of undertaking the
assessment, Mr Cuthbert may not have evaluated
for himself the required
reduction in value having regard to the factors he described, but rather posited
a buyer considering the
amount on top of salvage value that the buyer would pay
on the basis that “purchasers would have existed in the market who
have been willing to pay a further amount on top of the salvage value of the
[vehicle], in the hope that they would be able
to find someone to fix the
[defect] at a reasonable price, despite the absence of a known effective fix at
was the possibility of such a buyer approaching the question of price in that
way (as well as his own view as to the seriousness
of the defect) that caused
him to reach the opinion that an approximate 23.5% to 27% reduction was
appropriate (para 124).
the precise manner in which the assessment reflected Mr Cuthbert’s
application of the factors in the manner he described
in his report is, at
least, somewhat obscure when regard is had to the terms of his report. It
appears to focus upon a buyer who
was assessing, by reference to the factors
Mr Cuthbert had identified, an amount that the buyer was willing to pay on
top of salvage
value in the hope that the defect could be fixed. At least on
its face, this appears to be different to forming his own opinion
amount by which he should reduce the value from the retail market price by
reference to the factors he has described in
order to take account of the
defect. It appears to focus upon the price that a buyer who was purchasing a
vehicle that would have
no utility unless the vehicle was repaired might be
willing to pay.
Mr Cuthbert
was also asked whether his opinion would differ if at the time of purchase
“there was a real possibility that an
effective fix ... would become
available from around January 2020”. As to that question, his evidence in
his report was as
follows (paras 127 and 128):
I consider that a delay in the development of an effective fix of almost four
years is too long to have an impact on my assessment
of the reduction in value
to the [vehicle] resulting from the [defect] and risk of the [defect
consequences] at the time of purchase.
The possibility of an available fix for the [defect] four years after the
[vehicle] was purchased does not change the fact that the
purchaser would have
been exposed to four years of owning the vehicle without the fix. This is not a
case of the vehicle being restored
to a defect-free state immediately after
purchase; four years is sufficiently long for the impact of the [defect] and the
consequences] to be likely to be experienced by the owner.
reasoning in the report as to the significance of a real possibility of a fix
some four years later rests upon the view that there
would have been a period
when the defect consequences would be likely to be experienced.
may be noted that in response to criticisms raised concerning the valuation
approach set out in his report, Mr Cuthbert provided
a supplementary
report, dated 22 October 2021. In that report he explained his opinion
concerning fair market value in the following
terms (para 12 (c)):
... in my view and based on my experience, it is unrealistic and incorrect to
conclude that a prospective purchaser of the [vehicle]
in April 2016 who is
aware that the vehicle suffers from the [defect] and the risk of experiencing
one or more of the Defect Consequences
and that no fix for the [defect] exists
at that time, would be willing to pay the same purchase price as they would if
the [vehicle]
did not suffer from the [defect] and the risk of experiencing one
or more of the Defect Consequences. In these circumstances, based
experience, the seller would need to reduce the purchase price of the [vehicle]
in order to achieve a sale to a prospective
purchaser who had this knowledge.
he then went on to explain again that in his experience and opinion the
valuation of motor vehicles was an impressionistic
exercise. He explained his
approach in the following terms (para 18):
... valuing motor vehicles is an impressionistic exercise in which a number of
factors should be considered, including the cosmetic
condition of the vehicle,
the mechanical condition of the vehicle and the general popularity and
desirability of the vehicle in the
relevant market. These factors, and the
individual characteristics of particular vehicles, will take on different levels
of importance
depending on the kind of the vehicle being valued and the context
in which it is being valued.
then explained that his view on the reduction in value of the vehicle the
subject of the claim by Mr Williams and DCS was formed
having regard to the
following (we paraphrase, save where quoted):
(1) the factors described in the passage quoted above (as explained in his
report), namely the various factors that he had identified;
(2) his assessment of the seriousness of the defect and the defect
consequences;
(3) there being no effective fix to the defect as at April 2016 (the time the
vehicle was purchased);
(4) the salvage value, “with a reduction to this level being the maximum
reduction I would expect to apply to a vehicle with
a defect which does not have
an effective fix at the time of purchase”; and
(5) the price at which Mr Williams and DCS may have been able to sell the
vehicle to a purchaser other than a salvage auction house
assuming that it had
not been driven (being the buyer he had described in his evidence as one willing
to pay a further amount on
top of salvage value in the hope that someone could
be found to fix the defect at a reasonable price).
regard to the supplementary report describes the salvage value as an outer limit
on the extent of the appropriate reduction.
Importantly for present purposes,
it reiterates Mr Cuthbert’s description of the task that he had
undertaken as being an impressionistic
assessment taking account of the factors
he had applied based upon his extensive experience in valuing motor vehicles
taking account
of their defects. It places his analysis of the price that a
purchaser might pay above the salvage value in that context.
Nevertheless,
it appears to treat the defect as one which is so serious that it is appropriate
to approach the valuation on the basis
that it requires the ascertainment of an
amount on top of salvage based upon the uncertain prospect (or hope) of being
able to find
someone who can fix the defect. Such an approach suggests, at
least, that he has in mind a buyer who considers that if the defect
fixed then the only use of the vehicle is for salvage.
submissions in the appeal criticised the reasoning of Mr Cuthbert on the
basis that it involved working up “in
some unspecified way” to reach
an amount on top of the salvage value. It was said to be an approach that
fixated on the salvage
value which was inappropriate for a vehicle that was
functional and not in a state where it needed to be scrapped by reason of the
defect. His reasoning process was characterised as “wholly opaque”
and involved working from an inappropriate starting
reliance was placed upon what emerged at the trial in the course of
cross-examination of Mr Cuthbert which was said to
demonstrate that no
objective means had been used to reach the conclusion as to the appropriate
reduction. Exchanges to the following
effect were said to be
significant:
(1) Mr Cuthbert agreed that what he did was to take the salvage value and
then say that “there might be a hypothetical consumer
who assesses the
probability of a fix arising and you add a bit to the value that you’ve
already arrived at when you do your
salvage method” (T127) (later in his
evidence he agreed that he was referring to “people having the hope that
be able to find someone to fix the defect at a reasonable
price” (T128)).
(2) It was put to Mr Cuthbert a number of times that he did not undertake
the exercise of going through the factors that he said
that he typically
considered in undertaking a value (set out above) but he was unable to explain
how he did so. In that regard Mr
Cuthbert referred to “the whole
process moving forward” (T127) and his methodology being one that
“follows through
the valuation process” (T129) as being the way he
established value but did not otherwise elaborate on the manner in which
factors identified by him had been applied.
(3) Mr Cuthbert maintained that it was appropriate to start the approach to
valuing the vehicle by starting with the salvage value
even though the vehicle
could do most of the things that a car should do, namely, get the passenger from
point A to point B (T128‑129).
(4) Mr Cuthbert seemed to agree that the approach that used the salvage
value as the baseline value was different to the approach
of using the factors
to assess a reduction from the retail price as explained in his report (T133).
was also put to Mr Cuthbert that a defect in his approach was that the use
of the salvage value as a starting point was to assume
that the vehicle could
not be driven and it was so unfit for use that the best that you could do is
sell it off for parts (T126).
Mr Cuthbert disagreed with that
characterisation. However, it may be noted that earlier he had agreed that in
most cases the affected
vehicles would remain capable of taking driver and
passenger from point A to point B (T113). Therefore, taking account of that
concession,
it would not be logical for Mr Cuthbert to undertake his
valuation analysis on the basis that the vehicle was only good for parts
the defect was fixed. This point may be viewed as support for a conclusion that
he did not undertake his valuation on that
basis or as a reason why, if he did,
he was in error as to his approach.
starting with a salvage value and positing the additional amount that a
purchaser might pay on top of the salvage value on the
basis that he might, to
use the language of Mr Cuthbert “put the vehicle back on the road at
a reasonable cost” (T126),
Mr Cuthbert appeared to have treated the
vehicle as if it was a write-off unless repaired in some way – or, at the
very least,
that the defect was so substantial that such an approach was
appropriate. Further, the required repair was considered on the basis
was only a possibility or a matter about which a purchaser may be hopeful. This
is supported by the fact that during cross-examination,
Mr Cuthbert
described his approach as “a variation in the salvage auction house as to
which type of salvage auction it may
be sold at” (T126). He referred to
two variants of salvage value. First, “the straight out salvage
value” (the
floor price) and second “the possibility of a potential
buyer considering that he can put the vehicle back on the road at a
cost to fix and have it back on the road for a figure that he has calculated
away from [the manufacturer’s standard
retail price]” (T126).
state of the evidence supported a submission to the effect that
Mr Cuthbert’s opinion appeared to have been formed on the
view that overstated the seriousness of the defect. Hence, its focus upon
salvage value and its ultimate emphasis upon
what a buyer might pay over and
above the salvage value on the basis that a repair might be found.
to the evidence of Mr Cuthbert, the primary judge made the following
finding (J[354]):
The seriousness of the mechanical problem, the lack of a fix at the time of
supply, the risk of additional servicing and associated
inconvenience, the
embarrassment and discomfort associated with excessive foul-smelling white smoke
and the impact on resale value
and desirability were all factors considered by
Mr Cuthbert ... I similarly accept his evidence that he did not start from
value and work up in a way that skews the value to the bottom end of the
Ultimately,
his Honour found that there was no reason not to accept Mr Cuthbert’s
evidence “as a useful guide to valuation”
and that it should be
accepted because he was a professional car valuer with 50 years’
experience and it accords with what
his Honour considered to be “robust
common sense”: J[356].
our view, this broad brush approach failed to have regard to the extent of the
validity of the main criticisms raised by Toyota,
namely the focus upon the
salvage value and the associated (implicit) view that the vehicle was so
defective it needed to be repaired
before it had any real utility as a motor
vehicle. It also failed to have regard to the emphasis that
Mr Cuthbert’s ultimate
assessment placed upon a notional buyer who
was the kind of buyer who would be purchasing a vehicle that was being sold for
that might be able to be repaired rather than upon the value that a
retail purchaser would place on the vehicle given the effect
of the defect on
the use of the vehicle.
our view, the issues raised concerning the use of the salvage value and proper
regard to the diminished use of the vehicle with
the defect should have led his
Honour to treat Mr Cuthbert’s percentage reduction in value with
considerable circumspection.
It should not have been treated as a useful guide
to valuation without making due allowance for the matters to which we have
To this extent, we uphold grounds 10 and 12 of the notice of
in our view, there were two additional conceptual reasons for concluding that
Mr Cuthbert’s approach overstated the
reduction in value, especially
to the extent that his value was sought to be deployed to support an aggregate
assessment of loss
for all group members who had bought and kept their defective
Toyota vehicles. They arise from the views we have expressed as to
valuation task required by the terms of s 272(1).
in the case of consumer goods, assessment of the reduction in value resulting
from a failure to comply with the consumer guarantee
should not be made on the
basis of an unadjusted resale value. This is because it is the value of the
goods to a consumer purchaser
that must be assessed. The resale price of a
consumer good will determine a different value, namely the second-hand value.
include transaction costs and discounts for risk. For those reasons, an
assessment of reduction in value without regard to such
considerations is likely
to overstate the reduction in value compared to an approach which considers the
extent of the reduction
in value for a reasonable purchaser resulting from the
failure to comply with the guarantee.
it failed to grapple with the effect on an aggregate assessment of reduction in
value damages of the possibility that a
free fix may become available. In that
regard, Mr Cuthbert’s value was expressed on the basis that no fix
was available.
He was then asked to say whether he would have a different view
if, at the time of purchase, there was a real possibility that an
effective fix
would become available almost four years later. In his view, that possibility
was too far away to have any impact
on his assessment. However, the purchase of
Mr Williams’s Prado was one of the earlier purchases of the defective
Other vehicles were purchased much closer to the time when the free
fix ultimately became available.
Mr Cuthbert’s
evidence was dealing specifically with the purchase of Mr Williams’s
Prado by DCS. However, reliance was
placed on the report to reach a conclusion
as to reduction in value damages on an aggregate basis for the whole of the
relevant cohort.
For reasons we have given, what was required in order to use
market information to support an aggregate assessment of value was
for account
to be taken of the possibility of a repair and the extent of the utility of the
vehicle in the meantime. Any such assessment
would depend upon matters such as
prevailing views as to Toyota’s approach to performing its warranty
obligations, views as
to the likelihood of the defect consequences arising and
views as to the seriousness of those defect consequences if they arose.
Therefore, there were issues in simply extrapolating the opinion expressed by
Mr Cuthbert by reference to the circumstances of Mr
Williams and DCS
to the aggregate assessment of reduction in value damages for all members of the
relevant cohort.
party addressed these aspects before the primary judge. We will return to them
when considering the appropriate orders to
be made on the appeal.
completeness we note that it was submitted that Mr Cuthbert’s
analysis did not take account of the potential resale value
of the vehicle. It
was put to him that he had not taken account of the market evidence as to what a
Prado may sell for in the market
place. He responded to the effect that there
was no secondary market information at that time (bearing in mind that the
task was in respect of the reduction in value of a new vehicle as at
the date of purchase). He accepted that the vehicles were popular
and renowned
for having a high resale value. He said that he should have included a sentence
in his report to the effect that Prados
are generally known for reliability and
were “not known for having an upcoming listed fault”. He did not
he should have brought to account the resale information at that time
because the full extent of the defect was not known. We can
see no difficulty
with this reasoning by Mr Cuthbert, so far as it goes.
it was submitted that Mr Cuthbert had accepted in cross-examination that the
inconvenience and embarrassment suffered by
Mr Williams was central to his
analysis. The relevant passages relied upon concern Mr Cuthbert’s
response to certain questions
that were posed by the primary judge for
consideration by the experts.
questions posed by the primary judge were based upon six assumptions the last of
which was expressed in the following terms:
... although unknown and unknowable at the time of purchase four years earlier,
the secondary market resale data shows no discernible
deterioration in the
resale value of vehicles like the [vehicle] purchased compared to similar types
of motor vehicles.
will emerge, the assumption appears to have been prompted by data collected by
Mr Stockton (considered in more detail below).
The other assumptions were
to the effect that the defect and its consequences existed at the time of
purchase, that it was also known
at the time of purchase that there was no ready
fix for the defect, that any additional servicing required to be undertaken by
of the defect would be undertaken under warranty at no cost, that it was
likely that there would be some negative but undetermined
impact on fuel economy
and that countermeasures are now available at no cost which will remedy the
defect if implemented.
upon the six assumptions, Mr Cuthbert was asked to express his opinion in
answer to three questions, namely:
as at the time of purchase, using only information which was available at the
time of purchase?
as at the time of purchase, using the information available today?
as at [the date of the initial trial]?
to 1, Mr Cuthbert maintained the value expressed in his report. As to 2,
he expressed the opinion that the value would be the
same because
Mr Williams would be faced with the defect consequences for a considerable
period during which time there would be requirements
for extra servicing and
possible repairs, he would have lost trust in his vehicle and he would have the
constant thought as to whether
or not the vehicle would leave him in an
embarrassing situation with the issuing of white smoke and/or the foul odour.
Mr Cuthbert identified many factors that affected a resale
valuation of Mr Williams’s Prado at the time of the initial trial
(some of which had increased used car values) and expressed the opinion that a
vehicle with the fix applied would have the same value
as those being advertised
for sale at the time.
one point in the course of his cross-examination about these answers,
Mr Cuthbert did accept that he was loading a lot of his assessment
of value into embarrassment and inconvenience (T196). He also agreed that in
referring to embarrassment and inconvenience
he was relying upon the information
from Mr Williams because “that’s the one we have the details
for” (T195).
However, shortly after that evidence, Mr Cuthbert said:
“I didn’t concentrate on the embarrassment and inconvenience.
took the overall ownership problems and consequences into my initial
calculations, and that’s what I based it on”
exchanges do indicate that the evidence of Mr Cuthbert concerned the
circumstances of use of the Prado as experienced by Mr
Williams. Whilst
they are an insufficient foundation to support the submission that the analysis
of Mr Cuthbert rested, in effect,
upon Mr Williams’s evidence as
to his embarrassment, they do expose the limitations of an opinion as to the
reduction in value
of a particular vehicle as a foundation for drawing
conclusions to support an aggregate assessment of reduction in value damages
all members of the relevant cohort. Reliance upon the actual experience of
Mr Williams and the conclusions that might be drawn
based upon that
experience (such as his embarrassment) tend to disconnect the analysis from an
objective assessment as to how a reasonable
consumer might view the significance
of the defect at the time of purchase taking into account the possibility that a
found and provided under warranty.
we note that Mr Cuthbert accepted that the availability of the fix restored
the value of the vehicle. This was made abundantly
clear in other evidence and
was not in issue on the appeal.
The evidence of Mr Boedeker
Mr Boedeker
presented expert evidence based upon results obtained from a “choice-based
conjoint survey”. Both before
the primary judge and on appeal Toyota
contended that there were many flaws in the analysis. The primary judge
accepted the merits
of many of the criticisms but concluded that the evidence
still had “some force” when it came to quantification of the
aggregate reduction in value for members of the relevant cohort. Toyota pressed
the significance of the flaws on the basis that
they should have led the primary
judge to conclude that Mr Boedeker’s evidence could provide no basis
for making such an assessment.
reasons that we develop below, we are not persuaded that the primary judge used
the figures produced by Mr Boedeker as part of
the foundation for
concluding that the appropriate measure of the reduction in value was 17.5% from
a relevant measure of the retail
price. Rather, his Honour confined his use of
the willingness to pay survey evidence. He treated it as some confirmation of
own assessment, based on the evidence of the nature of the defect and its
consequences, that the defect would have a significant
effect upon the value of
the vehicles to a reasonable consumer. Unlike the conclusion reached in the
case of Mr Cuthbert, his Honour
did not find that the figures produced by the
willingness to pay analysis provided a useful guide or any indication as to the
appropriate
figure. His Honour placed only limited reliance on the willingness
to pay analysis of Mr Boedeker (see J[379]).
those circumstances, we consider the attack upon the evidence of
Mr Boedeker to proceed from a false premise and it is not necessary
consider the validity of the analysis undertaken to support the particular
figures advanced by Mr Boedeker. Those figures were
not relied upon by the
primary judge.
The evidence of Mr Stockton
Mr Stockton
is an economist and econometrician. He has considerable experience applying
econometric analysis within what he describes
as the retail automotive industry
and has studied many different markets for automotive and agricultural
equipment. He says that
his experience has been undertaken with an emphasis on
pricing mechanisms and pricing behaviour.
Mr Stockton
prepared a very detailed report based upon the analysis of available market
information. He also drew upon information
concerning the affected vehicles.
He produced much detail concerning his sources of information, the economic
models he had used
and the calculations he had undertaken. He also summarised
his key findings in narrative terms and by reference to a series of tables.
present purposes, it is the information presented in the tables that assumes
significance.
his report dated 23 July 2021, Mr Stockton expressed the opinion that
buyers of the defective Toyota vehicles had made an overpayment
reliably attributable to the defect. He expressed the opinion that in a
scenario where the 2020 field fix was effective
then it was appropriate to use
what he termed a “Repair Cost Model” as the basis for assessing the
reduction in value
of the defective vehicles. He identified the reduction in
value generated by the defect as being “the amount of additional
that would have been necessary at the time of purchase for Group Members to
acquire the Defective Vehicles for which they bargained”.
It described
the cost to repair the defect as an observable and measurable increment being
“the amount of money or equivalent
market value that would be needed to
add to the transaction to make the Affected Vehicles as delivered equivalent to
the Affected
Vehicles as represented” (paras 34 to 41).
addition, Mr Stockton investigated whether the conditions had been
satisfied to enable an excess depreciation model (also described
as a diminished
value model) to be used to determine the reduction in value attributable to the
defect. It is a model that seeks
to identify a correlation between awareness of
a defect that was previously not identified and some change in observable market
As to whether such a model could be used, Mr Stockton concluded as
follows (para 46):
In this matter, those conditions are not satisfied. Rather, my inquiry strongly
supports the finding that the resale market does
not have well-developed
knowledge of the [defect], and therefore, is not exhibiting an informed response
to the [defect] in terms
of resale prices of [defective vehicles].
Nevertheless,
Toyota sought to deploy the market data that had been used by Mr Stockton
to reach that conclusion to support submissions
to the effect that the data
showed that, throughout the relevant period, the defective vehicles held their
value better than comparator
vehicles. Those comparator vehicles included the
same Toyota models supplied with a petrol engine in which the defect was not
reliance was placed upon the following passage from the report of
Mr Stockton (para 250):
Although my analysis of the resale market pricing behaviour of Affected Vehicles
described below is not the product of finalized
analysis of the type that I
would have conducted had I found that a Diminished Value model would reliably
bear upon the Questions
asked of me, in my opinion, I had sufficient data and
undertook sufficient analyses and testing to identify pricing trends and to
for effects that might affect resale market prices for reasons separate from the
[defect]. I have no reason to expect that
increasing sample size or refining
the model through additional regression specifications would have reversed or
negated trends observed
in the data. Consequently, I consider that I applied
appropriate diligence and professional care and made all relevant inquiries
reach the findings presented in this section, and those findings are, in my
opinion, reliable and indicative of the relevant pricing
trends in the resale
market, as those trends relate to the [defect].
above passage is to be found in the introduction to the section of
Mr Stockton’s report that is concerned with whether an
depreciation model could be used. Ultimately, as has been observed, it was
found that the model could not be used.
Mr Stockton was cross-examined as to the purpose to which some of his data
might be put. He was taken to some of his tables
and asked whether the data in
them could be used for comparing the retained values of affected vehicles with
the retained values
of unaffected vehicles of the same make and model (but with
petrol engines). In particular he was taken to a data point in the table
showed that the retained value for the defective vehicle was higher than the
retained value for the equivalent Toyota vehicle
with a petrol engine.
Mr Stockton
agreed that on average there was a higher average value retention for the
vehicles affected by the defect compared to
those that were not so affected
(T222). That concession is borne out by a consideration of the relevant tables
produced in his report.
his report, Mr Stockton tested this and other aspects of the data which he
described as counter-intuitive (para 265). Accordingly,
he went on to
investigate whether “other portions of the resale market indicate a
response to the [defect] at all”.
He described the inquiry that he
undertook in the following terms (para 266):
Inherently, this investigation consisted of two inquiries. First, irrespective
of whether the resale market responds to the [defect],
are there indicia of the
resale market’s distinct awareness of the [defect]? Second, if evidence
exists of market actors’
awareness of the [defect], is there an observable
response to that information? As described below, I conclude that in some
of the market, particularly Toyota dealerships, clear evidence of
knowledge of the [defect] is present. Furthermore, clear evidence
of a response
to knowledge of the [defect] is also present. By contrast, an asymmetry exists
between patterns observed in Dealer
Sales Data and patterns observed in Auction
Data. Based on the suite of findings described below, it is my opinion that the
sensitive response by Toyota dealerships to the [defect], relative to
auction participants, indicates that either Toyota dealerships’
to the [defect] is based on more mature information relative to the [defect] or
auction buyers’ response to the [defect]
is not based on mature market
knowledge relative to the [defect].
above conclusion is based on the following findings by Mr Stockton (para
First, Affected Vehicles traded-in to Toyota dealerships had much higher
frequency of DPF repairs than Affected Vehicles as a whole.
Second, trade-in prices paid by Toyota dealerships to Group Members correlated
negatively with the degree to which those vehicles
were in need of DPF repairs
prior to retail sale.
Third, auction sales prices were independent of the DPF repair history of
Affected Vehicles.
Fourth, Toyota dealership trade-in prices and retail prices of Affected Vehicles
correlated closely with DPF repair history of Affected
Fifth, the combination of the third and fourth findings described above
highlight an important gap in the behaviour of the auction
market and the more
informed trade-in market, as Toyota dealerships were acutely responsive to
Affected Vehicles’ DPF repair
history, whereas auction buyers’
behaviour was independent of that history.
(Separate sub-paragraph numbering excluded.)
submission advanced by Toyota was to the effect that Mr Stockton set out to
determine the negative reaction which the defect brought
market and, having seen that the market data showed no such negative reaction,
Mr Stockton concluded that something
was faulty about the market data. A
submission in those terms is unfair to Mr Stockton. There is no foundation
for suggesting that
Mr Stockton simply concluded that the data was wrong.
Rather, prompted by an understandable observation that the data appeared to
counterintuitive, Mr Stockton undertook a detailed analysis of what was
driving the result. He concluded from that analysis (and
the data which he
presented to support the five findings that he made) that there was an
informational problem with the data. In
short, the defect was not a matter that
was known to all market participants. In cases where there were reasons to
conclude that
the defect consequences had manifested and that was known to the
buyer then prices were lower. In auction markets there was different
the overall data were not suitable for an excess depreciation model as a means
of measuring the reduction in value for
all defective vehicles. However,
equally the same data could not be used to support the affirmative position
advanced by Toyota
in the appeal, namely that buyers of the defective vehicles
in resale markets were willing to pay more for them than comparable vehicles
despite being aware of the defect. Rather, the proper conclusion was that the
data could not be used to reach any conclusion because
the foundation for
concluding that there was a positive correlation between the defect and higher
value had not been established.
Rather, the more detailed analysis showed that
only some buyers were informed as to the defect and those buyers paid lower
compared to other buyers.
Significantly,
Toyota did not point on the appeal to any part of the evidence where
Mr Stockton accepted the premise for the submission
made on appeal by
reference to the data in the table, nor to any basis upon which the Court should
reject the analysis (and conclusions)
based upon the five factual findings made
by reference to a detailed consideration of the data.
above submission was advanced before the primary judge and rejected. His Honour
described it as being based upon a critical premise
that the market became
“fully informed of the [defect]”: J[90]. His Honour went on to
reject the validity of the use
of the market data analysed by Mr Stockton
as indicating that the defect did not affect the value of the relevant
criticised his Honour’s approach on the basis that the submission advanced
at the initial trial was to the effect that
the evidence showed that the market
became more informed over time, not that the market participants were fully
informed. Accepting
(for the purposes of the argument) that to be so, his
Honour was correct to describe the market being fully informed as a critical
premise for the use to which Toyota sought to put the market data. If some
segments of the market knew or the extent of awareness
was imperfect such that
the full significance of the effect was not apprehended or the extent of market
knowledge was gradual then
the data could not be used in the manner submitted by
Toyota. Unless there was a foundation for a conclusion that the market in
general was aware of the defect and its significance, then overall market data
could not be deployed to reach a conclusion that the
price in some way indicated
the general market response to the significance of the defect. All the more so
in the context of the
detailed analysis by Mr Stockton.
Ultimately,
as to the use of the market data in the tables prepared by Mr Stockton, the
primary judge found as follows (J[92]):
As Mr Stockton put it, and as I accept, there would need to be an awareness
generally on the part of consumers in the resale market
of a systematic
forward-looking propensity in Relevant Vehicles before it could be said the
market was informed... [Toyota] contends
that this does not accord with common
sense, because unknown future problems would have a greater adverse impact on
consumers. I
disagree. The fact that a consumer is aware of a past problem in
one vehicle does not mean they would associate this with a systemic
all vehicles going forward.
logic of this finding was not impeached. Further, Toyota’s submission
fails to adequately grapple with the significance
of the unchallenged findings
that Toyota engaged in misleading and deceptive conduct which included adverse
findings about its conduct
when it knew of the defect. Therefore, any
information that the market acquired was through individual experience of
owners and information channels that operated in a market where
Toyota was not accepting that there was a problem.
as to this aspect of the evidence, Toyota sought to rely upon the evidence of
its own expert Dr Pleatsikas. It must first
be observed that
Dr Pleatsikas did not express his own opinion as to conclusions that may be
reached concerning value. Rather, his
evidence was in the form of a critique.
In that context, Dr Pleatsikas offered up the following critique in the
course of giving
oral evidence concerning the reasoning of Mr Stockton as
to why it was not appropriate to use an excess depreciation model
[Mr Stockton] asserts that because he could find no real breakpoint in the
data indicating some type of major event that informed
the market about the
defect, that the diminished value analysis should be ignored. But the real
world is messy. We don’t
always have a single breakpoint. Data
filtration into a market is often gradual. What’s incontrovertible is
that more and
more data about the defect filtered into the market over time.
What’s also true is that the value premium for the affected
vehicles also
increased over time. If you put these facts together, the logical conclusion is
that the market did not impute a significant
negative market price effect on the
defect. As the market learned more about the defect the value premium increased
for these vehicles.
The bottom line is that none of Mr Stockton’s
four factors justify ignoring the diminished value analysis.
may be observed that the above passage from the oral testimony of
Dr Pleatsikas (upon which Toyota placed considerable reliance)
advances the
opinion that as the market learned more about the defect the value premium
increased. In our view, there are a number
of problems with this
as Dr Pleatsikas observed, the data actually showed that over time there
was an increase in the value premium for the defective
vehicles compared to
other vehicles. Yet, he used the data to reach an opinion that as the market
became informed it “did
not impute a significant negative market price
effect on the defect”. Understandably, he stopped short of attributing
increase in the value premium over time to the defect. However, necessarily
implicit in this approach to the data is the attribution
of the increase in
value premium to some other variable or variables. Dr Pleatsikas offered
no explanation in that regard as part
of the testimony relied upon.
Conceivably,
increases in value attributable to variables other than the defect might swamp
any negative effects of information about
the defect. This may be especially so
if the information about the defect was imperfect and not communicated across
all buyers.
the proposition that it might be concluded that there was no observable negative
effect on prices must also be evaluated
in the context of the findings made as
to the seriousness of the defect and its consequences. It was the seriousness
of the defect
together with the increase in the value premium over time that
caused Mr Stockton to consider the result to be counter-intuitive.
already addressed the respects in which Dr Pleatsikas disagreed with the
explanation offered by Mr Stockton after considering
the data more
the views of Dr Pleatsikas were not supported by any economic analysis of
the data that justified a conclusion that the data
concerning the value premium
might be said to be correlated with information about the defect becoming
available in the market.
the criticism by Dr Pleatsikas of the approach by Mr Stockton depended
upon whether it might be found, on all the evidence,
that information filtered
into the used vehicle market to a sufficient degree (both as to who knew and
what was known) that its potentially
negative effect upon value would be able to
be observed in the market data. The proposition that despite such knowledge
no observable negative effect on prices must also be evaluated in the
context of the findings made as to the seriousness of the defect
consequences.
may be noted that the contentions advanced for Toyota did not seek to support
the conclusion expressed by Dr Pleatsikas that there
was no justification
for ignoring the excess depreciation model (described as the diminished value
analysis). Rather, the view expressed
by Dr Pleatsikas concerning
“data filtration” was advanced to support a contention that the
Court, on appeal, should
have regard to the data presented in the tables to
conclude that there was no reduction in value by reason of the defect. At its
core, that submission was properly described by the primary judge as being based
upon a critical premise that the market as a whole
knew about the defect and its
consequences. Although his Honour used the term “fully informed”,
we do not understand
him to have done so by adopting any technical economic
meaning to the effect that every participant had perfect knowledge. Rather,
Honour was quite properly drawing attention to the fact that conclusions could
not be drawn from the evidence of the overall
average price being paid in the
second-hand market unless there was some basis for concluding that the market as
a whole was informed
of the problem (and not just some pockets who had some
general awareness that there was an issue with some vehicles in the context
Toyota declining to acknowledge publicly that there was a problem).
the real nature of the complaint raised by Toyota when it comes to the use that
it says should have been made of the market
data in the tables prepared by
Mr Stockton is to the effect that there should have been a finding by the
primary judge that over
time the point was reached where the market as a whole
knew enough that you would expect any concern amongst buyers in general to
reflected in a comparison between the prices being paid for vehicles with the
defect and their petrol engine counterparts. We
address that aspect of the
evidence below.
it must be noted that Mr Stockton also undertook a separate repair cost
model analysis. It was relied upon in support of
the claim for aggregate
reduction in value damages as a measure of the ‘floor’ for the
assessment, being a percentage
between 2.9% and 7.3% of the relevant retail
price: J[380]. The analysis was based upon the warranty repair costs that
Toyota reimbursed
to dealers for performing the 2020 field fix: J[383]. It
treated that amount as a proxy for what would have been required at the
purchase to ameliorate the defect. As the primary judge observed,
“although it measures the economic value of restoring
the consumer to the
position they ought to have been in at the time of supply, it does not account
for the fact that the [2020 field
fix] was not delivered for many years”
The extent to which the market became informed
Toyota, the following propositions were advanced as to why the market was
sufficiently informed about the defect such that the
information in the tables
produced by Mr Stockton should have been brought to account by the primary
(1) It was not necessary to demonstrate that the market was fully informed of
the defect before the information in the tables was
(2) There was evidence that supported conclusions that the market was informed
by print and online media.
(3) Contrary to the finding of the primary judge, the experts agreed that it was
appropriate and conventional for economists to use
information that concerned
sales from the used car market in forming conclusions as to the effect on value
of the defect of vehicles
sold in the new vehicle market.
(4) Contrary to the finding of the primary judge, the information prepared by
Mr Stockton was not confined to comparing vehicles
of different makes (by
reason of the comparison that could be made to the same Toyota vehicles with
petrol engines).
the basis of the above propositions it was contended that the information in the
tables should have led to a finding that there
was no reduction in value by
reason of the defects. For the following reasons, we do not accept that the
primary judge was in error
in approaching the damages issues on the basis that
the market was not sufficiently informed as to the defect and its consequences
to be able to conclude that the data as analysed by Mr Stockton was
relevant to the assessment of reduction in value damages.
The extent to which the market needed to be
reasons that have been given, unless it was established that the used car
transactions were informed to a considerable degree
by knowledge of the defect
on the part of buyers in general then it is not possible to safely conclude that
the average of such observed
prices indicates the effect of the defect on value.
Evidence to the effect that there was some awareness amongst some buyers was
sufficient. Further, it has not been shown that the primary judge was in error
in accepting the expert evidence of Mr Stockton
as to why conclusions as to
the effect of knowledge of the defect could not be drawn from the average prices
in the used car market.
The evidence concerning print and online media
Honour considered the evidence as to the extent to which the market had been
informed of the defect by the publication in the
print and online media of
articles about the problems that had been experienced by owners of diesel Toyota
vehicles: J[95]-[101].
His Honour identified six issues with the claim by
Toyota that the market had been informed in that way. Toyota seeks to challenge
his Honour’s reasoning in a number of ways.
Toyota placed reliance upon the evidence of Dr Pleatsikas. For reasons
that have been given, we do not accept that submission.
it was alleged that the primary judge erroneously found that the fact that the
articles were published “says nothing”
the time of purchase and was contrary to expert evidence about the
appropriateness of using subsequent
evidence of second hand sales (see below).
However, this contention misstated the nature of the relevant finding by his
Honour which
was expressed in the following terms (J[96]):
... none of the articles published prior to October 2020 disclose that the
Relevant Vehicles are defective in the way concluded by
referee and found by the
court. As regards to an article dated 23 October 2020, by the time that
article was published, an effective
fix had become available (as is explained in
the article). Even if one assumes that the information in this article was
by the resale market and reflected in market prices for used Relevant
Vehicles from October 2020, it says nothing about the reduction
in value of
those vehicles resulting from the defect at the time they were initially
supplied, when no effective fix was available.
to the above finding, it may be observed that the first sentence is not
challenged. It is of considerable significance because
it is a finding to the
effect that during the period from 2016 until October 2020 there was no media
article that disclosed the nature
of the defect as found by the Court. In
short, media articles could not be the means by which the market became informed
real seriousness of the defect and its consequences.
submission focussed upon the final sentence. It was addressing the significance
of an assumption in favour of Toyota
that an article published in October 2020
disclosed the defect. The point made by the primary judge was that even if such
an assumption
is made, there was a material difference between the circumstance
of a buyer purchasing a second-hand vehicle at a time when the
2020 field fix
was available and a buyer of the new vehicle at a time when no fix was
available. His Honour is not addressing the
possibility of a second-hand sale
at a time when there was awareness of the defect and no fix was available.
Indeed, it is understandable
why his Honour does not do so given the finding in
the first sentence that none of the articles provided that information.
Toyota criticised the following finding by his Honour (at J[97]):
... there is no evidence or reason to infer that the resale market for Relevant
Vehicles is an “efficient market” in
the sense that information
published on a trade website or in a newspaper should be taken to be absorbed by
the resale market and
reflected in the market price of the Relevant Vehicles.
The finding was said to be contrary to the evidence given by each of
Mr Cuthbert and Mr Williams.
to Mr Cuthbert, the evidence relied upon was given in very general terms
and concerned information about the market available on
CarSales.com and from
RedBook and AutoEdge that he would use to ensure that his assessments as to
value had a close connection to
the market price for used vehicles. The finding
by the primary judge addressed a different point. It concerned the extent to
the prevailing prices might reflect information that might be published on
a trade website or in a newspaper because it is information
that guides the
assessment of value made by most buyers.
to Mr Williams, he was cross examined as to his own use of such information
for his car purchases and in providing loss assessment
services to insurers.
Evidence that Mr Williams gave as to his own practice and awareness could
hardly provide a foundation for
a conclusion as to what may be the position in
the market as a whole, especially as he was an atypical purchaser given his
it was said that the primary judge fixed the bar too high in making findings to
the effect that the descriptions in the
articles were too general and did not
expose the seriousness of the defect. In that regard, the issue for present
purposes is whether
the average market data could be used to draw a conclusion
based upon observed average resale prices. If the information that was
available did not disclose the seriousness of the defect, that was a proper
basis upon which to question the use of such information
as a basis for finding
that the data could not be used to conclude that there was no effect upon value
from the defect.
it was said that evidence about Toyota’s consumer redress program did not
assist. As to such evidence his Honour introduced
the reference to that
material by saying “while I place minimal, if any, weight on this
factor”: J[101]. Given that
clear qualification, it could not be said
that there was error in not relying on Mr Stockton’s data by reason
of anything that
was said about the redress program.
the contention advanced does not challenge other reasons identified by the
primary judge for concluding that the market was
not fully informed of the
defect. They included the following unchallenged findings:
(1) Having regard to the content of the articles relied upon by Toyota it was
“arguable that a reasonable consumer reading
[them] would understand that
the problems or issues with the vehicles referred to in the articles have been
or are able to be fixed
[when] this was not the case” (J[99]).
(2) Toyota had, since the beginning of the proceedings (in 2019) denied the core
allegation that the vehicles were defective in design
and have an inherent
propensity to experience adverse consequences (J[100]).
(3) There were a number of issues with the hypothesis advanced by Toyota that
dealers may have been informing individual consumers
consequences, including the fact that there was no evidence to support the
assertion even though more than
7,000 of the vehicles were sold as used vehicles
by its dealers (J[106]-[107]).
(4) The information that Toyota allowed its dealers to give to the market was
tightly controlled and included information about what
dealers could provide to
customers and included instructions to dealers to tell customers to respond to
questions about the DPF by
telling customers that they were not the subject of
legal proceedings (J[111]).
Use of information concerning sales in the used car
found that the market was not apprised of the defect and its consequences, his
Honour noted that it would be necessary to say
something about “the
secondary market data” (namely the data assembled by Mr Stockton in
his tables): J[114]. Later
his Honour returned to this aspect when identifying
whether there had been any reduction in value by reason of the defect. His
began that aspect of his reasons with the observation that as a matter of
common sense and intuition, the nature of the defect and
its consequences led to
“a sound – indeed, irresistible – conclusion” that there
was reduced value at the
time of supply: J[330]-[331]. With respect, we
that context, his Honour addressed the secondary market data. He drew upon the
earlier findings as to the incompleteness of information
that was available to
the used car market: J[333]. He described this as a determinative reason to
place no weight on the data in
forming a view as to the extent of reduction in
value. Having regard to our conclusions concerning his Honour’s earlier
this was a full and sufficient basis for his Honour’s approach
of disregarding the second-hand pricing information when assessing
reduction in
Honour proceeded to make three additional points. First, his Honour emphasised
the significance of the existence of many confounding
factors in secondary
markets: J[334]-[335]. Next, his Honour observed (J[336]):
... even if the market had become increasingly informed of issues that related
in one way or another to the defect, Mr Stockton’s
initial regression
analyses did not test whether sales prices later in the period differed from
sales prices earlier in the period.
This means it cannot be inferred from the
market data that such information as there was in the market relating to the
and its consequences had no impact on value.
is force in both these points, neither of which is challenged.
Toyota focusses upon the final one of the three further points made by the
primary judge, being as follows (J[337]):
... when it comes to determining whether there was a reduction in value ...
resulting from the [defect], the fact that [the vehicles]
held their value
better than comparator vehicles in the resale market is of little moment for at
least two further reasons: (1)
it is not a comparison that is directed to
the new car market, so any potential relevance would be confined to the analysis
supply of second-hand vehicles to some group members; and (2) the
relevant question for analysing loss under s 272(1)(a) is not a
between the position the purchaser is in and the position the purchaser would be
in if they had purchased a different
between the true value of the goods actually purchased and the lesser of the
or the average retail price of those goods.
is the first of these two points that is presently relevant. Toyota challenged
the reasoning on the basis that the experts agreed
that it was appropriate to
use data from the used car market to reach conclusions about the value of the
defect. It may be accepted
that the experts agreed that it was conventional for
economists to reason from data in the used car market. However, given the
pathway adopted by the primary judge, that point was a wholly
insufficient basis upon which to seek to impugn the finding that the
used car market data did not provide a foundation for concluding that there was
no reduction in value. The real issues
in the case were whether it was possible
to reason from the data in the present case and, if so, what conclusions might
be drawn. It was not the case that the experts agreed that one could
simply take the used car market data and treat that in an uncritical
basis for concluding whether there had been a reduction in value by reason of
the defect.
The nature of the comparison
also contended that the second of the two points made in the quoted passage
above (J[337]) was incorrect. In particular, it
was said that it suggested that
the available data (in the tables produced by Mr Stockton) involved a
comparison with “a different
car altogether” and this was not
correct. It was said to be incorrect because there was data which enabled a
comparison between
the prices for the same model of vehicle but with a petrol
engine (although there were also other makes and models listed as possible
comparators). It is true that both types of comparators were presented in the
data. However, it is still possible to describe a
vehicle with a petrol engine
as a different type of car altogether.
any event, once again, the point being made concerns a relatively minor aspect
of the reasoning process. For reasons that we have
given, his Honour’s
approach is supported by a consideration of his unchallenged findings and
insufficiency in the passage
of oral testimony of Dr Pleatsikas relied upon
Conclusion on the extent to which the market became
the reasons we have given, we are not persuaded that the primary judge was in
error in not bringing to account the evidence concerning
the average sale prices
of used vehicles in reaching a conclusion as to the quantum of reduction in
value damages.
Consideration of Toyota’s propositions
regard to the reasons we have expressed, we now address each of the propositions
advanced by Toyota in the appeal.
Proposition (1): Alleged error in using ‘willingness
to pay’ evidence (ground 5)
is important to begin the consideration of proposition (1) by noting the way in
which the primary judge approached the “willingness
to pay” evidence
given by Mr Boedeker as commented upon by Toyota’s expert
Honour undertook a detailed analysis of the criticisms of the
“choice-based conjoint survey” upon which the opinions
Mr Boedeker were based. His Honour concluded that analysis in the
following way by first addressing a point made by the applicants
Dr Rossi’s criticisms about the survey should not be accepted because
he had not taken up the opportunity to participate
in the design of the survey
(J[376]-[379]):
The applicants’ contentions may have some merit, but that does not mean
the survey should be accepted uncritically. The fact
is, as [Toyota] submits,
there were a number of difficulties with the survey, which throw doubt on the
validity of a number of responses,
and should influence the weight to be
attributed to it. In saying this, at times, [Toyota] exaggerates these
difficulties: for
example, Mr Boedeker accepted that the five attribute
survey produced anomalies and instead sought to focus on those results
in the six attribute version of his survey: Second Boedeker Report
(at [79]). Similarly, as will be seen, the emphasis on illogicality
responses is overstated.
Nevertheless, the applicants do not contend that the survey ought to be the
source of truth for a precise reduction in value. It
is the general picture
that emerges from the conjoint analysis which it is said, and I accept, is still
of some limited utility in
coming to a landing on a figure for any reduction in
The results of Mr Boedeker’s survey, at a very broad level, make
intuitive sense: wholly unsurprisingly, they suggest consumers
are willing to
pay less for defective vehicles than they are willing to pay for identical,
non-defective vehicles, and the difference
in [willingness to pay] widens as the
probability of manifestation of the [defect consequences] and the duration of
the [defect]
In summary, while it is no doubt true that Mr Boedeker’s survey
confronted difficulties, I accept his conjoint survey evidence
is a very general
indicator of a significant reduction in value of the Relevant Vehicles resulting
from the [defect]. Given Dr Rossi’s
criticisms and my reservations
as to the accuracy of the survey (and having regard to the principles of law
that apply in relation
to the valuation exercise), it is unrealistic (and
unnecessary) to seek to attach any greater reliance or precision to
Mr Boedeker’s
survey than this general impressionistic finding.
can be seen that the primary judge placed only limited reliance upon the
willingness to pay analysis by Mr Boedeker.
Ultimately,
the conclusion by the primary judge was expressed at J[393] in the following
terms (already quoted but reproduced again
at this point for ease of
reference):
The applicants advocate for a reduction in value of 25 per cent. There is
always a difficulty in settling upon a pin-point figure
in cases of this type.
Doing so, although necessary, tends to lend a patina of precision to what in
truth is an evaluative and imprecise
exercise upon which, at least at the
margins, reasonable minds may differ. I am inclined, however, to consider the
figure fastened
upon by the applicants as being simply too high. My reasons for
this conclusion have been addressed in relation to my findings as
to the expert
evidence, which has led me to conclude that although the evidence of
Mr Boedeker and Mr Cuthbert has some force, a
number of the criticisms
directed to its accuracy and reliability also have merit.
But the conclusion
that a reduction in value must still be a figure of significance not only aligns
with common sense, but more specifically,
my perception of the evidence of Mr
Williams and the effect of the [defect consequences] more generally, as borne
out by the customer
(as to which see [183]). Doing the best I
can, a reduction in value in the range of 15 per cent to 20 per cent is
appropriate having
regard to all the evidence. Given the need to land on an
exact figure, I should settle in the middle of this range, that is, a reduction
of 17.5 per cent.
(Emphasis added.)
above passage was followed by the following further reasoning at
While, of course, the applicants bear the onus of establishing a reduction in
value and an appropriate quantification for that reduction,
I am somewhat
fortified in this view by reason of the fact that none of [Toyota’s]
experts provided any real analysis of their
own as to the reduction in value
that was suffered by group members. Although Mr O’Mara conceded that
the [defect] reduced
the value of [Mr Williams’s Prado], he did not
express any view about the quantum of that reduction in value: see [351].
Likewise, Toyota’s expert economists provided no positive evidence in
relation to the quantification of the reduction in value.
the ultimate reasoning by the primary judge to support the finding of aggregate
reduction in value damages of 17.5% appears
to have involved the following
constituent parts:
(1) the evidence of Mr Boedeker and Mr Cuthbert has some force but
there are valid criticisms of their analysis (noting the earlier
findings that
(a) the evidence of Mr Boedeker was a general indicator of a significant
reduction in value but it was unrealistic
(and unnecessary) to place any greater
reliance upon it; and (b) the evidence of Mr Cuthbert was a useful guide to
valuation);
(2) the findings to the effect that the defect was significant and had
substantial consequences meant that as a matter of common
sense the resulting
reduction in value must have been “a figure of significance”;
(3) the evidence of the nature of the customer complaints about the consequences
experienced by them also supports a conclusion that
the reduction in value must
have been “a figure of significance”;
(4) the overall thrust of the evidence of Mr Williams of his experience of
the defects when using the Prado vehicle as also borne
out by the customer
complaints supports the figure of 17.5%; and
(5) Toyota did not lead evidence as to the quantification of the reduction in
the context of that analysis, it appears that Mr Boedeker’s evidence
was relied upon as providing some support. However,
for reasons we have given
that support was not as to the figures concerning willingness to pay but the
indication the survey provided
as to the significance of the defect for
consumers. As discussed above, it appears that the figure arrived at by
Mr Cuthbert was
given some significance because of his Honour’s
finding that it was a useful guide to valuation. As noted above, in this
we consider the primary judge erred.
to that matter, the ultimate conclusion by the primary judge was principally
based upon his Honour’s assessment of the
seriousness of the defect and
its consequences (being findings based upon the report of a referee) and the
evidence of Mr Williams
and the many others who had made complaints to
Toyota, buttressed by the lack of any countervailing evidence from Toyota as to
the reduction in value might be quantified.
Importantly,
his Honour accepted the merit of a number of criticisms directed to the accuracy
and reliability of the analysis of Mr
Boedeker and Mr Cuthbert.
that context, the particular reliance placed upon the evidence of
Mr Williams and the complaints received by Toyota confirms that
was considering an appropriate percentage to reflect the evidence as to the
consequences of the defect in what were relatively
common driving
conditions.
proposition (1) is based upon an argument to the effect that it was not correct
to refer to willingness to pay as a
measure of market value. This was really a
legal argument to the effect that s 272(1) required an assessment of the
reduction in
market value and the willingness to pay analysis did not determine
market value. For reasons we have given, we do not accept the
validity of this
argument. His Honour was correct to focus upon the price that reasonable buyers
would pay for the goods (in the
present case the vehicles) if they had known of
the defect. This was to focus upon the utility of the consumer goods in the
of the buyer rather than the resale value. It was an approach that was
appropriately directed to the reduction in that value that
resulted from the
failure to comply with the consumer guarantee. For that purpose, it was not
necessary to posit a market in which
Toyota was free to choose not to supply the
defective goods if the price was too low. Rather, it was appropriate to focus
upon understanding
the effect upon the willingness to pay that knowledge of the
defect would have on relevant buyers. As the analysis was not ultimately
by the primary judge to determine with any precision a clearing price, it is not
necessary to determine whether a willingness
to pay analysis might be used in
Ultimately,
it could not be said that it was inconsistent with the proper legal conception
of the statutory provision to include in
the assessment process a general view
that the defect was viewed by reasonable buyers as being very significant when
reaching a conclusion
as to an appropriate percentage reduction. The primary
judge went no further than using the evidence of willingness to pay in that
those reasons proposition (1) is not a basis for demonstrating error in the
reasoning by the primary judge.
Proposition (2): Alleged error in failing to have regard to
the data that formed part of the evidence of Mr Stockton
contended that the data included in the tables prepared by Mr Stockton
concerning average market prices paid for used vehicles
(the “secondary
market data”) should have been used by the primary judge to conclude that
there was no reduction in value
resulting from the failure by Toyota to comply
with the consumer guarantee. For reasons that have been given, we do not accept
validity of that contention. No error has been demonstrated in the
reasoning by the primary judge as to why that data did not assist.
viewed, for reasons that have been given, contrary to the submission advanced by
Toyota, the data in the tables prepared
by Mr Stockton were not evidence
that pointed in a different direction to the evidence relied upon by the primary
judge. Rather,
it was evidence which had not been shown to be probative of that
oral submissions, Toyota also sought to rely upon the evidence of the extent of
complaints made to Toyota dealers by owners as
evidence to support the
conclusion that the market must have been aware of the defect and its
consequences. The fact that there
were many complaints being made at a time
when Toyota was not accepting the existence of the defect does not demonstrate
in the marketplace more generally.
also sought to rely upon evidence to the effect that some buyers were repeat
purchasers of a considerable number of vehicles.
It did not adduce any evidence
from any of these buyers, the conditions in which the vehicles were used or the
process by which
decisions were made to purchase more vehicles. Submissions as
to the use to which the fact of subsequent purchases may be put in
circumstances
where the factual circumstances of the purchases was not in evidence were no
more than conjecture. The evidence that
the purchases occurred fell well short
of demonstrating that those responsible for the purchases were aware of the
defects and their
consequences as well as the prospect that the same defects
might manifest in other vehicles purchased from Toyota yet chose to continue
buy more vehicles.
proposition (2) must be rejected.
Proposition (3): Alleged insufficiency of the foundation
for the common sense assessment by the primary judge
is necessary to be clear about the nature of proposition (3). It was a claim to
the effect that the opinion evidence relied upon
by the primary judge in making
what he described as a common sense assessment was so fundamentally flawed that
the primary judge
was in error in relying upon that evidence. In short, it was
a claim that there was an insufficient evidentiary foundation for the
reached by the primary judge. Quite properly, it was not a complaint about the
adoption of a common sense approach by
which the relevant evidence was
identified and synthesised into an overall conclusions concerning the reduction
in value. Such an
approach to the assessment of damages of the kind claimed was
appropriate and consistent with authority.
the issue raised by proposition (3) is whether there was a sufficient
evidentiary foundation for the common sense assessment.
It involves two steps.
The first is to criticise the evidence that was relied upon. The second is to
maintain that, on appeal,
this Court should conclude that there was no basis
upon which to make the kind of common sense assessment that the primary judge
undertook. By those steps it is contended that the proper conclusion to reach
is that aggregate reduction in value damages had not
been established for the
relevant cohort.
have already explained our understanding of the nature of the common sense
assessment undertaken by the primary judge. In our
view it did not place any
real reliance upon the actual figures advanced by Mr Boedeker. Rather, it
relied upon the contents of
his survey as exposing reasons supporting the
impressionistic assessment (made by reference to the evidence as to the
consequences
of the defect in relatively common driving conditions) that the
defect was of such a character that it would be significant for any
buyer. Otherwise, it was the evidence of Mr Cuthbert as to value and the
evidence of Mr Williams together with the record
of the nature and extent
of the complaints that was used by the primary judge together with his
Honour’s assessment of the
seriousness of the problems that the defect
could present that formed the foundation upon which the 17.5% figure
the reasons set out at [
] above, we consider that the primary
judge erred in his reliance on Mr Cuthbert’s evidence of value, and
to this extent grounds
10 and 12 are made out.
these reasons, and to that extent, proposition (3) is made out. It follows that
the primary judge’s assessment that the
reduction in value of the relevant
vehicles was 17.5% cannot stand.
it does not follow that there is an insufficient basis to undertake an
assessment on a common sense basis. We address that
aspect separately
Proposition (4): Alternatively to (3), the common sense
assessment should have taken account of Mr Stockton’s resale figures
repair cost analysis
the extent that proposition (4) is based upon the use of the data in the tables
prepared by Mr Stockton, for reasons that have
already been given it should
be rejected.
the extent that proposition (4) seeks to deploy the evidence of Mr Stockton
concerning repair costs in a manner that would cause
the damages to be assessed
by reference to those costs we see considerable difficulties. The costs
identified by Mr Stockton are
those that are reimbursed by Toyota to its
dealers for undertaking the 2020 field fix. They do not include the no doubt
considerable
costs incurred by Toyota in finding a fix (noting that it took a
number of years to develop). Therefore the figures produced by
Mr Stockton
are likely to understate the ultimate economic cost of remedying the
and more fundamentally, as the primary judge observed, to focus only upon repair
costs is to fail to bring to account the
costs associated with the delay in the
repair being available. During that time, the utility of the defective vehicle
been significantly diminished. The repair only operates
prospectively. An assessment of reduction in value damages based upon repair
costs will fail to bring to account that aspect of the reduction in value which
will have been experienced by consumers from the
time of purchase up until the
time when Toyota is able to carry out the repair (as distinct from simply find
these reasons, proposition (4) is not made out.
Conclusion on appeal grounds
from grounds 10 and 12, the grounds of appeal considered in this section of
these reasons are not made out.
Re-assessment of the reduction in value
indicated above, it follows from our conclusion in relation to grounds 10 and 12
and Toyota’s proposition (3) that the primary
judge’s assessment
that the reduction in value was 17.5% cannot stand. In these circumstances, the
question arises whether
this Court is able to and should re-assess the reduction
in value of the relevant vehicles. Any such re-assessment would be of the
reduction in value of the relevant vehicles
before taking into account
(as we consider is necessary and appropriate) the fact that the 2020 field fix
became available. That is because the Court does
not have sufficient material
before it to determine what allowance should be made for the fact that the 2020
field fix became available.
At the hearing of the appeal, the parties indicated
that, if the Court found error in the primary judge’s determination of
17.5% figure, it would be open to this Court to re-assess that figure.
the evidence of Mr Cuthbert (which is the subject of the successful appeal
grounds) little weight and otherwise adopting the
same approach as the primary
judge and focussing upon the seriousness of the defect and its consequences, we
are of the view that
there was a sufficient basis to reach a conclusion as to
the extent of the reduction in value expressed as a percentage of an appropriate
measure of the retail price.
reasons that have been given, the assessment of the reduction in value required
a consideration of the extent of the loss of utility
resulting from the failure
to conform to the consumer guarantee. It required a focus upon the reduction in
the price that a reasonable
consumer would be willing to pay taking account of
the defect when compared to the retail purchase of the same goods without the
defect. Although resale prices might be relevant, especially to the extent that
they revealed the extent of a discount that may
be required in order to sell
goods with the defect compared to goods without the defect, care must be taken
in using prices paid
on resale of used goods. As we have explained, there are
reasons unrelated to any defect as to why there may be a considerable
differential
between the value of the goods in the hands of the consumer and the
value of the goods on resale.
the present case there was detailed evidence in the form of the report from the
referee as to the nature of the defect and its
consequences. Further, the
consequences were likely to arise in relatively common driving conditions.
Therefore, the defect was
one which was likely to manifest for many buyers.
These aspects of the findings by the primary judge were not in issue on the
Further, the nature of a motor vehicle and its utility to a consumer
are matters of ordinary everyday understanding. It is not
necessary for the
Court to receive evidence as to the nature of the use to which vehicles of the
kind the subject of the present
claims might be put by a consumer. On the basis
of the findings as to the defect and its consequences, the Court can form a view
as to an appropriate percentage reduction in utility as viewed by a reasonable
we noted at the outset of these reasons, the primary judge made detailed
findings concerning the defect and its consequences.
Some of those were more
technical in nature. Others concerned the practical consequences for the owner
of the vehicle. In our view,
it is appropriate to have regard to the way the
matters the subject of those findings would be viewed by a reasonable purchaser
a motor vehicle in order to form a view as to the extent of the effect upon
the utility of the vehicle over its useful life. We
consider the following
findings to be of particular significance:
(1) the defect was present in all relevant vehicles and was inherent in their
design: J[15(6)], J[62];
(2) each vehicle had the propensity to experience one or more of the defect
consequences: J[63];
(3) a key occurrence which caused the defect to manifest was the exposure of a
relevant vehicle to regular continuous driving at
approximately 100km per hour:
(4) the likelihood or probability that any given relevant vehicle would suffer
from one or more of the defect consequences was relatively
high: J[64];
(5) if the defect did manifest then the symptoms included excessive white smoke
and foul-smelling exhaust and system warning notifications
displaying on an
excessive number of occasions for an excessive period of time: J[15(9)],
(6) if the warning notifications were ignored then the vehicle would go into
limp mode which would prevent the vehicle going into
fifth gear and would limit
acceleration: J[81(3)];
(7) there was a need to have the vehicle inspected, serviced and/or repaired
more often: J[59(6)]; and
(8) there was an increase in fuel consumption and decrease in fuel economy:
J[59(12)], J[66]-[74];
was no suggestion by these findings that the safety of those in any of the
relevant vehicles when the excessive smoke was produced
was threatened or that
the defect might adversely affect the safe road handling capacity of those
vehicles. They were not made unroadworthy
by the defect consequences. In all
other respects, the features of the vehicles were not compromised. Rather, the
potential consequences
were additional servicing and compromised fuel efficiency
together with the production of occasional foul smelling smoke.
is conceivable that particular consumers may have been acutely embarrassed by
the production of the smoke. There was reference
in the evidence to
“several customers getting stopped by the police, and also other road
users”: J[86]. These aspects
may or may not provide the foundation for a
claim to damages under s 272(1)(b) of the ACL. However, in our view, it is
to focus upon the effect upon value to consumers in general rather
than the particular sensitivities of some consumers. It is the
way a reasonable
consumer would view the characteristics of the defect and its consequences for
the practical use of the vehicle
(which are deemed to be known to the consumer
for the purposes of assessing the reduction in value damages) that assume
significance.
reference to the above evidence as to the nature of the defect and its
consequences, this Court is able to make an assessment of
the reduction in value
expressed in percentage terms by reference to an appropriate measure of the
retail price. Again, there is
no issue in the appeal concerning the manner in
which the primary judge identified the retail price based upon the expert
presented as to the way in which such prices may be determined.
Accordingly,
even in the absence of expert evidence, the Court is able to reach a view as to
the extent of the reduction in value
based upon a close consideration of the
evidence as to the nature of the defect. In effect, this is substantially what
by the primary judge. His Honour also found some overall support for
the conclusion that the reduction in value was significant
by reference to the
survey evidence of Mr Boedeker to the effect that the willingness to pay
for vehicles with the defect was considerably
lower than the willingness to pay
for vehicles without the defect. As we have explained, we do not understand his
Honour to have
otherwise used that evidence for the purposes of reaching a view
as to an appropriate figure for the reduction in value.
would assess the reduction in value of the relevant vehicles (before taking into
account the availability of the 2020 field fix)
at 10% for the following
first is our general agreement with the approach by the primary judge which
placed emphasis upon the importance of making an assessment
of the extent of the
effect of the defect and its consequences on the utility of the vehicle in the
hands of the consumer. It is
possible to undertake such an assessment in
percentage terms informed by the evidence as to the seriousness of the defect
consequences. That evidence is to be found in the contents of the
referee’s report, the descriptions by Mr Williams, the contents
the complaints to Toyota and the Court’s own objective assessment of the
significance of those consequences.
second is the merit of the submission advanced by Toyota to the effect that much
of the utility of the vehicle was unaffected
by the defect and its consequences,
even on the basis that the vehicle may be expected to exhibit the defect
consequences in relatively
common driving conditions.
third is the merit of certain of the criticisms raised by Toyota concerning the
reasoning by Mr Cuthbert which tended to give
undue emphasis to a salvage
value. This tended to give the false impression that the defect was so
significant that vehicles with
the defect should be viewed as having little
utility unless a fix could be found and regard to Mr Cuthbert’s
figures by the
primary judge tended to overstate the reduction in value.
these reasons, we conclude that the reduction in value of the relevant vehicles
(that is, the vehicles that were the subject of
the primary judge’s
aggregate damages award), before taking into account the fact that the 2020
field fix became available,
CONCLUSION AND ORDERS
the reasons set out above, we have concluded that the second group of appeal
grounds is made out. It follows that the primary
judge’s aggregate
damages award (and associated orders) need to be set aside. Further, we have
concluded that some of the
third group of appeal grounds are made out. In light
of that conclusion, we have re-assessed the figure for the reduction in value
the relevant vehicles,
before taking into account the availability of the
2020 field fix,
are not in a position to re-assess the reduction in value of the relevant
taking into account the availability of the 2020 field fix
because further material is necessary to undertake that task, in circumstances
where neither party at trial advocated for the conceptual
approach that we
consider to be correct.
these circumstances, a question arises whether the matter should be remitted for
re-assessment of reduction in value damages or
whether the representative
applicants have simply failed to prove their case for reduction in value damages
for the relevant cohort
(so that there should be no remittal). We consider the
appropriate course in the interests of justice to be for the matter to be
remitted for re-assessment of reduction in value damages (and damages for excess
GST) in accordance with these reasons. We consider
this to be the appropriate
course in circumstances where neither party at trial advocated for the
conceptual approach that we consider
to be correct, and the approach was not
raised by the primary judge with the parties during the hearing of the matter or
while judgment
was reserved. The re-assessment of reduction in value damages
should take place on the basis that (as we have found) the reduction
before taking into account the availability of the 2020 field fix is 10%. The
aspect that remains to be determined is what
allowance should be made (by way of
reduction of the 10% figure) for the availability of the 2020 field fix.
Consistently with our
reasons, that aspect is to be approached in a way that
takes into account the period of time that the particular consumer held their
vehicle before the fix became available. There is no reason why the remittal
should not be to the primary judge.
Fernando v Commonwealth of Australia
[2014] FCAFC 181
‑[53] (Besanko and Robertson JJ, Barker J
agreeing), remittal to the primary judge does not result in a new trial. It is
continuation of the original trial. The continuation is on the basis of the
findings as made save to the extent that they have been
overturned on appeal.
We note that a remitter that takes effect as an order for a new trial is in a
different category:
R v Carroll
[2010] NSWCCA 55
77 NSWLR 45
‑[29]. We are not ordering a new trial.
will be a matter for the primary judge on remitter to determine whether, and the
extent to which, it would be appropriate to give
leave to reopen and adduce
further evidence. It will also be a matter for the primary judge on remitter to
determine whether an
assessment of reduction in value damages on the basis we
have stated can be undertaken on an aggregate basis for all of the relevant
cohort, for subgroups within the relevant cohort or not at all.
will give the parties the opportunity to make submissions on what consequential
orders we should make (in particular, what other
orders made by the primary
judge need to be set aside in light of our reasons) and costs.
Accordingly,
we will make orders to the effect that:
(1) The appeal be allowed.
(2) Paragraphs 1 to 5 of the orders made by the primary judge on 16 May
2022 be set aside.
(3) The matter be remitted for re-assessment of reduction in value damages under
ss 271(1) and 272(1)(a) of the Australian Consumer
Sch 2 to the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), and damages for
excess GST under ss 271(1) and 272(1)(b) of the ACL, in accordance with the
reasons of the Full Court.
(4) Within 14 days, each party file a written submission on consequential orders
(5) Within 28 days, each party file any responding written submission on
consequential orders and costs.
(6) Subject to further order, the issues of consequential orders and costs be
determined on the papers.
I certify that the preceding three hundred and
twenty-three (323) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
of the Honourable Justices Moshinsky, Colvin and
Dated: 27 March 2023
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.31 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter