Australian Macedonian Human Rights Committee (Inc) v State of Victoria [2000] HREOCA 52 (8 September 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
No: H97/189
AUSTRALIAN MACEDONIAN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMITTEE (INC)
Complainant
STATE OF VICTORIA
REASONS FOR DECISION
HEARING COMMISSIONER ALEXANDER STREET SC
Date of Reasons: 8 September 2000
A complaint under the
Racial Discrimination Act
(“the Act”) dated 25 July 1995 was lodged with the Equal Opportunity
Commission of Victoria, as agent for the
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission (“the Commission”), signed by the Secretary of the
Australian-Macedonian
Human Rights Committee (Inc) and also signed by the Acting
President of the Macedonian Council Australia Inc. Further particulars
complaint were provided to the Commission by letter dated 15 August 2000, again
signed by the two above named entities (collectively,
complaint”).
The complaint asserted that the Victorian Premier and Victorian Government
had breached the Act “by directing that the Macedonian
language be
referred to as “Macedonian (Slavonic)”. The complaint identified a
memorandum dated 21 July 1994 addressed
to all Ministers on the Premier’s
letterhead and signed by the Premier upon the subject described as
‘“Macedonian”
Language’. That memorandum contained a
direction, which I shall refer to as “the directive”, in the
following terms:
Further to the Federal Government’s decision to use the term Slav
Macedonians (and in order to be consistent and avoid any further
confusion) I
now request all Victorian Government Departments, and agencies, to refer for the
time being to the language that is
spoken by people living in [the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia], or originating from it, as Macedonian
(Slavonic).
How members of the respective communities choose to describe themselves, and
in particular how they choose to describe their ethnicity
and language will
continue to remain up to those individuals and communities themselves.
The two entities on behalf of whom the complaint was signed asserted that
they were aggrieved by the directive because of the change
of name of the
Macedonian language, that they were insulted by the change because it was based
upon considerations of ethnic differentiation,
that the Macedonian language was
being treated differently to any other language in the State of Victoria and
that this was entirely
unnecessary.
The complaint specifically focussed upon an alleged contravention of
of the Act and referred to Article 1.1 and Article 5 of the
International
Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Racial Discrimination Convention
(“the Convention”). The complaint also alleged that the
directive constituted a requirement in contravention of
section 9(1A).
complaint also alleged that the directive was a law and contravened
section 10.
The complaint also alleged that the Victorian Government was in the
circumstances supplying services on less favourable terms involving
contravention of
by reason of the reference to the Macedonian
language in terms that were offensive, insulting and denigrating. The complaint
alleged that the Premier had contravened
sections 16
by reason of
issuing the directive.
The complaint recorded that an attempt to have the directive rescinded had
been unsuccessful and sought a direction that the Premier
and the Victorian
Government “cease using the term ‘Macedonian (Slavonic)’ when
referring officially to the Macedonian
1.2 The initial Inquiry and proceedings to date
Relevantly, where a complaint is made to the Commission under section 22
alleging an unlawful act, the Race Discrimination Commissioner
must inquire into
the act and endeavour by conciliation to effect a settlement of the matter to
which the alleged act relates, unless
the Race Discrimination Commissioner
decides not to inquire into the alleged act or decides not to continue the
inquiry into the
alleged act on the grounds identified in section 24(2).
The complaint was the subject of initial investigation by the Race
Discrimination Commissioner resulting ultimately in a decision
under section
24(2) being notified to the Secretary of the Australian-Macedonian Human Rights
Committee (Inc) by letter dated 26
June 1997 that the act complained of was not
unlawful and that the Race Discrimination Commissioner had decided not to
continue inquiring
into the complaint.
Pursuant to a letter dated 15 July 1997 the Secretary of the
Australian-Macedonian Human Rights Committee (Inc) exercised the right
section 24(4) of the Act to have the complaint referred to the Commission for
Directions were made on 20 October 1997 for the complaint to proceed as a
representative complaint brought by the Australian-Macedonian
Human Rights
Committee (Inc) on behalf of its members pursuant to section 25L of the Act.
The matter was then the subject of a hearing before Sir Ronald Wilson, AC,
KBE, CMG, QC, as the Hearing Commissioner on 18 and 20
November 1997 and a
decision was delivered on 8 January 1998 that the complaint be dismissed.
The Macedonian Teachers’ Association of Victoria Inc made application
to the Federal Court of Australia for an order of review
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act
in relation to the
decision dated 8 January 1998. In those proceedings the applicant acted not
only in its own right but also as
a representative on behalf of its members
pursuant to
Federal Court of Australia Act
matter was heard by the Honourable Justice Weinberg on 19 and 20 October 1998
and judgment was delivered on 21 December 1998
in which, relevantly the
following orders were made:
decision of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission dismissing the
complaint brought against the State of Victoria by
the Australian-Macedonian
Human Rights Committee (Inc) be set aside.
complaint be remitted for further consideration according to law.
further consideration by the Commission of that complaint be confined to the
material filed at the time of the original decision.
An appeal was
heard by the Full Federal Court of Australia comprising O’Connor, Sundberg
and North JJ on 20 May 1999 and judgment
dismissing the appeal was delivered on
16 September 1999. An application was made for special leave to appeal to the
of Australia and was dismissed on 26 May 2000.
Under section 25A of the Act the Commission is required to hold an inquiry
into each complaint or matter referred to it under relevantly
section 24(5).
relevantly binds the Crown in the right of the States and accordingly
the complaint under
against the respondent falls within the Act.
OF THIS INQUIRY
2.1 Non-Publication Direction
The material that this inquiry has taken into account by way of further
consideration into the complaint was not adduced in public
when the inquiry was
first undertaken by Commissioner Sir Ronald Wilson. Notwithstanding the general
importance of holding an inquiry
in public, upon balancing the competing public
interests, I am satisfied that it is appropriate within the meaning of section
that this inquiry, by way of further consideration, be held in private.
There are in my view proper grounds for holding that the
material produced to
the Commission should remain confidential rather than form part of the record
available to the public as generally
occurs where the inquiry is held in public.
In this regard certain witnesses who gave evidence were only willing to do so,
of what I find to be legitimate concerns, on the basis of suppression
of their identity. However conducting the inquiry by way of
consideration in private does not adequately protect those witnesses. Upon
balancing the competing public interests I am
also satisfied it is necessary
that the identity of witnesses before the Commission not already published and
in the public arena
should remain suppressed. The reasons in this determination
refer only to witnesses the identity of whom have already been published
in the public arena. A suppression of identity direction was made by
Commissioner Sir Ronald Wilson and similar orders were
made in the related
proceedings in the Federal Court of Australia.
I direct pursuant to section 25J of the Act that no person shall publish the
names of witnesses who have appeared before the Commission
or the names of
deponents who have sworn affidavits produced to the Commission or information
that might identify them as witnesses
or deponents before the Commission,
(a) to the extent set out in this determination or already published and in the
public arena; or
(b) by the parties, any aggrieved person or their legal advisers only in so far
as is necessary for the purpose of obtaining legal
advice or the preparation and
conduct of any Court proceedings; or
(c) for official purposes which necessitates disclosure either for performance
of statutory duties or law enforcement.
2.2 “On the
papers” Direction
I also record that in the telephone directions hearing on 24 August 2000 I
directed that the inquiry would be conducted “on
the papers”,
meaning on the material already filed with the Commission comprising both
evidence and submissions. In this regard
there was an express reference by
Commissioner Sir Ronald Wilson on 20 November 1997 “for the parties to
file their submissions
with the Commission”. In my view the said direction
is in accordance with the Order 3 of the orders referred to above made
Honourable Justice Weinberg on 21 December 1998.
Conducting this inquiry “on the papers”, in the circumstances,
also, in my view, accords with affording as little formality
and technicality
and with as much expedition as the requirements of the Act dictate and still
enables a proper consideration of the
matters before the Commission. I am also
satisfied that notice was given to each party of the intention to conduct the
inquiry “on
the papers” and I note that no objection was made to
this course by either party.
I am also satisfied that both parties have had a reasonable opportunity to
make submissions to the Commission all of which I have
read together with the
transcripts and exhibits and I have taken this material into account in making
this determination.
2.3 Application for Joinder by Pan-Macedonian Association of Melbourne and
Victoria Inc
By letter dated 21 July 2000 the Pan-Macedonian Association of Melbourne and
Victoria Inc made application to be joined as a third
party to the complaint. At
the telephone directions hearing on 24 August 2000 I decided that the
application should be refused and
indicated that my full reasons for the
decision on this application would be included in this determination.
In support of the application the letter dated 21 July 2000 identified the
Pan-Macedonian Association of Melbourne and Victoria Inc
as being the major
representative body of the Greek Macedonians in Melbourne and Victoria and that
they were directly involved in
the original contentions that gave rise to the
memorandum dated 21 July 1994. The Pan-Macedonian Association of Melbourne and
Inc represents 49 Greek clubs which in turn represent 29,000 members.
It is said that determination of legal issues in this complaint
may have far
reaching implications for the Greek community in Melbourne and in Australia in
relation to language, culture and identity
and accordingly it seeks to be joined
so as to be heard and play a part in determining the legal questions that will
directly affect
the Greek community. The application foreshadowed that evidence
could be adduced from various Balkan experts and language experts
to support its
submissions and claims relating to the use of the word Macedonian as it relates
to history, culture and language.
The application asserted that joinder as a
third party was necessary given the sensitive and complex nature of the issues
Section 25F provides as follows:
The parties to an inquiry shall be the complainant, the respondent, any
person joined by the Commission as a party to the inquiry
and any person to whom
the Commission grants leave to appear as a party to the inquiry.
The Commission is also given power under section 25V to make directions
relating to procedure for the purposes of an inquiry. In
considering whether
the Pan-Macedonian Association of Melbourne and Victoria Inc should be joined as
a party or granted leave to
appear as a party to the inquiry it is, in my
opinion, material to take into account Order 3 made by the Honourable Justice
on 21 December 1998. That Order binds the Commission in this inquiry
to confine itself to the material filed before Commissioner
Sir Ronald Wilson.
In my view, the reference to material filed in Order 3 comprises both the
evidence and the submissions. In these
circumstances the joinder serves no
practical utility and I reject the application on this ground.
Further, an application by the same entity was earlier made to and rejected
by Commissioner Sir Ronald Wilson. No material change
of circumstances or
substantial injustice was identified to support this further application for the
same relief. In my view, it
is in the public interest that there be consistency
upon a procedural ruling of this kind, in respect of repeated application, in
the absence of a material change of circumstances or substantial injustice and
on this additional ground the application is rejected.
Further, I have also considered the grounds advanced in support of the
application. In my view identifying and determining the issues
in question in
this inquiry is an exercise that has been properly addressed by the existing
parties to the complaint. In my opinion
it is material to take into account the
nature of the inquiry being undertaken by the Commission. The inquiry is
confined to the
subject matter of the complaint and is primarily for the
purposes of finding whether or not the complaint is substantiated and if
making of a determination within the scope of section 25Z of the Act.
In this regard, although the complaint lodged initially referred to the
Premier and the Government of Victoria, the respondent has
been treated by both
parties in this inquiry as the State of Victoria and was so identified in the
determination of the Race Discrimination
Commissioner under section 24(2) made
on 26 June 1997 as well as in the referral to the Commission pursuant to section
24(5) dated
8 August 1997. The State of Victoria as respondent has in adducing
and challenging evidence as well as in its written submissions
taken issue with
the alleged unlawful conduct identified in the complaint and the respondent is
the relevant entity directly affected
if the complaint be substantiated in this
determination under section 25Z.
Although I accept that there is a keen and real interest by the members of
the Pan-Macedonian Association of Melbourne and Victoria
Inc in the perceived
issues involved in the complaint, I am of the opinion that justice can be done
for the purposes of this inquiry
without the joinder or appearance of that
applicant as a party to the inquiry.
Moreover, in my opinion, the dictates of expedition as well as achieving a
prompt inquiry into the matters at issue between the existing
parties are best
served by making a determination on the material already filed even if Order 3
had not been made. In this regard
I have taken into account the volume of
material that has already been generated in the form of submissions, exhibits,
transcripts
and authorities.
I should also add that, in my opinion, this is not an inquiry at large into
the use of the word Macedonian as it relates to history,
culture and language
but rather an inquiry into a specific complaint of alleged unlawful conduct
under the Act.
Further, in my opinion, given the nature of this inquiry it would be a great
tragedy if a perception were painted that the determination
of the legal issues
raised by this complaint have far reaching implications for the Greek community
in Melbourne and in Australia
in relation to language, culture and identity.
The legal issues involve essentially cold questions of construction of the Act
are then applied to the findings made in relation to the act the subject
of the specific complaint. There is no question of law
in this regard that is
of any greater importance for the members of the Pan-Macedonian Association of
Melbourne and Victoria Inc
than for every other person in Australia, all of whom
are subject to the salutary provisions of the Act.
To the extent that the inquiry requires the making of findings of fact, those
are findings made on the material to which the Commission
has had regard and
those findings of fact have no legal status and do not bind or purport to bind
any persons. Moreover, even in
relation to the parties to the inquiry it must
be understood that section 25Z(2) specifically provides that a determination of
Commission “is not binding or conclusive between any of the parties
to the determination”. Where the Commission exercises
its discretionary
power under section 25Z(3) to state findings of fact in the making of a
determination under section 25Z(1) this
is done primarily for the purpose of
revealing the method and reasoning in the making of the determination upon the
material that
is before the Commission so as to ensure a proper and valid
exercise of statutory power. The inquiry into and determination of a
is however an important part of the civil regime for the implementation and
enforcement of the principles of dignity and
equality enshrined within the
Convention and given domestic effect by the provisions of the Act. It would be a
great tragedy if a
finding of fact in this determination or any inquiry under
the Act was misconceived as having some wider impact and an even greater
if such a finding of fact was interpreted as a ground for fuelling tensions
between any Australians or indeed any people.
I do not, in this regard, suggest
in any way that joinder of a responsible organisation such as the Pan-Macedonian
Association of
Melbourne and Victoria Inc or indeed a refusal of the joinder
application would generate or fan any tensions.
Accordingly, taking into account the grounds advanced in support of the
application, the purpose of this inquiry and the limited role
of any findings of
fact as explained above, I decline to exercise the power to join the
Pan-Macedonian Association of Melbourne and
Victoria Inc as a party to this
inquiry into the complaint and further, I refuse leave to the Pan-Macedonian
Association of Melbourne
and Victoria Inc to appear as a party to the inquiry
into the complaint.
2.4 Application for joinder of the Macedonian Teachers’ Association
of Victoria
An application was made for joinder of the Macedonian Teachers’
Association of Victoria at the telephone directions hearing
on 24 August 2000.
In support of the application it was pointed out that this was the entity that
had the conduct of proceedings
in both the Federal Court of Australia and High
Court of Australia relating to the determination made on 8 January 1998. No
application for joinder has been made to the Commission and no cogent
explanation was given as to why the application was made so
In light of the terms of Order 3 which confines the Commission to the
material already filed, I can see no practical utility in exercising
of joinder. I am satisfied that justice can be done for the purposes of this
inquiry without the joinder of the Macedonian
Teachers’ Association of
Victoria. Further, this is a matter in which clearly careful attention was
given to the identity
of the complainant at the time of the making of the
representative direction on 20 October 1997.
In all the circumstances, I decline to exercise the power to join the
Macedonian Teachers’ Association of Victoria as a party
to this inquiry
into the complaint and further, I refuse leave to the Macedonian Teachers’
Association of Victoria to appear
as a party to the inquiry into the complaint.
2.5 Application to amend complaint
An application was made in November 1997 to amend the complaint so as to
include an alleged contravention of section 18C of the Act.
This is an inquiry
into the complaint dated 25 July 1995 and further particularised on 15 August
1995 which raised a number of alleged
contraventions, all under Part II of the
Section 18C is contained in a separate Part of the Act, being Part IIA, and
did not commence operation until 13 October 1995. The
amendment was described in
the Second Reading Speech, 1995, Hansard page 3336, as “a new law dealing
with racism in Australia”.
The only formulation of the proposed amendment
is found in the complainant’s opening on 18 November 1997 and the
complainant’s
submissions. No other formulation of the proposed amended
complaint was provided. In the opening, counsel, on behalf of the complainant,
referred to section 18C and accepted that it had not been:
...specifically identified in this complaint until now. In my submission
that in no way ought to bind the complainant from raising
doesn’t introduce any new issues of fact or evidence and it ought not to
be shut out, if necessary, from making an
application to amend the complaint,
bearing in mind that in this situation the complaint was made before any legal
services were
retained by the complainant so it was made on their own behalf ...
We don’t seek to put section 18C in issue on the basis of
the directive
being the relevant act for the purpose of section 18C. What we say are the acts
under section 18C are those which
I have identified in paragraph 22 of the
submissions.
The complainant’s outline of submissions dated 10 November 1997
21. The respondent itself and through its servants and agents (see section
18E of the Act) has:
(a) engaged in acts which were reasonably likely in the circumstances to offend,
insult and humiliate the people whom the complainant
represents;
(b) and those acts have been because of ethnic origin (namely Macedonian ethnic
origin) of the people whom the complainant represents,
in contravention of
section 18C of the Act.
acts referred to in paragraph 21:
(a) the continued insistence on adherence to the directive;
(b) refusal on behalf of the Government to attend Macedonian community functions
unless the directive is adhered to at those functions;
(c) the publication and distribution of community information in Macedonian
which identifies the Macedonian language as ‘Slavonic’;
(d) differentiating between Macedonian and every other VCE language in the way
that language is identified and named;
(e) differentiating between Macedonian and every other language, including
English, which is taught in Victorian schools in the way
the language is
identified and named.
In my opinion, these alleged acts do
introduce issues of fact in relation to the element of section 18C that do not
arise in the complaint
dated 25 July 1995 and further particularised on 15
August 1995. There is a different focus on the nature and timing of the alleged
act falling within section 18C. Although there is some force in the proposition
that these alleged acts arise out of the making
of the directive, it does in my
opinion involve new matter and I consider it amounts to a fresh and different
complaint. I have
taken into account that the complaint does in my view raise
the ongoing implementation of the directive but only in the context of
allegations under Part II.
Although I consider that there is power under section 25V(1)(c) and (d) to
permit amendments clarifying, correcting or refining the
matters at issue
between the parties so as to ensure that justice is done, the proposed amendment
in the present case in my opinion
seeks to raise new issues between parties of a
material and different nature under a Part that was not in force at the time of
complaint. I consider that the proposed amendment is in substance a fresh
I am also concerned by the fact that the new allegations are not set out in a
complaint lodged under section 22 and that accordingly
no steps have been taken
in relation to these allegations under section 24. I am not satisfied that
there is power to make this
Further, on the assumption that there is power, I find that the proposed
amendment is not appropriate or necessary to ensure that
justice is done. In my
opinion, it goes beyond the matter of mere formality and technicality to permit
an amendment that introduces
a fresh complaint formulated in submissions, under
a different Part, in relation to a different time period, and which requires
identification
of different acts and proof of different facts. In the
circumstances I decline to grant the proposed amendment of the complaint.
The opening recital to the Act records relevantly that:
...it is desirable, in pursuance of all relevant powers of the Parliament,
including, but not limited to, its power to make laws with
respect to external
affairs, with respect to the people of any race for whom it is deemed necessary
to make special laws and with
respect to immigration, to make the provisions
contained in this Act for the prohibition of racial discrimination and certain
forms of discrimination and, in particular, to make provision for giving
effect to the Convention.
The Convention is defined in section 3 of the Act to be the
International
Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Racial Discrimination
open for signature on 21 December 1965 and entered into force on 2 January 1969
and which is set out in the schedule to the
Section 3(1) provides:
In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears –
...“services” includes services
consisting of the provision of facilities by way of banking or insurance or of
for grants, loans, credit or finance.
Section 3(3) provides:
For the purposes of this Act, refusing or failing to do an act shall be
deemed to be the doing of an act and a reference to an act
includes a reference
to such a refusal or failure.
Section 9 provides as follows:
(1) It is unlawful for a person to do any act involving a distinction,
exclusion, restriction or preference based on race, colour,
descent or national
or ethnic origin which has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the
recognition, enjoyment or exercise,
on an equal footing, of any human right or
fundamental freedom in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other
public life.
(1A) Where:
(a) a person requires another person to comply with a term, condition or
requirement which is not reasonable having regard to the
circumstances of the
(b) the other person does not or cannot comply with the term, condition or
requirement; and
(c) the requirement to comply has the purpose or effect of nullifying or
impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an
equal footing, by
persons of the same race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin as the
other person, of any human right
or fundamental freedom in the political,
economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life;
the act of requiring such compliance is to be
treated, for the purposes of this Part, as an act involving a distinction based
or an act done by reason of, the other person's race, colour, descent or
national or ethnic origin.
(2) A reference in this section to a human right or fundamental freedom in
the political, economic, social, cultural or any other
field of public life
includes any right of a kind referred to in Article 5 of the Convention.
(3) This section does not apply in respect of the employment, or an
application for the employment, of a person on a ship or aircraft
(not being an
Australian ship or aircraft) if that person was engaged, or applied, for that
employment outside Australia.
(4) The succeeding provisions of this Part do not limit the generality of
this section.
Section 10 provides as follows:
(1) If, by reason of, or of a provision of, a law of the Commonwealth or of a
State or Territory, persons of a particular race, colour
or national or ethnic
origin do not enjoy a right that is enjoyed by persons of another race, colour
or national or ethnic origin,
or enjoy a right to a more limited extent than
persons of another race, colour or national or ethnic origin, then,
notwithstanding
anything in that law, persons of the first-mentioned race,
colour or national or ethnic origin shall, by force of this section, enjoy
right to the same extent as persons of that other race, colour or national or
ethnic origin.
(2) A reference in subsection (1) to a right includes a reference to a right
of a kind referred to in Article 5 of the Convention.
(3) Where a law contains a provision that:
(a) authorises property owned by an Aboriginal or a Torres Strait Islander
to be managed by another person without the consent of
the Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander; or
(b) prevents or restricts an Aboriginal or a Torres Strait Islander from
terminating the management by another person of property
owned by the Aboriginal
or Torres Strait Islander;
not being a provision that applies to persons generally without regard to
their race, colour or national or ethnic origin, that provision
shall be deemed
to be a provision in relation to which subsection (1) applies and a reference in
that subsection to a right includes
a reference to a right of a person to manage
property owned by the person.
Section 13 provides as follows:
It is unlawful for a person who supplies goods or services to the public or
to any section of the public:
(a) to refuse or fail on demand to supply those goods or services to another
(b) to refuse or fail on demand to supply those goods or services to another
person except on less favourable terms or conditions
than those upon or subject
to which he or she would otherwise supply those goods or services;
by reason of the race, colour or national or ethnic origin of that other
person or of any relative or associate of that other person.
Section 16 provides as follows:
It is unlawful for a person to publish or display, or cause or permit to be
published or displayed, an advertisement or notice that
indicates, or could
reasonably be understood as indicating, an intention to do an act that is
unlawful by reason of a provision of
this Part or an act that would, but for
subsection 12(3) or 15(5), be unlawful by reason of section
12 or 15, as
the case may be.
Section 17 provides as follows:
It is unlawful for a person:
(a) to incite the doing of an act that is unlawful by reason of a provision
of this Part; or
(b) to assist or promote whether by financial assistance or otherwise the
doing of such an act.
Section 18 provides as follows:
(a) an act is done for 2 or more reasons; and
(b) one of the reasons is the race, colour, descent or national or ethnic
origin of a person (whether or not it is the dominant reason
or a substantial
reason for doing the act);
then, for the purposes of this Part, the act is taken to be done for that
The Act was amended by Act No. 101 of 1995 which took effect on 13 October
1995 to insert section 18C which provides as follows:
(1) It is unlawful for a person to do an act, otherwise than in private, if:
(a) the act is reasonably likely, in all the circumstances, to offend,
insult, humiliate or intimidate another person or a group
of people; and
(b) the act is done because of the race, colour or national or ethnic origin
of the other person or of some or all of the people
in the group.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an act is taken not to be done in
private if it:
(a) causes words, sounds, images or writing to be communicated to the
(b) is done in a public place; or
(c) is done in the sight or hearing of people who are in a public place.
(3) In this section:
"public place" includes any place to which the public have access as of right
or by invitation, whether express or implied and whether
or not a charge is made
for admission to the place.
Section 18D provides as follows:
Section 18C does not render unlawful anything said or done reasonably and in
good faith:
(a) in the performance, exhibition or distribution of an artistic work; or
(b) in the course of any statement, publication, discussion or debate made or
held for any genuine academic, artistic or scientific
purpose or any other
genuine purpose in the public interest; or
(c) in making or publishing:
(i) a fair and accurate report of any event or matter of public interest; or
(ii) a fair comment on any event or matter of public interest if the comment
is an expression of a genuine belief held by the person
making the comment.
The Second Reading Speech for the Act, 1975, Hansard pages 285-286,
relevantly records the purpose of the legislation as follows:
The purpose of this Bill is to make racial discrimination unlawful in
Australia and to provide an effective means of combating racial
prejudice in our
The Bill introduces into Australian law for the first time the obligations
contained in the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination. It is asserted in this Convention that all human beings
are born free and equal in dignity
and rights and that any doctrine of
superiority based on racial differentiation is scientifically false, morally
condemnable, socially
unjust and dangerous and without any justification. I
need hardly say that I am sure all honourable members would agree with these
sentiments. Eighty-one countries have already ratified or acceded to the
Convention. The Convention was signed on behalf of Australia
on 13 October 1966
and the ratification of the Convention by Australia is, I believe, urgent and
Legislation has a vital role to play in the elimination of racial
discrimination and the enactment of this Bill is a fundamental step,
a condition
precedent, it could be said, that must be taken if Australia is to ratify the
Convention. The common law provides few
effective remedies against
discrimination in the exercise of human rights, whether it is based on race or
colour or on any other
grounds. The proscribing of racial discrimination in
legislative form will require legal sanctions. These will also make people
aware of the evils, the undesirable and unsociable consequences of
discrimination – the hurtful consequences of discrimination
make them more obvious and conspicuous. In this regard the Bill will perform an
important educative role. In addition,
the introduction of legislation will
furnish legal background on which to rest changes reflecting basic community
attitudes. The
fact that racial discrimination is unlawful will make it easier
for people to resist social pressures that result in discrimination.
In making racial discrimination unlawful, the Bill follows the definition
used in the Convention. The Bill will thus make it unlawful
for a person to do
an act involving discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or
ethnic origin which impairs the
enjoyment of fundamental rights and
freedoms...
The Bill represents an important step in the Government’s program with
respect to human rights. It will provide the basis upon
which Australia can
comply with the obligations imposed by the Convention on Racial Discrimination.
The Bill is based on the view
that laws proscribing discrimination are vital,
but not in themselves alone can they be sufficient. The educative role is at
as significant and the Bill recognises that there must also be effective
and systematic enforcement of rights and the promotion of
education and
research, if the elimination of racial discrimination in this country is to be
achieved in fact as well as in the theory...
Relevantly the introduction to the Convention records (with emphasis added by
underlining) as follows:
Considering that the Charter of the United Nations is based on the principles
of the dignity and equality inherent in all human beings,
and that all Member
States have pledged themselves to take joint and separate action, in cooperation
with the Organisation, for the
achievement of one of the purposes of the United
Nations which is to promote and encourage universal
respect for and
observance of
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without
distinction as to race, sex,
or religion,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaims that all
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and
rights and that
is entitled
the rights and freedoms set out therein, without
distinction of any kind, in particular as to race, colour or national origin,
Considering that all human beings are equal before the law and are entitled
equal protection
of the law against any discrimination and against any
incitement to discrimination, ...
Considering that the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination of 20 November 1963 (General
Assembly resolution
1904(XVIII)) solemnly affirms the necessity of speedily eliminating racial
discrimination throughout the world
in all its forms and manifestations
of securing understanding of and respect for the dignity of the human
Reaffirming that discrimination between human beings on the grounds of race,
colour or ethnic origin is an obstacle to friendly and
peaceful relations among
nations and is capable of disturbing peace and security among peoples and the
harmony of persons living
side by side even within one and the same State,
Convinced that the existence of racial barriers is repugnant to the ideals of
any human society,
Alarmed by manifestations of racial discrimination still in evidence in some
areas of the world and by governmental policies based
on racial superiority or
hatred, such as policies of apartheid, segregation or separation,
Resolved to adopt all necessary measures for speedily eliminating racial
discrimination in all its forms and manifestations, and to
prevent and combat
racist doctrines and practices in order to promote understanding between races
and to build an international community
free from all forms of racial
segregation and racial discrimination, ...
Desiring to implement the principles embodied in the United Nations
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
secure the earliest adoption of practical measures to that end.
Article 1 paragraph 1 provides as follows:
In this Convention, the term “racial discrimination” shall mean
any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference
based on race, colour,
descent, or national or ethnic origin which has the purpose or effect of
nullifying or impairing the recognition,
enjoyment or exercise, on an equal
footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic,
social, cultural
or any other field of public life.
Article 1 paragraph 3 provides as follows:
Nothing in this Convention may be interpreted as affecting in any way the
legal provisions of States Parties concerning nationality,
citizenship or
naturalisation, provided that such provisions do not discriminate against any
particular nationality.
Article 1 paragraph 4 provides as follows:
Special measures taken for the sole purpose of securing adequate advancement
of certain racial
or ethnic groups or individuals requiring such
protection as may be necessary in order to ensure such groups or individuals
enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms shall not
be deemed racial discrimination, provided, however, that
such measures do not,
as a consequence, lead to the maintenance of separate rights for different
racial groups and that they shall
not be continued after the objectives for
which they were taken have been achieved.
Article 2 paragraph 1 provides as follows:
States Parties condemn racial discrimination and undertake to pursue by all
appropriate means and without delay a policy of eliminating
discrimination in all its forms and promoting understanding among all races,
and, to this end:
(a) Each State Party undertakes to engage in no
act or practice of racial
discrimination against persons, groups of
persons or institutions and to ensure that all public authorities and public
institutions,
national and local, shall act in conformity with this obligation;
(b) Each State Party undertakes not to sponsor, defend or support racial
discrimination by any persons or organisations;
(c) Each State Party shall take effective measures to review governmental,
national and local policies, and to amend, rescind or
nullify any laws and
regulations which have the effect of creating or perpetuating racial
discrimination wherever it exists;
(d) Each State Party shall prohibit and bring to
an end, by all appropriate means, including legislation as required by
circumstances,
discrimination
by any persons, group or
organisation;
(e) Each State Party undertakes to encourage, where appropriate,
integrationist multi-racial
organisations and movements and other means
of eliminating barriers between races, and to discourage anything which tends to
Article 4 refers relevantly to the State parties adopting positive measures
designed to eradicate all incitement to or acts of discrimination
and relevantly
in paragraph (c):
Shall not permit public authorities or public institutions, national or local
to promote or incite racial discrimination.
Article 5 provides as follows:
1. In compliance with the fundamental obligations laid down in article 2 of
this Convention, States Parties undertake to prohibit
and to eliminate
discrimination
in all its forms
and to guarantee the right of everyone, without distinction as to race, colour,
or national or ethnic origin, to
equality before the law, notably in the
enjoyment of the following rights:
(a) The right to equal treatment before the tribunals and all other organs
administering justice;
(b)The right to security of person and protection by the State against
violence or bodily harm, whether inflicted by government officials
individual, group or institution;
(c) Political rights, in particular the rights to participate in
elections—to vote and to stand for election—on the basis
universal and equal suffrage, to take part in the Government as well as in the
conduct of public affairs at any level and to have
equal access to public
(d) Other civil rights, in particular:
(i) The right to freedom of movement and residence within the border of the
(ii) The right to leave any country, including one's own, and to return to
one's country;
(iii) The right to nationality;
(iv) The right to marriage and choice of spouse;
(v) The right to own property alone as well as in association with others;
(vi) The right to inherit;
(vii) The right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion;
(viii) The right to freedom of opinion and expression;
(ix) The right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association;
(e) Economic, social and cultural rights, in particular:
(i) The rights to work, to free choice of employment, to just and favourable
conditions of work, to protection against unemployment,
to equal pay for equal
work, to just and favourable remuneration;
(ii) The right to form and join trade unions;
(iii) The right to housing;
(iv) The right to public health, medical care, social security and social
(v) The right to education and training;
(vi) The right to equal participation in cultural activities;
(f) The right of access to any place or service intended for use by the
general public such as transport, hotels, restaurants, cafes,
theatres and
The Act is appropriately categorised as beneficial and remedial legislation
and accordingly the provisions require a liberal construction
rather than a
construction that is literal or technical:
City of Perth
[1997] HCA 30
(1997) 191 CLR 1
at 12. The Act specifies the particular ingredients which
amount to unlawful conduct proscribed by Part II and Part IIA and is not
comprehensive discrimination code. As a result, conduct that would be regarded
as discriminatory in its ordinary meaning may fall
outside the Act. Further,
Part II and Part IIA provide a civil regime to make racial discrimination
unlawful in Australia and section
26 makes clear that unlawful acts within
either Part II or Part IIA do not amount to a criminal offence.
Section 9(1) requires the following elements to be established:
(i) the doing of an act by a person involving a distinction, exclusion,
restriction or preference;
(ii) the distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference must be based on
race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin;
(iii) the distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference must have the
purpose or effect of:
(a) nullifying
or impairing;
recognition, enjoyment or exercise;
(c) on an equal
human right or fundamental freedom in the political, economic, social, cultural
or any other field of public life.
The complainant
carries the burden of proof in establishing unlawful conduct assessed by the
civil standard of proof on the balance
of probabilities. No intention or motive
to discriminate is necessary to establish unlawful conduct within section 9(1).
an act involves a distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference is a
matter of fact to be determined by reference to the alleged
unlawful act.
The term “involving” must, consistent with this type of
provision, be given a broad interpretation and embraces a meaning
of including
or implying. An act may involve a number of impacts. However it is sufficient
for the purpose of section 9(1) if the
act involves a distinction, an exclusion,
a restriction or a preference. The term “distinction” has a meaning
that includes
differentiation or distinguishing one thing from another. No
submission was advanced that the act involved an “exclusion”.
term “preference” has a meaning that includes a choice or selection
of one thing above another. The term “restriction”
has a meaning
that includes something that restricts, limits or derogates. “Based
on” requires a foundational link between
“the distinction,
exclusion, restriction or preference” and the “race, colour, descent
or national or ethnic origin”,
rather than a narrower causal link and has
a meaning that includes “founded upon” or “by reference
Determining the existence of a foundational link of this kind
between the two concepts is an objective issue of fact. “Based
does not mean “solely based on”. It is the distinction, exclusion,
restriction or preference involved in an
act that must be “based on”
race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin.
“Descent” and “national or ethnic origin” must also
be given a liberal construction. “Descent”
has a meaning that
includes coming from, by birth or lineage, an ancestor or ancestors and does not
require any particular citizenship,
country of birth or particular territorial
link. The terms “national” and “ethnic” give expanded
the term “origin”. “National origin” has a
meaning that includes coming from, by birth or lineage, an identifiable
or country of people. In particular, the nation or country need no longer exist
or indeed have a particular international
status. In my opinion, the term
“ethnic origin” has a meaning that includes coming from an
identifiable group or community
who use speech different to the majority
language (here in Australia English) and does not require any particular
territorial link.
It is the “distinction, exclusion, restriction or
preference” which must have the proscribed purpose or effect. Determining
the purpose is an objective exercise of finding of fact as to the end sought to
be achieved. Determining the effect is an exercise
of finding of fact as to the
end achieved.
“Nullifying or impairing” are terms of wide scope and, in my
opinion, have a meaning that includes diminishing. “Recognition,
enjoyment or exercise” are also words of broad scope. I consider that
“recognition” applies to recognition by
all and that
“enjoyment and exercise” apply individually and collectively
depending on the right or freedom. To confine
these three terms to an
individual recognition, individual enjoyment or individual exercise does not
accord with the purpose of the
Convention or with the width of certain expressed
rights or freedoms. In my opinion, “recognition” includes
acknowledgment
of something as valid or entitled to consideration. This is, in
my view, supported by reference to the notions embraced within the
the Convention “to promote and encourage universal respect for and
observance of” and “of securing understanding
of and respect
for”. “Enjoyment” is the only one of these three terms used
in Article 5 and in my opinion, embraces
a meaning which includes satisfaction
from possession, right to use or use. “Exercise”, in my opinion, is
probably included
for abundance of caution, and embraces use of. The words
“on an equal footing” require a comparison with others in relation
to “recognition, enjoyment or exercise”. The object of this
comparison is “any human right or fundamental freedom
in the political,
economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life” which is
given expanded but not exhaustive
content by the principles of dignity and
equality in all human beings referred to in Article 5 of the Convention.
Whether an alleged
human right or fundamental freedom exists and is of the
relevant kind is a question of law but, in my view, whether the alleged right
freedom is the subject of the proscribed purpose or effect is a question of
4. EVIDENCE
An affidavit was tendered from Professor Clyne, in which he said relevantly:
Language is an instrument of nationhood. The authenticity and recognition of
a language is usually a precursor to the recognition
of a nation or ethnic
group. Language provides people of a particular ethnic grouping with the
ability to identify and describe
themselves and their culture. There are many
examples throughout the world, and within Australia, of the disastrous impact
loss of the language can have on [an] ethnic group. Use of a language
without fear, shame, humiliation or embarrassment is dependent
in part upon the
acceptance and recognition of that language by governments and public
Oral evidence was also given by Professor Clyne as to the distinction
recognised by linguists between a language and a dialect in
a literate society
as well as the reasons for development of a standard language. Professor Clyne
pointed out that a language can
be written in any script and that there were
people who spoke Macedonian and then wrote Macedonian in Greek script because
was the language in which they were literate. Professor Clyne indicated
that the word “Macedonian” when used as a noun
is more often used to
refer to the standard language of what was the Republic of Macedonia.
Professor Clyne explained a linguist’s concept of a community language
in Australia and emphasised the importance in the Australian
community of both
indigenous languages and immigrant languages. Professor Clyne described
Macedonian from a linguists point of view
as a Slavic language and described
Slavonic as being a synonym for Slavic but an older version of the word Slavic.
Professor Clyne
indicated that some Macedonian speakers came from Greece and
that there were also speakers of Macedonian dialects from Greece.
Professor Clyne identified the significance of the recognition of minority
languages in various parts of the world. Professor Clyne
accepted that what was
spoken as Macedonian would not be Ancient Macedonian. Professor Clyne also
accepted from a linguistic viewpoint
that use of Macedonian as an adjective to
describe a particular region was appropriate to identify Macedonian dialects,
he indicated that such speakers would describe their language as
An affidavit of a school teacher was also tendered, identifying that
Macedonian had been taught within the State school system in
Victoria as a
community language for more than ten years. The teacher also said “a
fundamental criteria in language maintenance
is the sense that learning a
language will in someway be beneficial and is deemed to be of value by the
society”. The affidavit
also deposed to the 1995 annual VCE Macedonian
graduation to which Mr Honeywood was invited and declined to attend. In
to the effect of the directive, the deponent said:
...no other group has a government stipulation as to how they must
self-identify their language at these events in order to obtain
recognition and participation. In this context we felt that as a group we were
being treated differently and marginalised
because we refused to implement the
directive at a community level.
The affidavit recorded that a particular secondary college in which the
parents wished to hold a barbecue as a fund raiser for the
school were told they
could not advertise their barbecue unless they complied with the directive.
The deponent also referred to the cessation of a brochure relating to
Macedonian “because the directive is at loggerheads with
the community and
the way the speakers identified the language, no brochure has been produced,
meaning that one group of language
speakers we serve as a school is being
treated differently, in the dissemination of study information to ethnic
The deponent also referred to an example when Macedonian
welfare workers were unable to obtain funding for a community education
workshop: “the Macedonian welfare workers network could not undertake such
an agreement not only because they are opposed to
the ethnic renaming but mainly
because nobody in our community would participate in such a workshop if it was
advertised with that
name”. The deponent said “the issue of respect
and recognition of group self-identification by Government is central
equality and access to services”. The deponent stated “it is not
true, as the Premier suggests in his directive,
that we as Macedonians are free
as a community to describe our language as we please”. Reference was also
made to the fact
that the directive had given rise to some Government
departments creating brochures referring to “Macedonian/Slovenian”,
whereas in fact Slovenian is a totally different language. The deponent said
“language is a central core value to ethnic identification
verbal expression of linguistic identification” ... “almost all
cultural activities for Macedonian people
revolve around our language. If our
language is belittled and slurred, our culture is belittled and slurred”.
relating to total enrolments in languages for 1994, 1995 and 1996 was
tendered in evidence.
Evidence was also led orally from this teacher. The teacher indicated that
the number of students enrolled in the subject Macedonian
had according to the
census decreased from 1994 when there were 1,512 to 1,389 in 1995, following
which there was an increase in
1996 to 1,673. The teacher identified the
language being taught at a particular primary school as being Macedonian and
subject was taught at more than 12 schools. In answer to a question as
to any adverse effect on enrolments from the directive, the
teacher said:
It doesn’t seem to have an adverse effect on enrolments because of the
strategies that we undertook as teachers and as a community.
The teacher identified the terms “Slav” and
“Slavonic” as being used in some circumstances in a derogatory
The teacher also accepted from a linguistic viewpoint that the language
Macedonian was a Slavonic language, in the sense of
language family. The
teacher gave evidence that:
Macedonian-Slavonic is not its language name and I do not agree that that
should be the name used to refer to it now because the language
we have always
referred to is Macedonian. It has been on certificates and examinations and
appears all around Australia, apart from
here in Victoria, and I could never
agree to Macedonian-Slavonic being an appropriate language name for our
The teacher further gave evidence that when the directive happened “the
community was just beside itself”.
The teacher also gave the following relevant evidence:
President: I think you were asked as to whether there wasn’t sections
of the community which were relatively content to work
within the directive?
Teacher: No. If there were those sections of the community, they were not
content and we have taken this on really – we have
reached a crossroads in
terms of multicultural education when this directive was introduced and
originally came through, the community
and teachers and students decided,
‘Right, we will fight this, we will boycott this. We will boycott our own
language classes.
We won’t attend. We will have protest marches. We
will withdraw the children from the classes.’ That was the original
– that was the knee jerk reaction from the community. Even as teachers in
terms of preparing the examination for VCE
and High School Certificate in
Victoria, we reached this stage to make a point that ‘No, we are not happy
with this’,
but it became obvious to us that if we did this we were
committing linguistic suicide. We were committing language suicide. If
kids didn’t go to the classes, principals would close them down and if
they closed them down, the funding would be reallocated
to a priority language.
We are not a priority language. So then we had to make a choice.
President: It’s a question of survival from your perspective?
Teacher: It’s a survival perspective, so we either continue on, keep on
applying pressure to the relevant educational bodies
to try and reverse this
directive or we try some other matters and in my affidavit I refer to the fact
that it was so important to
heal the effect within the community and we could
only do that by reframing this thing to students and to parents and to the
in saying ‘Well, okay we are not going to go out and physically
fight with anybody, that’s stupid, but we will put all
our energies into
supporting our language programs, into developing new language programs and just
learning our language’.
That was the way we fought back and, yes, its
reflected in the numbers but that’s why its reflected. That means we have
to use that sort of positive reinforcement to fight this directive and
that’s something I’m very proud of, and the fact
the conflict
resolution strategies that we implemented with students really had a positive
effect. As a multicultural educator,
we’ve been trained to imbue students
with tolerance and that becomes part and parcel of our training and I think that
we enacted as Macedonian language teachers. I know of no other language
teacher group that’s had to do that in the context
of multicultural
The teacher also indicated that throughout the world the language Macedonian
is taught as Macedonian. The teacher did not accept
that it was a logical step
from the Federal Government’s decision in 1994 to refer to people who
originate from the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (“FYROM”)
as Slav-Macedonians, because “nothing’s changed, the people
refer to themselves – their ethnic identifier is
Macedonian”. The teacher stated that Slav-Macedonian and
Macedonian-Slavonic
were “both labels that the people don’t want
used” and were equally offensive. The teacher also pointed out
what was going to appear on certificates would be problematic and
would hinder students going on to do further studies in a subject
Macedonian-Slavonic, because that did not exist in any other tertiary
institution in Australia or, for that matter, the world,
so there were real
education issues here effecting real students in a real context. It
wasn’t a word play about semantics
and that’s what the Union took
An affidavit of Mr Honeywood was tendered, being the person who held the
position as parliamentary secretary to the Minister for Ethnic
Affairs in 1994
and who assisted the Premier, being the Minister for Ethnic Affairs, in relation
to the directive issued on 21 July
Mr Honeywood gave evidence identifying concerns as to tensions between
number of primary
schools teaching what he referred to as Macedonian-Slavonic from 1994 through to
1996. The number of secondary
schools remained the same between 1994 and 1996
and Mr Honeywood also referred to special funding that had been provided. Mr
referred to concerns in the State of Victoria about ensuring peace and
harmony within Australian communities. Mr Honeywood gave
some evidence relating
to a belief of confusion about the description of the language.
Mr Honeywood also pointed out that there are any number of reasons why
student enrolment for languages increase or decrease, but that
no study had been
undertaken to identify the changes in relation to the students studying
Macedonian. Mr Honeywood pointed out that
the enrolment figures were based on
the start of the year and accepted that the decrease was identified six months
after the directive
was introduced. Mr Honeywood also gave oral evidence as
Mr Honeywood: The reason for the directive was based on the concern that the
Premier and I both had about the fact that on an unprecedented
basis we had
disharmony, we had violence, between two of our largest ethnic communities, that
we had one of those ethnic communities
arguing very strongly that the
terminology Macedonian and the territorial rights being claimed by the newly
liberated former state
of Yugoslavia, Macedonia was against their perspective,
and of course, the Slav-Macedonian community argue very strongly that they
should be able to retain those descriptive terms, even though the Federal
Government had said that this was not to be the case in
terms of the community
and in terms of the country.
Miss Mortimer: Those tensions and those arguments centre on the recognition
or non-recognition of FYROM and the identification of
a people or a race. Is
that right?
Mr Honeywood: And in addition to that the Greek community’s strong view
that the language termed Macedonian by the Slav-Macedonian
community could not
be a correct descriptor given that there are Greek dialects of Macedonian.
Mr Honeywood described a position where a community had only three
descriptors, one the name of the community, secondly the country
of origin and
thirdly the language used. Mr Honeywood pointed out that the Federal Government
had officially changed two of the
descriptors:
...but had left out the third traditional usual descriptor of a community by
way of the language and we believe that given that education
Government matter, it was appropriate that the third one of that trilogy be
addressed, given the concerns that were raised.
Later in evidence Mr Honeywood indicated that the third descriptor “was
a major issue” that was “exacerbating the
difficulties in terms of
retaining peace and harmony”.
Mr Honeywood made references to rejecting Skopjean as a language name and
accepted that there was no formal meeting with the Macedonian
community prior to
issuing the directive. Mr Honeywood also gave evidence that he saw the term
“Slavonic” in its purest
term and not in a sense that was
derogatory. Mr Honeywood also said “my motivation, as I said, was to find
a compromise that
stood up correctly, linguistically speaking” and agreed
with the proposition that bracketing Slavonic was, he considered, the
number of choices that perhaps all had some disadvantage. Mr Honeywood also
gave evidence that:
...the language was a matter for the State Government jurisdiction, that it
was the third traditional descriptor of a community and
I can’t think of a
fourth or fifth because there are already only three that I can think of and
that that third one had to
be changed to be consistent with the fact that a
State had become independent and we’d had the problems with peace and
and the Federal Government for the same reasons as I quoted from Gareth
Evans speech to Parliament, in the interests of peace and
harmony across
Australia – had decided to change the descriptor for the name of the
country, the descriptor for the name of
the community and, of course, the
education system being a Victorian issue, we ...
Mr Honeywood identified the reference to jurisdiction being the State
Government’s jurisdiction over education.
Mr Honeywood was also asked about the refusal of the Victorian Government to
give its sanction or imprimatur to any function that
will not use the name
Macedonian-Slavonic and said, relevantly:
We deliberately sanctioned the naming of organisations as they wanted to call
themselves. But you cannot compromise a Government
representative by requiring
him to attend a function at which a terminology is going to be officially used
which goes against Government
policy. We were at great pains to leave the
organisations with the ability to call themselves as they saw fit. But in terms
the function that I’m sure Miss Mortimer is alluding to or about to
allude to, that function was a specific invitation to hand
out official language
certificates to VCE students that refused to use Government policy terminology
and I cannot hand out, representing
the Government, official certificates that
use a different descriptor.
In further cross examination Mr Honeywood appeared to accept that the
proposed certificates that were to be handed out were not Government
certificates but certificates organised by the Macedonian Teachers’
Association of Victoria. Mr Honeywood was also asked the
Miss Mortimer: What I asked you was, does that not mean that in order to
receive official sanction, community organisations that organise
events where
the language has to be referred to, like this, as an integral part of the event
must comply with the directive if they
are to receive official presence,
official sanction.
Mr Honeywood: No, it does not, because quite simply this was a very specific
case of a certificate of attainment being given that
related to a subject that
had been taught at matriculation level for Year 12 of high school and it related
therefore to the descriptor
of that subject taught. Can you imagine the
compromise of any Government official who had gone to that function and handed
out certificates,
be they official or be they community-based or whatever, that
attested to a student having completed a subject that did not exist?
Mr Honeywood continued and said “in terms of Government policy the
subject did not exist”. Mr Honeywood indicated that
the criterion that
would govern his consideration of a particular invitation would be the extent to
which, if any, it compromised
him in relation to the Government’s policy.
Mr Honeywood was also asked questions about the possible confusion or
embarrassment that a student may face seeking to use a certificate
tertiary institutions outside Victoria which certificate refers to completion of
certain units in Macedonian in 1994 and
completion of other units of
Macedonian-Slavonic in 1995. Mr Honeywood said:
As I say, if it had not been bracketed I could imagine that it could give
rise to some confusion but all one would have to do would
be to refer to the
Encyclopaedia Britannica to see that Macedonian is part of the Slavonic
languages and I am sure that any university
academic who is looking at accepting
a student on the basis of that subject, namely that foreign language, I am sure
that they would
have sufficient education to understand that that was the
language which was being referred to.
Mr Honeywood also referred to “our own State Government directive in
terms of the naming of the language as Macedonian-Slavonic,
on the basis that
you can’t have only one department in a government referring to a language
one way and having every other
government department ...”.
An affidavit of Dr Casule was also tendered, in which he expressed views as a
linguist about there being only one Macedonian language
in the world today, as
well as the development of the language and in relation to the directive said:
Language is a distinguishing characteristic of a person’s ethnic
background. Where people’s lands have been taken or
conquered and their
culture discouraged or prohibited, language is sometimes one of the few
remaining identifiers of an ethnic group
... In my opinion the right to change
the name of a language rests with, and has always been exercised by, the
speakers of that language
and no one else. I know of no other situation where a
change in the name of an officially and internationally recognised language
been forced upon native speakers by a Government.
Dr Casule continued “In my opinion, the renaming of a language spoken
by a minority ethnic group is capable of leading to a
decline in the study of
that language, where the ‘new’ name is one which the ethnic group
finds offensive and humiliating”.
Dr Casule also stated “In my
direct experience, the eminent world linguists I know of and have spoken with
find the directive
absurd and without foundation from a linguistic point of
Dr Casule also gave oral evidence. Dr Casule made reference to Slovenia
being an area in Croatia, as well as identifying a region
that he understood to
have been referred to as Greek Macedonia, New Territories, Northern Greece and
Macedonia. Dr Casule also gave
evidence that all international world
associations of linguists referred to Macedonian only as Macedonian and that
this has been
the position since mid to late 1940s. Dr Casule indicated that he
considered there to be an axiom in linguistics “that nobody
has the right
to rename a language of anyone or give them the name of the language”. Dr
Casule pointed out the unacceptable
linguistic standard of an exact same exam
for Year 12 in New South Wales and in Victoria in which the description between
in the two States differs.
Dr Casule also accepted as a matter of classification that it was acceptable
to refer to Macedonian as a Slavonic language. Dr Casule
also indicated that he
took offence to the name of the language in the directive which he regarded as
denying him of one of his essential
human rights. He stated: “to change
the name of an internationally known language, that is the offensive
Casule expressed the opinion that the directive caused more
harm than it solved and “that’s when things started, when
started to believe they could affect another group”.
A fitter and welder, who described himself as ethnically Macedonian, gave
evidence about an occurrence where his wife required an
interpreter upon being
admitted to hospital and that a term consistent with the directive appeared on
the computer screen which caused
him anger and upset his feelings.
An affidavit of Professor Tamis was also tendered setting out views as a
sociolinguist about the language spoken by the people from
FYROM, and the
possibility for confusion. Publications by Professor Tamis were also tendered
as well as other historic material
and an article from the Institute of
Macedonian Studies.
Professor Tamis also gave evidence as a sociolinguist and referred to
Macedonian as having the status of a language as well as giving
evidence about
the development of the understanding of Ancient Macedonian and the borders of
Ancient Macedonia. Professor Tamis
also gave evidence that “we have
lobbied the international community that the unilateral use of the term
Macedonian by one
specific group is totally unjustifiable against the heritage
and the history of the Greek Macedonians”. Professor Tamis also
to a possible term being “Macedo-Slav” in respect of which he had no
personal knowledge as to whether anyone
else had adopted or used such a term.
Professor Tamis expressed the opinion that the Victorian Government phrased the
designation
to alleviate current conflict and confusion linguistically and from
the tension point of view between communities. Professor Tamis
expressed the
view that the term which is applied to name any given language in the world has
no basis in linguistic description
but is simply a political designation.
Professor Tamis also expressed the view that the only Macedonians are the
Ancient Greeks
and said “They are Macedonians. We are Macedonians. They
are the Yugoslavs, we are the Greeks. That’s my perception”.
An affidavit was also read from the manager of a radio station who gave views
from what he described as a Greek perspective of any
use of a word
“Macedonian” by people living in or coming from FYROM.
The manager also gave oral evidence. Expressing the view that use of the
word Macedonian by people living in or coming from FYROM
is unacceptable and
deeply offensive as well as referring to the continuing Macedonian heritage
Professor Hill gave evidence as a Slavonic linguist. Professor Hill was of
the view that in the context of school teaching and school
examinations there
was no possibility of confusion between Ancient Macedonian, Modern Macedonian
and Greek Macedonian dialects.
Professor Hill also expressed the view:
...that directive is likely to cause confusion because any addition to the
name immediately starts people asking questions; what
is actually meant. As I
said, if a language is offered as a subject at school or for examination then it
is assumed that the reference
is to the standard language. If it is qualified
in some way people start asking what – why the qualification, is this
not a course in contemporary standard Macedonian. Is it perhaps a
course in Macedonian dialects or something like that.
Professor Hill also gave evidence about a telephone conversation some time in
1994 with someone who was an adviser to the Premier
of Victoria. An article by
Professor Hill was also tendered, as well as the content of an interim
An affidavit of a university student expressed shock and outrage upon finding
out about the directive. Two affidavits of a real estate
agent were also
tendered to the same effect. Two affidavits were also tendered of an arts
student who studied Macedonian and was
outraged and disappointed by the
directive. In particular “I cannot understand why I have to identify
myself to a stranger
in this way; it is like I am forced to insult myself by
using the term ‘Slavonic’”.
An affidavit was also tendered which referred to a conversation with Mr
Honeywood in which the deponent was told the reasons for the
directive were to
clarify the matter because of another language that was being taught called
Greek Macedonian at a particular university.
The deponent identified that this
asserted fact turned out to be incorrect. The deponent stated that the
directive was causing
tension within schools “making students feel they
and their language were worth less or different from all others”.
deponent referred to being distraught from having to sign off on an exam which
was required to comply with the directive and
said “this was a period of a
lot of stress for me, my dilemma was that a government department was forcing me
to call my language
something different to what I call it”.
A number of newspaper articles, editorials and extracts from other works were
also tendered. There was also tendered a recognition
by Canada of the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and an extract from the Encyclopaedia of Language
and Linguistics.
I accept the evidence of Professor Clyne and Dr Casule and the school teacher
to which I have referred and specifically in relation
to the identification with
the name Macedonian by users of the language Macedonian and the material
significance of the language
Macedonian to the culture of the users and
maintenance of that culture. I do not find the evidence of Professor Tamis
and the opinion evidence as to conflict and confusion was in my view
strongly influenced by subjective belief.
Except to the limited extent identified in my findings I accept the evidence
of Mr Honeywood as to his state of mind. I also accept
the evidence of the
other witnesses to which I have referred.
Detailed submissions have been filed on behalf of the complainant and the
respondent, all of which I have taken into account together
with the whole of
the evidence in the findings I now make.
5. FINDINGS
5.1 Findings as to section 9(1)
The direction by the Premier contained in the memorandum dated 21 July 1994
was, I find, the doing of an act namely the issue of a
policy directive in terms
of the memorandum and that act was done in connection with and in the course of
the duties as Premier of
the State of Victoria. I find that the act of issuing
the said directive was done by the respondent.
It is then necessary to consider whether that act of using the directive
involved “a distinction, exclusion, restriction or
preference based on
race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin”. The directive
involved differentiating between persons
of a particular ethnic origin who speak
a particular cultural language and persons who speak other cultural languages.
distinction involved in this differentiating is the re-naming of the
cultural language of persons of a particular ethnic origin.
I find that
distinction involved in the act of issuing the directive is founded upon ethnic
origin and is also a distinction by
reference to ethnic origin. I find that the
re-naming of a cultural language in the directive is a distinction based on
ethnic origin
of the persons using that cultural language. I find that, the
distinction involved in the act of using the directive being the re-naming
the cultural language has as its true basis and is founded upon the ethnic
origins of persons who speak Macedonian.
In my opinion, the directive in the present case is substantially different
from the issues that have arisen in relation to recognition
of nations,
Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 32
(1994) 181 CLR 183
at 195-196;
[1948] HCA 37
(1948) 77 CLR 449
at 467, and it is not necessary to
determine whether an act of that nature falls within the scope of the Act. An
act of issuing
a directive by the respondent concerning Government policy as to
name of a language is, in my opinion, an act within the scope of
the Act if the
elements of a relevant provision are able to be established and I reject the
argument that it is a political issue
outside the scope of the Act.
Attention has also been drawn to the decision of the European Court of Human
Rights in the
Belgian Linguistic Case (No 2)
[1968] ECHR 3
(1968) 1 EHRR 252
of the proposition that the directive does not affect any human right or
fundamental freedom and that linguistic rights
are outside the Convention. In
that case the European Court of Human Rights held relevantly that there was no
right to education
in a language of one’s choice by a state. Attention
was drawn to the decision of the majority at 284 that a provision that
rights and freedoms:
...does not forbid every difference in treatment in the exercise of the
rights and freedoms recognised ... In addition, and in particular,
reach absurd results were one to give Article 14 an interpretation as wide as
that which the French version seems to imply.
One would, in effect, be lead to
judge as contrary to the Convention every one of the many legal or
administrative provisions which
do not secure to everyone complete equality of
treatment in the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms recognised. The competent
authorities are frequently confronted with situations and problems
which, on account of differences inherent therein, call for different
solutions; moreover, certain legal inequalities tend only to correct factual
inequalities. The extensive interpretation mentioned
above cannot consequently
be accepted.
It is important, then, to look for the criteria which enable a determination
to be made as to whether or not a given difference in
treatment, concerning of
course the exercise of one of the rights and freedoms set forth, contravenes
Article 14. On this question,
the Court, following the principles which may be
extracted from the legal practice of a large number of democratic States, holds
that the principle of equality of treatment is violated if the distinction has
no objective and reasonable justification. The existence
of a such a
justification must be assessed in relation to the aim and effects of the measure
under consideration, regard being had
to the principles which normally prevail
in democratic societies. A difference of treatment in the exercise of a right
in the Convention must not only pursue a legitimate aim: Article 14
is likewise violated when it is clearly established that there
is no reasonable
relationship of proportionality between the means employed and the aim sought to
be realised.
Although these matters are relevant on the question of construction in
determining the existence and kind of human right or freedom
Convention there is, in my opinion, no defence to a contravention of section
9(1) of objective and reasonable justification
or of pursuit of a legitimate aim
in which there is a reasonable relationship of proportionality with the means
employed to achieve
It is next necessary to consider whether this distinction in the re-naming of
the language of persons of a particular ethnic origin
has the proscribed purpose
or effect. I do not accept that the directive was issued for the purpose of
avoiding confusion in the
description of the language. Mr Honeywood gave no
cogent evidence to support confusion in Government Departments or elsewhere. I
do find that Mr Honeywood made the decision to change the “third
descriptor” and that Mr Honeywood formulated the distinction
prepared the directive for issue by the Premier whilst acting within the scope
of his employment. I do not accept that
avoiding inconsistent administrative
references to the language was a purpose of the distinction. I find that it was
a purpose of
the distinction involved in the act of issuing the directive to
ease perceived tension between individuals. I find that it was also
of the distinction to maintain peace and harmony in the State of Victoria. I do
not accept that that a purpose of the
distinction was to placate a particular
community in preference to another.
I find that it was not a purpose of the distinction involved in the act
comprised in the directive to nullify or impair the recognition,
enjoyment or
exercise on an equal footing of any human right or fundamental freedom in the
political, economic, social, cultural
or any other field of public life. The
above findings and the penultimate sentence of the memorandum dated 21 July 1994
are inconsistent
with the distinction having a purpose of nullifying or
impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise on an equal footing of any
human right or fundamental freedom. Accordingly, I find that the directive was
not unlawful conduct by reason of having a proscribed
purpose but this still
leaves the issue of whether the directive was unlawful conduct because of its
The critical issue which then arises for consideration under section 9(1) is
whether the distinction involved in the directive has
the effect of nullifying
or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of
human rights and fundamental
freedoms in the relevant fields.
The effect of the distinction in the re-naming of the language does impact
upon the recognition of the language in departments or
instrumentalities of the
respondent. A particular administrative description or name is not itself a
human right or fundamental
freedom. The unclosed category of human rights and
fundamental freedoms protected by the Convention are concerned primarily with
matters of substance which an individual can exercise or enjoy. The unclosed
category does not however create separate proprietary
rights to names or
descriptions. The human rights and freedoms protected by the Convention and by
the Act are not concerned with
legal rights to names or descriptions but rather
moral rights of people.
In my opinion, it is clear from the opening paragraph to the Convention which
refers to “respect for and observance of human
rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex,
religion”, as well as the reference to “ethnic origin” in
Article 1, that linguistic minorities are intended
to benefit from the
protection of the Convention. As a matter of construction “cultural
rights” in Article 5 of the
Convention must include a cultural language.
Languages develop so as to express the needs of their users and provide an ever
kaleidoscope as means of understanding ourselves and our society. No
people or their language are better than another.
A cultural language includes in my opinion what may be described as a dialect
or patois which is taught, learnt and used in cultural
and social activities and
is identified with by the users of the language. Whether speech is recognised as
a language by international
linguists is not, in my view, determinative of the
question of fact as to whether there is a cultural language used by persons of
ethnic origin. If the cultural language is identified with, in description or
name, by the cultural language users this is, in my
opinion, part of the
cultural right. Identification with a cultural language in cultural and social
activities may involve more than
mere expression of the language. Mere
expression is a freedom specifically recognised by Article 5 paragraph
1(d)(viii) of the Convention
but this does not exhaust the protection given to a
linguistic minority specifically in relation to cultural rights within paragraph
1(e). The identification by the users with the cultural language may include
the description or name of the cultural language which
in cultural and social
activities is used by the people speaking, reading or writing the cultural
language. The badge of personal
identity, value and belonging of persons of
ethnic origin with each other in cultural and social activities may comprise
their identification
in the description or name with, and use of, the cultural
language. Identification in the description or name of the cultural language
the users of the cultural language may be of material significance in
maintaining the identity of the persons of ethnic origin
and their use of the
cultural language. If the name of the language no longer exists the identity,
value and belonging in learning,
teaching or using the language may be
diminished or destroyed. If, in the context of social and cultural activities,
the language
of a linguistic minority is not taught, learnt and used, this would
lead to the demise of the cultural language. Where the cultural
language is the
cornerstone of the identity of an ethnic community a demise of the cultural
language would be destructive of the
ethnic community.
I find that there are people of ethnic origin who in social and cultural
activities teach, learn and use the language Macedonian.
I find that
immediately prior to the directive the language Macedonian was used by people of
ethnic origin in Australia. I find
that the Macedonian language is a cultural
language and identified with in the name Macedonian by the cultural language
find that the language Macedonian is the cornerstone of the identity
of the ethnic community who speak Macedonian. I find that the
badge of personal
identity, value and belonging of this ethnic community in cultural and social
activities comprises their identification
with the name and use of the cultural
language Macedonian.
In my opinion, it accords with the principles of dignity and equality for a
linguistic minority to have recognised, to enjoy and to
exercise the human right
in social and cultural activities to teach, learn and use a cultural language as
identified with, in description
or name, by the cultural language users. In my
opinion, one of the moral rights protected by the Convention is the right in
and cultural activities to teach, learn and use the cultural language
Macedonian as identified with in the name Macedonian by the
cultural language
users. In my opinion, this right is a human right in the cultural life of the
users of the Macedonian language.
Accordingly, I am of the opinion that the human right in social and cultural
activities to teach, learn and use the cultural language
Macedonian, as
identified with in the name Macedonian by the cultural language users, exists
and is of a kind within Article 5 of
the Convention and, in any event, is a
human right within the meaning of section 9(1). I find in the present case that
involved and established a right in social and cultural activities to
teach, learn and use the language Macedonian as identified
in the name
Macedonian by the language users. I find this right is a cultural right of
persons of ethnic origin in Australia who
speak Macedonian.
The recognition focused upon by the protection in section 9(1) is
acknowledgment of the human rights and freedoms of people by all
including Government bodies, emanations or departments as valid or entitled to
consideration. In the present case, re-naming
of the language provides a new
pigeonhole label whereby the former name of the language ceases to exist for
Government administrative
purposes. I find that Mr Honeywood’s evidence
that the language Macedonian does not now exist was an admission by the
as to the effect of the distinction involved in the act of issuing
the directive in terms of the memorandum dated 21 July 1994. I
find that the
effect of the directive is that Government bodies, emanations and departments of
the respondent do not recognise that
the language Macedonian exists. I find
that the human right as established above is not recognised as valid or entitled
to consideration
by Government bodies, emanations and departments of the
respondent. I find that this effect of the distinction impairs recognition
the cultural rights of users of the Macedonian language in social and cultural
activities. The fact that the distinction does
not impair expression of the
cultural language is not an answer to this want of recognition.
I find that the distinction does have the effect of adversely affecting and
diminishing the recognition of the said right by individuals
and within the
Government bodies, emanations or departments of the respondent. I find that
Macedonian (Slavonic) is not a description
or name used by persons who learn,
teach or use the Macedonian language in cultural or social activities and is not
identified with
the cultural language by users of the cultural language. I find
that the distinction has had the effect of diminishing the recognition
cultural rights by users of the cultural language in cultural and social
activities. I find that issuing the directive has had
the effect of impairing
recognition of cultural rights of the users of the Macedonian language in
cultural and social activities.
I find that other users of cultural languages
have recognition, enjoyment and exercise of their cultural rights without
directives re-naming the cultural language and accordingly have
recognition and enjoyment of their cultural right on a different
and unequal
footing to users of the Macedonian language.
Accordingly, I find that issuing the directive in terms of the memorandum
dated 21 July 1994 was an act by the respondent which involved
a distinction
based on ethnic origin which has the effect of impairing the recognition on an
equal footing of a human right in the
culture of users of the Macedonian
language namely, “in social and cultural activities to teach, learn and
use the language
Macedonian as identified in the name Macedonian by the language
users” and is unlawful conduct under section 9(1) of the Act.
I find that
even if the degree of satisfaction in relation to these findings required
greater certainty because of the seriousness
of the alleged unlawful conduct and
gravity of the consequences flowing from such a finding, I am in fact so
satisfied in relation
to each of the findings of fact I have made in holding
that the respondent has engaged in unlawful conduct under section 9(1).
Even if there were a defence of objective and reasonable justification or
legitimate and reasonably proportionate aim as referred
to above, the onus would
lie upon the respondent to establish the same. I apply a test of objective
reasonableness as requiring
a logical and understandable basis and that views
may differ about the matter:
Australian Medical Council
[1996] FCA 1618
(1996) 68 FCR 46
I find that the policy of the Federal Government in relation to FYROM, as
announced on 14 March 1994, did not require any change to
the name of the
language as the terms used in that policy were for the purposes of assembling
data as to country of birth or nationality.
The people living in or originating
from the FYROM are not one and the same as people in Australia who enjoy and use
the language
Macedonian in cultural and social activities. The correspondence
following the directive by the respondent both from Senator Evans,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Senator Bolkus, the then Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, do not support the
directive being regarded by
those persons as a logical step. I find the change made is not a logical step
founded upon the Federal
Government policy. The linguistic explanation advanced
by Mr Honeywell for the decision “to change the descriptor” is
accept objectively an understandable basis but I find in all the circumstances
it was not objectively a logical basis. I accept
that there had been acts of
violence and tension in the State of Victoria prior to the respondent’s
directive and that the
duty to maintain peace order and good government is a
heavy burden which at times requires balancing competing interests and making
difficult and unpopular decisions. However, most Government policy can be said
to be for the maintenance of peace, order and good
government and the
performance of this duty does not take the policy outside the scope of the Act.
Further, a legitimate purpose
for particular conduct does not mean that the
conduct objectively assessed has a logical basis.
The reasons for the directive according to its terms were twofold “to
be consistent and avoid any further confusion”.
The first reason of
consistency is flawed as it was neither a consistent step with the Federal
Government’s decision nor a
logical step founded on that decision. The
second expressed reason is unsupported by any actual confusion within
Government Departments
or any other evidence of genuine confusion. The other
reason subsequently expressed, which I accept existed as a reason, was to
peace and harmony and to quell tensions between certain persons. In the
absence of any consultation of persons using the Macedonian
language or a
similar change being made anywhere else in the world I am not satisfied that
this reason is objectively logical. The
argument that this was a problem unique
to Victoria is not convincing. I am not satisfied that the directive was in all
the circumstances
objectively reasonable and accordingly I am not satisfied that
there was a reasonable justification for the distinction involved
in issuing the
directive. Further, I am also not satisfied that there is a reasonable
relationship of proportionality between the
distinction involved in the
directive and the aims sought to be achieved.
5.2 Findings as to section 9(1A)
The act identified, being the issue of the directive contained in terms of
the memorandum dated 21 July 1994, does not, I find, amount
to requiring another
person to comply with a term, condition or requirement, quite apart from the
other criteria under section 9(1A).
Further, I find that the directive was not
one with which the departments of the respondent did not or could not comply
meaning of section 9(1A)(b). Further, the Government bodies,
emanations and departments to which the directive applied in the act
the subject
of the complaint are not an “other person” in respect of whom any
requirement to comply has the prohibited
purpose or effect. No other act was
identified in the complaint and reliance upon this provision appears to have
been abandoned
in the complainant’s opening and was not developed in the
submissions. I further find that any such requirement in the directive
have the prohibited purpose or prohibited effect within section 9(1A).
5.3 Findings as to section 10
Insofar as section 10 is concerned there is, in my opinion, no law involved
in the directive contained within the memorandum dated
21 July 1994 and
accordingly section 10 has no application.
5.4 Findings as to section 13
I accept that the term “services” in section 13 (taking into
account the interpretation of services in section 3(1)) is
wide enough to
include education:
State of Victoria
[1995] VicRp 27
(1995) 1 VR 421
427. A narrower view as to the scope of the meaning of services was tentatively
expressed but without determining the same in
Aboriginal Students Support
& Parents Awareness Committee, Traeger Park Primary School, Alice
Minister for Education; Northern Territory
However, I find that there was no refusal or failure to supply education
services to another person on less favourable terms or conditions
upon or subject to which the respondent would otherwise supply those services.
In my opinion, the change in name of the
subject is not a term or condition
imposed on the supply of educational services. I also find that the change in
name is not less
favourable terms or conditions than those upon which or subject
to which the respondent was otherwise supplying educational services.
find that there was no refusal or failure on demand to supply educational
services. I find that the continued insistence
on adherence to the directive is
not a refusal or failure on demand to supply educational services to another
person, except on less
favourable terms or conditions. I find that the refusal
on behalf of the Government to attend Macedonian community functions unless
directive was adhered to at those functions is not a refusal to supply
educational services to another person, except on less
favourable terms and
conditions. I find that the publication and distribution of community
information which identifies the Macedonian
language with the suffix
(“Slavonic”) is not a refusal or failure to supply educational
services to another person, except
on less favourable terms or conditions. I
find that the differentiating between the way Macedonian is identified and named
languages is not a refusal or failure to supply educational services
on less favourable terms or conditions. I find that the alleged
contravention
of section 13 is not made out.
5.5 Findings as to section 16
In relation to section 16, I find that there was no intention by the
respondent to do an act that was unlawful by reason of a provision
of Part II of
the Act and accordingly I find there is no unlawful conduct as raised in the
complaint under section 16 of the Act.
5.6 Findings as to section 17
I find that the act of issuing the memorandum does not amount to inciting the
doing of an act that is unlawful by reason of the provision
of Part II. I
further find that the respondent did not assist or promote, whether by financial
assistance or otherwise, the doing
of an act that is unlawful by reason of a
provision of Part II. I accept that the respondent did not know or intend that
of the directive was unlawful by reason of a provision of Part II of
the Act. I find that the respondent did not contravene section
6. CONCLUSION AND RELIEF
I find the complaint substantiated and that the respondent engaged in an
unlawful act contrary to section 9(1) of the Act by issuing
the directive in
terms of the memorandum dated 21 July 1994. The complaint does in my view pick
up the continuing implementation
of the directive. So far as the evidence
reveals the directive remains in operation in the State of Victoria and is a
act of implementation which I find for the same reasons amounts to
continuing unlawful conduct by the respondent within section 9(1)
of the Act. In
these circumstances, I see no reason why the determination should not include
the language of injunction found in
section 25Z(1)(b)(i) “that the
respondent should not continue the unlawful conduct”.
A prayer for relief in the form of damages was withdrawn which is
understandable given the difficulties on the evidence of establishing
or damage having been suffered by the persons represented by the complainant. I
find that the persons represented by the
complainant have been distressed and
humiliated by the unlawful conduct of the respondent within section 9(1) and by
the continuing
unlawful conduct of the respondent.
It was suggested that no relief should be included in the determination and
that the matter could be left for the respondent to take
appropriate action. It
was also submitted that no relief should be granted as this is a delicate matter
thereby implying a risk
of tensions. It would be a great tragedy, as I have
earlier said, if misconception of the nature of this determination caused any
However, the complaint has been substantiated and I consider it would be
unjust to refuse declarations on this ground. In my view
the complainant is
entitled to an appropriate declaration as against the respondent. I am
satisfied that the determination I propose
to make under section 25Z(1)(b)(i)
against the respondent together with these reasons is sufficient to redress the
injured feelings
and humiliation suffered by the persons represented by the
complainant. I reject the proposition that the complainant in its
representative
capacity is not an aggrieved person under section 22 and any such
defect in the complaint was cured by the representative directions
October 1997.
In the circumstances, I make a determination under section 25Z in relation to
the complaint against the respondent as follows:
I declare that the respondent has engaged in conduct rendered unlawful by
section 9(1) of the Act by the act of issuing the directive
in terms of the
memorandum dated 21 July 1994 which involved a distinction based on ethnic
origin in re-naming the language Macedonian
and had the effect of impairing the
recognition on an equal footing of a human right in the cultural life of users
of the Macedonian
language and I declare that the respondent should not continue
such unlawful conduct.
I note by way of reminder that I have made a direction pursuant to section
25J of the Act that no person shall publish the names
of witnesses who have
appeared before the Commission or the names of deponents who have sworn
affidavits produced to the Commission
or information that might identify them as
witnesses or deponents before the Commission, except:
(a) to the extent set out in this determination or already published and in the
public arena; or
(b) by the parties, any aggrieved person or their legal advisers only in so far
as is necessary for the purpose of obtaining legal
advice or the preparation and
conduct of any Court proceedings; or
(c) for official purposes which necessitates disclosure either for performance
of statutory duties or law enforcement.
DATED THIS DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2000
Alexander W Street SC
Hearing Commissioner
RTF format (207 KB)
Signed PDF/A format