URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/2017/34.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection; SZTGM v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection [2017] HCA 34 (6 September 2017)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER, NETTLE, GORDON AND EDELMAN JJ
Matter No S272/2016
SZTAL APPELLANT
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER
PROTECTION & ANOR
RESPONDENTS
Matter No S273/2016
SZTGM APPELLANT
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER
PROTECTION & ANOR
RESPONDENTS
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border
SZTGM v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2017] HCA 34
6 September 2017
S272/2016 &
Matter No S272/2016
appellant pay the first respondent's costs.
Matter No S273/2016
appellant pay the first respondent's costs.
On appeal from the Federal Court of Australia
Representation
S B Lloyd SC with B Mostafa for the appellant in each matter (instructed by
S P Donaghue QC, Solicitor-General of the Commonwealth with M J Smith for the
first respondent in each matter (instructed by Australian
Submitting appearance for the second respondent in each matter
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Migration – Protection visa – Complementary protection –
Cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment – Meaning
of "intentionally
inflicted" – Degrading treatment or punishment – Meaning of
"intended to cause" – Where Refugee
Review Tribunal found appellants would
likely be imprisoned for short period if returned to Sri Lanka – Where
prison conditions
in Sri Lanka may not meet international standards –
Where definition of "cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment" in s 5(1)
Migration Act
(Cth) requires intentional infliction of pain or
suffering – Where definition of "degrading treatment or punishment" in
Migration Act
requires intention to cause extreme humiliation
– Whether Sri Lankan officials intend to inflict pain or suffering or
extreme humiliation – Whether intention established by knowledge or
foresight of pain or suffering or extreme humiliation.
Words and phrases – "complementary protection regime", "cruel or
inhuman treatment or punishment", "degrading treatment or punishment",
"foresight of result", "intended to cause", "intention", "intentionally
inflicted", "oblique intention".
Migration Act
Criminal Code
CJ, NETTLE AND GORDON JJ. The relevant provisions of the "complementary
protection regime" of the
Migration Act
(Cth) ("the
background to their inclusion in the
in 2012 are set out in the reasons of
Edelman J. The regime gives effect to Australia's non-refoulement
obligations under the United
Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (1984) ("the CAT") and the
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966) ("the ICCPR"). At
the same time, it addresses what was a lengthy and time consuming
relating to the grant of a protection visa to a non-citizen who was not a
criterion for the grant of a protection visa under
s 36(2)(aa)
is that the applicant is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom
"the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and
foreseeable consequence of the non-citizen being removed
from Australia to a
receiving country, there is a real risk that the non-citizen will suffer
significant harm".
relevant circumstances stated in
as constituting "significant
harm" are that the non-citizen would be subjected to "torture", "cruel or
inhuman treatment or punishment"
or "degrading treatment or
punishment"
or inhuman treatment or punishment" is relevantly defined in
as an act or omission by which "severe pain or suffering, whether physical
or mental, is
intentionally inflicted
on a person" (emphasis added). As
definition is not taken from the ICCPR. The ICCPR did not provide a definition.
It did not expressly require that pain or
suffering of the requisite degree be
intentionally inflicted; nor has it subsequently been interpreted as importing
such a requirement.
The definition of "cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment" in
is a partial adaptation of the definition of
"torture" in
, which is clearly enough derived from the definition of
"torture" in Art 1 of the CAT, which, in turn, speaks of "any act by which
severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted
on a person" for certain purposes such as obtaining
information or a confession,
or intimidating or coercing the person or a third person.
Section 5(1)
also defines "degrading treatment or punishment" for the purposes of the
It means an act or omission that causes and is
intended to cause
humiliation which is unreasonable. That definition, like the definition of
cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment in
, is not taken from the ICCPR.
The ICCPR does not expressly require that humiliation of the requisite degree be
intentionally caused;
nor has it subsequently been interpreted as importing such
a requirement.
The Tribunal's findings
Refugee Review Tribunal ("the Tribunal") found that, if the appellants were
returned to Sri Lanka, their country of origin, and
if they were arrested and
charged under the laws of that country because they had left it illegally, they
would likely be held in
remand for a short period, which may be one day, several
days or possibly two weeks. The Tribunal accepted that prison conditions
Lanka are poor and may not meet international standards by reason of matters
such as overcrowding, poor sanitary facilities
and limited access to food.
issue before the Tribunal, relevant to these appeals, was whether, in sending
the appellants to prison, Sri Lankan officials
could be said to intend to
inflict severe pain or suffering or to intend to cause extreme humiliation. The
Tribunal concluded that
the element of intention was not satisfied. The country
information before it indicated that the conditions in prisons in Sri Lanka
are the result of a lack of resources, which the Sri Lankan government
acknowledged and is taking steps to improve, rather than an
intention to inflict
cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment or to cause extreme humiliation.
Federal Circuit Court (Judge Driver)
correctly in our view, that the Tribunal is to be understood to have concluded
that "intentionally inflicted" in the definition
of "cruel or inhuman treatment
or punishment" connotes the existence of an actual, subjective, intention on the
part of a person
to bring about suffering by his or her conduct. His Honour
considered the same to be true with respect to the words "intended to
the definition of "degrading treatment or punishment". His Honour found no
error in that reasoning, and a majority of
a Full Court of the Federal Court
Nicholas JJ)
agreed. Buchanan J dismissed the appeals on other grounds.
the cases concerning the meaning of "intention" to which Kenny and
Nicholas JJ in the Full Court referred was
R v Willmot (No
"[t]he ordinary and natural meaning of the word 'intends' is to mean, to have in
Zaburoni v The
a majority of this Court adopted that statement as to the ordinary meaning
of "intends" as correct and rejected an argument that the
word requires an
assessment of a person's foresight of the consequences of his or her
Intentionally inflicted or caused
appellants contend that the conditions of "intentional infliction of pain or
suffering" or "intentionally causing extreme humiliation"
are satisfied if a
person does an act knowing that the act will, in the ordinary course of events,
inflict pain or suffering, or
cause extreme humiliation. On this argument,
clearly enough, intention involves an assessment of the foresight of the
consequences
of an act. No detailed submissions were made by the parties in
these appeals about the debate, in England, regarding the concept
of "oblique
It is therefore unnecessary to enter into that debate for the purposes of these
the appellants' construction to the present cases, it is said that, if officials
in Sri Lanka were to cause the appellants
to be detained, those officials would
intend to inflict pain or suffering or cause extreme humiliation because they
must be taken
to be aware of the conditions giving rise to such harm in the
prisons to which the appellants would be sent.
meaning of "intention" for which the appellants contend is the second,
alternative, meaning of "intention" with respect to a
result in s 5.2(3) of the
Criminal Code
This meaning also appears in the definition of "intention" given in the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court
The first meaning given in s 5.2(3) accords with the ordinary meaning adopted in
appellants also rely upon certain international law sources, including a
decision of the Appeals Chamber of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the
and cases which follow it, as supporting the meaning for which they
starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory provision is
the text of the statute whilst, at the same time,
regard is had to its context
Context should be regarded at this first stage and not at some later stage and
it should be regarded in its widest
This is not to deny the importance of the natural and ordinary meaning of a
word, namely how it is ordinarily understood in discourse,
to the process of
construction. Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise that,
understood in its statutory, historical
or other context, some other meaning of
a word may be suggested, and so too, if its ordinary meaning is not consistent
with the statutory
purpose, that meaning must be rejected.
, the plurality held that a person is ordinarily understood to
intend a result by his or her action if the person means to produce
that result.
What is involved is the directing of the mind, having a purpose or design. So
understood, intention refers to a person's
actual, subjective,
as the Tribunal and Kenny and Nicholas JJ in the Full Court concluded.
, Nettle J reasoned in a way different from the plurality.
In his Honour's
logically followed that an accused could be said to intend to bring about a
result where he or she foresaw that his or her actions
would have an inevitable
or certain consequence. The plurality in
acknowledged
that evidence that a person understood that a particular result was an
inevitable consequence may go a long way towards proving intent,
but held that
it was not to be equated with it. Given that conclusion, the manner in which
Nettle J reasoned in
now stands rejected.
context of the
does not tell against the ordinary meaning of "intention"
accepted in
. To the contrary, the fact that the element of
intention is contained in the definition of "torture", from which the
definitions
in question are derived, tends to confirm it. A perpetrator of
torture, clearly enough, means to inflict suffering because it is
part of his or
her ultimate purpose or design to subject the victim to pain and suffering in
order, for example, to obtain a confession.
is, of course, possible that words taken from an international treaty may have
another, different, meaning in international law.
In such a case their
importation into an Australian statute may suggest that that meaning was also
intended to be
But as Edelman J
there is no settled meaning of "intentionally" to be derived from any
international law sources. In particular, the decisions of
the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, to which this Court was referred,
do not provide any settled meaning.
the decision of the European Court of Human Rights ("the ECHR") in
Kalashnikov v
which was referred to in argument before this Court, does not assist with
respect to the meaning of "intention" in
. At issue in
that case was whether the applicant being subjected to appalling prison
conditions in Russia for almost five years
amounted to a violation of Art 3
of the European Convention on Human Rights ("the European Convention"), which
provides that "[n]o
one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment". The concepts of "torture", "inhuman treatment
punishment" and "degrading treatment or punishment" are not further defined in
the text of the European Convention. The factual
dissimilarities of
Kalashnikov
may be put to one side. The argument put by Russia appears
to have been similar to that put forward by the first respondent with
the intention of Sri Lankan officials, namely, that the Russian authorities had
no intention of causing physical suffering
to the applicant or harming his
health, but rather the unsatisfactory conditions of detention, which the
government was doing its
best to improve, were owing to economic reasons and
were experienced by most
The ECHR rejected that argument, holding that a lack of intention to humiliate
or debase the applicant could not rule out a violation
of Art 3 so far as
concerns degrading treatment. Treatment has been deemed by the ECHR to be
"degrading" when it is such as to arouse
in victims feelings of fear, anguish
and inferiority capable of humiliating and debasing them. The existence or
otherwise of a purpose
to do as such was treated only as "a factor to be taken
Since Art 3 was violated by degrading treatment, which does not require a
positive intention under ECHR case law, the ECHR's reasoning
Kalashnikov
does not shed light on the meaning of intention as used in the definitions
Criminal Code
, the alternative definition of "intention" in
s 5.2(3) does not form part of the context in which the complementary
protection regime
and the definitions contained in it are to be
considered.
Criminal Code
definition of "intention" was enacted in 1995 to apply to
all Commonwealth offences. An offence of torture was inserted into the
Criminal Code
that existing definition of intention applied automatically to it. No inference
can be drawn about the definition being considered
particularly appropriate to
acts of torture and therefore to the other conduct which constitutes
"significant harm".
alternative definition of "intention" in s 5.2(3) of the
reflects a policy choice concerning criminal responsibility. It
appears from the Explanatory Memorandum to the Criminal Code Bill
those proposing it were well aware that it went against the view that awareness
of, or foresight of, result is, at best, evidence
of intention. The Explanatory
Memorandum in that regard referred to
In that case, Lord Bridge of Harwich firmly expressed the view that, as an
element of any offence involving specific intent, foresight
of consequences
"belongs, not to the substantive law, but to the law of
This accords with the reasoning of the plurality in
the complementary protection regime was inserted in the
in 2012 it would
have been a simple enough matter to have adopted the
Criminal Code
definition of "intention" if it had been thought appropriate to its purposes,
but there is no reference to that definition and nothing
to suggest that it was
considered to be appropriate. Applying the alternative meaning of "intention"
would have the consequence
that the ambit of the protection afforded by the
complementary protection regime of the
would be wider than the ordinary
meaning of that word would allow. It is not immediately obvious that it was
thought necessary or
desirable to meet Australia's obligations under the CAT or
the ICCPR in this way.
in pari materia
, in the sense that they deal with the same subject matter
along the same lines, may form part of the context for the process of
construction.
Acts of this kind are said to form a kind of code or scheme,
which arises from the degree of similarity
Without this feature there is no warrant to transpose the meaning of a word from
one statute to another or to assume, where the
same words are used in a
subsequent statute, that the legislature intended to attach the same meaning to
Criminal Code
are not statutes
in pari materia
Criminal Code
in its complementary protection provisions have
in common that they give effect to Australia's obligations under the CAT, but
do so in different ways and for different purposes. The
makes persons criminally responsible for acts of torture in the same
way as they may be responsible for other offences involving
intent. The
provisions of the complementary protection regime in the
offer protection
against the return of a non-citizen to a country where the Minister has
substantial grounds for believing that the
person will be at risk of significant
harm, by the grant of a visa enabling the person to stay in Australia. The
is not concerned with whether country officials should be held criminally
responsible but with the reality of the risk of harm from
them. That risk is
assessed by reference to what those officials might be understood to intend with
respect to a non-citizen if
the non-citizen is returned to that country.
reference in the
to "intentionally inflicting" and "intentionally causing"
is to the natural and ordinary meaning of the word "intends" and therefore
actual, subjective, intent. As
confirms, a person intends a
result when they have the result in question as their purpose.
intention of a person as to a result concerns that person's actual, subjective,
state of mind. For that reason, as the plurality
pains to point
knowledge or foresight of a result is not to be equated with intent. Evidence
that a person is aware that his or her conduct will
certainly produce a
particular result may permit an inference of intent to be drawn, but foresight
of a result is of evidential significance
only. It is not a substitute for the
test of whether a person intended the result, which requires that the person
meant to produce
that particular result and that that was the person's purpose
in doing the act.
Intention applied
the present cases the question for the Tribunal was whether a Sri Lankan
official, to whom knowledge of prison conditions can
be imputed, could be said
to intend to inflict severe pain or suffering on the appellants or to intend to
cause them extreme humiliation
by sending them to prison. That question was to
be answered by the application of the ordinary meaning of "intends", as the
has been explained, evidence of foresight of the risk of pain or suffering or
humiliation may support an inference of intention.
In some cases, the degree of
foresight may render the inference
But in the present matters, having regard to the evidence before the Tribunal
(including evidence about what the Sri Lankan authorities
might know), the
Tribunal was entitled to conclude that it was not to be inferred that the
Sri Lankan officials intended to inflict
the requisite degree of pain or
suffering or humiliation.
each matter the appeal should be dismissed and the appellant should pay the
costs of the first respondent.
J. A policeman arrests a person at an airport on suspicion of the person
having committed a crime. The policeman does so
because that is his job. That
is where his job ends. The policeman knows that the person will be remanded in
custody in a gaol
and he knows that the conditions in the gaol will be
appalling. There is nothing the policeman can do about that.
the policeman "intend" to subject the person to the appalling gaol conditions?
Not obviously; not obviously not; and no amount
of contemplating the abstract
meaning of "intend" will supply the answer. The answer depends on why the
question is asked.
question is asked here in the implementation of the regime for "complementary
protection" introduced into the
Migration Act
(Cth) by the
Migration Amendment (Complementary Protection) Act
question is asked for the particular purpose of applying the term "intend"
– or more particularly its cognate terms
"intended" and "intentionally"
– as occurring in the statutory definitions of "cruel or inhuman treatment
or punishment", "degrading
treatment or punishment", and
subjection to any of which is defined to constitute a form of "significant
expression "significant harm" as so defined is the critical expression within
the statutory formulation of the criterion for
a protection visa, as an
alternative to the criterion that the applicant for the visa
a non-citizen in Australia "in respect of whom the
Minister is satisfied Australia has protection obligations" because the person
that the applicant for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia "in respect of
whom the Minister is satisfied Australia has protection
obligations because the
Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and
foreseeable consequence of the non-citizen
being removed from Australia to a
receiving country, there is a real risk that the non-citizen will suffer
significant
"protection obligations" to which that alternative criterion refers are
relevantly those which Australia has under Art 7 of
the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights ("the ICCPR") in respect of cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment and
degrading treatment or punishment and under Art 7 of
the ICCPR and Art 3 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment ("the CAT") in respect of torture.
of the difficulty encountered in answering the question in the present cases has
been that competing answers have been presented
at each level of the judicial
hierarchy as a choice between what has been argued on the one hand to be a fixed
"ordinary meaning"
of the word "intentionally" as appearing in a domestic
statute and what has been argued on the other hand to be a settled meaning
international law of the same word appearing as part of the definition of
"torture" in Art 1 of the CAT. Much effort has been
expended exploring whether
the word has or has not acquired a settled meaning in international law. The
word has not been shown
to have a settled meaning in international law. But
that does not exhaust the relevance of international law to the choice of
meaning, and it does not lead to the result that the statutory meaning
of the word is left to be determined as an exercise in abstract
K & S Lake City Freighters Pty Ltd v Gordon & Gotch
"Problems of legal interpretation are not solved satisfactorily by ritual
incantations which emphasize the clarity of meaning which
words have when viewed
in isolation, divorced from their context. The modern approach to
interpretation insists that the context
be considered in the first instance,
especially in the case of general words, and not merely at some later stage when
ambiguity might
be thought to arise."
on that statement, and its antecedents, Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gummow JJ
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club
"[T]he modern approach to statutory interpretation (a) insists that the context
be considered in the first instance, not merely at
some later stage when
ambiguity might be thought to arise, and (b) uses 'context' in its widest sense
to include such things as the
existing state of the law and the mischief which,
by legitimate means such as those just mentioned, one may discern the statute
intended to remedy."
of those passages have been "cited too often to be
Their import has been reinforced, not superseded or contradicted, by more recent
statements emphasising that statutory construction
involves attribution of
meaning to statutory text. The task of construction begins, as it ends, with
the statutory text. But the
statutory text from beginning to end is construed
in context, and an understanding of context has utility "if, and in so far as,
it assists in fixing the meaning of the statutory
constructional choice presented by a statutory text read in context is sometimes
between one meaning which can be characterised
as the ordinary or grammatical
meaning and another meaning which cannot be so characterised. More commonly,
the choice is from "a
range of potential meanings, some of which may be less
immediately obvious or more awkward than others, but none of which is wholly
ungrammatical or unnatural", in which case the choice "turns less on linguistic
fit than on evaluation of the relative coherence
of the alternatives with
identified statutory objects or
to making such a choice is discernment of statutory purpose. The unqualified
statutory instruction that, in interpreting
a provision of a Commonwealth
"the interpretation that would best achieve the purpose or object of the
(whether or not that purpose or object is expressly stated in the
preferred to each other
interpretation"
"is in that respect a particular statutory reflection of a general systemic
the same process of contextual construction is involved when the question is one
of what content is to be given to a statutorily
invoked concept which is
expressed in words the ordinary or grammatical meaning of which is well-enough
understood but insufficiently
precise to provide definitive guidance as to how
the concept is to be understood and applied in the particular statutory setting.
An example is the varying senses in which the concept of causation might be
invoked in statutory provisions which attribute responsibility
for loss caused
"by" or "because of" or "as a result of" contravention of different statutory
norms. Because "one cannot give a
common sense answer to a question of
causation for the purpose of attributing responsibility under some rule without
knowing the
purpose and scope of the
"[t]he application of a causal term in a statutory provision is always to be
determined by reference to the statutory text construed
and applied in its
statutory context in a manner which best effects its statutory
concept of intention is similarly insufficiently precise to allow its content in
a particular statutory context always to be
determined by reference merely to
ordinary or grammatical meaning. That is particularly so where the question is
whether a person
"intends" a result which the person is aware will occur but
which the person does not want to occur, either as an end in itself or
means of achieving some other end. Does the dentist "intend" to cause pain to
the patient? Does the judge who finds for the
plaintiff knowing that the
damages will bankrupt the defendant "intend" to bankrupt the defendant? Does
the "strategic bomber" who
drops the bomb on the enemy munitions factory
"intend" to kill the children in the adjacent school? The answer will not be
in a dictionary, and neither common sense nor conceptual analysis can be
expected to yield a single answer satisfying across a range
of circumstances
irrespective of why the question is
the concept of intention invoked in a particular statutory context is objective
or subjective and, if subjective, whose and
what state of mind will suffice to
constitute the requisite intention will vary from statute to
Where the question is one of subjective intention as to the result of conduct,
"introduction of the maxim or statement that a man
is presumed to intend the
reasonable consequences of his act is seldom helpful and always
But whether a man or woman is to be taken subjectively to intend the known or
expected consequences of his or her act is less susceptible
of generalisation.
Intention as to a result will sometimes require the purpose or design of
bringing about the
other times, intention as to result will sufficiently be found in willingness to
act with awareness of the likelihood of the
Absent express legislative indication as to which of those, or perhaps other,
alternatives is applicable in a given context, the
choice between them becomes a
matter of construction. Neither alternative can be dismissed simply on the
basis that it lies beyond
the ordinary meaning of intention.
to making the constructional choice presented by the statutory text in the
present context is the purpose for which the
complementary protection regime was
introduced. That purpose was identified at the time of introduction as being
"to allow all claims
by visa applicants that may engage Australia's
non-refoulement
obligations under the [identified] human rights
instruments to be considered under a single protection visa application process,
with access to the same transparent, reviewable and procedurally robust
decision-making framework ... available to applicants who
make claims that may
engage Australia's obligations under the Refugees
Convention"
The interpretation which would best achieve that identified purpose, and which
is for that reason to be preferred to any other interpretation,
interpretation which would more closely align the statutory criterion for the
grant of a protection visa to Australia's obligations
under Art 7 of the ICCPR
and Art 3 of the CAT.
prefer the interpretation of "intended" and "intentionally" in the relevant
statutory definitions which would more closely align
the statutory criterion for
the grant of a protection visa to Australia's obligations under Art 7 of the
ICCPR and Art 3 of the CAT
is not to invert the process of interpretation in the
manner criticised in
NBGM v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Rather, it is to endeavour to adopt from a range of potentially available
constructions that which best allows the domestic statutory
language to fulfil
its statutory purpose. There is no question that "it is the words of the
the question is, and remains throughout the requisite analysis, as to the
meaning of those words.
word "intentionally", as has already been mentioned, appears in the definition
of "torture" in Art 1 of the CAT. The definition
is framed relevantly to
encompass "any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or
mental, is intentionally inflicted
on a person" for specified kinds of purposes.
The word does not appear in Art 7 of the ICCPR, which states relevantly that
one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment".
first to the context for the word as appearing in the statutory definition of
torture within the complementary protection
regime that is provided by the
definition in Art 1 of the CAT, it is important to recognise that Australia's
obligations under the
CAT go beyond the obligation imposed by Art 3 not to
"expel, return ('refouler') or extradite a person to another State where there
are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being
subjected to torture". They include as well the obligation
imposed by Art 4 to
"ensure that all acts of torture
are offences under its criminal
law", irrespective of where those acts might be committed, to which effect is
given by the creation
of an offence of torture under the
Criminal Code
the definition of torture within the complementary protection regime effectively
adopts the language of the definition in
Art 1 of the CAT, in referring to any
act "by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is
intentionally inflicted
on a person", the
Criminal Code
operates to
translate that language into a physical element and a fault element. The
physical element of the offence of torture spelt
Criminal Code
is relevantly that a perpetrator "engages in conduct that inflicts severe
physical or mental pain or suffering" on a
The corresponding fault element spelt out in the
Criminal Code
"intention"
The requisite intention will exist in either of two scenarios. One is where the
perpetrator means to engage in the conduct and
means to bring about infliction
of severe physical or mental pain or suffering on the victim. The other is
where the perpetrator
means to engage in the conduct and is aware that
infliction of severe physical or mental pain or suffering on the victim "will
in the ordinary course of
Admittedly,
the two scenarios in which the requisite fault element of intention will exist
are the product of application to the
particular crime of torture of general
principles of criminal liability set out in the
Criminal Code
application of those general principles of criminal liability to that crime can
hardly be characterised as unthinking. Before
insertion of the offence of
torture into the
Criminal Code
Crimes Legislation Amendment
(Torture Prohibition and Death Penalty Abolition) Act
same general principles of criminal liability had
the crime of torture as then created by the
Crimes (Torture) Act
(Cth). Those general principles of criminal liability could easily have been
modified. They were not. The effect of applying them
was and remains to make
the mental element of the crime of torture as defined in Australia correspond
with the mental element of
the crime of torture as defined in the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal
Australia is a party to the Rome Statute and Parliament has facilitated
compliance with Australia's obligations through the enactment
International Criminal Court Act
it might be open to Parliament to adopt one approach to the definition of
torture in Art 1 of the CAT in the legislative implementation
of Australia's
obligation under Art 3 of the CAT and another approach to the same definition in
the legislative implementation of
Australia's obligation under Art 4 of the CAT,
for Parliament actually to do so would be strangely inconsistent. No reason
for thinking that Parliament would have done so. In particular, no
reason appears for attributing to Parliament a legislative intention
narrower view of torture for the purpose of protecting the victim than the view
of torture it has expressly spelt out for
the purpose of punishing the
perpetrator.
from the definition of torture within the complementary protection regime to the
definitions of cruel or inhuman treatment
or punishment and of degrading
treatment or punishment respectively, there is no reason to think that
Parliament adopted the same
word or a cognate word in definitions introduced at
the same time as part of the complementary protection regime yet intended that
word to have a different meaning. The underlying notion of intention in each of
the three definitions must be the same.
is another and somewhat broader contextual reason to think that the wider notion
of intention is appropriate. It lies in the
scope of Art 7 of the ICCPR, to
which the definitions of cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment and of
degrading treatment or punishment
are directed.
proscription in Art 7 of the ICCPR that "[n]o one shall be subjected to torture
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment" is mirrored in the
proscription in Art 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights that "[n]o one
shall be subjected
to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment". In
Kalashnikov v
the European Court of Human Rights concluded that Art 3 had been violated by the
gaoling of a prisoner for a long period in overcrowded
and unsanitary conditions
resulting in an adverse effect on his physical health. In reasoning to that
conclusion, the European Court
accepted that there had been "no indication that
there was a positive intention of humiliating or debasing" the prisoner, saying
that "although the question whether the purpose of the treatment was to
humiliate or debase [the prisoner] is a factor to be taken
into account, the
absence of any such purpose cannot exclude a finding of violation of Art
the reasoning in
Kalashnikov v Russia
as transferable to Art 7 of the
ICCPR, that reasoning indicates that a positive intention on the part of the
perpetrator to bring
is not essential to the occurrence of a violation. The reasoning indicates
turn that the introduction of the concept of intention into the statutory
definitions of cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment
and of degrading
treatment or punishment might in some cases produce a result in which a victim
of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment would be denied
complementary protection in circumstances in which Australia's protection
obligation under Art 7 of
the ICCPR would be engaged. That the introduction of
the concept of intention narrows the scope of complementary protection provides
no reason for treating the particular notion of intention that is incorporated
into the definitions as a narrow one. To the contrary,
it confirms the
appropriateness of understanding the sense in which intention has been invoked
to be a wide one.
circumstances of the prisoner who was the victim in
Kalashnikov v Russia
can be treated as illustrative of the circumstances of a person who would come
within the scope of Australia's protection obligation
under Art 7 of the ICCPR.
What the illustration shows is that to understand the underlying notion of
intention in each of the three
statutory definitions as met where a perpetrator
acts with awareness that the consequence to the victim will occur in the
course of events is to adopt a construction which allows the statutory
criterion for the grant of a protection visa better to meet
Australia's
obligation under Art 7 of the ICCPR, and which for that reason best achieves the
purpose for which the complementary
protection regime was introduced.
reasons for decision of the Refugee Review Tribunal in the present cases are
capable of being read as containing findings to
the effect that the conditions
to which the applicants for protection visas would be subjected when held on
remand on being returned
to Sri Lanka would not be so extreme as to amount to
cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment or to degrading treatment or punishment
irrespective of any question of intention. That is how Buchanan J read them in
the Full Court of the Federal Court. His Honour
would have dismissed the
applicants' appeals to that Court on that
Federal Circuit Court and the plurality in the Full Court of the Federal Court
proceeded on a different view. They interpreted
the decisions of the Tribunal
as turning on findings to the effect that the conditions to which the applicants
would be subjected
when held on remand would be the result of a lack of
resources "rather than an intention by the Sri Lankan government to inflict
cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment or cause extreme humiliation". They
therefore treated the decisions of the Tribunal as
turning on the view that the
notion of intention incorporated into the definitions of cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment and
of degrading treatment or punishment within the
complementary protection regime is limited to a subjective intention to bring
the relevant outcome. That view, they held, was correct in
only question raised in the applicants' appeals to this Court is whether the
plurality in the Full Court was itself correct in
law in endorsing that limited
view of intention. Recognising the question to be one of principle appropriate
for resolution by this
Court, the Minister has filed no notice of contention
seeking to have the appeals dismissed on the basis identified by Buchanan
the reasons given, I consider that the view of intention endorsed by the
plurality in the Full Court and now endorsed by the
majority in this Court is
too narrow. On the construction of the definitions I think to be preferable,
the requisite intention will
exist in either of two scenarios: where the
perpetrator means to engage in conduct meaning to bring about the result adverse
the victim; and where the perpetrator means to engage in conduct aware that
the result adverse to the victim will occur in the ordinary
would allow each appeal and make the consequential orders sought by the
appellants.
Introduction
central question in these two appeals is the meaning of "intentionally" in
Migration Act
(Cth), as amended in
There is no dispute that, as the Full Court of the Federal Court held in each
appeal, a person intends a result if the person "means"
to achieve it in the
sense of having it as the person's desire, aim, or purpose. But the appellants
submitted that the concept of
intent does not have to
bear a narrow
which is limited to this sense of desire, aim, or purpose. They
submitted that it had a broader meaning in
The essential submission of
the appellants was that the broader meaning of intention extends beyond desire,
aim, or purpose and
also "sees intent established once knowledge of the
likelihood of the consequences [ie results] of an act reaches a sufficient
of certainty". The appellants submitted that it was a sufficient degree
of certainty if the actor knew that the result would occur
in the ordinary
course of events.
broader meaning of intention is precisely the concept that philosophers since
Bentham have described, and debated, as "oblique
intention". Bentham described
oblique intention as arising where a result "was in contemplation, and appeared
likely to ensue in
case of the act's being
In submissions of identical effect, the appellants argued that intention could
arise in such a case because "you have knowledge
that the act you want to do is
likely to have a result". Although the appellants used the synonym "indirect
intention" in place
of "oblique intention", they relied upon a famous article by
Professor Glanville
which Williams popularised, and supported, Bentham's label of oblique intention.
For convenience, in these reasons I will describe
the appellants' submissions by
that well-known, and shorthand, label of "oblique intention", accepting that it
is identical to the
synonym used by the appellants of "indirect intention".
have been a number of judgments in this Court, relied upon by the appellants,
that have described intention in terms which
include within it this notion of
oblique intention. Different formulations of oblique intention have insisted
upon different degrees
of foresight. Sometimes it has been said that the result
must be foreseen as "inevitable" or "virtually certain". Sometimes it
said that the result need only be foreseen as "probable". And the
has defined intention with respect to a result as
existing where that result is expected to "occur in the ordinary course of
The fundamental point of oblique intention is that foresight of a result is not
used as a means to
intention in the sense of an aim or purpose.
The point is that voluntary conduct with a foreseen result means that the
foreseen result
context in which the question is raised in these two appeals concerns whether a
Sri Lankan official who intends to detain briefly
in custody a returned asylum
seeker, and knows of the shocking conditions in custody, therefore intends that
the detainee be subjected
to those shocking conditions. The two appellants
applied for protection visas, alleging that they would suffer (i) torture,
cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment, or (iii) degrading
treatment or punishment upon return to Sri Lanka if their applications
denied. Since they had not departed Sri Lanka lawfully they would be exposed to
a brief period of detention on remand. They
alleged that the infliction of pain
and suffering (within the definitions of these three matters in the
would arise as a result of prison conditions if they were
returned. They submitted that "severe pain or suffering, whether physical
mental" would be "intentionally inflicted" upon them, within the meaning of
Migration Act
the appellants correctly submitted, the Full Court of the Federal Court
effectively concluded that "actual, subjective, intention"
cannot be proved in
an oblique way merely by proving that the Sri Lankan official who would order
the detention of the appellants
would do so with knowledge of the consequences
of his or her intended act. The appellants submitted that this was an error for
alternative reasons.
the appellants alleged that the
Migration Act
should be construed
consistently with an alleged international meaning of intention which was said
to include oblique intention.
The appellants submitted that this international
meaning was applied in the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (1984) ("the Convention
against Torture"). The appellants' submission on an international
intention which includes oblique intention placed particular emphasis upon the
definition of intention in the
Criminal Code
, which incorporated oblique
appellants' first submission should not be accepted. No established, consistent
definition of intention emerges from the international
jurisprudence which the
relevant provisions of the
Migration Act
could be thought to have adopted
when they were inserted. The approach in the
Criminal Code
includes oblique intention, is not a uniform international model. In any event,
Criminal Code
adoption of oblique intention was made in
circumstances of controversy where a choice was taken to depart from the
ordinary meaning
of intention, which does not include oblique intention. The
Migration Act
did not include the extended, and controversial,
Criminal Code
definition.
second reason given by the appellants was that the ordinary meaning of intention
includes the concept of oblique intention.
The first respondent relied upon the
joint judgment of Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ in
Zaburoni v The
where their Honours rejected the concept of oblique intention. The decision
cannot resolve these appeals. There was no issue in that
case as to whether "intent" in s 317(b) of the
Criminal Code
include oblique intention. Indeed, it was conceded in argument that intention
did not include oblique intention, so no
reference was made to any of the
earlier High Court judgments which had recognised or applied oblique
Perhaps more fundamentally, even if the obiter dicta in
treated as having impliedly rejected the earlier authorities, there would be a
large question about the extent to which
a later decision about the ordinary
meaning of intention can be used to construe the meaning of that concept in an
earlier statute.
Nevertheless, the conclusions of the joint judgment about the
ordinary meaning of intention should be endorsed. Despite earlier
authority in
this Court which suggested the contrary, the ordinary meaning applied in
is not new. The earlier decisions of this Court which treated
the ordinary meaning of intention as including oblique intention were
uncontroversial. Properly understood, oblique intention is not intention at
all. Those cases must now be understood as using
the word "intention" as a
proxy for another concept, such as recklessness or a mental state other than
best construction of the
Migration Act
is that it uses "intention" in its
natural and ordinary sense rather than the unnatural or fictitious sense in
which it is used in
some earlier authorities. The Full Court in each case was
correct to so conclude. The appeals must be dismissed.
Migration Act
amendments relevant to these appeals
Background to the 2012 amendments
the Second Reading Speech to the 2012 amendments, the Minister explained that
prior to the amendments there existed "a significant
administrative hole in
[Australia's] protection visa application process". The "hole" gave rise to a
need to "align" Australia's
protection visa process with Australia's
international obligations of
non-refoulement
administrative "hole" arose in the following way. Prior to the 2012 amendments,
an applicant to whom Australia owed complementary
protection obligations, such
as protection from torture or cruel or inhuman treatment, fell outside the five
categories outlined
in the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (1951)
and was therefore ineligible to receive a protection visa.
The only way
that an applicant could obtain a protection visa was to make an application to
the Minister. Since the criteria for
the application would not be satisfied, a
delegate of the Minister would refuse the application (see
s 65(1)(a)(ii)
and (b) of the
Migration Act
). The applicant would then apply for review
to the Refugee Review Tribunal, which application would necessarily be
dismissed. However,
the dismissal of the application for review would enliven
the discretion of the Minister, under
to substitute a decision that was "more favourable" to the
applicant if the Minister thought it was in the public interest to do so.
effect of this scheme, in the words used by the Minister in the Second Reading
Speech, was that applicants would have to go through
a process of "applying,
failing, seeking review and failing again, just so they are then able to apply
to the minister for personal
intervention"
The Minister described this as a "lengthy process" which was "very time
consuming and extremely
Migration Act
was therefore amended "to establish an efficient,
transparent and accountable system for considering complementary protection
which will both enhance the integrity of Australia's arrangements for
meeting its
non-refoulement
obligations and better reflect Australia's
longstanding commitment to protecting those at risk of the most serious forms of
Migration Act
was amended by the
Migration Amendment (Complementary
Protection) Act
(Cth), the relevant provisions of which took
effect on 24 March 2012.
The operation of the 2012
2012 amendments introduced
s 36(2)(aa)
Migration Act
provided an additional basis for a grant of a protection visa. That
additional basis is complementary protection in circumstances
applicant does not fall within
because he or she is not a person
because the person
is a refugee. As Lander and Gordon JJ said in
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v
s 36(2)(aa)
recognises that a non-citizen may be entitled to a protection
visa because of Australia's
protection obligations under the
Convention against Torture or the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (1966) ("the
ICCPR"). In broad terms, the criterion is that the Minister
must be satisfied that Australia has protection obligations in relation
visa applicant. Those protection obligations arise if the Minister has
substantial grounds for believing that, "as a necessary
and foreseeable
consequence of the non-citizen being removed from Australia to a receiving
country, there is a real risk that the
non-citizen will suffer significant
Paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) of
then respectively provide that a
non-citizen will suffer significant harm if, among other things, the non-citizen
will be "subjected
to torture" or "subjected to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment" or "subjected to degrading treatment or
punishment".
3(1) of the Convention against Torture, to which Australia is a party, provides
that "[n]o State Party shall expel, return
('refouler') or extradite a person to
another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be
of being subjected to torture". The definition of "torture" in Art
1(1) of the Convention against Torture was substantially reproduced
Migration Act
. Torture is defined in
as follows:
means an act or
omission by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is
intentionally inflicted on a person:
(a) for the purpose of obtaining from the person or from a third person
information or a confession; or
(b) for the purpose of punishing the person for an act which that person
or a third person has committed or is suspected of having
committed; or
(c) for the purpose of intimidating or coercing the person or a third
(d) for a purpose related to a purpose mentioned in paragraph (a),
(b) or (c); or
(e) for any reason based on discrimination that is inconsistent with the
Articles of the Covenant;
but does not include an act or omission arising only from, inherent in or
incidental to, lawful sanctions that are not inconsistent
with the Articles of
the Covenant."
, "Covenant" is defined to mean the ICCPR.
departure in
Migration Act
from the definition of torture
in the Convention against Torture is that
does not restrict the
torture, as Art 1(1) does, to pain or suffering "inflicted by or at the
instigation of or with the consent
or acquiescence of a public official or other
person acting in an official capacity". The Explanatory Memorandum accompanying
2012 amendments, including the definition of torture, explained that in
extending the definition in this respect, "Australia is mindful
that Article
1(2) of the [Convention against Torture] enables States Parties to adopt
national legislation that contains provisions
of wider application than the
[Convention against Torture]
definition"
Cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment
Australia's
non-refoulement
obligation in relation to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment arises under Arts 2 and 7 of the ICCPR. Article 7 of that
"No one shall be subjected to torture or to
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. In particular, no one
shall be subjected
without his free consent to medical or scientific
experimentation."
the definition of torture in
Migration Act
, which was
derived closely from the Convention against Torture, the definition of "cruel or
inhuman treatment or punishment" in
departed significantly from the
ICCPR. The ICCPR did not define "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment". But
Migration Act
did define "cruel or
inhuman treatment or punishment". It included a requirement of intention which
was not present in the ICCPR.
definition of "cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment" is essentially an extension of the definition of
torture where the pain
or suffering was not inflicted for one of the purposes or
reasons stipulated under the definition of
definition is as follows:
cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment
means an act or omission by which:
(a) severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally
inflicted on a person; or
(b) pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally
inflicted on a person so long as, in all the circumstances,
the act or omission
could reasonably be regarded as cruel or inhuman in nature;
but does not include an act or omission:
(c) that is not inconsistent with Article 7 of the Covenant; or
(d) arising only from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions that
are not inconsistent with the Articles of the
consequence of this approach to "cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment" in
Migration Act
is that the concept operates as an extension of the
provisions in relation to torture rather than to implement any particular
international
obligation. At least in the requirement for intention in the
definition of "cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment" in
therefore, common ground that the definition still left a "hole" in the
Migration Act
scheme. In circumstances in which an applicant for a
protection visa would be returned to a country where the person would be subject
cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment, the applicant
would need to make a necessarily unsuccessful application for a protection
with a necessarily unsuccessful review by the Tribunal, before the application
could be considered by the Minister.
Migration Act
incorporate an international law meaning of "intention" from the Convention
against Torture?
appellants' submission concerning an alleged international meaning of
"intention", which included oblique intention, essentially
involved three steps.
First, the definition of cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment is essentially
an extended application of
the definition of torture. Therefore, "intention" in
relation to cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment should have the same
as its use in relation to torture. Secondly, "intention" is a word that
is capable of bearing more than one meaning. Thirdly, the
2012 amendments to
Migration Act
adopted the international law meaning of intention, as
that meaning is applied in the definition of torture in the Convention against
Torture. The appellants submitted that according to the international law
meaning, intention is "established once knowledge of the
likelihood of the
consequences of an act reaches a sufficient degree of certainty". As I have
explained, this extension of intention
to include foresight is oblique
first step of the appellants' submission should be accepted. The same reference
to intention, in definitions of closely related
concepts, should have the same
meaning. Ultimately, the first respondent did not contend that the word
"intention" should have a
different meaning in relation to the definition of
"torture" from its meaning in relation to "cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment".
to the second step in the appellants' submission, it can be accepted immediately
that "intention" is capable of being used by
statutes with different meanings.
Statutory words must always be read in their context. Indeed, it was common
ground between the
parties that the definition of intention in the
(Cth) departed from some common law definitions of intention. But that
does not mean that the word has more than one ordinary or
natural meaning.
appellants' submission falters at the third step. However, several of the
appellants' propositions in the third step should
be accepted. The appellants
correctly submitted that when Parliament implements a treaty into domestic law
by using the same words
as the treaty, "it is reasonable to assume that
Parliament intended to import into municipal law a provision having the same
as the corresponding provision in the
In other words, where particular words are consciously imported from an
international instrument into municipal law then it will
generally be the case
that the words in municipal law are used in the same way as an established
international law meaning of those
words. This approach is applicable to the
definition of "torture" in
Migration Act
. Contrary to the
submissions of the first respondent, the definitions in
automatically be treated as a "code" to be interpreted without reference to any
international materials. The Explanatory
Memorandum to the Bill which
introduced the 2012 amendments containing the definition of torture said that
the purpose of stating
expressly what torture
does not include was
"to confine the meaning of torture
to the meaning expressed in
international expert commentary (for example, commentary by relevant
international human rights treaty
bodies) on the meaning of that term as
reason why the appellants' submission fails at the third step is that there is
no established international law meaning of intention
against which the use of
that word in the
Migration Act
should be construed. The international
law sources relied upon by the appellants are limited, are conflicting, and do
not demonstrate
any established or consistent meaning of intention. They can be
divided into three categories. The first category involves decisions
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. The second concerns
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (1998) ("the Rome Statute")
Criminal Code
. The third category concerns a publication by the
Immigration and Refugee Board of
The third category can be put to one side because the publication contained
different meanings of intention in the text and the
footnotes and, in any event,
it was only a domestic publication provided by the Executive of one country for
the use of a Tribunal
in that country. Each of the first two categories can be
examined in turn.
to the decisions of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, the appellants relied upon the decision of
the Appeals Chamber in
Prosecutor v
and subsequent Trial Chamber decisions which followed the Appeals
The accused persons in
Prosecutor v Kunarac
argued that rapes that they
had committed did not fall within the definition of torture because their
intention was "of a sexual nature".
The Appeals Chamber rejected this
submission.
Appeals Chamber said that the Trial Chamber had adopted a definition of torture
with reference to the Convention against Torture
and the case law of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
The definition was described as having the
following three elements: (i) the infliction, by an act or omission, of severe
or suffering, whether physical or mental; (ii) the act or omission must be
intentional; and (iii) the act or omission must be aimed
at one of the matters
provided in the Convention against
text of Art 1 of the Convention against Torture, which the Appeals Chamber was
explicating in the threefold definition, refers
to "any act by which severe pain
or suffering ... is intentionally inflicted". The threefold definition does not
involve any element
of oblique intention. It requires, as the third element,
that the act be "aimed at" causing severe pain or suffering. This is a
sense of intention. In a later passage in the Appeals Chamber's judgment it was
said that, irrespective of the motive of
the accused, their acts involved
"In view of the definition, it is important to establish whether a
perpetrator intended to act in a way which, in the normal course
would cause severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, to his
This reference to the "normal course of events" does not appear to refer to
the issue of intention in the third element of the definition.
Instead, it
appears directed to the first requirement, that the act inflicts pain or
suffering. As Kiefel CJ pointed out during
oral argument, this is a
requirement of causation, not intention.
second category of international sources relied upon by the appellants includes
the Rome Statute and the
Criminal Code
which were said to be
evidence of opinio iuris for an international definition of intention for the
purposes of torture. The text
of the Rome Statute was drafted and circulated in
1998. It entered into force on 1 July 2002. Article 7(1)(f) of the Rome
provides that torture may constitute a crime against humanity. Article
7(2)(e) defines torture consistently with the Convention
against Torture.
However, Art 30(2)(b) defines intention for the purpose of the whole of the
Rome Statute. That definition of intention
includes oblique intention. It
applies in relation to a consequence where the "person means to cause that
consequence or is aware
that it will occur in the ordinary course of events".
The same definition of oblique intention is given in the definition of intention
with respect to a result in s 5.2 of the
Criminal Code
. That section of
Criminal Code
defines intention "with respect to a result" as arising
"if he or she means to bring it about or is aware that it will occur in the
ordinary course of events".
definitions of intention in the Rome Statute and the
Criminal Code
establish an international law meaning of intention for the purposes of the
Convention against Torture, which could then be
transplanted to
Migration Act
. There is no evidence that the definitions in the Rome
Statute and the
Criminal Code
were enacted to pick up the definition in
the Convention against Torture. The definition in each is different from the
approach taken
by the Appeals Chamber in
Prosecutor v Kunarac
both cases, the definition applies to a wide range of offences. As for the
Criminal Code
there is also the obvious difficulty in
establishing international opinio iuris by reference to the practice of a single
State actor.
Independently
of the lack of any particular international law definition of intention, there
is a further, insurmountable problem
with transplanting the definition of
intention in the
Criminal Code
Migration Act
problem is the conscious choice about a definition of intention that was made in
Criminal Code
but not made in the
Migration Act
insertion of the offence of torture in the
Criminal Code
occurred by
amendments to the
Criminal Code
which entered into force on 14 April
Prior to that time, the
Crimes (Torture) Act
(Cth) defined torture
as "any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or
mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person".
Section 3(2)
provided that,
except so far as a contrary intention appeared, expressions used in the
the same meaning as in the Convention against Torture. Whatever the meaning of
intention in the Convention against Torture,
it is arguable that the meaning was
altered by the operation of the particular
Criminal Code
definition of
intention to offences
from 15 December 2001. Certainly, when the offence of torture was substantially
amended and relocated in the
Criminal Code
in 2010, the plain consequence
was to provide for the inclusion of oblique intention as contained in the
Criminal Code
definition. In contrast, the enactment of the 2012
amendments to the
Migration Act
did not purport to apply the
definition.
different choice made concerning the definition of intention in the
cannot be said to have been due to a consensus, less than two years
after application of the
Criminal Code
definition to torture, that the
definition was so well established that it need not be set out in full.
when the definition of intention was inserted into the
Criminal Code
in 1995, it was recognised in the Explanatory Memorandum
that the inclusion of awareness that an event will occur in the ordinary
of events was
controversial
Two reasons given in the Explanatory Memorandum illustrate this controversy.
One reason was that it was contrary to the approach
taken by the House of Lords
one of those
Bridge of Harwich, with whom the other Law Lords agreed, said that the maxim
that a person "is presumed to intend the natural
and probable consequences" of
his or her acts did not belong as part of the meaning of intention but was
merely evidence from which
an inference of intention
other reason for controversy was that the distinction between circumstances and
consequences (ie results) is problematic at
the margins. The words chosen in s
Criminal Code
were adopted
with reference to this
controversy.
The ordinary meaning of intention in language and
was common ground that, in the absence of any established meaning of intention
in relation to torture in international law jurisprudence,
the meaning of
intention in
Migration Act
read in context,
must be its natural and ordinary meaning.
judgments of this Court have recognised or supported a concept of oblique
intention. For instance, the appellants relied upon
a passage in
where Dixon CJ approved the remarks of Professor Kenny that "in law it is clear
that the word 'intention' ... covers all consequences
whatever which the doer of
an act foresees as likely to result from it". A similar observation was made by
Later, in a joint judgment in
which was also referred to by the appellants, this Court cited English
English judicial
for the proposition that "on one view, a person who does an act knowing its
probable consequences may be regarded as having intended
those consequences to
occur", although it was ultimately "unnecessary to enter upon that controversy".
the most famous English academic support for this view was given by Glanville
Williams. In an article relied upon by the
appellants, advocating for the
adoption of oblique intention, Williams suggested an
a villain who blows up an aircraft in flight with a time-bomb, merely for the
purpose of collecting on insurance. The villain's
aim was not to kill the
people on board although he knew that their deaths would be an inevitable
side-effect
Williams postulated that while it was not the villain's aim or purpose to kill
the people on board, it was possible for the law
to say that he intended their
deaths. However, even Williams recognised that oblique intention, as reflected
in this example, is
not the ordinary meaning of intention. Williams' argument
was that the recognition of oblique intention was "a small departure"
ordinary meaning of intention and "permissible on grounds of
Neither point should be accepted. First, as I explain below, the departure from
ordinary language is not small. Indeed, Williams
acknowledged that the extended
meaning "does not always work satisfactorily" in some cases including,
pertinently for these appeals,
in relation to instances of mental
Secondly, even if there were some warrant to extend intention to a different
concept by reference to some preferred policy, a transparent
approach should be
taken which recognises that the concept being employed is not intention at all.
However, where a statute employs
a term in its ordinary sense, there can be no
warrant for the extension of the meaning beyond its ordinary sense.
instances of support for oblique intention in this Court can arguably be seen in
Bahri Kural v The
and can be seen in
Peters v The
Bahri Kural
, Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ said that intention to
import a drug "is established" if (i) an accused intended to bring an article
into Australia, and (ii) the accused knew that the article contained narcotic
drugs. It is possible to treat (ii) as just a circumstance
from which intention
is inferred rather than recognition of oblique
However, the decision of McHugh J (with whom Gummow J agreed) in
is an unequivocal recognition of oblique intention. The
appellants relied upon a passage where his Honour said
"If a person does something that is virtually certain to result in
another event occurring and knows that that event is certain or
certain to occur, for legal purposes at least he or she intends it to
the support for oblique intention that was identified by the appellants in
academic writing and various judgments in this
Court the concept should not be
accepted as the ordinary meaning of "intention". For three reasons, the better
approach is to recognise
that where intention is used in its ordinary sense it
bears its ordinary meaning. If another concept is relevant then the word
"intention"
would be better avoided. It will often only engender confusion for
the same word to be used to embrace that which Bentham described
by the misnomer
"oblique intention", and which the appellants described as "indirect intention".
first reason why oblique intention should be regarded as invoking a concept
different from intention is that the recognition
of oblique intention as a form
of intention has often proceeded from the false assumption that a person can
intend an undesired consequence.
For instance, in
reached the conclusion that intention includes oblique intention because he
considered that "a person may intend to do
something even though it is the last
thing that he or she wishes to bring
In oral submissions, the appellants therefore asserted that intention could
arise at two levels, either in respect of a result
that is desired or in respect
of one that is undesired, but is likely to occur. The argument that oblique
intention is just an example
of an intention about something undesired initially
appears attractive. But it suffers from the flaw of conflating two different,
although overlapping, senses of
A person can desire a consequence in the sense of volitionally choosing
it. Or a person can desire a consequence in the sense of emotionally
wanting it.
Hence, a person who boards a plane from London to Manchester
can still have a desire, in the sense of volitional choice, to travel
Manchester even if "Manchester is the last place he wants to be and his motive
for boarding the plane is simply to escape
Another example is an accused who "sets fire to his enemy's house so as to spite
the enemy even though he regrets the destruction
of the house because it is a
masterpiece of period
architecture"
The accused desired to destroy the house in the sense of volitionally choosing
that outcome, even though he did not desire it in
the sense of emotionally
wanting it.
second reason why "oblique intention" should not be treated as intention is that
it can lead to an absurd and unnatural use of
the word "intention". For
instance, a person who buys a lottery ticket will be aware that success is
highly unlikely, or that in
the ordinary course of events the person's ticket
will not be successful. But no-one would speak of the person intending to be
unsuccessful.
Professor Finnis gives an example of a woman who decides to give
testimony at her brother's trial although "acutely conscious of
uncontrollable
She intends to give evidence but no-one would say that she intends to stutter.
She does not choose, or desire, to do so.
third reason for eschewing oblique intention as a type of intention is that
despite the authority in this Court which has recognised
it, there is also
substantial authority which has cast doubt upon whether oblique intention is
really intention at all. For instance,
Vallance v The
Taylor J contrasted a "result foreseen as a not unlikely consequence" with
"actual intent". In
Giorgianni v The
Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ suggested that where it is sufficient that an act is
done with foresight of its probable consequences,
then it may be that such
"intent may more properly be described as a form of recklessness". And in
perhaps the most illuminating
passage, Windeyer J said in
Vallance v The
probability that harm will result from a man's acts may be so great, and so
apparent, that it compels an inference that he actually
intended to do that
harm. Nevertheless, intention is a state of mind. The circumstances and
probable consequences of a man's act
are no more than evidence of his intention.
For this reason this Court has often said that it is misleading to speak of a
presumed always to intend the natural and probable consequences of his
acts. And this, I do not doubt, is so. Because intent is
a state of mind, it
becomes necessary to ask what is that state of mind; what for the purposes of
the criminal law is comprehended
in the idea of an intentional act. Under the
law apart from the Code, an accused would be guilty of unlawfully wounding if
purpose was to inflict a wound: he would also be guilty if, without
any actual purpose to wound anyone, but foreseeing that what
he was about to do
was likely to cause a wound to someone, he yet went on to do it. The common law
treats what was done recklessly,
in that way, as if it had been done with actual
intent. It says that a man, who actually realizes what must be, or very
will be, the consequence of what he does, does it intending that
consequence. The word 'intentional' in the Code carries, I think,
concepts of the common law. I therefore do not read
as altering these
principles. It is, I may add, in my view undesirable to insist upon desire of
consequence as an element in intention.
There is a risk of introducing an
emotional ingredient into an intellectual concept. A man may seek to produce a
result while regretting
the need to do so."
this passage Windeyer J made several points which should be reiterated and
affirmed as a summary of the discussion so far. First,
the foresight of
consequences which is the basis for "oblique intention" is not intention at all.
It is only evidence from which
an inference can be drawn of intention, in the
sense of meaning for some result to occur or having that result as an aim or
Secondly, there are instances where the common law treats recklessness
as if it were intention. The law does itself no credit by
deeming one concept
to be another. Thirdly, there is a danger which can be caused by a focus on
desire. This danger is that desire
is a concept which can be understood in
either an emotional sense or a volitional sense. When desire is used as a
synonym for intention
then it ought to be used in the sense of volitional desire
or, in other words, the person's aim or purpose.
ordinary meaning of intention was considered in
Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ quoted, with
the approach of Connolly J in
R v Willmot
that the ordinary and natural meaning of the word "intends" is "to mean, to
have in mind", and that dictionary definitions show that
"what is involved is
the directing of the mind, having a purpose or design". As their Honours
explained, this meaning of intention
is different from the knowledge that
conduct "will probably produce a particular
They explained that when asking whether a person had unlawfully transmitted a
serious disease with intent to do so, the meaning
of intention made irrelevant
concepts of foreseeability, likelihood and
probability
To prove an intention to produce a particular result, by the ordinary meaning of
intention, it is necessary to establish that the
accused meant to produce that
result by his or her
considerable weight was placed on
by the first respondent in
argument that decision is only relevant to these appeals as an illustration of
what the ordinary and natural
meaning of intention has always been. The
decision, which concerned the meaning of intent in s 317(b) of the
(Q), cannot be an authority which affects the construction of different
legislation enacted years earlier. Further, the legitimacy
of "oblique
intention" as part of the concept of intention was not in issue in
. The Crown did not argue on that appeal that Mr Zaburoni had an
intention to transmit the human immunodeficiency virus ("HIV") because
Zaburoni had oblique intention arising from a choice to have unprotected sexual
intercourse with the foresight that the act of
unprotected sexual intercourse
would cause HIV. Apart from the lack of any evidence about Mr Zaburoni's
foresight of the possibility
of HIV, the statistical evidence was that there was
a 14 per cent risk of transmission, not that it was a certain result which had
been foreseen.
appellants' submission that the ordinary or natural sense of intention includes
"oblique intention" should not be accepted.
In ordinary or natural language,
oblique intention is not intention at all. Nor should it attract that label in
law. The same ordinary
meaning applies in
The application of the ordinary meaning of intention to these
appeals, therefore, would ask whether a person (the relevant Sri Lankan
official) will
to produce a particular result such as the severe
pain or suffering which is an element of the definition of cruel or inhuman
or punishment.
The decisions below
appeals concerned decisions by the Tribunal to affirm the decisions of delegates
of the Minister to refuse protection visas
to each appellant under
Migration Act
In each case, the appellant submitted to the
Tribunal that a protection visa should be granted because there was a real risk
he would suffer significant harm if removed to Sri Lanka. The risk of
significant harm was said to arise because of the treatment
in Sri Lanka of
citizens who departed contrary to Sri Lankan laws. The appellants
submitted that this treatment would amount to
torture or to "cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment" as those terms are defined in
Migration Act
SZTAL's case, the Tribunal accepted that since November 2012 all returnees who
left Sri Lanka illegally had been arrested after
their return. They were held
on remand and then charged with an offence under the
Immigrants and Emigrants
1945 prior to being bailed.
Tribunal found that SZTAL would be remanded for a short period of time of
between one night and several nights, and possibly
up to two weeks. As to the
treatment during remand, the Tribunal referred to country information which
indicated that prison conditions
in Sri Lanka did not meet international
standards, with concerns of "overcrowding, poor sanitary facilities, limited
access to food,
the absence of basic assistance mechanisms, a lack of reform
initiatives and instances of torture, maltreatment and violence". The
quoted from a former United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture, cited by the
United States Department of State, who reported
that "the combination of severe
overcrowding and antiquated infrastructure of certain prison facilities places
unbearable strains
on services and resources". The Tribunal also referred to a
press report which quoted returnees who said that they "slept on the
line" with their "bodies pressed up against each other", that they "could not
roll over", and that some nights they had
to take turns sleeping due to lack of
Tribunal described how Sri Lankan authorities have acknowledged the poor prison
conditions but said that a lack of space and
resources has inhibited reform.
The Tribunal cited a call by the President of Sri Lanka for "an overhaul of the
penal code and for
the lower courts to reduce prison congestion and expedite the
hearing of cases", as well as plans to construct and expand several
partnership with the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Tribunal determined that a "relatively short period of remand" did not amount to
an act or omission by which severe physical
or mental pain or suffering is
intentionally inflicted, nor did it amount to an act which could reasonably be
regarded as cruel or
inhuman. The Tribunal reiterated the requirement for
intentional infliction of cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment or degrading
treatment or punishment and said that "[m]ere negligence or lack of resources
does not suffice". The Tribunal continued:
"The country information
above indicates that the poor prison conditions in Sri Lanka are due to a lack
of resources which the government
appears to have acknowledged and is taking
steps to improve, rather than an intention by the Sri Lankan government to
inflict cruel
or inhuman treatment or punishment or cause extreme humiliation."
reasons, and decision, of the Tribunal in SZTGM's case, including the
information referred to by the Tribunal and the reasoning
of the Tribunal, were
relevantly identical.
SZTAL and SZTGM sought review of the Tribunal's decisions in the Federal Circuit
Court. One submission for the appellants was
that the Tribunal had misconstrued
the meaning of "intention" in
Migration Act
applications were dismissed. The primary judge in the Federal Circuit Court in
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border
held that the phrase "intentionally inflicted" required the existence of an
actual, subjective intention on the part of a person
to bring about the
suffering by his or her conduct. Therefore, the Tribunal did not err by failing
"to consider whether the Sri
Lankan authorities had the necessary intent because
they foresaw the consequences of their
This reasoning was incorporated by the same primary judge in his reasons in
SZTGM v Minister for Immigration and Border
appellants appealed to the Federal Court. The appeals were heard together, with
a third appeal, by the Full Court (Kenny, Buchanan
and Nicholas JJ). The
Full Court dismissed the appeals. In a joint judgment, Kenny and Nicholas JJ
held that "intention" in
Migration Act
natural and ordinary meaning of "actual subjective intention by the actor to
bring about the victims' pain and suffering
by the actor's
Their Honours observed that the primary judge was correct to dismiss the
applications for review because the Tribunal had treated
"intentionally
inflicted" as requiring an "actual subjective intention to cause the relevant
harm" irrespective of whether the authorities
foresaw the consequences of their
The third member of the Full Court, Buchanan J, dismissed the appeals on the
basis that the Tribunal had found that the level of
harm did not meet the
physical or mental elements of the
definitions
The first respondent did not bring any notice of contention seeking to dismiss
each appeal from the decision of the Full Court of
the Federal Court on the
basis that the Tribunal had found that the physical element of the definition
was not satisfied.
The approach to intention applied by the
primary submission of the appellants in the Full Court of the Federal Court had
been that the approach the Tribunal should have
taken was to ask whether the
actor knows or is aware that pain or suffering will be inflicted by the act or
omission "in the ordinary
course of events". For the reasons explained above,
the Full Court correctly rejected that submission.
the appellants maintained that submission in this Court, their submission in
this Court was more nuanced. The appellants'
ground of appeal in this Court was
that the Full Court erred by requiring the "actual, subjective, intention" to be
one which cannot
be proved merely by the actor's knowledge of the consequences
of his or her intended acts or omissions, no matter how certain that
may be. The appellants' submission was effectively that intention could include
circumstances where knowledge of (ie belief
in) the future consequences of a
voluntary act reaches a sufficient degree of certainty. Hence, they submitted
that the Full Court
and primary judge both erred by failing to apply the correct
test. This submission of the appellants requires the recognition of
intention" as a legitimate and ordinary use of intention. For the reasons I
have explained, that submission cannot be accepted.
appeals must therefore be dismissed. The Full Court was correct that the
Tribunal was required only to consider intention as
meaning an "actual,
subjective, intention". It was not sufficient for that intention to be proved
by oblique intention. Foresight
of consequences, especially with a high degree
of perceived likelihood, is a matter from which intention can be inferred. But
is not part of the definition of intention. The appellants could only have
established "intention" within par (a) of the definition
of "cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment" in
Migration Act
Tribunal accepted that a relevant Sri Lankan official acted in a way meaning, in
the sense of having as an aim or purpose,
that "severe pain or suffering,
whether physical or mental" would be inflicted. This conclusion was rejected by
the Tribunal.
appeals should be dismissed. In each matter the appellant should pay the costs
of the first respondent.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 24 February 2011
Migration Act
s 36(2A)(c)
, (d) and (e).
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] FCCA 64
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] FCCA 87
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCAFC 69
; (2016) 243 FCR 556 at 580
[1985] 2 Qd R 413.
R v Willmot (No 2)
Qd R 413 at 418.
(2016) 256 CLR 482;
[1974] UKHL 2
; [1975] AC 55;
[2008] UKHL 30
; [2003] 2 Cr App R 30.
Section 5.2(3)
provides: "[a]
person has intention with respect to a result if he or she means to bring it
or is aware that it will occur in the ordinary course of events
(emphasis added).
2187 UNTS 90, Art 30(2)(b)
(entered into force on 1 July 2002).
Prosecutor v Kunarac
(Judgement)
(International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-96-23 and IT-96-23/1-A, 12 June 2002).
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355 at 381-382 [69]-[71];
[1998] HCA 28
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
[2009] HCA 41
; (2009) 239 CLR 27 at 46-47
[2009] HCA 41.
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408;
[1997] HCA 2.
Zaburoni v The Queen
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 489
per Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ (citing
[2006] QCA 202
; [2007] 1 Qd R 64 at 93
), see also at 501 [55] per
Zaburoni v The Queen
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 504
Zaburoni v The Queen
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 490
Bjelke-Petersen
[1982] HCA 27
; (1982) 153 CLR 168 at 265;
[1982] HCA 27.
At [84]-[89].
[2002] ECHR 596
; (2003) 36 EHRR 34.
Kalashnikov v Russia
[2002] ECHR 596
; (2003) 36 EHRR 34 at 607
Kalashnikov v Russia
[2002] ECHR 596
; (2003) 36 EHRR 34 at 611
Crimes Legislation Amendment
(Torture Prohibition and Death Penalty Abolition) Act
Australia, Senate, Criminal
Code Bill 1994, Explanatory Memorandum at 14.
[1984] UKHL 4
; [1985] AC 905.
R v Moloney
[1984] UKHL 4
; [1985] AC
905 at 928.
Bennion on Statutory
Interpretation: A Code
6th ed (2013) at 553.
Lennon v Gibson Howes
(1919) 26 CLR 285 at 287;
[1919] UKPCHCA 2
; [1919] AC 709 at 711-712;
Coverdale v West
Coast Council
[2016] HCA 15
; (2016) 90 ALJR 562 at 570
; 330 ALR 424 at 434;
Zaburoni v The Queen
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 490
Zaburoni v The Queen
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 490
Section 5(1)
Migration Act
Section 36(2A).
Section 36(2)(a).
Section 36(2)(aa).
[1985] HCA 48
; (1985) 157 CLR 309 at 315;
[1985] HCA 48.
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408;
[1997] HCA 2
(footnote omitted).
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Jayasinghe
(2016) 247 FCR 40 at 43 [5] and [7].
Thiess v Collector of
[2014] HCA 12
; (2014) 250 CLR 664 at 671
[2014] HCA 12
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
; (2012) 250 CLR
[2012] HCA 55.
Taylor v Owners –
Strata Plan No 11564
[2014] HCA 9
; (2014) 253 CLR 531 at 557
[2014] HCA 9.
Section 15AA
Interpretation Act
Thiess v Collector of
[2014] HCA 12
; (2014) 250 CLR 664 at 672
Environment Agency v Empress
Car Co (Abertillery) Ltd
[1998] UKHL 5
; [1999] 2 AC 22 at 31, cited in
Compensation Fund v Tambree
[2005] HCA 69
; (2005) 224 CLR 627 at 642
Comcare v Martin
[2016] HCA 43
258 CLR 467 at 479
[2016] HCA 43.
See generally Simester, "Moral
Certainty and the Boundaries of Intention", (1996) 16
Oxford Journal of Legal
445; Sir Anthony Mason, "Intention in the Law of Murder", in
Naffine, Owens and Williams (eds),
Intention in Law and Philosophy
(2001) 107.
News Ltd v South Sydney
District Rugby League Football Club Ltd
[2003] HCA 45
; (2003) 215 CLR 563 at 579-580
[2003] HCA 45.
Stapleton v The Queen
[1952] HCA 56
; (1952) 86 CLR 358 at 365;
[1952] HCA 56.
Smyth v The Queen
[1957] HCA 24
; (1957) 98 CLR 163 at 166-167;
[1957] HCA 24
Parker v The Queen
[1963] HCA 14
111 CLR 610 at 631-632;
[1963] HCA 14.
Zaburoni v The Queen
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 488
, 501 [55];
[2016] HCA 12.
Vallance v The Queen
[1961] HCA 42
; (1961) 108 CLR 56 at 61;
[1961] HCA 42
Chandler v Director of Public
Prosecutions
[1964] AC 763 at 804-805.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Migration Amendment (Complementary Protection) Bill 2011
Explanatory Memorandum at 1.
[2006] HCA 54
; (2006) 231 CLR 52 at 71-72
[2006] HCA 54.
Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v QAAH of 2004
[2006] HCA 53
; (2006) 231 CLR 1 at 16
[2006] HCA 53.
Division 274.
Section 274.2(2)(a).
Section 5.6(1).
Section 5.2(1) and (3).
See s 2.2 of the
2187 UNTS 90, Art 30.
[2002] ECHR 596
; (2003) 36 EHRR 34.
[2002] ECHR 596
; (2003) 36 EHRR 34 at 589
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCAFC 69
; (2016) 243 FCR 556 at 589-590
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] FCCA 64
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] FCCA 87
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCAFC 69
; (2016) 243 FCR 556
Migration Amendment
(Complementary Protection) Act
(Cth). The amending provisions
commenced by proclamation on 24 March 2012.
An Introduction to
the Principles of Morals and Legislation
, (1823), vol 1 at 141.
Williams, "Oblique Intention",
Cambridge Law Journal
Criminal Code
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 488-489
[2016] HCA 12.
Zaburoni v The Queen
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 483, 485.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 24 February 2011
at 1356-1357.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 24 February 2011
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 24 February 2011
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Migration Amendment (Complementary Protection) Bill 2011
Explanatory Memorandum at 1.
[2013] FCAFC 33
; (2013) 210 FCR 505 at 526
Migration Act
s 36(2)(aa).
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Migration Amendment (Complementary Protection) Bill 2011
Explanatory Memorandum at 9 [52].
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Migration Amendment (Complementary Protection) Bill 2011
Explanatory Memorandum at 5 [16].
Bjelke-Petersen
[1982] HCA 27
; (1982) 153 CLR 168 at 265;
[1982] HCA 27.
Greentree v Minister for Environment and Heritage
[2005] FCAFC 128
; (2005) 144 FCR 388 at
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Migration Amendment (Complementary Protection) Bill 2011
Explanatory Memorandum at 9 [52].
Immigration and Refugee Board
Consolidated Grounds in the Immigration and Refugee Protection
Act: Persons in Need of Protection – Risk to Life or Risk of
Unusual Treatment or Punishment
(Judgement)
(International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Appeals Chamber,
Case No IT-96-23 and IT-96-23/1-A, 12 June 2002).
Prosecutor v Limaj
(Judgement)
(International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
Trial Chamber II, Case No IT-03-66-T, 30 November 2005) at [238];
v Martić (Judgement)
(International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, Trial Chamber I, Case No IT-95-11-T, 12 June 2007) at [77].
Prosecutor v Kunarac
(Judgement)
(International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-96-23 and IT-96-23/1-A, 12 June 2002) at
Prosecutor v Kunarac
(Judgement)
(International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-96-23 and IT-96-23/1-A, 12 June 2002) at
Crimes Legislation Amendment
(Torture Prohibition and Death Penalty Abolition) Act
Criminal Code
ss 2.2(2) and 5.2.
Australia, Senate, Criminal
Code Bill 1994, Explanatory Memorandum at 13-14.
R v Moloney
[1984] UKHL 4
; [1985] AC
R v Hancock
[1985] UKHL 9
; [1986] AC 455;
[1986] EWCA Crim 2
; [1986] 1 WLR
1025; [1986] 3 All ER 1.
R v Moloney
[1984] UKHL 4
; [1985] AC
R v Moloney
[1984] UKHL 4
; [1985] AC
905 at 928-929.
[1961] HCA 42
; (1961) 108 CLR 56 at 59;
Vallance v The Queen
[1961] HCA 42
; (1961) 108 CLR 56 at 73.
[1985] HCA 22
; (1985) 156 CLR 464 at 469;
[1985] HCA 22.
Mitchell (ed),
Pleading, Evidence and Practice in Criminal Cases
, 41st ed (1982) at
995-1001; Kenny,
Outlines of Criminal Law
, (1902) at 148.
[1974] UKHL 2
; [1975] AC 55 at
82, 86, 96. Cf at 74-75 and, now,
[2017] AC 387 at 413-414
Williams, "Oblique Intention",
Cambridge Law Journal
417 at 423, acknowledging the immediate
source of the example as Lord Hailsham of St Marylebone in
[1974] UKHL 2
; [1975] AC 55 at 74, who, in turn, borrowed from The Law Commission,
Imputed Criminal Intent (Director of Public Prosecutions v Smith)
Report No 10, (1967) at 14-15 [18], which, in turn, may have borrowed it
from Williams,
The Mental Element in Crime
(1965) at 34-35.
Williams, "Oblique Intention",
Cambridge Law Journal
417 at 423.
Williams, "Oblique Intention",
Cambridge Law Journal
417 at 426.
Williams, "Oblique Intention",
Cambridge Law Journal
417 at 435.
[1987] HCA 16
; (1987) 162 CLR 502
[1987] HCA 16.
[1998] HCA 7
; (1998) 192 CLR 493 at 521-522
per McHugh J, 533 [93] per Gummow J;
[1998] HCA 7.
Smith v The Queen
[2017] HCA 19
; (2017) 91 ALJR 621 at 642
; 343 ALR 561 at 586;
[2017] HCA 19.
Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
; (1998) 192 CLR 493 at 522
Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
; (1998) 192 CLR 493 at 522
Intention and
(2011) at 177.
R v Moloney
[1984] UKHL 4
; [1985] AC
905 at 926, also conflating the two senses of desire.
Zaburoni v The Queen
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 491
, citing Gillies,
Criminal Law
(1997) at 50.
Intention and
(2011) at 237.
[1961] HCA 42
; (1961) 108 CLR 56 at 68.
[1985] HCA 29
; (1985) 156 CLR 473 at 506;
[1985] HCA 29.
[1961] HCA 42
; (1961) 108 CLR 56 at
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 488
[1985] 2 Qd R 413 at
Zaburoni v The Queen
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 489
. See also at 504 [66] per Nettle J.
Zaburoni v The Queen
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 489
Zaburoni v The Queen
[2016] HCA 12
; (2016) 256 CLR 482 at 490
[2015] FCCA 64
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] FCCA 64
[2015] FCCA 87
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCAFC 69
; (2016) 243 FCR 556 at 578
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCAFC 69
; (2016) 243 FCR 556 at 563
, 571 [40].
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCAFC 69
; (2016) 243 FCR 556 at 589-590
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (390 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter