Ngadju Native Title Aboriginal Corporation v Mining Equities Pty Ltd and Another [2025] NNTTA 13 (26 May 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
Ngadju Native Title Aboriginal Corporation v Mining Equities Pty Ltd
and Another
[2025] NNTTA 13
(26 May 2025)
Application No:
WO2024/0781
IN THE MATTER of the
Native Title Act 1993
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into an expedited procedure objection
application
Ngadju Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (WCD2014/004)
(native title party)
Mining Equities Pty Ltd
(grantee party)
State of Western Australia
(Government party)
DECISION TO DISMISS OBJECTION APPLICATION
Mr Glen Kelly
Catchwords:
Native title – future act – proposed grant of exploration
licence – expedited procedure objection application –
comply with directions –
– objection application
Legislation:
Title Act 1993 (Cth)
Michael Daniel Teelow/Michael Page/Northern Territory
[2001] NNTTA 107
166 FLR 266
Teelow v Page
Representative of the native title party:
Katarina Bevk, Ngadju Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
Representative of the grantee party:
Peter Gianni, Mining Equities Pty Ltd
Representatives of the Government party:
Andrea Wyles and David Crabtree, Department of Energy, Mines, Industry
Regulation and Safety
REASONS FOR DISMISSAL
12 July 2024, the
of Western Australia gave notice under s 29 of
Native Title Act
(Cth) of its intention to grant
exploration licence E 63/2427 to Mining Equities Pty Ltd (
notice included a statement that the State considers the grant of the
proposed licence to be an act attracting the expedited procedure
Native Title Act
(expedited procedure statement).
expedited procedure applies, the State may grant the proposed licence without
requiring parties to enter the right to negotiate
procedure per
Native Title Act
[3] The proposed
licence is located approximately 120 km in a westerly direction from Norseman
and covers an area of approximately
5.8 km². It overlaps the
native title determination (WCD2014/004), held in trust by the Ngadju Native
Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC as the registered
native title body
September 2024, Ngadju lodged an objection to the State’s assertion that
the expedited procedure applies to the grant
of the licence with the National
Native Title
. The objection application was lodged within the
timeframe outlined in
Native Title Act
and as such, under
, the Tribunal is required to determine whether the grant of the proposed
licence is an act attracting the expedited procedure. To
this end, under a
delegation from the President of the Tribunal, I was appointed to constitute the
Tribunal for the purposes of the
inquiry in this matter.
Relevant Facts
correspondence to the Tribunal dated 28 November 2024, the grantee stated its
preference for the matter to proceed to inquiry
and the matter was subsequently
referred to a directions hearing on 5 March 2025.
[6] On 5 March
2025 I made directions requiring all parties to provide submissions to the
inquiry. Ngadju were directed to provide
contentions and evidence by 23 April
2025, however on the date of compliance, no contentions or evidence were
received from Ngadju.
[7] On 29 April
2025, the Tribunal emailed all parties noting that Ngadju had failed to comply
with directions and that the objection
application was now at risk of dismissal.
Parties were provided until 6 May 2025 to make any comments and in the case of
make a request for further time. No response was received from
Consideration of Dismissal
[8] Pursuant
Native Title Act
, the Tribunal may dismiss an
objection application at any stage of the inquiry in circumstances where the
native title party fails
within a reasonable time to proceed with the objection
application or to comply with a direction of the Tribunal. While the Tribunal
has broad discretion to dismiss an objection application, doing so has
significant consequences for the native title party and is
not an action taken
[9] The nature
of the expedited procedure and the principles relevant to consideration of
dismissal of an objection application for
failure to comply with directions are
set out in the Tribunal's decision in
Teelow v Page
at [13]. I have
applied those principles in my consideration of this matter.
[10] On this
occasion, it is my view that Ngadju has been afforded sufficient opportunity to
progress this objection application but
have failed to do so within a reasonable
time. The Tribunal allowed ample time and opportunity for Ngadju to provide
evidence for
the inquiry or request an extension to do so, however Ngadju failed
to comply with directions.
[11] Having
regard to all of the facts and circumstances of this matter, I am satisfied that
the objection application should be dismissed.
Determination
expedited procedure objection application in relation to exploration licence
E63/2427 is dismissed under
Native Title
Mr Glen Kelly
RTF format (203 KB)
Signed PDF/A format