Review and Visa Applicant: Ayman El Chami IRT Reference: N98/02392 #number 13369 [1999] IRTA 13369 (27 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT DECISION: N98/02392 13369.doc
REVIEW AND VISA APPLICANT: Ayman EL CHAMI
TRIBUNAL: Kim WILSON
Presiding Member
DATE: 27 January 1999
PLACE: Sydney
DECISION: The Tribunal affirms the decision to cancel the Subclass 100 Spouse
visa issued to the Review Applicant.
REASONS FOR DECISION
This is an application for review of a decision to cancel a Subclass 100 Spouse
visa which was granted on 3 September 1997. The
decision to cancel the visa
was taken on 29 September 1998 by a delegate of the Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs.
The visa was cancelled because the Department received information from the
woman who participated in the marriage ceremony, a Miss
Rima. This information
indicated to the Department that the marriage between the Review Applicant and
Miss Rima was not a genuine
and continuing relationship and therefore the basis
on which Mr El Chami had come to Australia was not substantiated.
The Review Applicant was married to Miss Rima in a religious ceremony in
Lebanon on 12 June 1996. This is the ceremony known as
'signing of the book'.
After the signing of the book the Review Applicant came to Australia and he
claims that the marriage broke
down shortly after a civil ceremony in Australia
on 13 November 1997. There was to be a further community ceremony which was
to the signing of the book but this never occurred.
The Review Applicant maintains that the signing of the book was the final
marriage ceremony. He claims that he is entitled to rely
on that and his
custom. The Review Applicant asserts that as far as he was concerned he was
married to Miss Rima.
The contrary view to this is that the signing of the book in the circumstances
of this case indicated a commitment to further engagement
in other ceremonies
for the purpose of settling the marriage.
The subsequent events indicate that the commitment of Miss Rima to this
arrangement was less than fulsome. According to the evidence
of the Review
Applicant, on the day of the formal civil ceremony, Miss Rima indicated in no
uncertain terms that she was not committed
to the marriage.
The Tribunal heard evidence from Mr El Chami in relation to this matter. He
insisted on his view that the signing of the book in
Lebanon was the end of the
matter and that this constituted a marriage and, accordingly, the basis on
which he had come to Australia
was correct.
The Tribunal has some concerns in relation to this matter and they were aired
during the hearing with Mr El Chami. In essence, the
Tribunal's view is that
the signing of the book alone, without any other evidence, where there has
subsequently been a breakdown
in the relationship, evidenced through normal
social behaviour, is indicative of a social arrangement rather than a committed
The Tribunal is aware that the beliefs of the Review Applicant are
relevant to be taken into account in this matter. They are,
however, not the
only matter that the Tribunal must consider. In cases such as this the
subsequent behaviour of the parties is often
indicative of what their original
intention was.
In a case such as this, the assertions about the circumstances of the signing
of the book ceremony in Lebanon, as they relate to
indicating a continuing and
genuine relationship, are difficult to accept. The Tribunal considers that
given the subsequent events
in relation to the behaviour of the woman, Miss
Rima, that it is very hard to declare that, from the time the signing of the
ceremony occurred, there was a genuine and committed relationship. There
was never any consummation of the marriage in the physical
There is no evidence from Miss Rima that at the time of the Review Applicant
coming to Australia and up until the time of the religious
divorce, which
occurred after the civil ceremony, that she viewed this as a committed
relationship. On the contrary, there is evidence
from her that she and the
Review Applicant understood that they were not married, and would not be
married, until there were further
activities carried on in Australia.
The Tribunal has given this matter deep consideration. At the end of that
consideration however, the Tribunal is not convinced that
the arrangements were
as asserted by Mr El Chami. The Tribunal considers that the relationship which
was entered into in Lebanon
was not a formal marriage. The reason for this is
the subsequent behaviour of the parties. The Tribunal doubts the claims of the
Review Applicant in the context of his compliance with sections 101 and 104 of
subdivision C. The Tribunal considers that the Review
Applicant had
misrepresented the nature of his relationship with Miss Rima in that he claimed
that the marriage had been completed.
As indicated above, the Tribunal rejects
this view of the circumstances of the case.
The Tribunal has considered whether the discretion to cancel the visa was
properly exercised. The Tribunal believes that the appropriate
matters were
taken into account and in a matter such as this, given the circumstances, the
exercise of the discretion to cancel the
visa has been appropriately exercised.
The Tribunal is not aware of any other matters which need to be taken into
account in relation
to the Review Applicant.
The Tribunal affirms the decision to cancel the Subclass 100 Spouse visa issued
to the Review Applicant.
I certify that this and the 3 preceding pages are a true copy of the decision
and reasons for decision of this Tribunal.
DATED: 28 January 1999 for DEPUTY REGISTRAR
RTF format (11.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format