D20-21\088 [2020] SCTA 196 (25 November 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\088
FILE NUMBER : 18-242
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Previous Employer
The First Fund
The Second Fund
The Third Fund
The Previous Trustee
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 28 September 2020 before Justin
Malbon, Member.
the Review Meeting, the Tribunal Chairperson considered it appropriate to
reconstitute the Tribunal pursuant to s9(1A)(a) of
the Complaints Act to remove
any perception of bias.
Review Meeting was adjourned and following adjournment, the Review Meeting was
reconvened on 28 October 2020 before Stephen Duffield,
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision under review is the Trustee’s refusal to compromise the
Complainant’s claim in the amount of $13,561.92.
Previous Trustee notified the Complainant of its decision by email dated 15
December 2017. The Trustee notified the Complainant
of its agreement with the
Previous Trustee’s decision by email dated 30 January 2020.
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Trustee.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
submission was received from the Complainant.
Trustee chose to rely on material previously provided to the Tribunal.
submission was exchanged and responses were invited. The Complainant responded.
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
electronic files provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant made a complaint that the decision of the Previous Trustee, as
affirmed by the Trustee, was
unfair or unreasonable for the reasons
summarised in this determination.
Complainant joined the Second Fund’s corporate division on 11 February
2003 via her employment with the Previous Employer.
Funds totalling $5,977 were
rolled over from the First Fund. She was provided a default level of insurance
cover (Cover), including
Death, Total and Permanent Disablement (TPD) and Income
Protection (IP).
Cover consisted of:
Death/TPD: $285,770.46
IP: $2,719.38 per month.
November 2003 the Complainant ceased employment with the Previous Employer and
her then benefit of $9,752.28 and Cover was transferred
into the personal
division of the Third Fund in January 2004.
10 March 2004, the Third Fund was successor fund transferred into the Fund.
3 October 2019 the Trustee assumed trusteeship of the Fund from the Previous
Previous Trustee sent all the correspondence about the Complainant’s
account to her last known address and only received
one piece of returned mail
on 17 August 2007 (Single Returned Mail).
July 2017 under a retention initiative project, the Previous Trustee liaised
with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) using stringent
data matching criteria
and the Complainant’s address was updated and her 2017 annual Fund benefit
statement was posted to her
current address.
13 September 2017 the Complainant requested the Previous Trustee cancel her
Cover and on 20 September 2017 the Previous Trustee,
at the Complainant’s
further request, rolled-over her Fund account balance in the amount of $33.57
into another fund.
complaint was lodged on the basis the Previous Trustee failed to report the
Complainant’s Fund account to the ATO as a lost
Fund member despite not
receiving any contributions or rollovers for many years. The Complainant noted
she was unaware of the Fund
account because it had not been reported to the ATO.
Complainant further advised when she searched the ATO for ‘lost
superannuation accounts’ over many years, her Fund
account was not
identified as a lost account. The Complainant sought a refund of the fees and
insurance premiums deducted from her
Fund account which she believed was
approximately $12,000.
Previous Trustee, with the Trustee’s subsequent concurrence, rejected the
Complainant’s request for a refund on the
basis that:
Previous Trustee only received one piece of returned mail from the
Complainant’s last known address; and
had not been notified of an updated address. The ATO guidelines recommended
receiving two returned mails before it can consider
the member as lost. The
Previous Trustee noted her Cover had been active on her Fund account since it
commenced and noted its obligations
in considering the impact on a
member’s insurance cover if it reports an account as
Complainant is not satisfied with the Previous Trustee’s position, as
agreed to by the Trustee, on the basis it was irrelevant
the Previous Trustee
only received one piece of returned mail because reg1.03A [of the
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994
stipulates a member can be deemed ‘lost’ where they satisfy the
criteria of being an ‘inactive’ member.
Complainant noted no further contributions or rollovers were received into her
account since 2003; pursuant to reg1.03A after
5 years she should have been
reported to the ATO as a lost member.
resolution sought by the Complainant is a refund of the fees and premiums
charged in the amount of $13,561.92.
Quantum in dispute
to the Complainant, the amount of the Quantum in dispute is $13,561.92 as at 24
January 2018.
Events not in dispute:
− The Complainant’s date of birth.
− The dated the Complainant joined the Second
Fund’s corporate division per her Previous Employer. The Complainant was
also provided the Cover.
− The date the Previous Trustee received a rollover
of $5,977from the Complainant’s First Fund account.
− The date the Complainant ceased employment
with the Previous Employer.
− The date the Complainant’s benefit of
$9,752.28 was transferred from the Second Fund to the personal division of the
Third Fund, including the Cover.
− The date the Successor Fund Transfer of the
Third Fund to the Fund (including the Cover) occurred.
− The date the Previous Trustee received the
Single Returned Mail.
− Under a retention initiative project, the Previous
Trustee liaised with the ATO using stringent data matching criteria and
Complainant’s address was updated. Her 2017 annual Fund benefit statement
was posted to the Complainant’s updated
− The date the Complainant requested
cancellation of the Cover.
− The date the Complainant’s Fund
benefit was rolled-over into another fund.
Tribunal does not consider any provisions of the trust deed are relevant to this
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
Tribunal considers the
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994
(Regulations)
as at 2 July 2007 – being the date immediately
prior to the date of the Single Returned Mail, are relevant to this complaint;
specifically:
1.03A Lost member
(1) A member of a fund is taken to be a lost member at a particular time
(a) the member is uncontactable, that is, if and only if:
(i) the fund has never had an address for him or her; or
(ii) 2 written communications have been sent, or, if the trustee so chooses,
1 written communication has been sent by the fund to
the member’s last
known address and returned unclaimed; or
the member is an inactive member, that is, if and only if:
(i) he or she has been a member of the fund for
longer than 2 years; and
(ia) he or she was, at the time he or she joined the
fund, a person in respect of whom there was in effect a contribution arrangement
of the kind referred to in subsection 16(5) of the Act (which deals with the
definition of standard employer-sponsored member); and
(ii) the fund has not received a contribution or
rollover in respect of him or her within the last 5 years of his or her
of the fund;
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
main points made by the Complainant are as follows:
The Complainant,
in her Registration of Complaint form submits:
I recently became aware of a [Fund] account that
commenced in 2003. The account has not had any contributions (apart from the
rollover amount) and the money in the account has been reduced to almost
nothing over the years due to fees and insurance premiums.
I have searched for lost superannuation over the years using the ATO lost
super register, but this account never came up because the
superannuation fund
never reported it to the ATO as a lost member.
According to the ATO website:
"Your super fund will report you as a lost member if either:
- they have not been able to contact you
- they have not received any contributions or rollover amounts for you in the
last five years
- your account was transferred from another fund as a lost member account and
no new address has been found...
Since no contributions or rollover accounts had been made to the account, and
[the Fund] received mail returned to sender (17/08/2007)
the account should have
been reported to the ATO and I should have been able to find it by searching the
ATO's lost super register.
If my account had been reported to the ATO, I would have rolled over the
funds in the account into my current, active superannuation
account and the
money would not have been eaten up by fees and insurance premiums.
The Complainant
refers to the definition of ‘Lost Member’, in particular
and (b) which states:
(1) A member of a fund is taken to be a lost member at a particular
(a) the member is uncontactable, that is, if and only if:
(i) the fund has never had an address for him or her; or
(ii) 2 written communications or, if the trustee so chooses, 1 written
communication have been sent by the fund to the member’s
address and returned unclaimed; or
(b) the member is an inactive member, that is, if and only if:
(i) he or she has been a member of the fund for longer than 2 years; and
(ia) he or she was, at the time he or she joined the fund, a person in
respect of whom there was in effect a contribution arrangement
of the kind
referred to in subsection 16 (5) of the Act (which deals with the definition of
standard employer-sponsored member
(ii) the fund has not received a contribution or rollover in respect of him
or her within the last 2 years of his or her membership
of the fund; or
In regard to the definition, the Complainant believes she should have been
deemed a lost member due to account inactivity (since the
account had not had
any regular contributions since the initial rollover from the First Fund in
February 2003).
The issue of whether or not she was uncontactable is irrelevant. Therefore,
she believes the Previous Trustee should have reported
her account to the ATO
after two years of inactivity (i.e. on 11 February 2005).
The Previous
Trustee should have reported the Complainant’s superannuation account to
the ATO as a lost member due to inactivity
on 19 January 2006, because:
1) there had been no contributions since 19 January 2004, and 2) I
was a standard employer-sponsored member at the time I joined the
issue of whether or not I was contactable is irrelevant in this case.
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
Consistent with
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994
, members are
only deemed as ‘lost members’ if the Trustee has never had an
address for the member, or they have received
two pieces of returned mail that
were sent to the member’s last known address and have not received any
contributions or rollovers
within the last 12 months.
provisions were in place in 2007 when the Previous Trustee first received a
returned mail for the Complainant’s account
on 17 August 2007. As the
Previous Trustee has not since received another piece of returned mail for the
Complainant’s account,
the Complainant could not have been classified as a
‘lost member’. Accordingly, the Previous Trustee was not permitted
by law to transfer the Complainant’s account to the ATO. Therefore, the
Trustee submits that in view of
subsection 37(5)
Superannuation
(Resolution of Complaints) Act 1993
the Tribunal should dismiss the
refers to the definition of Lost Member, which has two parts:
Complainant
Part (a) which relates to an individual who has joined the fund (Personal member); and Part (b) which relates to an individual who
has joined the fund through an employer -sponsored scheme (Corporate member).
Complainant commenced her employment with the Previous Employer, her
superannuation was transferred from the First Fund into
the employer-sponsored
plan established by the Previous Employer (the Second Fund); at that time the
Complainant was a Corporate
member. After leaving her employment with the
Employer on 31 December 2003, the Complainant’s corporate account balance
member details transferred into the Third Fund’s personal
superannuation fund, where she became a Personal member. This transfer
as a result of the Previous Trustee being notified by her Previous Employer of
the Complainant’s resignation.
There was only
one occasion where a communication sent to the Complainant was returned to the
Fund. The Previous Trustee had no other
record of any returned mail. For this
reason the Previous Trustee did not believe it had reasonable grounds the
Complainant could
not be contacted. With this being the case, there was no
reason for the Previous Trustee to consider the other requirement, even
it relates to member activity. For this definition of Lost Member to be met,
both requirements must be met.
The Complainant
refers to the ATO guidelines for the definition of Lost Super. One component, of
which, was the Fund not having received
a contribution or rollover in the last
five years. This component relates to the definition of a Lost Member who is a
member of ‘employer
sponsored fund’ and otherwise known as a
Corporate member. The Complainant was not a Corporate member, as such the
was not relevant to the Previous Trustee’s considerations.
As the Previous
Trustee didn’t consider the Complainant to be a Lost Member, there was no
obligation to notify the ATO and have
her account entered on the Lost Member
The Trustee
submits it is quite normal for a superannuation fund to hold accounts on behalf
of members, where there are no contributions
or rollovers received but insurance
premiums are deducted and fees charged. Often this occurs where a member changes
employment.
Usually in these cases the member has been with the fund from a
young age and has an automatic accepted level of insurance, which
would not be
available through another fund offered by the new employer. In these cases,
there is a risk to the Trustee, if it was
to treat the member as being lost and
transferring the funds to the ATO, thereby cancelling the member’s
insurance cover, against
the member’s will.
The Trustee
Superannuation Funds are passive marketers relying on employers or
word of mouth to grow the membership. All the initial information
available to a
Superfund is provided by the new member’s employer or the member. Once
established, this information can only
be changed by an explicit instruction
from the member. Superannuation funds maintain a passive relationship with its
membership,
only communicating via mail or more recently electronically, as
required. Most commonly sending Member Annual Statements, setting
member’s transactional activity during the year; investment returns and
static information about the member’s
personal details and arrangements
with the Fund. Superannuation funds have no other, realistic or cost effective
way, to ensure each
member’s details are accurate other than relying on
the member to advise it of any change.
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must initially determine whether the
decision of the Trustee refusing to compromise
the Complainant’s claim in
the amount of $13,561.92, was fair and reasonable in its operation in relation
to the Complainant
in the circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decision was fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the material it has
relied on has been provided to both Parties
is common ground between the Parties as to the factual reality of the Single
Returned Mail. As this occurred on 17 August 2007,
it is the Regulations as at 2
July 2007 which the Tribunal considers to be relevant; specifically:
1.03A Lost member
(1) A member of a fund is taken to be a lost member at a particular time
(a) the member is uncontactable, that is, if and only if:
(i) the fund has never had an address for him or her; or
(ii) 2 written communications have been sent, or, if the trustee so chooses,
1 written communication has been sent by the fund to
the member’s last
known address and returned unclaimed; or
the member is an inactive member, that is, if and only if:
(i) he or she has been a member of the fund for
longer than 2 years; and
(ia) he or she was, at the time he or she joined the
fund, a person in respect of whom there was in effect a contribution arrangement
of the kind referred to in subsection 16(5) of the Act (which deals with the
definition of standard employer-sponsored member); and
the fund has not received a contribution or rollover in respect
of him or her within the last 5 years of his or her membership of
Previous Trustee had advised the Tribunal, in respect of reg1.03A(1)(a)(ii) that
it relied on 2 pieces of ‘written communication’
being returned
‘unclaimed’, before treating a Fund member, such as the Complainant,
as a ‘lost member’. The
Complainant has not disputed the Previous
Trustee’s assertion in that regard and the Tribunal notes such an approach
is permitted
by reference to reg1.03A(1)(a)(ii). It is also common ground
between the Parties there was only 1 piece of ‘written
communication’
that was returned on 17 August 2007.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal determines by reference to reg1.03A(1)(a) the Complainant could not
have been considered a ‘lost member’
by the Previous Trustee.
Complainant however relevantly contends:
I have had a thorough look at the wording of the definition of
'lost member' in the
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994
(https://www.legislation.gov.au/Series/F1996B00580) (note: the same regulations
[name of person] refers to in his statement below).
In the regulations, a
‘lost member’ is consistently defined as uncontactable OR inactive.
Rather than uncontactable AND
inactive (as per [Previous Trustee’s] policy
and [name of person’s] explanation) (*I looked at all versions between 28
Dec 2002 and 08 Aug 2008).
For example, text from the version of the regulations for the period 05 Apr
2007 to 30 Jun 2007 (https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/F2007C00239)
(note: I chose this version because it covers the end of the time period of the
earliest annual statement that I have, i.e.
for the 2006/7 financial year, and
the amount on this report is the money I am seeking to recover from the
1.03A Lost member
(1) A member of a fund is taken to be a lost member at a particular time
(a) the member is uncontactable, that is, if and only if:
(i) the fund has never had an address for him or her; or
(ii) 2 written communications or, if the trustee so chooses, 1 written
communication have been sent by the fund to the member’s
address and returned unclaimed; or
(b) the member is an inactive member, that is, if and only if:
(i) he or she has been a member of the fund for longer than 2 years; and
(ia) he or she was, at the time he or she joined the fund, a person in
respect of whom there was in effect a contribution arrangement
of the kind
referred to in subsection 16 (5) of the Act (which deals with the definition of
standard employer-sponsored member);
(ii) the fund has not received a contribution or rollover in respect of him
or her within the last 2 years of his or her membership
of the fund; or
Because of the 'or' between
(b), I believe I should have been
deemed a lost member due to account inactivity alone (since the account had not
had any regular
contributions since the initial rollover from [First Fund] on 11
Feb 2003). And the issue of whether or not I was uncontactable is
irrelevant.
Therefore, I believe [Previous Trustee] should have reported my account to the
ATO after 2 years of inactivity (i.e.
on 11 Feb 2005).
its part the Tribunal considers it more appropriate to consider reg1.03A as
applicable at 2 July 2007, rather than the version
used by the Complainant,
namely as applicable at 5 April 2007, noting the former required a 5 year gap in
‘contribution or
rollover’ rather than the latter’s 2 year
gap. However, for the reasons outlined below, the Tribunal considers nothing
turns on this issue.
order for the Complainant to have access to reg1.03A(1)(b) she would have needed
to have been a member of Fund 2 – the ‘Corporate
longer than ‘2 years’; it is not disputed between the Parties the
Complainant’s membership of Fund
2 commenced on 11 February 2013 and ended
on 28 January 2014, when she was transferred to Fund 3 – the
‘Personal fund’.
Clearly, the Complainant was not a member of Fund 2
– the ‘Corporate fund’ for longer than ‘2 years’,
therefore she could not avail herself of the ameliorating provisions of
reg1.03A(1)(b).
Accordingly,
the Tribunal determines by reference to reg1.03A(1)(b) the Complainant could not
be considered an ‘inactive member’.
Consequently,
the Tribunal determines the Trustee’s decision refusing to compromise the
Complainant’s claim in the amount
of $13,561.92 was fair and
reasonable.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decision under review
if it is satisfied that the decision, in its
operation in relation to the
Complainant, was fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons
stated above the Tribunal
is so satisfied.
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Trustee.
Stephen Duffield, Member
Tribunal signature: 25 November 2020
RTF format (305 KB)
Signed PDF/A format