1311502 [2015] RRTA 298 (21 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 298
(21 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
Afghanistan
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Christian Carney
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the
direction that the applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Statement made on 21 May 2015 at
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
applicant arrived in Australia by boat [in] June 2012 without a visa or
passport. He is a Hazara Shi’a Muslim and was born
in [District 1] of
Uruzgan, Afghanistan, in [year]. He claimed that he and his family left
Afghanistan in 2000 in fear of their
lives from the Taliban and lived illegally
in Pakistan until 2012 when he came to Australia. He fears being persecuted in
Afghanistan
by the Taliban and other Sunni extremist groups because of his race
and religion, and because of his long residence in Pakistan and
was interviewed by a delegate of the Minister for Immigration in March 2013, who
considered him to be a reliable witness who had
provided a genuine and honest
account of his past circumstances. However, after considering a range of
independent information about
the security conditions that existed at that time,
the delegate did not accept he faced a real risk of being persecuted if he
to his home village in [District 1] of Uruzgan.
Tribunal must consider and decide whether the applicant has a well-founded fear
of being persecuted in Afghanistan for one or
more of the five reasons set out
in the Refugees Convention and, if not, whether there are substantial grounds
for believing that,
as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of his being
removed from Australia to Afghanistan, there is a real risk that he will
significant harm. In considering these issues, the Tribunal has applied the law
set out in Appendix 1.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
applicant has presented his claims on five different occasions since he arrived
in Australia, including at two interviews with
Departmental officers while he
was unrepresented: his ‘Bio Data Interview’ [in] June 2012 and his
‘Entry Interview’
[in] July 2012, both of which were conducted at
[an] Immigration Detention Centre. Following his release from immigration
a registered migration agent assisted him to prepare his application
for the visa, which was lodged [in] November 2012, and he attended
an interview
with the delegate [in] March 2013. At all times, his evidence was given through
the assistance of a qualified Hazaragi-English
language interpreter.
Tribunal had the opportunity to observe him give evidence at a hearing on 11 May
2015, during which it was able to clarify aspects
of his claims and test his
reliability as a witness. Like the delegate, the Tribunal found him to be a
reliable and credible witness.
He presented as a withdrawn and quietly spoken
man who gave most of his evidence in a direct and sincere manner. He was
and sought clarification when necessary, and did not give the
impression he was willing to exaggerate or embellish his evidence when
opportunity to do so was available. He was able to provide specific and
personal details about his claimed experiences in Afghanistan,
Pakistan. Importantly, his evidence at the hearing was consistent with his
evidence on each of the previous occasions he
presented his claims, and the
Tribunal was impressed by the spontaneous nature of his responses to questions
he had not before been
asked. In addition, he provided a copy of his Taskera,
which supports key aspects of his claims, including his identity, nationality
and home region in Uruzgan. He has consistently spoken in the Hazaragi language
and the Tribunal observed him to have the typical
Asiatic physical features of
the Hazara people. Further, his claims are consistent with independent reports
of similar events from
the relevant time, which gives credence to the
plausibility of his claims and evidence.
these reasons, having carefully considered the information and evidence before
it, the Tribunal has formed the view that the applicant’s
evidence about
what occurred to him in Afghanistan and Pakistan, was based on his personal
experience, and was a reliable account
of events that actually occurred, and,
accordingly, accepts that:
applicant was born in [a village in District 1] of Urzogan province of
Afghanistan in
He is Hazara
and a Shi’a Muslim and a national of Afghanistan. He was [one of a number
of] children. He worked on the family
farm from about 1992 until 2000.
(b) His family
lived under the control of the Taliban from about 1996 to
In about 1999
his eldest brother was abducted by the local Taliban and his family were forced
to pay a large ransom to have him
released. In fear of further persecution, the
applicant and his family left their ancestral lands in 1999 and travelled to
married in Quetta in about 2000 and his wife subsequently gave birth to his
[children]. His wife and [children] remain
(d) He lived in
[an] area of Quetta without permission from 2000 to about 2008, where he worked
as a [occupation]. In 2008 he travelled
to Iran in search of work. He lived in
Iran without permission for about one year and worked as a [occupation]. He was
by the Iranian authorities and deported to the border in 2009, and,
with the assistance of a smuggler, travelled to Quetta.
(e) He left
Quetta in 2012 because of the increasing attacks against Hazaras by the Taliban
and other Sunni extremist
(f) Except for
one sister who lives with her husband in [a certain district], all of his
siblings and other relatives live in Quetta.
He has never been to Kabul and has
no relatives or known connections in Kabul or
Is there a real chance the applicant would
suffer persecution on return?
light of the above findings, the Tribunal must consider whether the
applicant’s fears of being harmed on return are
‘well-founded’.
The High Court of Australia has held that a person
has a ‘well-founded fear’ of persecution if he has a genuine fear
founded on a ‘real chance’ of being persecuted for a Convention
reason. In the leading case on the issue, the former
Chief Justice of the High
Court, Sir Anthony Mason stated that the expression ‘a real
clearly conveys the notion of a substantial, as distinct from a remote chance,
of persecution occurring ... If an applicant establishes
that there is a real
chance of persecution, then his fear, assuming that he has such a fear, is
well-founded, notwithstanding that
there is less than a fifty per cent chance of
persecution occurring. This interpretation fulfils the objects of the
Convention in
securing recognition of refugee status for those persons who have
a legitimate or justified fear of persecution on political grounds
if they are
returned to their country of origin.
The High Court’s decision in
establishes that a person can
have a well-founded fear of persecution even though the possibility of the
persecution occurring is
well below 50%. Indeed, the High Court has prescribed a
low threshold for determining whether an applicant’s fear is
“well-founded”
and it can be reached even if the event feared is
“unlikely to occur” and has only a “10 per cent chance”
of occurring, however, the chance of it occurring must be more than
“far-fetched” or
and the evidence must indicate “a real ground for believing that the
applicant ... is at risk of persecution”; a fear
well-founded if it is merely assumed or if it is mere
speculation”.
evidence before the Tribunal does not indicate that the applicant has been
subjected to adverse treatment in Afghanistan that
would constitute persecution.
Nevertheless, the courts have made it clear that “proving persecution in
the past is not an essential
step in an applicant demonstrating that he or she
has a well-founded fear of
persecution.”
The issue for determination is whether, on the basis of the circumstances that
exist now, his fears of future harm are well-founded,
as understood in the terms
set out above.
considering this issue, the Tribunal has had regard to a range of independent
information about a number of different matters relating
to the prevailing
security and human rights conditions in Afghanistan, in the context of the
claims made by the applicant. As noted
above, he fears that he would be
subjected to serious harm by the Taliban or some other Sunni extremist groups
because of his race
and religion, as a Hazara Shi’a, and his long period
of residence outside the country in Australia, Iran and Pakistan. In
context, the Tribunal has had regard to a range of independent information about
the current and prospective security conditions
in [District 1] of Uruzgan; the
recent situation for Hazara and Shi’a people in [District 1] and the
surrounding districts
of Uruzgan province and in Kabul; the presence of the
Taliban and other armed militants in and around [District 1], and throughout
Uruzgan and in Kabul, including the conditions on the roads in and out of
[District 1], Uruzgan and Kabul; the capabilities of the
state to provide
protection; and information with regards to the possibility of the applicant
relocating to Kabul.
information before the Tribunal from DFAT, the US State Department, the
International Crisis Group
and other reliable sources, indicates that
Afghanistan’s security situation has increasingly deteriorated in recent
While the Taliban suffered a military defeat in 2001-2002 and were
ousted from Kabul, the evidence indicates that they left Afghanistan
of their resources and leadership intact and re-established operations in
Pakistan. Over the past 10 years the Taliban
has returned to Afghanistan and
gained military momentum and is now conducting operations in more than 75% of
the country. The US
led invasion of Afghanistan in 2001 seems to have only
dispersed the Taliban, and although ISAF attempted to rid the country and
of the Taliban over the past 13 years, it has been unable to do so. Experts
consider that with the US-led coalition’s
withdrawal of troops in December
2014, the Afghan security forces will have limited success in repelling the
insurgency. The insider
threat stemming from Taliban infiltration of the Afghan
National Army and police has already affected Western capacity building.
Attacks by the Taliban and other insurgent groups have intensified in recent
years, and so have Afghan and ISAF counter-attacks,
producing a mounting
civilian and combatant death-toll. The available information indicates that the
areas in which the Taliban
has had access, influence or control, has fluctuated
over the past 10 years, which is consistent with efforts by international and
Afghan forces to restrict its sphere of influence. In recent years, an
ascendant Taliban increased its operations in and around
Uruzgan, including in
[District 1], and carried out targeted attacks against ISAF forces and civilians
who worked with or for the
government or foreign forces, including
information before the Tribunal indicates that Uruzgan is one of the most
volatile provinces in Afghanistan. In its March 2014
‘Country Information
Report – Afghanistan’, DFAT
There are many areas of the country contested by insurgent forces
and no part of the country can be considered totally free from conflict-related
violence. The situation remains fluid and any categorical assessment on the
security in a particular area could be rendered quickly
inaccurate. Although
this list is not exhaustive, contested areas are mainly in the south (including
in parts of Helmand, Kandahar,
Uruzgan and Zabul) and east of the country
(including in parts of Ghazni, Paktika, Khost, Paktia, Nangarhar, Kunar and
Insurgents are also present in areas of western, central and northern
March 2015, the Department’s
Country of Origin Information Service,
issued its report ‘Afghanistan: Hazara Issues Paper’, which provides
an analysis of desk-top research on recent reports
relating to the security and
human rights issues facing the Hazara community in various parts of Afghanistan,
and included the following
information about the situation for Hazaras in
Uruzgan is a mainly Pashtun province, as all its Hazara districts
went to the new Daykundi Province in 2004. Today only Gizab and
Khas Uruzgan
districts have Hazara minorities – about 25% in each case ... The security
situation for Hazaras in Uruzgan province
is more dangerous than in other
provinces and Hazaras have been targeted by insurgents because of their
March 2015 the
Institute for the Study of War
issued a detailed report
‘The Taliban Resurgent: Threats to Afghanistan’s Security’
which provides detailed analysis
of the security conditions in the most volatile
provinces in Afghanistan, including with regard to
Significant
Taliban attacks and skirmishes in nearby Uruzgan province also increased during
the 2014 fighting season, particularly
in September and October 2014. Uruzgan,
Daikundi, and western Ghazni province comprise a remote and mountainous region
east of Sangin
that has historically served as sanctuary for the Taliban in
central Afghanistan. This region lies between the Taliban’s southern
areas of operation and eastern Afghanistan. Uruzgan lacks major infrastructure
and ANSF presence compared to Kandahar, allowing
the Taliban to become
entrenched over time. Security in the province improved in 2010 with the
development of a robust Village Stability
Operations (VSO) effort and Afghan
Local Police (ALP), which helped ISAF to establish security in rural villages
and promote local
governance and development from 2010-2012. Provincial police
commander Matiullah Khan’s private army and other local powerbrokers
supplemented ISAF security operations. Over the past two years, however, many
of these safeguards have gone away, particularly
with the withdrawal of ISAF
forces from Camp Holland in 2013, leaving local police forces on their own to
repel Taliban assaults.
Local media sources reported large Taliban contingents moving through Uruzgan
province toward eastern Khas Uruzgan district in August
2014. By October 19,
2014, Taliban fighters surrounded and took control of villages within Gizab
district. The militant activity
shut down roads leading to the provincial
capital of Tarin Kot and closed down most schools across the district. The
attacks also
carried a symbolic value, taking place four years after
ISAF-supported VSO teams had ejected the Taliban from the district. By the
of October 2014, the Taliban reportedly controlled at least eighty percent of
the district, prompting civilians to request help
from the ANSF.
In response to these distress calls, security forces deployed to the area and
clashed with Taliban forces in Gizab district and its
surrounding districts,
including in Deh Rawud district near the Uruzgan provincial capital by November
5, 2014. Taliban fighters
likely shifted back and forth between Uruzgan and
Helmand, leveraging their established transit networks to evade decisive
confrontations
with the ANSF. The spread of attacks across Uruzgan and Helmand
likely exceeded the operational reach of the ANSF in southern Afghanistan.
Taliban have therefore been able to re-establish influence proximate to key
southern provinces and demonstrate its ability to
reverse significant ISAF and
ANSF successes against the insurgency.
the past nine months, there have been a considerable number of security
incidents in Uruzgan involving attacks by the Taliban on
institutions, including the assassination in March 2015 of the all-powerful
Police Chief of Uruzgan, Matiullah Khan, who
had worked with ISAF and Australian
forces to repel the rising Taliban insurgency. Police stations, military
barracks, schools and
organisations associated with international forces,
foreign governments and international NGOs, have all been targeted by the
as noted in the following selection of available reports:
‘Insurgents
kill 12 Afghan policemen in Uruzgan: official’,
fighting erupts in Uruzgan’,
The Frontier Post
‘Afghanistan:
Taliban attack on district headquarter in southern Uruzgan province
Indian Express
kill second police chief from same Afghan province’, Reuters, 26 April
workers killed in Afghanistan after abduction by Taliban: officials’,
Afghan Police Chief killed by Taliban suicide bomber’,
kill 7 police officers in central Afghanistan’,
Associated Press
Control About 80% Of Gizab District In
Uruzgan Province Four Years After
Successful Revolt’,
The Guardian
, 28 October
900 Taliban militants launch attacks in Uruzgan province’,
regards to accessing [District 1], reports indicate that travel along key roads
between Kabul and Kandahar, including in and
out of and through Uruzgan and
Zabul, is dangerous, as militant groups, including the Taliban, regularly set up
checkpoints and have
killed and harmed those who work for or support the Afghan
government and international community, including
recent years there have been regular reports of ambushes, robberies, kidnappings
and killings by the Taliban and criminal groups
along these roads, and the
security of roads in the region has become volatile and increasingly dangerous.
In March 2014, DFAT advised
4.23 Insecurity compounds the poor condition of Afghanistan’s limited road
network, particularly those roads that pass through
areas contested by
insurgents. Taliban and criminal elements target the national highway and
secondary roads, setting up arbitrary
armed checkpoints. Official ANP and ANA
checkpoints designed to secure the road are sometimes operated by poorly-trained
known to use violence to extort bribes. More broadly, criminals and
insurgents on roads target all ethnic groups, sometimes including
kidnapping for
ransom. It is often difficult to separate criminality (such as extortion) from
insurgent activity.
4.24 Individuals working for, supporting or associated with the Government and
the international community are at high risk of violence
perpetrated by
insurgents on roads in Afghanistan. Carrying documentation that would indicate
employment or another connection with
the Government is dangerous. Because
Hazaras are perceived to be affiliated with either the Government or
international community,
those Hazaras travelling these routes who work for the
Government or international community frequently take precautions to ensure
that, if they are stopped, they could not be identified as such.
4.25 Hazara MPs and several credible civil society contacts have told DFAT that
‘dozens’ of Hazaras were killed on roads
to and from Hazarajat in
2013. However, DFAT has no reliable evidence to indicate that insurgents
disproportionately target Hazaras
on roads in Afghanistan. Hazaras are often the
main travellers on roads to Hazarajat, so higher numbers of victims could also
the higher volume of traffic ...
regard to what might happen in the foreseeable future in Afghanistan, the
independent evidence before the Tribunal including
from United Nations
Secretary-General,
International Crisis
Institute for the Study of War
indicates a significant likelihood that, following the handover from
international to Afghan security forces in late 2014, the Taliban
will further
increase its power and control over most parts of the country. It is clear that
Afghanistan remains in a highly volatile
and unpredictable phase, and it appears
likely that insurgent activity will increase in the reasonably foreseeable
future, as the
Taliban seeks to expand its sphere of control. In light of the
widely pessimistic outlook for Afghanistan’s security situation,
Tribunal considers it prudent to adopt a cautious approach in making predictions
as to the relative safety for a person in the
applicant’s situation. As
the independent information demonstrates, areas once thought to be relatively
free of Taliban influence
may not necessarily be so in the future. Assessing
the risks to the applicant in such volatile and uncertain conditions is a
task. However, in the Tribunal’s view, the independent
information supports the adoption of a sceptical view towards the proposition
that the risk of harm to a person in the applicant’s circumstances in
[District 1] of Uruzgan is remote, and will continue
to be so in the reasonably
foreseeable future.
Tribunal considers that, in the event he returned to [District 1], there are a
number of features and attributes of his background
and characteristics that
would make the chance of him suffering serious harm, in the terms prescribed by
the High Court of Australia,
real and not remote. These include the fact he has
the typical Asiatic physical features of a Hazara person, which clearly
him as a Shi’a Muslim, as well as his extended period outside
Afghanistan, including three years in Australia, a coalition
partner in the ISAF
forces that were stationed in Uruzgan between 2002 and
Importantly, he has no remaining family or relatives in [District 1], and, since
he was last there in 2000, there have been considerable
changes in the area,
including the creation of the Daykundi province in 2004 [to] which the majority
of the former Hazara population
of Uruzgan now
circumstances, in light of the indications that the Taliban is present and
active in more than 80% of [District 1], the
Tribunal is unable to make a
confident finding that the chance of him coming to the adverse attention of the
Taliban, on either the
roads into or out of [District 1], or inside the
district, is remote or far-fetched, or that it is based on mere speculation,
accordingly, finds that there is a real chance of him suffering serious
harm in this way in the reasonably foreseeable future.
Convention nexus
the applicant to meet the refugee criterion, the Tribunal must be satisfied that
there is a real chance he would be singled out
for serious harm in a
‘systematic and discriminatory’ manner for the ‘essential and
significant’ reason of
his race, religion, nationality, political opinion
or membership of a particular social group. He has claimed that he is at risk
of persecution because of his Hazara race and his Shi’a religion, and his
membership of the particular social group of Hazara
returnees, and that the
Taliban or other armed Pashtun group would impute him with an adverse political
opinion, based on his race,
religion, lack of familial connections and their
impression of him being an outsider as a Hazara who has been outside the country
for over 15 years including for an extended period in Australia.
its ‘Thematic Report: Hazaras in Afghanistan and Pakistan’, issued
on 26 March 2014, DFAT
assesses that Hazara minorities living in Pashtun-majority areas in Uruzgan,
Helmand and Kandahar are less safe than those living
in Kabul or Hazara-majority
areas of Hazarajat. These Pashtun-majority areas typically experience higher
levels of violence, which
affects all Afghans in these areas, including Hazaras.
Hazaras living in these areas typically avoid travel outside their immediate
Department’s
Country of Origin Information Service
report provided the following information:
The Liaison
, an independent non-government organisation, provided an analysis in
of Uruzgan following a four year assessment of the province
from 2006 –
2010. It specifically highlights Uruzgan Khas as having ‘greater problems
with insecurity’ and to be
losing ground to the many insurgent groups in
the district. In June 2010, 11 Hazara males were discovered beheaded in Khas
According to the 2011
United States Commission on International
Religious Freedom Report,
police officials stated that they were killed by
the Taliban ‘because they were ethnic Hazaras and Shiite Muslims.’
Pajhwok Afghan News
reported that the bodies were ‘found in the
Baghchar area of Khas Uruzgan district, where a notorious Taliban commander,
Khan, was killed a month back during a clash with coalition troops’.
Other reports indicate the Hazaras were killed to avenge
the gruesome killing of
seven Pashtuns by a notorious Hazara commander from Ghazni province.
In December 2011 the
Wakht News Agency
reported that the local police
commander and local police in the district of Khas Uruzgan were actively helping
the Taliban to kill
Hazaras and seize their lands. Reports indicate that
confrontations continued in 2013-4 between the Hazara Afghan Local Police (ALP)
units and the Taleban. In May 2014, a group of 50 Afghan Local Police (ALP)
members fled from Khas Uruzgan to ethnically-Hazara
their commander was summoned to the provincial capital for questioning over his
In September 2010, the
Hazaristan Times
published an article
describing mass displacement forced migration of Hazaras in Uruzgan due to
insecurity and also made comment
on the limited amount of media attention
surrounding the events against the Hazara in the area. The displacement of
Hazaras was also
noted in the
Afghanistan Protection Cluster 2010 Report
published by the United Nations Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. The report provided data in relation to displacement
(note, not only
the displacement of Hazara) from Uruzgan Khas in April 2009 and June 2010
illustrating the insecurity in the area.
The report stated that in April 2009,
778 families originally from districts of Uruzgan (Khas Uruzgan, Chora and Char
been displaced and in June 2010, 277 Families or 1,939 individuals
were displaced to Uruzgan District Centre from Khas Uruzgan due
to insecurity.
The report also stated that in June 2010 the area was inaccessible for
government and NGOS ‘due to the conflict
March 2014, DFAT assessed that Hazaras “are not currently at any greater
risk of violence than other ethnic groups in Afghanistan”
“[t]he security situation in Afghanistan remains fluid and varies from
district to district within individual provinces”,
noting that “any
categorical assessment on the security in a particular area could be rendered
quickly inaccurate.”
In a somewhat analogous assessment
the Department’s
Country of Origin Information Service
report on Afghanistan states:
Although the Taliban leadership and
the group as a whole has not been anti-Shia or anti-Hazara, the sporadic
killings of Hazaras in
remote regions since 2001 seems to indicate that a small
number of Taliban commanders in various parts of Afghanistan do hold either
anti-Shia or anti-Hazara views. The Taliban is made up of individuals with a
wide range of motivations – some join for religious,
political or
ideological reasons, others join for financial reasons, others to solve local
problems or pursue personal causes, such
as revenge, and yet others are
criminals who use the cover of the movement to prey on the population. As Van
Biljert states: ‘The
variety within the Taliban movement also illustrates
that the movement has a spectrum of enemies, and that not all Taliban fighters
will attack the whole range.’
one view, the available information indicates that, for most of the past decade,
the primary motivation of the Taliban and other
armed militants in attacking
people traveling on the roads in between Kabul and Kandahar, and in and out of
Uruzgan, appears to be
political, as it has mostly been targeted against persons
connected to or associated with the Afghan government or international
or simply criminal, in that it involves robbery, extortion, kidnapping and
ransom. However, the sources consulted by the
Tribunal agree that the Taliban
is predominantly Sunni and Pashtun, and that the Taliban and Pashtuns have a
historical hatred of
Hazaras based on ethnicity and religious sect, among other
things. Despite the gains made by some Hazaras in recent years, there
evidence to indicate that the entrenched enmity towards Hazaras by the Taliban
and Pashtuns has diminished, such that Hazaras
would not be at some risk of harm
for reason of their ethnicity or religion under an ascendant Taliban. More
recent reports indicate
that the Taliban and other armed insurgents, including
groups affiliated with Islamic State, have increasingly targeted Hazaras on
roads in and around Ghazni, Uruzgan and Zabul, and subjected them to incidents
involving serious harm. For example, the Department’s
of Origin Information Service
report includes a list of reported attacks on
Hazaras on the roads in Afghanistan, including the following attacks in 2014 and
March 2015 - A bus was stopped travelling between Ghazni and Jaghouri. Ten
Hazaras were abducted. After some hours nine were released
with one continuing
to be held at the time of writing. Unconfirmed reports believe the remaining
captive worked for the government.
23 February 2015 - Masked men stopped two vehicles traveling on the highway
near Zabul and identified and abducted 30 Hazaras. The
Hazaras were reported to
be Afghan refugees returning from Iran. Different reports identified the
abductors as possibly foreign and
either members of the Taliban or ISIS. As of
the time of publication, the men had not been found, although one Hazara escaped
25 February.
20 January 2015 - Eight or nine Hazaras were killed in Gilan district in
Ghazni when their van was exploded by a remote controlled
bomb. The Hazaras were
travelling from Kabul to Jaghori district. The pro-Hazara source
Kabul Press
claimed that ‘These victims were civilians who were going from Kabul
to Jaghori, did not work for any government offices and
did not have any
connection with any of Afghanistan’s political parties’, though
other sources do not give such details
20 September 2014 - Australian-Afghan Sayed Habib Musawi, a Hazara from
Jaghori district in Ghazni, was reportedly killed by the Taliban
travelling from Kabul to his home district of Jaghori. He was reportedly killed
as he was an Australian, but the fact that
he was also a Hazara may have been
16 September 2014 - Zainullah Naseri, a Hazara from Jaghori district in
Ghazni, was reportedly abducted and tortured by the Taliban
for two days in
Ghazni province after being deported from Australia. He escaped to Jaghori then
returned to Kabul. DFAT was unable
to confirm the report.
25 July 2014 - Suspected Taliban fighters halted two minibuses in Lal-o-Sar
Jangal district in the western province of Ghor, identified
14 Shia Hazara
passengers, including three women and a child, bound their hands, then shot them
dead by the side of the road.
28 June 2014 - The Taliban killed (Hazara sources say ‘beheaded’)
between 14 and 17 people, usually described as policemen
or ex-policemen, in
Gizab district of Uruzgan Province. This incident was little reported and
reports do not give much detail. According
to Hazara sources, the victims were
Hazaras, mostly students and workers, though other sources do not mention their
ethnicity. Other
information tends to support the assertion that the victims
were Hazaras: Hazaras comprised a disproportionately large part of the
force in Uruzgan and particularly in Gizab, according to a 2010 NGO report on
Uruzgan, and one of the reports mentions that
one of the victims was the nephew
of Governor Amanollah Timuri who is elsewhere reported to be a Hazara.
noted, 31 Hazaras travelling by bus on the highway from Kandahar to Kabul
were abducted in Zabul Province on 23 February 2015.
The armed men who carried
out the abductions stopped the vehicles in which people were travelling and
checked their identity cards
before abducting the Hazara
passengers.
Taliban denied involvement in the kidnapping and, as referred to above, there
have been suggestions that Islamic State was
responsible.
Reports suggest that traffic on the highway from Kabul to Kandahar has decreased
by a half as a result of this and other
Further, on 15 March 2015 ten Hazaras were kidnapped in the Qarabagh district
while travelling from Kabul to Jaghori in two cars.
Reports suggest that this
was not an isolated
have been further reports of attacks on Hazaras on the roads around Ghazni,
Uruzgan and Zabul since the Department’s
paper was published in March
2015. According to media reports, six Hazaras were abducted by armed masked men
on the Herat-Farah
highway in Farah province on 16 March
Hazaras were abducted in Ghazni as they were travelling out of their home
district, and their headless bodies were found
in Malistan district on or about
15 April 2015.
in September 2014, a dual Afghan-Australian citizen who came to Australia by
boat in 2000, Sayed Habib Musawi, was abducted and
killed by the Taliban when he
was on his way back to Kabul after visiting relatives in his village in the
Jaghori district of Ghazni
According to the most detailed report the minibus in which he was travelling was
stopped by the Taliban in Larga, a village in the
Muqur district, and one of the
Taliban ordered him by name to get off the bus. Another passenger heard one of
the Taliban asking
him, ‘Did you come from Australia?’ They found
his wallet, which had an Australian flag design, and also his driver’s
licence and Medicare card. His body was subsequently found in the Qarabagh
However, the Department’s recent
Country of Origin Information
report indicates he was killed in the Jaghori
According to the most detailed Australian news report, although Mr Musawi
was a Hazara his family believe that he was killed because
he was an Australian
citizen. The news report quotes Bashi Habib, the head of the security forces in
Jaghori, as stating that the
fact that Mr Musawi was an Australian citizen was
reported to the Taliban by an informant in his area.
recent reports suggest that Hazaras have been targeted by the Islamic State in
Afghanistan, with a
New York Times
report suggesting that the Taliban are
adopting a new campaign of brutality towards Hazaras in order to
‘compete’ with
IS. The report details the kidnapping and beheading
of four Hazara farmers in Ajristan District of Ghazni Province [and] the murder
of six Hazaras kidnapped from Daykundi
carefully considered the information and evidence before it, the Tribunal is
unable to dismiss the contention that the reason(s)
Hazaras have, in the recent
past, been subjected to serious harm in Uruzgan, is because of their race and
religion and an imputed
considering this issue the Tribunal has taken into account information which
indicates that, even if the main focus of Taliban
activity is directed against
perceived supporters or associates of the Afghan national government or the
international forces, Hazaras
are nevertheless differentially at increased risk
if they come to the attention of the Taliban in the course of such activity,
if it is primarily directed at different targets; moreover, some sources
suggest that Hazaras are perceived to be associated with
the government and the
West, or associated with government or Western
institutions.
Given the evidence about the historic enmity towards Hazaras in Afghanistan, and
the current targeting of Hazaras in both Afghanistan
and Pakistan for reasons of
their religion and ethnicity by Sunni fundamentalist groups linked with the
Taliban, the Tribunal considers
the weight of recent evidence indicates that, in
his individual circumstances, the applicant would face serious harm amounting to
persecution from the Taliban or some other Sunni insurgent group in the
reasonably foreseeable future for the essential and significant
reasons of his
race, religion and imputed political opinion, if he returned to his home
district of [District 1].
State protection
regard to the possibility of the applicant accessing protection from the state
authorities, DFAT has advised
ongoing insurgency, particularly in the south and east of Afghanistan means that
the Government struggles to exercise effective
control over parts of the
country. As a result, the Government lacks the ability to adequately address
human rights issues, protect
vulnerable groups and prosecute human rights
violators in those areas.
its most recent ‘Eligibility Guidelines’, UNHCR notes that state
protection in Afghanistan is compromised by high levels
of corruption,
ineffective governance, a climate of impunity, lack of official impetus for the
transitional justice process, weak
rule of law and widespread reliance on
traditional dispute resolution mechanisms that do not comply with due process
also stated that ‘to the extent that the harm feared is from non-State
actors, State protection is on the whole not available
in Afghanistan’.
In view of the unstable security situation in Afghanistan and potential for
further deterioration in the
context of the impending draw-down and the likely
resurgence of the Taliban, the Tribunal finds that the applicant would not be
to access state protection in accordance with the principles in
Respondents
, from the serious harm he faces from the Taliban and
other armed militants.
Tribunal has also considered whether or not it would be reasonable for the
applicant to relocate to another area of Afghanistan,
and considers that, in his
circumstances, Kabul is the only realistic option. Reports indicate that there
is an increasingly large
community of Hazaras in
relatively few reported incidents of Hazaras being targeted in the capital.
on the economic situation for Hazaras in Kabul are mixed. The
Department’s March 2015
Country of Origin Information Service
report provides a helpful presentation of a range of views and analyses.
Most commentators appear to agree that the overall socio-economic
situation for
Hazaras in Afghanistan has improved significantly, and that many Hazaras have
been able ‘embrace and create’
work and business opportunities in
Kabul. However, it is also stated that individual Hazaras’ experiences
differ greatly,
and that not all Hazaras have benefited from the increased
economic opportunities, that patronage and connections are still a critical
element in a person’s survival, and that the Hazaras are still described
as amongst the poorest communities in Afghanistan,
‘underclass’ of Hazaras present in Kabul. UNHCR has reported of the
widespread unemployment in Kabul that limit
the ability of a large number of
people to meet their basic needs. DFAT has also referred to unemployment being
widespread in Kabul
and underemployment common.
Guidelines and the recent DFAT ‘Thematic Report: Conditions in
Kabul’, advise that traditional extended family and
tribal community
structures are fundamentally important for successful
relocation.
DFAT and UNHCR stress that internally displaced Afghans rely on these networks
for their safety and economic survival, including
access to accommodation and an
adequate level of subsistence. DFAT assesses that a lack of financial resources
and lack of employment
opportunities are the greatest constraints on successful
internal relocation. They assess that this is exacerbated by Kabul’s
relatively high cost of living, particularly the cost of housing. They note that
relocation is generally more successful for single
men of working age. Returnees
generally have lower household incomes and higher rates of unemployment than
established community
members. Although DFAT assess that men of working age are
more likely to be able to return and reintegrate successfully, UNHCR has
highlighted the importance of employment skills. While the
Danish Refugee
has suggested that Hazaras relocating from the Hazarajat can and do
access support and assistance from a large community support
network, accessing
that support is dependent on having a contact point from an existing network,
which usually comes from the person’s
village or tribe, which the
applicant does not have. DFAT has also stated that internal relocation to urban
areas is more likely
to be successful for single men of working age but this is
not the situation for the applicant.
addition, even though reports indicate that Kabul is safer than other parts of
the country, there is evidence of a number of insurgent
attacks against
government institutions, political figures and Afghan National Security Forces,
as well as other security services
and international organisations. Though this
is not sufficient, in itself, to establish a real chance that the applicant
serious harm, the existence of these attacks and the danger that the
applicant may be caught up in them, contributes to the unreasonableness
relocation. Further, in the Tribunal’s view, the available information
indicates that it is reasonable to assume that increased
levels of insecurity
and instability throughout the country will cause further large-scale
displacements, with Kabul receiving increasing
numbers of new residents, placing
further pressure on the city’s already over-stretched infrastructure.
these circumstances, in light of the fact the applicant has no family or
relatives or known tribal or clan ties in Kabul, has been
outside the country
for over 15 years, has a wife and [young] children under the age of [age] to
support, with limited financial
means and employment-related skills, in the
Tribunal’s view, the widespread unemployment and high costs of living in
as well as the general lack of security in Kabul and poor living
conditions, mean that, in accordance with the principles established
by the High
particular circumstances, relocation to Kabul is not a reasonable option for the
the above reasons, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant has a
well-founded fear of being persecuted by non-state actors,
from which the state
would not be able to protect him, if he returned to Afghanistan now or in the
foreseeable future, and that,
in the circumstances, it would not be safe or
reasonable for him to relocate to another part of the country. The Tribunal
that the persecution which the applicant is at risk of suffering
involves ‘serious harm’ as required by
s.91R(1)(b)
of the Act, in
that it involves significant physical harassment or ill-treatment. The Tribunal
finds that the applicant’s
race, religion and imputed political opinion,
are the essential and significant reasons for his fear of persecution as
required by
s.91R(1)(a).
The Tribunal is satisfied that the persecution he is
at risk of suffering involves systematic and discriminatory conduct, as required
s.91R(1)(c)
, in that it is deliberate or intentional and involves his
selective harassment for a Convention reason.
Accordingly,
for all of the above reasons, the Tribunal finds that the applicant has a
well-founded fear of Convention-related persecution
if he returns to Afghanistan
now or in the foreseeable future. There is no evidence before the Tribunal to
suggest that the applicant
has a legally enforceable right to enter and reside
in any country other than his country of nationality and the Tribunal finds that
he is not excluded from Australia’s protection by
of the Act.
Tribunal is satisfied the applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia has
protection obligations and that he satisfies
the criterion set out in
for a Protection visa.
Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the direction that the
applicant satisfies
Migration Act
Christian Carney
APPENDIX 1 - RELEVANT LAW
of the Act provides that a visa may be granted only if the decision maker
is satisfied that the prescribed criteria for the visa
have been satisfied. The
criteria for a Protection visa are set out in
of the Act. An applicant for
the visa must meet one of the alternative criteria in
, (aa), (b), or
(c). That is, the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has
protection obligations under the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees
the Refugees Convention, or the Convention), or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as a person in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations
and that person holds a Protection visa of the same class.
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under
of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines prepared by the
Department of Immigration, ‘PAM3
Refugee and Humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines’ and ‘PAM3 Refugee and Humanitarian - Refugee
Law Guidelines’,
and any country information assessment prepared by the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade expressly for protection status
determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision
under consideration.
Refugee criterion
provides that a criterion for a Protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom
the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the Refugees Convention.
Generally speaking, as a party to
the Refugees Convention, Australia has
protection obligations in respect of people who are ‘refugees’ as
defined in Article
1 of the Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a
refugee as any person who:
... owing to well-founded fear of being
persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a
particular social group
or political opinion, is outside the country of his
nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that country; or who, not having a nationality and being
outside the country of his former habitual residence,
is unable or, owing to
such fear, is unwilling to return to it.
High Court of Australia has considered this definition in a number of cases,
Chan Yee Kin v MIEA
(1989) 169 CLR 379
Applicant A v MIEA
(1997) 190 CLR 225,
(1997) 191 CLR 559
Chen Shi Hai v
[2000] HCA 19
(2000) 201 CLR 293
MIMA v Haji Ibrahim
[2000] HCA 55
(2000) 204 CLR 1
MIMA v Khawar
(2002) 210 CLR 1
MIMA v Respondents
[2004] HCA 18
Applicant S v MIMA
[2004] HCA 25
(2004) 217 CLR 387
[2003] HCA 71
(2003) 216 CLR 473
SZATV v MIAC
(2007) 233 CLR 18
SZFDV v MIAC
(2007) 233 CLR 51.
Sections 91R
qualify certain aspects of Article 1A(2) for the purposes of the application of
the Act and Regulations to a particular
are four key elements to the Convention definition. Firstly, an applicant must
be outside his or her country. Secondly, the
applicant must fear persecution,
which, according to
of the Act, must involve ‘serious harm’
and ‘systematic and discriminatory conduct’. The expression
harm’ includes, for example, a threat to life or liberty;
significant physical harassment or ill-treatment; or significant
hardship or denial of access to basic services or denial of capacity to earn a
livelihood, where such hardship or denial
threatens the applicant’s
capacity to subsist:
The High Court has said that persecution may be
directed against a person as an individual or as a member of a group. The
persecution
must have an official quality, in the sense that it is official, or
officially tolerated or condoned or be incapable of being controlled
authorities of the country of nationality. However, the threat of harm need not
be the product of government policy; it may
be enough that the government has
failed or is unable to protect the applicant from persecution. Further,
persecution implies an
element of motivation on the part of those who persecute
for the infliction of harm. People are persecuted for something perceived
them or attributed to them by their persecutors.
the persecution which the applicant fears must be for one or more of the reasons
enumerated in the Convention definition:
race, religion, nationality, membership
of a particular social group or political opinion. The phrase ‘for
reasons of’
serves to identify the motivation for the infliction of the
persecution. The persecution feared need not be
attributable to a
Convention reason. However, persecution for multiple motivations will not
satisfy the relevant test unless a Convention
reason or reasons constitute at
least the essential and significant motivation for the persecution feared:
s.91R(1)(a).
an applicant’s fear of persecution for a Convention reason must be
‘well-founded’. This adds an objective
requirement to the
requirement that an applicant must in fact hold such a fear. A person has a
‘well-founded fear’ of
persecution under the Convention if they have
a genuine fear founded on a ‘real chance’ of being persecuted for a
reason. A fear is well-founded where there is a real substantial
basis for it but not if it is merely assumed or based on mere speculation.
‘real chance’ is one that is not remote or insubstantial or a
far-fetched possibility. A person can have a well-founded
fear of persecution
even though the possibility of the persecution occurring is well below 50 per
addition, an applicant must be unable, or unwilling because of his or her fear,
to avail himself or herself of the protection of
his or her country or countries
of nationality or, if stateless, unable, or unwilling because of his or her
fear, to return to his
or her country of former habitual residence. The
expression ‘the protection of that country’ in the second limb of
1A(2) is concerned with external or diplomatic protection extended to
citizens abroad. Internal protection is nevertheless relevant
to the first limb
of the definition, in particular to whether a fear is well-founded and whether
the conduct giving rise to the fear
is persecution.
Complementary protection criterion
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in
, he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of a protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect
of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing
that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
applicant being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm:
s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
‘Significant
harm’ for these purposes is exhaustively defined in
will suffer significant harm if he or she will be arbitrarily deprived of their
life; or the death penalty will be carried
out on the person; or the person will
be subjected to torture; or to cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment; or to
degrading treatment
or punishment. ‘Cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment’, ‘degrading treatment or punishment’, and
are further defined in
of the Act.
are certain circumstances in which there is taken not to be a real risk that an
applicant will suffer significant harm in a
country. These arise where it would
be reasonable for the applicant to relocate to an area of the country where
there would not
be a real risk that the applicant will suffer significant harm;
where the applicant could obtain, from an authority of the country,
such that there would not be a real risk that the applicant will suffer
significant harm; or where the real risk is one
faced by the population of the
country generally and is not faced by the applicant personally:
Credibility
Tribunal’s task of fact-finding may involve an assessment of an
applicant’s credibility. In this context, the Tribunal
is guided by the
observations and comments of both the High Court and Federal Court of Australia
in a number of decisions including
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs v Wu Shan Liang & Ors
(1996) 185 CLR 259
Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Guo
(1997) 191 CLR 559
Abebe v The
Commonwealth of Australia
[1999] HCA 14
(1999) 197 CLR 510
Randhawa v MILGEA
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437
Selvadurai v MIEA & Anor
[1994] FCA 1105
(1994) 34 ALD 347
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and McIllhatton v Guo Wei Rong
and Pam Run Juan
(1996) 40 ALD 445
Chand v Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs
(unreported, 7 November 1997),
Kopalapillai v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[1998] FCA 1126
(1998) 86 FCR 547
Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Rajalingam
[1999] FCA 719
(1999) 93 FCR 220.
these and other decisions, the courts have made it clear that it is important
that the Tribunal is sensitive to the difficulties
faced by asylum seekers and
that it adopts a reasonable approach in making its findings of credibility.
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and McIllhatton v Guo Wei Rong
and Pam Run Juan
(1996) 40 ALD 445
, Foster J stated at 482 that “care
must be taken that an over-stringent approach does not result in an unjust
exclusion from
consideration of the totality of some evidence where a portion of
it could reasonably have been accepted.” Numerous decisions
have endorsed
the principle that the benefit of the doubt should be given to asylum seekers
who are generally credible but unable
to substantiate all of their claims.
Tribunal has also had regard to the decision of
Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang & Ors
(1996) 185 CLR 259
comments of the High Court on the correct approach to determining findings on
credibility. Kirby J observed at [25]:
First, it is not erroneous
for a decision-maker, presented with a large amount of material, to reach
conclusions as to which of the
facts (if any) had been established and which had
not. An over-nice approach to the standard of proof to be applied here is
undesirable.
It betrays a misunderstanding of the way administrative decisions
are usually made. It is more apt to a court conducting a trial
than to the
proper performance of the functions of an administrator, even if the delegate of
the Minister and even if conducting
a secondary determination. It is not an
error of law for a decision-maker to test the material provided by the criterion
is considered to be objectively shown, as long as, in the end, he or she
performs the function of speculation about the “real
persecution required by Chan.
Tribunal is not required to accept uncritically any or all allegations made by
an applicant. Nor is it required to have rebutting
evidence available to it
before it can find that a particular factual assertion by an applicant has not
been made out, or obliged
to accept claims that are inconsistent with the
independent evidence regarding the situation in the applicant’s country of
nationality. In
Chand v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(unreported, 7 November 1997), the Full Court of the Federal Court observed that
“where there is conflicting evidence from
different sources, questions of
credit of witnesses may have to be resolved. The RRT is also entitled to
attribute greater weight
to one piece of evidence as against another, and to act
on its opinion that one version of the facts is more probable than
Nevertheless, as Burchett J counselled in
Sundararaj v
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[1999] FCA 76
necessary to:
... understand that any rational examination of the
credit of a story is not to be undertaken by picking it to pieces to uncover
discrepancies. Every lawyer with any practical experience knows that
almost any account is likely to involve such discrepancies.
The special
difficulties of people who have fled their country to a strange country where
they seek asylum, often having little
understanding of the language, cultural
and legal problems they face, should be recognised, and recognised by much more
as the Full Court noted in
Sujeendran Sivalingam v Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs
(unreported, 17 September 1998) “refugee cases may
involve special considerations arising out of problems of communication and
mistrust, and problems flowing from the experience of trauma and stress prior to
arrival in Australia.” On this point, the
Tribunal also takes into
account the comments of Professor Hathaway in
The Law of Refugee Status"
(1991, Butterworths) at pages 84-86. Nevertheless, there is no rule that a
decision-maker may not reject an applicant’s testimony
on credibility
grounds unless there are no possible explanations for any delay in the making of
claims or for any evidentiary inconsistencies:
Kopalapillai v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[1998] FCA 1126
(1998) 86 FCR 547
at 558-9. Nor is
there a rule that a decision-maker must hold a ‘positive state of
disbelief’ before making an adverse
credibility assessment in a refugee
case. However, if the Tribunal has ‘no real doubt’ that the claimed
events did not
occur, it will not be necessary for it to consider the
possibility that its findings might be wrong:
Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs v Rajalingam
[1999] FCA 719
(1999) 93 FCR 220
per Sackville J (with
whom North J agreed) at 241. In addition, if the Tribunal makes an adverse
finding in relation to a material
claim made by an applicant but is unable to
make that finding with confidence, it must proceed to assess the claim on the
the claim might possibly be true: see
MIMA v Rajalingam
[1999] FCA 719
93 FCR 220.
The Tribunal is also mindful of the observations of Gummow and
Hayne JJ in
Abebe v The Commonwealth of Australia
[1999] HCA 14
(1999) 197 CLR 510
... the fact that an Applicant for refugee status may yield
to temptation to embroider an account of his or her history is hardly
surprising. It is necessary always to bear in mind that an Applicant for
refugee status is, on one view of events, engaged in an
often desperate battle
for freedom, if not life itself.
‘Uruzgan Province - Land Cover Map’,
AIMS (United Nations)
available at
http://www.boekje-pienter.nl/images/uruzgan.pdf
‘Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 2000: Afghanistan’,
Department of State,
February 2001, available at
http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/2000/sa/721.htm
‘Afghanistan: Crisis of Impunity’,
Human Rights Watch
2001, available at
http://www.hrw.org/reports/2001/afghan2/Afghan0701.pdf
Report: Shias in Pakistan’,
, 18 December 2013; ‘The
widening specter of sectarian militancy’,
Weekly Pulse
2012, available at
http://www.weeklypulse.org/
details.aspx?contentID=2002&storylist=2
; ‘Sectarian killings in
Balochistan’,
The Daily News
, 15 October 2011, available at
http://www.dailynews.net.pk/oct2011
/15-10-2011/sectrai.asp
; ‘Forced out of town by ethnic violence in
Balochistan’,
Policy Research Group
, 27 May 2011, available at
http://policyresearchgroup.com/pakistan/forced_out_of_town_by_ethnic_violence_in_
balochistan.htm
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1989) 169 CLR 379
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1989) 169 CLR 379
Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Guo
(1997) 191 CLR 559
The Commonwealth
[1999] HCA 14
(1999) 197 CLR 510
per Gummow and Hayne JJ.
‘Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs
of Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan’,
, 6 August 2013, page
Information Report - Afghanistan’,
, 26 March 2014.
‘Afghanistan: Hazara Issues Paper’,
Department of Immigration and
Border Protection, Country of Origin Information Service,
March 2015,
Available at
http://www.understandingwar.org/report/taliban-resurgent-threats-afghanistans-security
Available at
http://www.dawn.com/news/1183134
Available at
http://www.thefrontierpost.com/article/299469/heavy-clashes-erupt-in-uruzgan/
Available at
http://indianexpress.com/article/world/neighbours/afghanistan-taliban-attack-on-district-headquarter-in-southern-uruzgan-province-kills-7/
Available at
http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/04/26/us-afghanistan-attack-idUSKBN0NH05T20150426
Available at
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-12/five-abducted-aid-workers-killed-in-afghanistan-officials/6386316
Available at
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/19/afghan-police-chief-killed-taliban
Available at
http://www.ctvnews.ca/world/taliban-kill-7-police-officers-in-central-afghanistan-1.2277958
Available at
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/27/taliban-return-afghan-town-gizab
Available at
http://www.khaama.com/nearly-900-taliban-militants-launch-attacks-in-uruzgan-province-8396
‘DFAT Report 1450 – RRT Information Request: AFG41196’,
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
, 5 November 2012; ‘Country
Information Report No. 11/56 – CIS Request No.AFG12298: Road security in
DIAC Country Information Service
, 21 September 2011;
Ruttig, T, ‘Comments provided by Thomas Ruttig on travel between Kabul and
Ghazni for Hazaras’, 25
May 2012; Maley, W, ‘On the Position of the
Hazara Minority in Afghanistan’, 9 September 2012; ‘Kabul-Kandahar
highway is a symbol of what's gone wrong in Afghanistan’,
, 9 September 2012, available at
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/afghanistan/9530320/Kabul-Kandahar-highway-is-a-symbol-of-whats-gone-wrong-in-Afghanistan.html
Zeerak, M, ‘Email to RRT, Re: Request for advice on road security and
ethnic targeting in Ghazni province’, 25 March
‘Thematic Report Afghanistan, Hazaras in Afghanistan and Pakistan’,
, 26 March 2014 at 4.22-25.
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and
security: report of the Secretary-General’,
UN General Assembly
December 2014, available at
http://www.refworld.org/docid/549808194.html
‘Afghanistan Annual Report 2014: Protection of Civilians in Armed
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
, 18 February 2015.
‘Afghanistan’s political transition’,
International Crisis
, 16 October 2014, available at
http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/asia/south-asia/afghanistan/260-afghanistan-s-political-transition.aspx
‘Post-ISAF Afghanistan: The early months’,
, 6 May 2015, available at
http://www.brookings.edu/research/reports/2015/05/bdc-nato-afghanistan-event-report
‘Australian soldiers pull out of Uruzgan province’,
16 December 2013, available at
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-12-16/australian-soldiers-pull-out-of-uruzgan-province/5159220
‘Afghanistan: Hazara Issues Paper’,
Department of Immigration and
Border Protection, Country of Origin Information Service,
March 2015,
‘Thematic Report Afghanistan, Hazaras in Afghanistan and Pakistan’,
, 26 March 2014, at 4.14.
‘Country Information Report - Afghanistan’,
2014, at 4.4 and 4.5.
‘Afghanistan: Hazara Issues Paper’,
Department of Immigration
and Border Protection, Country of Origin Information Service,
March 2015,
stalks Afghan minorities after rare attacks’,
News24 -South Africa
17 March 2015; ‘Drivers explain how Hazara passengers were kidnapped in
Afghan south’,
, 24 February 2015.
‘Taliban deny hand in abduction of 30 Hazara men in Zabul; Khalili says
they are safe’,
Afghan Zariza
, 7 March 2015, CXBD6A0DE2428;
Frud Bezhan, ‘Mass Abduction Of Hazaras In Afghanistan Raises Fears Of
Islamic State’,
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL)
February 2015, CXBD6A0DE1904; Ali M. Latifi and Shashank Bengali, ‘Afghan
officials acknowledge Islamic State presence
in their country’,
Angeles Times
, 17 March 2015, CXBD6A0DE3139.
Newly Abducted Hazara Passengers Released’,
2015; ‘Protests in Ghazni Over 31 Hazara Hostages’,
, 17 March 2015; ‘Traffic on Kabul-Herat highway down by a
Pajhwok Afghan News, Afghanistan
, 18 March 2015.
free 9 kidnapped passengers in Ghazni’,
Pajhwok Afghan News
-Afghanistan
, 15 March 2015; ‘9 abducted civilians freed by kidnappers
in Ghazni’,
Khaama Press
, 15 March 2015.
‘Another 6 Hazara Passengers Abducted’,
(Afghanistan), 18 March 2015.
abducted Hazaras beheaded in Afghanistan: officials,’
The Express
(Pakistan), 17 April 2-15, available at
http://tribune.com.pk/story/871896/five-abducted-hazaras-beheaded-in-afghanistan-officials/
man killed by Taliban because he was Australian report’,
Morning Herald,
29 September 2014; ‘Son of Afghan-Australian killed by
Taliban denied refugee status’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
September 2014.
Abdul Karim
Hekmat, ‘Hazaras face death on return to Afghanistan’,
Saturday Paper,
8 November 2014.
‘Programme summary of Afghan Bost Radio news in Pashto, 28 Sep 14’,
BostNews (Bost Bastan)
, 28 September 2014, CX1B9ECAB7743;
‘Programme summary of Afghan Sharq TV news in Pashto, 28 Sep 14’,
Sharq Magazine
, 28 September 2014, CX1B9ECAB7744.
‘Taliban Are Said to Target Hazaras to Try to Match ISIS’
Brutality’,
New York Times
, 23 April 2015, available at
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/23/world/asia/taliban-are-said-to-target-hazaras-to-try-to-match-isis-brutality.html?_r=0
William Maley ‘On the position of the Hazara Minority in
Afghanistan’, 7 December 2011; ‘Afghanistan:
Situation in Ghazni
Province - views of Member of Parliament’, DFAT, 15 July, 2010;
‘Failure of Security Transition?’,
Kabul Perspective
August 2012, available at
http://kabulperspective.wordpress.com/2012/08/15/failure-of-security-transition/
‘Thematic Report Afghanistan, Hazaras in Afghanistan and Pakistan’,
, 26 March 2014 at 3.40; ‘Afghanistan: Hazara Issues
Department of Immigration and Border Protection, Country of
Origin Information Service,
March 2015; Foschini, F,
The Social Wandering
of the Afghan Kuchis
, Afghanistan Analysts Network, 1 November 2013, p.19
available at
http://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/20131125_FFoschini-Kuchis.pdf
‘Thematic Report Afghanistan, Hazaras in Afghanistan and Pakistan’,
, 26 March 2014 at 5.1-5.4.
‘Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs
of Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan’,
, 6 August 2013, at p
‘Thematic Report Afghanistan, Hazaras in Afghanistan and Pakistan’,
, 26 March 2014 at 19.
‘Thematic Report: Conditions in Kabul’,
, 3 October
2014, at p 5-7; ‘Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International
Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from
Afghanistan’,
August 2013, p 72-75. See also Majidi, N., ‘Urban Returnees and
Internally Displaced Persons in Afghanistan’,
Middle East Institute
& Foundation pour la. Recherche Strategique,
25 January 2011, available
http://www.refugeecooperation.org/publications/
afghanistan/pdf/01_majidi.pdf
; Saito, Mamiko,
Dilemmas Between Borders, Experiences of Young Afghans Returning
“Home” From Pakistan and Iran
, AREU Synthesis Paper Series, July
2009, available at
http://www.areu.
org.af/index.php?option=com_docman&Itemid=&task=doc_download&gid=686
v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2007) 233 CLR 18.
RTF format (294 KB)
Signed PDF/A format