The King v Tsalkos [2025] HCATrans 71 (17 October 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 071
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Melbourne No M64 of 2025
B e t w e e n
THEODOROS TSALKOS
BEECH‑JONES
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON FRIDAY,
17 OCTOBER 2025, AT 10.00 AM
MR B.F. KISSANE, KC
May it please the
Court, I appear with my learned friend
MS S.C. CLANCY
for the appellant. (instructed by Office of Public Prosecutions
MR T. KASSIMATIS, KC
May it please
the Court, I appear with my learned friend
MS G.F. CONNELLY,
for the respondent. (instructed by Papa Hughes
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Kassimatis.
Before you begin, Mr Kissane, we note that the parties have agreed that
Justice Steward will participate
in the hearing by reading the transcript.
Mr Kissane.
MR KISSANE:
Thank you, your Honour. This
appeal concerns the admissibility of evidence of the distressed demeanour of the
complainant when
making a complaint. That evidence was given in a trial by the
complainant’s mother. What we submit is that that evidence
was admissible
and the court of appeal was wrong to conclude that it could not be used as
indirect evidence supporting the case of
the prosecution.
evidence, it is important for the Court to look at the evidence, and the best,
although the evidence is referred to in the
judgment below, the evidence is set
out in the appellant’s further material at page 9. That is the
evidence that the mother
gave on the occasion when she attended at the hospital.
And it is set out there, and that is the evidence that, we submit, ought
been and was admitted in the trial, and the Court of Appeal was wrong to
conclude that it could not be used for the purpose
of supporting the
complainant’s evidence.
Do you accept
it starts at the foot of page 8?
MR KISSANE:
Yes, I think that is ‑ ‑ ‑
In other words, it is: took the phone call and then turned
up onwards?
MR KISSANE:
MR KISSANE:
that, your Honour, but we submit that it plainly indicates that the mother
observed the distress of the complainant
and that observing of that distress was
in the context – and this is important – of her
complaining that she had been
raped. I do not know that the sections of the
Evidence Act
– the Court will well know as to how they
apply in this case. I am not sure that I need to go there.
You rely on what we recently said in
MR KISSANE:
Yes, what we submit is
that the correct analysis is of this evidence is as set out in
In particular, paragraph [27] of
set out the two bases
upon which the evidence can be used. That is:
that, if accepted –
the evidence can:
support the credit of the complainant if the jury were to find a causal
connection between the distress and the making of the complaint,
and second, as
evidence that, if accepted, could support the occurrence of the offending if the
jury were to find a causal connection
That is really your whole case, is it not? I mean,
came after the Court of Appeal’s decision and
paragraph [27] is the essence of your case.
MR KISSANE:
Yes, yes, that is correct, your Honour, and what we submit is that the
Court of Appeal were wrong to conclude that the evidence
could not be used in
the way set out in
complaint is, is it not, that they did not adopt that approach at all, they
adopted an approach by starting with the common
law rather than the
MR KISSANE:
Yes, yes, that
if you stepped through the process that is set out in
with 55 of the
Evidence Act
and moving forward through
MR KISSANE:
Yes, then the reason – what
that means, then, is that the reasoning that the Court of Appeal adopted in the
court below was
wrong, at least in the primary judgment and the judgment of
Justice Priest.
GAGELER CJ:
The only additional point is
section 137, is it not?
MR KISSANE:
section 137 obviously has a role to play in certain circumstances, but, in
our submission, it was not open to the court
to find that the probative value of
the evidence was outweighed by unfair prejudice, but indeed it is difficult to
see really what
the unfair prejudice is in a case of this nature. The Court of
Appeal in finding that the – I think the Court of Appeal did
that the probative value was outweighed by the unfair prejudice.
Court of Appeal’s approach was to, in effect, devalue the probative value
of the evidence and describe it as a weak form
of evidence which, again, is the
common law approach. In describing it as a weak form of evidence the Court of
Appeal then said,
well, in any event, it is outweighed by the unfair prejudice.
The unfair prejudice, in our submission, is not – the Court
said that it was susceptible of being given more weight than it deserves. Well,
we do not accept that that is unfair prejudice.
“unfair prejudice” takes into account, does it not, the directions
that can and should be given, including the
distress direction that was given.
MR KISSANE:
Yes, yes. So, there were two directions that
were of relevance. There was a general direction about indirect and
circumstantial
evidence, and then there was a specific direction in relation to
stress. As I read this Court’s judgment in
really only necessary to give the general direction only in relation to indirect
evidence, and circumstantial evidence and
the use that that evidence can be put
to, but in any event, the Court in this case gave a direction that was discussed
between the
judge and the parties in relation to indirect
Well, there may be circumstances where a
distress direction must be given, but not necessarily in every single
MR KISSANE:
Yes, we would accept that,
your Honour, that there may be circumstances where it needs to be given to
make sure that the jury do
not misuse the evidence. If there is a potential for
the jury to misuse the evidence, then the direction will need to be given,
if there is no potential for misuse, then we would submit that it is only
necessary then to give the general direction as to
the use of independent and
circumstantial evidence.
GAGELER CJ:
And this concept of
intractable neutrality, I think, was in play also in
not? This language that was used in the judgment of the Court of Appeal in that
MR KISSANE:
GAGELER CJ:
MR KISSANE:
It was certainly discussed in
, but I am not sure that the Court really went so far, because
this case was on foot at that stage, so I am not sure that the Court
went really
so far as to, in
, consider intractable neutrality, but we
submit that that is not an
Evidence Act
If one follows
through the admissibility provision from section 55, and in this case
including section 66, of the
Evidence Act
, then it is not a function
of the trial judge to consider whether the evidence is intractably
neutral ‑ ‑ ‑
it is a matter for the jury.
MR KISSANE:
Yes, it is a matter for
the jury, and here, the alternative explanation that was put forward by the
defence counsel was that the
complainant was concerned about her mother finding
out that she had been working as a prostitute in St Kilda. That was put forward
as an alternative explanation.
We submit that that is simply a matter
for the jury to – once the evidence is admissible, it is not a
function of the judge
to weigh up those two competing inferences and decide
whether in some shape or form it is intractably neutral. It is a matter for
jury to consider.
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Kissane, this concept
of intractable neutrality, this is in the context, in this case, where the
distress accompanied a complaint
without, you just had distress but no recount of the offending, you might see
you may not use that language, but you might see some work to
do with the admissibility stage.
MR KISSANE:
would accept that, your Honour. As I understand the way the
Court of Appeal below analysed the situation was they said,
that you have to analyse the distress evidence in the absence of the complaint
evidence. That then raises the question
of intractable neutrality.
of course submit that that is not the correct approach to take, that that is the
common law approach, in effect, of looking and
seeing whether the distress
evidence can stand on its own absent any complaint. Whereas here, we are in the
Evidence Act
situation where the complaint and the distress evidence
are tied together.
Your Honour is right, if there was a
hypothetical circumstance where there was distress, then not so sure that it
would be analysed
in terms of intractable neutrality, but there may well be a
question as to whether the evidence was admissible, because if it is
distress in the absence of anything, it may
BEECH‑JONES
Be probative.
probative value.
MR KISSANE:
‑ ‑ ‑ affect the probability that the events
occurred, which would be the analysis that one would
BEECH‑JONES J:
The other thing I wanted to
ask you was that the majority seemed to treat distress as not evidence of the
representation. My query
is, regardless of whether it accompanies a complaint
or it does not, its value is as an implied representation by the person who
distressed, is it not?
MR KISSANE:
Yes, it is, in the
sense that it is an observation of them and they are representing something. So
yes, that is correct.
BEECH-JONES J:
Distress after the event, I
MR KISSANE:
Yes. The Court of Appeal did
not really analyse it in those terms, I do not think. I think
BEECH-JONES J:
they separated it out in the representation from part of their reasoning. They
said it is not evidence of representation;
it is an observation, but is it not
just an observation of a representation, is my
MR KISSANE:
Well, I think it could be analysed as an
implied representation that some traumatic event has
BEECH-JONES J:
go to section 66(2), it talks about the representations given by the person
who made it.
MR KISSANE:
a person who saw, heard or otherwise perceived the representation being
That would extend, would it not, to the mother’s
evidence of observing the distress of the
complainant?
MR KISSANE:
Yes, yes. So, it is –
and I think again, at common law, it would have been the case that the
complainant would have had
to give evidence of the complaint for it to be
admissible. The
Evidence Act
extends that out so that it is
the – evidence can be given of the representation by the person who
heard the representation,
not just the person who made the
representation.
Well, it has conditions in (2)(a) and
(b) which we have to be met.
MR KISSANE:
Yes, of course,
and that is the threshold question of section 66, which is fresh in the
memory, and on occasions there is a section
that refers to children under the
You are applying that to the
mother’s evidence, not to the distress.
MR KISSANE:
That applies to the mother’s evidence.
I am just not sure how much value you get from characterising distress evidence
as evidence of an implied representation
of distress. If the distress is
involuntary, really, is it not just a piece of evidence from which one might
infer distress, without
needing to consider whether it was a representation of
MR KISSANE:
Yes. That is why we – the
judge gave directions at the time that it was indirect evidence. One could
potentially analyse
it, as Justice Beech‑Jones was asking me, as an
implied representation, but generally speaking it is simply a piece of evidence.
analysed it as
implied representation that the events occurred, and then it becomes admissible
and an exception to the hearsay rule.
MR KISSANE:
In terms of
the complaint?
MR KISSANE:
BEECH‑JONES J:
But that is the distress, because if
it is not that query, how is it admissible?
MR KISSANE:
admissible as an
implied ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
Representation.
MR KISSANE:
‑ ‑ ‑ representation? Well, it would be as a
piece of circumstantial evidence. So, indirect or circumstantial
which is how, I think, it was analysed in
But circumstantial evidence that the events occurred.
Which is then an exception to the
hearsay rule under section 66.
MR KISSANE:
Yes, if you
need to use section 66 for this. I mean, if it is an implied
representation, then it would be admissible under
GAGELER CJ:
I suppose you say it is really no
different from someone being observed to be bleeding from the head after an
MR KISSANE:
Yes. One probably would not analyse that
as an implied representation, one would just analyse that as a piece of
circumstantial
evidence that presumably bolstered their evidence or supported
their evidence that they had been assaulted. So, in the same way,
distress – observed distress – supports the evidence of
the complainant.
In this case, the reason for the distress
is – we say it is open to the jury to conclude that the reason for
the distress is
that she was raped, because that is, when the mother observed
her, in effect what she is saying to the mother. So, we submit that
the complaint and the happening of the event that binds it all together, but as
a piece of supporting evidence, the observation
of the mother that she was
distressed is, we submit, admissible, and the Court of Appeal was wrong to
conclude otherwise.
Now, I did want to say something about the way the
evidence was, and the jury were, directed to use the evidence and the way the
prosecutor referred to the evidence. It is the case that the prosecutor
referred to the evidence as “independent evidence”,
prosecutor submitted about the evidence, as found in the appellant’s
further materials at page 11.
What we submit about that is that the
prosecutor was doing no more than describing that the evidence had come from the
complainant’s
mother and described that as independent evidence that
supports her, which is ‑ of course, “independent
we submit, is referring back to, in effect, the common law, but
what we say the prosecutor was doing there was really doing no more
describing the fact that the mother, having described the complainant as being
upset was – and was an independent source.
Whereas what the
trial judge then did, following the discussion about directions, the trial judge
directed the jury, we submit correctly,
that the evidence was indirect
evidence – that is, circumstantial evidence – that
supports the case. One of the things
the Court of Appeal did in the judgment
below was to describe the evidence as “indirect”,
“independent”,
“circumstantial”, and to use those words
interchangeably.
One of the arguments that is put against us is that the
court was – the prosecutor used the word “independent”
and so the court was required to consider whether the evidence met the test of
independence, which is, we submit, a common law concept.
It is not one that is
set out in section 55 of the
Evidence Act
which refers to direct and
indirect evidence, so we ‑ ‑ ‑
Well, in paragraph 9 of the reasons of President Emerton and
Justices McLeish and Boyce, they say:
We understand the terms . . . to be used interchangeably and
to mean the same as ‘corroborative’, that is, evidence of
alleged that is independent of the complainant and . . . the
accompanying complaint to the mother.
MR KISSANE:
And you take issue with that
MR KISSANE:
Yes. So, that is the common law
I accept that. So, you take issue with
their starting point?
MR KISSANE:
Yes. So, that is their
starting point, that independence was the same as indirect, and we submit that
at common law there was
a requirement, in effect, that distress evidence be
independent of the evidence of the complainant. It was something to be
which is why there were those rules in place that discussed the need
for there to be a temporal connection between the distress and
the happening of
So, that – and so, at common law, the independence
of the evidence was important. What we submit is that when you start off
those terms being interchangeable, then you are, in effect, applying the common
law and not applying the
Evidence Act
, which section 55 of talks
Does this issue
not raise a question about what the jury would have made about the word
“independent”, rather than
what the judges make of the word
“independent”?
MR KISSANE:
Yes. I think that is
right, your Honour. What we submit is that when the jury heard that
address of counsel, they would have
probably just considered: yes, it is
independent in the sense that it comes from the mother, and the mother is not
the complainant.
That seems to be the effect of the
two sentences that are read together, where the prosecutor talks about what is
not independent
evidence and what is independent evidence, at the top of
MR KISSANE:
Yes, and the jury would have had no
concept of independent corroboration, which is the common law concept. So, they
just seen it as an address saying, well, there is the
complainant’s evidence and there is the mother’s evidence, which
independent of the complainant.
They would not have considered it as a
legal term, or they would have just considered it as something that was obvious.
have known that the mother had given evidence in addition to the
complainant, and the mother’s observation was not –
observation of her, not the complainant, and in that sense,
independent.
So, your Honour’s question is correct, but we
submit that a jury, when listening to that, would have just considered that,
yes, it was independent of the complainant, in the sense that it was the
mother’s evidence, but then, the Court of Appeal –
once they put the terms of “indirect”, “independent”,
“circumstantial” together – is using
“independent” in the sense of independent corroboration, which is
the common law concept.
The Court of Appeal then, in
effect – in the judgment of President McLeish and
Justice Boyce – found that the evidence
was not independent, in
effect that ‑ ‑ ‑
Final paragraph, is it?
BEECH‑JONES
Paragraph 33, I think it might be.
It is the last paragraph of
BEECH‑JONES
Paragraph 51.
MR KISSANE:
Paragraph 65, page 96 of the core appeal book, was the one I was
thinking of, where they talk about a:
substantial miscarriage of justice –
because the jury was invited to use AB’s distress as independent
support for her account in circumstances where it was simply
GAGELER CJ:
You link that back to
paragraph 9. That is the sense in which “independence” has
been used throughout the judgment?
MR KISSANE:
Throughout the judgment, as opposed to the ordinary sense that the jury may have
understood, as Justice Gleeson points out,
as just a word that means that
it comes from a different source.
What we submit is that it is all tied
up with the court’s continued use of the common law, which is not a
criticism in the
sense that this Court’s decision in
not come down until after the Court of Appeal’s decision, but
nonetheless they are both in that principal judgment –
if I can call
it that – and the judgment of Justice Priest continued with the
common law analysis.
That is why, because they were continuing with that
common law analysis, the court went down a path of requiring the causal link
between the offending and the distress evidence to be established without the
complaint evidence, which is the second error that
we have referred to in our
We say that that was an error in doing that, in the sense that
it applied the common law. The rationale for that common law rule
hearsay rule, and that rationale, since
applies to complaint evidence admissible under section 66, and we say
therefore it flows on to the evidence of distress.
So, the Court of Appeal were
wrong to insist on – and it is a difficult intellectual exercise to
do, but disaggregating the
complaint evidence from the distress evidence when it
was really evidence that came together from the mother.
We have already
discussed intractable neutrality. I am not sure I need to take that point much
further. So, what that really leaves
is the issue of section 137. I think
your Honour the Chief Justice jumped to that pretty quickly when I got
to my feet, but in our
submission, there is no basis for the evidence to be
excluded under section 137 once it is given its proper weight, which is as
piece of indirect or circumstantial evidence that supports the
complainant’s evidence and can be used in those two ways that
are set out
in that paragraph. I took the Court to, in
primary judgment concluded that the:
evidence of distress is susceptible to being given more weight than it
BEECH-JONES J:
So, you are reading from
what paragraph when you say that?
MR KISSANE:
BEECH-JONES J:
What paragraph of the primary judgment are
you reading from when you say that?
MR KISSANE:
So, in terms of
the – it is in paragraph 30, page 88, I
BEECH‑JONES J:
Yes, I see.
Where the Court of Appeal says that:
distress as independent evidence would be slight, and would be outweighed by
the danger of unfair prejudice, thereby engaging s 137
BEECH-JONES J:
That was not really the ground of appeal, was
MR KISSANE:
No, the ground of appeal – there was
no focus on 137.
BEECH-JONES J:
It was not asked for a
trial either, was it?
MR KISSANE:
No. So, the ground of appeal
was that the distress evidence – I think, in fairness to my learned
friends, the distress evidence
was admissible as context but could not be used
as indirect evidence that supported, and that was the ground of appeal. In
to paragraph 30, your Honour, paragraph 58
of – which is under the heading:
Warning as to weight?
which was the evidence should be given little weight issue which was
really dealt with in
You say that
stands in stark contrast to paragraph [28] of
MR KISSANE:
Yes, which says that –
paragraph [28] says it is quintessentially a matter for the jury court,
at 58 discusses the risk that
a jury may place “inordinate
weight” on the distress. In our submission, that is just simply not
something that would
arise in these circumstances. The jury were well able,
with proper directions, to give the evidence the weight that they considered
deserved, and our submission is it is not susceptible of being given more weight
than it deserves. So, paragraph 58 is where
that phrase comes
Your Honour, I think that it is now, in addition to that,
suggested against me that section – that the danger of unfair
arises because the jury could reason backwards from the evidence, but
that is exactly the way the evidence is used. It is not direct
evidence, it is
indirect evidence, that supports. In addition, as I understand it, it is
suggested that the unfair prejudice arises
because of an – because
the jury may overestimate the cause of the distress and reject other possible
Well, at the end of day we submit that is a matter for the jury
and does not rise to the level of unfair prejudice, but it is the
case that it
was not a feature of the discussion in the court. The court below –
what the – the way I think it comes
up in the court below is the
court says: well, it cannot be used for this purpose, but if we are wrong about
that, then section
137 comes into play.
BEECH-JONES J:
the foundation that it is of little weight is the same foundation that was said
to warrant the warning.
MR KISSANE:
Yes, yes. Well, that
is the genesis of this whole issue. As your Honour knows from
, there is the warning that the – it was, at common
law, given to a jury that distress evidence carried little weight, but it
assertion of the court below. What we submit is that it was a matter for the
jury as to the weight that should be given to
the evidence. So, unless there is
anything further there ‑ ‑ ‑
Mr Kissane, it just goes to the foundations or principles
recognised by
. Would the principle operate in exactly the same
way and favour an accused person if an accused person wished to lead to evidence
of their own distress, particularly in circumstances where they are accused of
the commission of the crime, such as in a case like
MR KISSANE:
I do not see any reason
why – I mean, an accused would presumably give evidence and say:
this is what happened, and in the
context of that, I was upset or distressed and
it was observed by other people, I would have thought that would be admissible,
the observations of the others would be admissible to support the evidence
of the accused.
MR KISSANE:
I think it would come down to the accused
would have to give that evidence, and then if the accused gave evidence of being
distressed,
then others could presumably come along and support that. So, I do
not see why it would be restricted to a complainant. I also
do not see why, as
a matter of principle when one looks at the scheme of the
Evidence Act
that it is particularly restricted to sexual offences, either.
representation sections in the
Evidence Act
are not prescribed as only
applying to complainants in sexual offences. If somebody is assaulted, for
example, and they then make
a complaint and they are observed to be distressed,
then if there is an issue as to whether they were assaulted then that evidence
would be admissible, we would submit.
Unless the Court has any further
questions, they are the submissions of the appellant.
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, thank you Mr Kissane. Mr Kassimatis.
KASSIMATIS:
I wonder whether the Court may grant me a very brief
break – a short break.
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, certainly.
How long do you wish?
MR KASSIMATIS:
GAGELER CJ:
Five minutes?
MR KASSIMATIS:
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, certainly. The Court will adjourn for
five minutes.
AT 10.37 AM SHORT
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 10.44
MR KISSANE:
Your Honour, could I just
say one further thing before my learned friend addresses the
GAGELER CJ:
MR KISSANE:
relation to the discussion that was had between Justice Beech‑Jones,
I think Justice Gleeson and the learned Chief
Justice, in relation to
whether it was an implied assertion – whether the distress was an
implied assertion – when one
looks at section 59 of the
Evidence Act
, the hearsay rule refers to:
the existence of a fact that it can reasonably be supposed that the person
intended to assert by the representation.
What we in fact submit is that
evidence is – a person who is distressed is not intending to assert
anything. It is the observation
of distress, in the same way as an observation
of a bruise is relevant, that makes the evidence admissible. So, in this case,
complainant ‑ ‑ ‑
It might in some cases and might not in others. So, it might be very
difficult to dissemble the evidence that is given of a very
distressing account
that is given in terms that enunciate the distress and the evidence of the
distress, but there may be other circumstances
such as autonomic bodily
responses that are not intended but that are not part of the
representation.
MR KISSANE:
Yes, and what we would submit is
that the distress in this circumstance is not necessarily admissible only
because of some sort
of implied representation but because it is something that
is observed that is happening to the complainant and observed by the mother
the context of – admittedly in the context of what she says, but she
is not intending to assert that she is distressed.
She is asserting that she
has been raped, but it is not – it is the observation of the mother,
we submit, that is admissible.
BEECH‑JONES J:
regardless of a case where there is no statement and any other basis, the
observations of the mother here – of the distress
while recounting
the events – is part of that representation.
BEECH‑JONES J:
By the way, when the
victim – when that occurred, this victim was under the age
of 18, is that right?
MR KISSANE:
BEECH‑JONES J:
So, that would – we do not
have to worry about fresh in the memory, it satisfies 66(2)(b)(ii).
Yes, it does.
BEECH‑JONES J:
MR KISSANE:
Yes, your Honour. Yes, thank
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, thank you.
Mr Kassimatis.
MR KASSIMATIS:
If the Court pleases. It may
be accurate to describe the distress in this case as occurring in the context of
the complaint to the
mother. It is less accurate, in our respectful submission,
to say that the distress occurred when the complaint occurred or that
accompanied the complaint.
The evidence, and the entirety of the
evidence, was only that when the mother arrived at the hospital, before she had
spoken to her
daughter, to AB, or the complainant, she observed her to be in
distress. She gave no evidence about the complainant’s state
at the time
she made the complaint, and the complainant gave no evidence of her own state
when speaking to her mother and making
the complaint.
important for no more or less than the discussion my learned friend has had with
the Court about whether it was part and
parcel of the complaint, or whether it
was more like a bruise, and that informed the Court of Appeal’s decision
in the court
below because it was in that context that the prosecutor relied
upon the evidence. I will say something shortly about whether the
construction
given by my learned friends to the prosecutor’s submissions can be
sustained, but that was the context in which
their Honours dealt with it in
the court below.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Kassimatis, I am
just looking at the appellant’s book of further materials. At
page 9, line 4, the mother says that her
daughter was:
very very distressed.
MR KASSIMATIS:
BEECH‑JONES J:
Did you have any conversation with –
at that time?
Is that not the same time?
MR KASSIMATIS:
Well, we would say that is once she then entered the room and spoke to
Can I just make sure that is right.
Lines 19 to 26, the mother is asked again:
A moment ago you just said that when you observed –
she was, what was your word –
And she said:
I think I said distressed.
What was it about her presentation that led you to say that she was
distressed?---Well she was just very very upset . . .
yelling or screaming . . . I knew she was very very
MR KASSIMATIS:
Yes, but that harks back to what she saw
when she arrived.
That is a very confined reading of
the evidence on that page, I have to say.
MR KASSIMATIS:
if the Court is against us, that is the reading we advance to the
BEECH‑JONES J:
It was not the trial judge’s
reading – the address is at page 11, the Crown said the:
mother’s observation of the distress . . . was
experiencing at the time –
That is, at the time of the
MR KASSIMATIS:
With respect, it is not a statute.
“At the time” means at the time she arrived at the hospital and
spoke to her daughter.
“At the time” has to be seen in the light of
what the witness said earlier, which was: I arrived and observed her
distressed.
In any event – now, my learned friend took the Court to
that same page 11 of the appellant’s further materials.
one sees when one reads that page is the following, in our respectful
submission. It said that no more was said by the prosecutor
then that the
evidence of distress was independent in the sense that it came from the mother
as opposed to the complainant herself.
At lines 1 to 8, the learned
prosecutor distinguished that evidence from complaint evidence, where the source
of the evidence was
the complaint, but if “independent” meant what
our learned friends have said it means, that would have fallen into the
What is the
MR KASSIMATIS:
I beg your pardon,
your Honour?
What is the “that
would have fallen into the same category”? I just did not understand the
submission, Mr Kassimatis,
I am sorry.
KASSIMATIS:
That complaint evidence also would have been
independent ‑ ‑ ‑
KASSIMATIS:
‑ ‑ ‑ because
it came from a third party. At lines 8 to 15, there is a fairly
accurate summary of the common
law position as it applied to distress and its
use as independent evidence. Then, were they any doubt about it, at
lines 24 to 29,
the learned prosecutor gives another example of independent
support. Namely, the bruise that was observed on the complainant’s
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Kassimatis, just so I
understand, why are we looking at the address of the prosecutor in this
MR KASSIMATIS:
Because our learned friend has
advanced to the Court the submission that in addressing the jury to treat the
evidence as independent,
all the prosecutor was doing was using it, or likening
it to indirect or circumstantial evidence.
submission is responsive to your complaints about the prosecutor’s
address, but your complaints about the prosecutor’s
address were part of
the ground of appeal before the Court of Appeal.
MR KASSIMATIS:
No, it was. We submitted to the Court of Appeal expressly that the prosecutor
had invited the jury to treat the evidence as independent,
and that it was not
admissible for that purpose.
GAGELER CJ:
Independent in a common
MR KASSIMATIS:
Yes, and in fact, in the court
below ‑ ‑ ‑
complaint is that the trial judge failed to
correct ‑ ‑ ‑
MR KASSIMATIS:
that submission by the
prosecutor, not the prosecutor’s submission by itself.
KASSIMATIS:
No, that is correct. In the court below, the submission that
is advanced here was not relied upon. In the court below, the
prosecutor’s
treatment of the evidence as independent was
GAGELER CJ:
And you say this explains the language
used in the Court of Appeal.
MR KASSIMATIS:
Indeed. Now, we
candidly invited the court below to treat the references to independent
evidence, circumstantial evidence and indirect
evidence as interchangeable,
because that was the law at the time. Indeed, that was the premise upon which
the model direction which
was given was drafted. In treating the notions of
independence, indirect evidence and circumstantial evidence as interchangeable,
the Court of Appeal was doing not more than what it had done and what it had to
date understood the law to be.
So, when assessing whether there has been
a substantial miscarriage of justice, the court had to determine whether,
against that
background, the jury may have understood whether there was a real
risk that the jury may have understood the prosecutor’s reference
independent evidence, and the judge’s failure to correct that, as a form
of corroboration. In our respectful submission,
the court did not err in
finding that it was in fact the case.
BEECH‑JONES J:
where did they find – which finding of the Court of Appeal are you
talking about? Because I thought their finding was
it could not be used. Are
you saying in finding that it could not be used as independent evidence, that is
implicitly saying, one,
the prosecutor did submit that, two, the trial judge
erred in not correcting that?
MR KASSIMATIS:
your Honour. If there was a basis to distinguish the two, there might not
necessarily have been a finding that there was
a substantial miscarriage. In
, this Court concluded that questions of relevance and
permissible use should no longer be analysed within the prism of notions such
independent support and corroboration. It found that to do so is a
“recipe for confusion”.
In our respectful submission, that
same recipe relevantly pervaded the respondent’s trial. We take it that
trials should no
longer feature invitations to treat evidence of a
complainant’s distress as independent evidence when in fact, with respect,
that is what occurred, again, in the respondent’s trial.
the court below also observed that the treatment of a complainant’s
distress as independent evidence was, unless certain
strictures were adhered to,
fraught and often unnecessary. But – and I am harping on about it, I
know – the court was
faced with having to address the implications of
the manner in which the jury was addressed by the prosecutor and then directed
the trial judge.
So, just so I understand that,
Mr Kassimatis, I understand your submission about the prosecutor’s
address and indirect –
was it put below and is it put now that even
if that is right, that is not corrected by both the indirect evidence and the
MR KASSIMATIS:
And why is that?
MR KASSIMATIS:
Because they are terms of art, effectively.
the terms of art? The word
“independent”?
MR KASSIMATIS:
No, the notions
of indirect and circumstantial evidence.
submission really comes down to is that, in light of the prosecutor’s
submissions using the word “independent”,
the direction by the trial
judge that the mother’s observation of the distress that [AB] was
experiencing at the time is independent
evidence is a direction that caused a
substantial miscarriage of justice.
MR KASSIMATIS:
Almost – the address by the prosecutor, and then the elaboration of
the notion of independence so as to make clear that it
was something other than
refers to as circumstantial evidence, and then the
judge’s direction.
But the jury will not have
MR KASSIMATIS:
No, I understand
that, but they were told by the prosecutor that, in no uncertain terms, this is
what independent means. It is
not like complaint evidence that is treated for
its consistency, it is more like a bruise; it is to be treated as corroboration.
Then the judge’s failure to correct that, in our respectful submission,
amounted to a substantial miscarriage.
GAGELER CJ:
elaborate that, where is the substantial miscarriage of justice assuming the
evidence to be admissible in accordance with
for the reasons
MR KASSIMATIS:
understand it, with respect, the reasons in
do not go so far as
to say that there is no difference between indirect or circumstantial evidence
and what the common law understood
“independent support” to
represent. Even after
, if there was a risk – a real
risk – that the jury treated it as corroboration, then in our
submission that is the source
of the miscarriage.
As distinct from just another piece of evidence to be
weighed – is that the point?
MR KASSIMATIS:
Yes, precisely.
GAGELER CJ:
Because treating it as
corroboration gives it a greater weight, you say, than just reading it as
another sort of piece of evidence.
Is that it?
KASSIMATIS:
It gives it a separate probative
GAGELER CJ:
KASSIMATIS:
It is like being able to call evidence from someone
who might have seen the event.
hard to see that the jury could have understood the trial judge’s
direction in that way, but if the trial judge’s
direction that the
mother’s observation is independent evidence is plainly not a suggestion
that the mother was present at
the occurrence of the events or that the mother
is providing some independent support of what occurred at the events, no one
understand it in those terms. It has to be read in light of what was said
immediately beforehand, which is that it is independent
of things that the
complainant had said.
MR KASSIMATIS:
If that were
true, that would have to have been equality true of complaint
KASSIMATIS:
And the prosecution distinguished it from complaint
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Kassimatis, the
trial judge never used the phrase “independent evidence” at
MR KASSIMATIS:
No, she did
BEECH‑JONES J:
What her Honour said
the prosecution invites you to use this as indirect evidence, that is
circumstantial evidence that supports its case that –
did not consent.
MR KASSIMATIS:
The prosecutor did
not do that, though.
BEECH‑JONES J:
just that statement is completely in accordance with
, is it not
MR KASSIMATIS:
It is factually wrong
BEECH‑JONES J:
You say it is factually
wrong because you say the prosecution went beyond that.
KASSIMATIS:
No, I say the prosecutor invited the jury to treat
it as independent support.
BEECH‑JONES J:
just asking you, though, in terms of the direction of law, that is consistent
, is it not?
MR KASSIMATIS:
The direction
that follows is consistent with
. The manner in which
her Honour commences the direction is to attribute to the prosecutor the
submission that he invited them to
use it as indirect. He did not. He invited
them to use it as independent, in a very specific
BEECH‑JONES J:
One thing the prosecutor invited the
jury was to say:
you can use your common experience that recounting a stressful experience is
accompanied by outward signs of distress.
There is nothing wrong with
that, is there?
MR KASSIMATIS:
No, but there is something wrong
in likening distress which amounts to independent evidence as something
different from complaint
GAGELER CJ:
So, is that your
essential point?
MR KASSIMATIS:
GAGELER CJ:
So, it is not really about admissibility at all. It is about the conduct of the
prosecutor.
MR KASSIMATIS:
Yes. We did not ask to come
GAGELER CJ:
No, I understand.
BEECH‑JONES
You are always welcome.
MR KASSIMATIS:
your Honour.
It is a bit more than the conduct of
the prosecutor, though, is it not? Your complaint is it is the conduct of the
not corrected by the trial judge.
MR KASSIMATIS:
your Honour.
You would have to have both
MR KASSIMATIS:
Yes, we do.
you say it is an irregularity, or an error of law?
MR KASSIMATIS:
It is an irregularity. Finally, just on the question of relevance and
intractable neutrality, in our respectful submission, there
remains scope,
, for a trial judge – and the answer to this might
be, as your Honour Justice Edelman put to my friend, that it will
on the case, but there must be room for a trial judge, as gatekeeper, to
scrutinise the hypotheses which might be available in assessing
whether evidence
is relevantly admissible.
Deciding that, if all of them are no more than
equally open, to use the phrase “intractably neutral”, then
is not met. We accept readily that in doing so, the judge has
to allow for the advantages of the jury in assessing the evidence,
but we do not
accept that the path taken by the court below, in determining whether the
relevant evidence was admissible,
was in that respect erroneous. That is,
by assessing one hypothesis against another.
Yes, those are our
submissions.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Kassimatis.
Mr Kissane.
MR KISSANE:
Yes, thank you, your Honour.
To the extent that the grounds have shifted, of course, there is no notice of
contention in relation
to the actions of the prosecutor that my learned friend
says were, in some shape or form, wrong to describe the evidence as independent.
In any event, can I just add
GAGELER CJ:
you embarrassed by that or are you able to meet it on its merits?
No, I am not embarrassed in that sense. We did not come here to
fight that point, your Honour, in one sense. In any event, can
the picture by – I think it is important to understand that, yes, the
prosecutor said the evidence was independent
evidence in his final address, but
when it came to the jury directions discussion – and this is set out
at page 135 of the
core appeal book, paragraph 212 of the judgment of
the court below:
The prosecutor raised the topic of distress –
Her Honour at that stage indicates that what she is intending to do
is to give a direction that they can use distress evidence as
indirect evidence.
In quotes, her Honour says:
I’ll remind the jury of what it was.
are you reading from? I am sorry.
MR KISSANE:
paragraph 212 of the judgment in the court below. It is the judgment of
Justice Niall.
So, what are we drawing from this?
MR KISSANE:
submitting ‑ ‑ ‑
Is your point that there was a discussion, and there was no – that
this matter that has been raised by the respondent was
not raised at this
MR KISSANE:
Yes, it was not raised at the time, but what
her Honour said she was going to do was to direct the jury that the use of
the evidence
was as indirect evidence, and so that was the way it
was – leaving aside the address of the prosecutor, that was the way
Honour proposed to direct the jury about it, which is, in our
submission, consistent – as I think Justice Beech‑Jones
pointed out to my learned friend – with the direction that she gave
and consistent with the judgment of this Court in
there is no dissent from either the prosecutor or the defence that that is the
appropriate direction to give. So, it is not
the case that the judge was
required to, in our submission, correct some sort of submission that the
evidence had some corroborative
power over and above its use as supportive
Well, it is really the failure to seek a
redirection. You say, following the interchange with the trial judge saying
am going to direct in terms of indirect or circumstantial
evidence – and then there is a direction which uses the word
“independent”,
and there is no suggestion afterwards that there
needs to be a redirection to change the word “independent” to
“circumstantial”.
MR KISSANE:
No, and the
direction that the evidence could be used as indirect evidence was correct and
that this discussion comes, as I understand
it, after the addresses
of – it might have been before, but in any event, there is
is before, because at the bottom of the defence is:
I will be going to the jury on the basis that there were other reasons for
MR KISSANE:
Yes, that is right. I think
your Honour is right about that. So, it is before, but in any event there
is no request to redirect
once the prosecutor uses the word
“independent”, which, in our submission, indicates that nobody
thought there was anything
wrong with the way it was put at the time and that it
is capable of having not a legal meaning but a meaning that members of the
public would understand it as just separate from the
complainant.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, before we get to this idea of an
irregularity, you are saying, look, when you look at how this unfolded, it is
not so much a question
direction. It is that it was understood that what the trial judge was directing
was reflecting what was understood by the prosecutor’s submission. Is
that where we get to?
MR KISSANE:
Well, we do not get to an
irregularity, is what we submit, your honour,
because ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Because they would not take “independent” in the way your
opponent contends it means.
MR KISSANE:
because ‑ ‑ ‑
possibly reinforced by what was the next sentence and what her Honour then
says immediately after identifying how –
proposes to use it as
indirect evidence and says:
if there are any arguments you make . . . [trial counsel for
the accused], I’ll put them in as well.
MR KISSANE:
Yes, but then she does not go to the suggestion of
independent. She does not use the word “independent” in her charge
to the jury, she just refers to it in the way that she indicated she was going
to do as indirect evidence, but of course she adds
in the alternative
explanation which was fleshed out in the final address of defence
I suppose that is not quite right, is it,
because this discussion is before the summing up? So, we go: have this
discussion, we
then have the prosecutor’s address and the defence counsel
address – so, it is at that point there would have to be a
say: I need it fixed.
MR KISSANE:
The prosecutor went too far
and should not have referred to it as independent evidence, but the fact that
there was none tends
to indicate that it was just understood as an ordinary
usage of the word “independent”, as opposed to adding some
value to it as some sort of corroboration over and above some sort of
supportive evidence. I should add to it, we do not –
what we submit
is that the evidence of distress was supportive.
We do not accept that,
Evidence Act
, corroboration has some additional aspect to it.
In the end, we are not embarrassed. We are aware of the point that they are
but what we submit is that it is not a point, when one looks at the
trial as a whole, that has any merit. In any event, the Court
of Appeal below
was not really dealing with an error of description by the prosecutor, but was
dealing with the admissibility
GAGELER CJ:
Well, the actual ground of appeal that the joint judgment is expressed to
address is a bit ambiguous. They seem to deal with it
as a point of
admissibility, but one can interpret it on its face in the way that has been put
to us by Mr Kassimatis, I think.
MR KISSANE:
actually do not recall whether in the court below I addressed the issue of
independence, but I do know that Justice Priest,
who has set out the
arguments that I made in the comprehensive fashion that he usually does, does
not refer to me referring to an
argument about the prosecutor’s reference
to independent evidence in his final address.
your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
Yes. Thank you, Mr Kissane.
The Court will consider its decision in this matter and will adjourn until
Tuesday, 4 November.
AT 11.17 AM THE MATTER WAS
RTF format (1.37 MB)
Signed PDF/A format