Hobart Hebrew Congregation v Scully [2000] HREOCA 38 (21 September 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION ACT 1975
No. H97/109
HOBART HEBREW CONGREGATION and JEREMY JONES (in his capacity as Executive
Vice-President of the Executive Council of Australian Jewry)
Complainants
OLGA SCULLY
Inquiry Commissioner: Mr Anthony Cavanough QC
Date of decision: 21 September 2000
The Commission:
(a) finds that the complaint has been substantiated;
(b) declares that the respondent, Mrs Olga Scully, by distributing
anti-Semitic literature in letterboxes in Launceston, Tasmania,
and by selling
or offering to sell such literature at a public market in Launceston, has
engaged in conduct rendered unlawful by
of the RDA;
(c) declares that the respondent, Mrs Olga Scully, should not repeat or
continue such unlawful conduct;
declares that the respondent, Mrs Olga Scully, should apologise
for her unlawful conduct by writing to the complainants a letter of
the following terms:
“Mr. Jeremy Jones
Executive Vice President
Executive Council of Australian Jewry
146 Darlinghurst Road
DARLINGHURST NSW 2010
I, Mrs Olga Scully, do hereby unreservedly apologise to you and to the Hobart
Hebrew Congregation for my conduct in distributing anti-Semitic
literature in
letterboxes in Launceston, Tasmania, and by selling or offering to sell such
literature at a public market in Launceston
in contravention of the
Discrimination Act
DATED this 21st day of September 2000
ANTHONY CAVANOUGH QC
Inquiry Commissioner
I certify that this and the preceding one (1) page is a true copy of the
Decision of Mr Anthony Cavanough QC, Inquiry Commissioner.
Hearing Solictor:
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION ACT 1975
No. H97/109
HOBART HEBREW CONGREGATION and JEREMY JONES (in his capacity as Executive
Vice-President of the Executive Council of Australian Jewry)
Complainants
OLGA SCULLY
REASONS FOR
DECISION OF
MR ANTHONY CAVANOUGH QC
COMMISSIONER
Hearing: Launceston, Tasmania
Date of hearing: 16 November 1998
Date of receipt of
written submissions: Complainants: 28 January 1999
Respondent: 12 April 1999
Date of decision: 21 September 2000
Appearances: Complainants: Mr Stephen Rothman SC instructed by Geoffrey
Edwards & Co, Solicitors
Respondent: In person
This inquiry arises out of a complaint to the Race
Discrimination Commissioner lodged by Mr Jeremy Jones on behalf of the Executive
Council of Australian Jewry with the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission (“the Commission”) on 7 August 1996
Discrimination Act
(Cth) (“the RDA”). In the complaint, Mr
Jones alleged that the respondent, Mrs Olga Scully, had distributed material
letterboxes in Launceston, Tasmania, that contained offensive material based on
racial hatred, in particular anti-Semitic literature,
and had sold or offered to
sell such material at a public market in Hart Street, Launceston. Attached to
the complaint were examples
of this material which included references to Jews
as “leeches” who were involved in “destroying white
and using “predatory tactics”, together with an
article in the “Launceston Daily Examiner” of 22 May 1996
“Woman admits sending hate mail” in which Mrs Scully is identified
as having placed anti-Semitic material in
mailboxes. The complaint alleged that
the material had caused a great deal of distress to Jewish and other recipients
on her own admission, Mrs Scully was involved in a campaign of
disseminating anti–Jewish propaganda. It was put that the
constituted a public act and was in breach of
In a written response submitted on her behalf by a solicitor, Mrs Scully
admitted placing much of the material in the letter boxes
but claimed that the
material, in most part, was not reasonably likely to offend and thus did not
fall within
She further claimed that even if the material were
offensive, the exemption under
would apply because she had a relevant
genuine belief.
The Race Discrimination Commissioner decided that the nature of the complaint
was such that it should be referred to the Commission
for inquiry under s.24E of
The matter was referred accordingly by the Race Discrimination Commissioner
to the Commission on 23 March 1997. A report, including
annexures of 52 pages,
accompanied the referral.
1.2 The Initial Inquiry
The matter first came before Inquiry
Commissioner the Hon Robert Nettlefold for inquiry. Commissioner Nettlefold
determined that
the complainant, named as the Executive Council of Australian
Jewry (“the Council”), did not have standing to bring the
under s.22(1) of the RDA. On 21 October 1997 he dismissed the complaint
accordingly under s.25X of the RDA on the basis
that it was misconceived.
Commissioner Nettlefold’s decision was challenged by the Council and Mr
Jones in the Federal Court before Wilcox J. His Honour
upheld the challenge.
On 13 February 1998 his Honour ordered that the decision to dismiss the
complaint be set aside and that the
Commission hear and determine the complaint
according to law:
Executive Council of Australian Jewry and Jeremy Jones v
Olga Scully
(1998) 79 FCR 537.
His Honour agreed with Commissioner
Nettlefold that because the Council itself, being an unincorporated body, was
not a “person”
in the eye of the law, it was incapable of being a
“person aggrieved” within the meaning of s.22(1) of the RDA and
was not a competent complainant (at 548C). However, this did not mean
that the complaint was a nullity. It was necessary to go
behind the name and
consider whether the juristic persons who constituted the incorporated
association were “persons aggrieved”
by the allegedly unlawful act.
If they were, the complaint was competent because in law, though not in name, it
was made by them.
One of the members of the Council was the Hobart Hebrew Congregation, an
incorporated body which represented the Jewish community
throughout Tasmania,
including in the Launceston District. Wilcox J said that if there was truth in
the allegations made against
Mrs Scully, her actions must have had a special
impact on members of the Launceston Jewish community (at 548G). His Honour had
described the material as “stridently anti-Semitic” (at
539D). His Honour considered that there was no reason to doubt
that the Hobart
Hebrew Congregation was a “person aggrieved” by the alleged acts (at
549A). His Honour concluded :
“If the Hobart Hebrew Congregation could make a competent complaint
under s.22(1)(a) of the Act in its own name, it seems to
me the Council (through
its members) also may do so. As the Hobart Hebrew Congregation is a constituent
of the Council, the Council
represents at the national level those members of
the Launceston Jewish Community who were specially affected by Ms Scully’s
actions. Of course, the Council is not itself a “person”, it is an
agglomeration of “persons”, so any complaint
is legally the
complaint of its members. In their representative role, if not on an individual
basis, those persons were “persons
aggrieved” by the alleged
unlawful acts. In my opinion, the case falls within par (b) of s.22(1) of the
Wilcox J then turned to Mr Jones’ claim to standing. His Honour held
that Mr Jones was a “person aggrieved” because
he was the Executive
Officer of the national Jewish organization, an organization that represented
the interests of Jews throughout
the country, including in the Launceston area.
Hence the complaint was competently made by him under s.22(1)(a).
Pursuant to the orders of Wilcox J, the complaint was remitted to the
Commission for hearing and determination. It was allocated
to me as Inquiry
Commissioner. It went through a number of interlocutory steps before it came on
for hearing.
1.3 The Present Inquiry
1.3.1 Identification of the complainant(s)
One of the matters which
arose during the interlocutory proceedings was the need to identify the
complainants correctly. The complainants’
solicitors asserted that there
were now five complainants, as follows:
“Mr Jeremy Jones, Executive Vice President of the [Council]
The Hobart Hebrew Congregation
Mr Tom Schlesinger, Tasmanian Vice President of the [Council]
Mr George Goldsteen of Launceston
Dr Felix Goldschmied of Launceston
All care of the [Council], 146 Darlinghurst Road, Darlinghurst, NSW,
It is clear from the judgment of Wilcox J that the Hobart Hebrew Congregation
and Mr Jeremy Jones (in his capacity as Executive Vice
President of the Council)
are appropriately viewed as complainants. The other individuals named by the
solicitors are members of
the Jewish community living in Tasmania. Two live in
Launceston itself. The other, Mr Schlesinger, is the Tasmanian Vice President
of the Council. They may well be persons whose interests fall to be represented
generally by the Hobart Hebrew Congregation. But
I do not think that Wilcox J
intended to convey that all or any such individuals should be regarded as
existing complainants in this
proceeding on that account.
The RDA does not expressly confer any power on the Commission to permit an
amendment of a complaint, other than a representative complaint
(see s.25N), or
to add a complainant or a respondent as distinct from a third party (see s.25D).
On the other hand, the Full Court
of the Federal Court has held, obiter, in
relation to a complaint under the
Sex Discrimination Act
provisions of which are relevantly comparable), that the Commission has power to
allow the amendment of complaints and
to add and remove complainants upon
application by a duly authorized person :
Abbott Australasia Pty Ltd v HREOC
[1999] FCA 427
(1999) 88 FCR 132
No explicit application for leave to amend the complaint or to add the named
individuals as complainants was made in the present case.
Moreover, with
respect, I have some doubt as to whether the Commission truly does have power to
allow complaints to be amended or
to add complainants in an RDA proceeding
(other than a representative proceeding) after the complaint has been lodged,
particularly
after the matter has been referred to the Commission by the Race
Discrimination Commissioner pursuant to s.24E of the RDA. To do
so would seem
to involve some tension with the provisions of Division 2 of
which confer discretionary powers on the Race Discrimination
Commissioner, as distinct from the Commission, not to inquire into a
in certain circumstances and which specify particular avenues for the review of
decisions made by the Race Discrimination
Commissioner in the exercise of such
In any event, in the present case the recognition or joinder of the three
individuals as complainants would be of little or no moment
additional or special relief is sought on their behalf. Even if I had power to
add them as complainants and an application
to do so were made, I would be
inclined to refuse the application at this stage, as a matter of discretion. In
all the circumstances,
I have concluded that the complainants should be
identified as the Hobart Hebrew Congregation and Mr Jeremy Jones (in his
abovementioned
capacity) only. These reasons and the accompanying determination
have been headed accordingly.
1.3.2 Pre-hearing procedures
It is necessary that I outline some of
the pre-hearing steps that took place in this matter.
Before the referral, Mrs Scully had been represented from time to time by E J
Wall and Associates, Barristers and Solicitors, of Western
Australia. Letters
from that firm setting out Mrs Scully’s response to the complaint are
included in the referral report.
However, by the time the matter reached me,
Mrs Scully was apparently no longer being legally represented.
The first directions hearing before me took place by telephone on 24 April
1998. I was satisfied that Mrs Scully had had due notice
of it. However, she
did not take part. Mr Rothman SC appeared for the complainants, as he has done
throughout this matter. I appointed
Ms Susan Roberts, a senior legal officer of
the Commission, as counsel assisting the Commission pursuant to s.25K of the
meant that both parties were automatically entitled to be legally
represented if they chose.
I directed that the complainants file and serve particulars and witness
statements by 11 May 1998 and that the respondent do likewise
by 1 June 1998.
The hearing was fixed for 22-24 June 1998 in Launceston. Mrs Scully was
notified in writing of the directions.
On or about 11 May 1998, after the complainants had provided their
particulars and witness statements, Mrs Scully made contact with
the Commission
and commenced to participate in the proceedings. However, she did not file any
material by 1 June 1998. She asked
for more time. She also sought an
adjournment of the hearing. At a telephone directions hearing on 9 June 1998 I
granted these
requests. The hearing was re-scheduled for 24-28 August 1998.
On or about 2 July 1998 Mrs Scully filed extensive documentation, including
statements from five proposed witnesses as well as herself
together with
attachments. Much of it was, like the material initially complained of,
“stridently anti-Semitic” (to
use the phrase of Wilcox J). Mrs
Scully made it clear that she wanted to demonstrate that the anti-Semitic
statements contained
in her leaflets and articles, or most of them, were true.
At the next telephone directions hearing on 22 July 1998, Mr Rothman
foreshadowed evidentiary objections to much of Mrs Scully’s
material. He
said that his clients would be seeking advance rulings from me, prior to the
hearing, that the material in question
not be received in evidence. He said
that, depending on my response, the complainants would have to consider putting
on rebuttal
evidence. It seemed to me that this matter could not be dealt with
satisfactorily by telephone. It was subsequently decided by
me that the hearing
dates be vacated and that a portion of the allocated time be used for a
preliminary hearing in person in Launceston.
Such a preliminary hearing did take place on 27 August 1998. Mr Rothman
appeared for the complainants. Mrs Scully appeared for herself.
In the course
of extended discussions, principally with Mr Rothman, I indicated provisionally
that I was not inclined to rule, at
that stage, that any of Mrs Scully’s
material should be rejected in advance as irrelevant (or otherwise).
Ultimately, Mr Rothman did not press the submission that Mrs Scully’s
material should be rejected in advance. I gave the parties
further time to file
and serve further proposed evidentiary material as they may be advised. A
further telephone directions hearing
was fixed for 17 September 1998 and the
final hearing was fixed for 16-20 November 1998. These dates were selected
partly in order
to accommodate Mrs Scully’s request for sufficient time to
arrange for the attendance of her witnesses.
Additional directions for the filing and service of material were given at
the telephone directions hearing on 17 September 1998.
Both parties did
thereafter file and serve further proposed evidentiary material. Such material
was continuing to be received by
the Commission from or on behalf of Mrs Scully
as late as 11 November 1998.
1.3.3 The hearing
This matter duly came on for hearing on 16
November 1998. Mr Rothman announced his appearance for the complainants. Mrs
Scully stated
that she was appearing for herself and that she had with her an
“assistant”, a Dr Frederick Toben. (A witness statement
of Dr Toben
had previously been filed on behalf of Mrs Scully). Unfortunately, counsel
assisting had become ill just prior to the
hearing and could not attend.
After a short preliminary matter was dealt with, I called on Mr Rothman to
open the complainants’ case. But Mrs Scully interrupted
announcement that came as a surprise to me. The transcript records the
following exchange:
“Mrs Scully:
Before the case is opened, I’d like to
announce that I had intended to bring five witnesses who have prepared a lot of
and figures to support the accuracy of the historical leaflets that I
distribute, but as I have not been given the assurance that
truth is a defence
in this case I have not brought my witnesses here to this Commission hearing. I
claim that widespread ignorance
of the truth can be very deeply offensive to
Russian and German people because the blame for criminal acts falls on the
people instead of on the guilty. My main cause is to defend the
Russian people from the accusation that communism was inflicted
by them onto
their country, and I defend the German people against allegations – lying,
deceitful allegations – about
gas chambers, gas ovens and extermination
policies. I have not been given the assurance that truth is a defence in what I
claim I have an inalienable right to freedom of speech given to me by God
Almighty. This inalienable right cannot be taken away
from me. Our Lord Jesus
Christ told us that we shall know the truth and the truth will set us free.
Truth is a moral virtue, and
if it is not taken into consideration at this
hearing then I simply have to withdraw from the hearings because I consider them
be immorally based and perverse.
The Commissioner: Anything else?
Mrs Scully: Well, you see, if the truth is not defence, then the lies will
continue to flourish.
The Commissioner: You don’t wish to participate in the hearing any
further. Is that right?
Mrs Scully:
Well, I have not been given the assurance that truth is a
defence, so would you please excuse me because I will then withdraw from
Mrs Scully then walked out of the hearing room. Dr Toben withdrew also.
Neither returned during the remainder of the proceedings.
In due course Mr Rothman opened the complainants’ case and called the
complainants’ evidence. He took me through the
documents upon which the
complainants relied. Some of them included handwritten annotations made by Mrs
Scully. Mr Rothman called
as witnesses Felix Goldschmied, Jeremy Sean Jones (the
co-complainant), George Hans Goldsteen and Thomas Bernard Schlesinger. Each
gave evidence on oath or affirmation. Each adopted as true and correct their
respective witness statements which had earlier been
filed. These became
exhibits. Each witness gave short additional evidence in answer to questions
from Mr Rothman and from me.
Originals of the photocopied materials attached to
the original complaint were tendered and received as exhibits. Some of the
included coloured highlighting apparently done by Mrs Scully. I
received also into evidence an article by Mr Jones entitled “Holocaust
Denial, Clear and Present Vilification” and an article by one Mr Michael
Shermer entitled “Proving the Holocaust –
The Refutation of
Revisionism and the Restoration of History”.
Mrs Scully having withdrawn, none of the witness statements or attachments
previously filed by her became exhibits. In these circumstances,
I discussed
with Mr Rothman the possible significance of s.25W of the RDA, which
“25W In determining whether an act is unlawful by reason of a
provision of
, the Commission is not required to have regard to any
exception or exemption provided for in those Parts unless there is evidence
before the Commission that the exception or exemption is or may be applicable in
relation to that act”.
At the conclusion of the evidence I granted leave to the complainants to make
submissions in writing. Although Mrs Scully had withdrawn,
and notwithstanding
the provisions of s.25W, Mr Rothman was content that the complainants’
written submissions be served on
Mrs Scully and that she should have time to
respond to them in writing if so advised. A timetable for the filing and
the submissions, any response and any reply to the response was set.
The parties did not adhere strictly to the timetable set.
complainants’ submissions were received on 28 January 1999. Mrs
Scully’s response, dated 31 March 1999, was received
by the Commission on
12 April 1999. The complainants did not file any submissions in reply.
2. STATUTORY PROVISIONS
of the RDA commenced operation on
13 October 1995. It is headed “Prohibition of Offensive Behaviour Based
on Racial Hatred”.
The presently relevant provisions are ss.18B, 18C and
18D, which are as follows:
(a) an act is done for 2 or more reasons; and
(b) one of the reasons is the race, colour or national or ethnic origin of a
person (whether or not it is the dominant reason or
a substantial reason for
doing the act);
then, for the purposes of this Part, the act is
taken to be done because of the person’s race, colour or national or
18C(1) It is unlawful for a person to do an act, otherwise than in private,
(a) the act is reasonably likely, in all the circumstances, to offend,
insult, humiliate or intimidate another person or a group of
people; and
(b) the act is done because of the race, colour or national or ethnic origin
of the other person or of some or all of the people in
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an act is taken not to be done in
private if it:
(a) causes words, sounds, images or writing to be communicated to the public;
(b) is done in a public place; or
(c) is done in the sight or hearing of people who are in a public place.
(3) In this section:
“public place” includes any place to which the public have access
as of right or by invitation, whether express or implied
and whether or not a
charge is made for admission to the place.
18D Section 18C does not render unlawful anything said or done reasonably and
in good faith:
(a) in the performance, exhibition or distribution of an artistic work; or
(b) in the course of any statement, publication, discussion or debate made or
held for any genuine academic, artistic or scientific
purpose or any other
genuine purpose in the public interest; or
(c) in making or publishing:
(i) a fair and accurate report of any event or matter of public interest;
(ii) a fair comment on any event or matter of public interest if the comment is
an expression of a genuine belief held by the person
of the RDA and the implied constitutional
freedom of political communication
of the RDA makes unlawful
certain defined acts which will generally consist of speech, writing or other
forms of communication. This
immediately provokes reflection about the
relationship between
and the implied constitutional freedom of
political communication referred to in
Lange v Australian Broadcasting
Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
and other recent cases.
It has been said with authority that a non-judicial tribunal (such as this
Commission) would generally do well to assume or accept
the constitutional
validity of the legislation which it is administering or applying unless and
until a court finds to the contrary:
Re Adams’ and the Tax Agents
(1976) 12 ALR 239
(per Brennan J, sitting as President of the AAT) and
cases there cited; compare
Re Boulton; ex parte Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Engineering Union
(1998) 73 ALJR 129
at 132-133 per Kirby J.
Further, there has been no explicit challenge to the validity of
present inquiry, nor have any notices of a constitutional question been given to
the Attorneys-General pursuant to
Judiciary Act
or otherwise. (Since the Commission is not a court,
is not strictly
applicable to proceedings before it).
On the other hand, Mrs Scully is no longer legally represented, and her
written submissions include a reference in general terms to
(1993) 95 DLR (4
) 202, in which the
Canadian Supreme Court declared invalid, as contrary to the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms, a law under
which Mr Zundel had been charged as a result of
his publication of a pamphlet denying the fact of the Holocaust during World War
II. In addition, I take into account that
of the RDA is fairly recent
legislation and that there has not yet been any judicial consideration of its
constitutional validity.
Even if it is not open to me to treat the provisions of
as invalid,
a consideration of the principles relating to the implied freedom of political
communication may properly be undertaken
to inform my interpretation and
application of those provisions, at least if their meaning or application be in
any way unclear or
difficult. I raised this matter with Mr Rothman at the
hearing, but there is no reference to it in his written submissions. In all
circumstances, I propose to consider the relevant principles.
The test for determining whether a law infringes the constitutional
implication is stated in
, supra, at 567-8 as follows:
“First, does the law effectively burden freedom of communication about
government or political matters either in its terms,
operation or effect?
Second, if the law effectively burdens that freedom, is the law reasonably
appropriate and adapted to serve
a legitimate end the fulfillment of which is
compatible with the maintenance of the constitutionally prescribed system of
representative
and responsible government and the procedure prescribed by s.128
for submitting a proposed amendment of the Constitution to the informed
of the people (hereafter collectively “the system of government prescribed
by the Constitution”). If the first
question is answered
“yes” and the second is answered “no”, the law is
Levy v Victoria
(1997) 189 CLR 579
at 608-609 per Dawson
It is conceivable that the restrictions imposed by s.18C(1) of the RDA might
in certain circumstances effectively burden freedom of
communication about
government and political matters. However, it seems to me that, bearing in mind
the exceptions or exemptions
available under s.18D, Part IIA as a whole is
“reasonably appropriate and adapted to serve a legitimate end the
fulfillment
of which is compatible with the
maintenance of the system of
government prescribed by the Constitution.” The Senate Standing
which reported on the
Racial Hatred Bill
(Cth) considered that the
exemptions were “necessary to support the constitutional validity of the
Bill”: see L McNamara
and T Solomon, “The Commonwealth
: Achievement or Disappointment?”
[1996] AdelLawRw 9
(1996) 18 Adel LR 259
at 269. The “legitimate end” of the law is, or includes, the
fulfillment of Australia’s international obligations
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination which is scheduled to the RDA, especially
Article 4 thereof. In
my view, this end is compatible with the maintenance of the system of government
prescribed by the Constitution.
A similar conclusion was arrived at by the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal of New South Wales in relation to a
constitutional
on the racial vilification provisions of the
Anti-Discrimination Act
Kazak v John Fairfax
Publications Limited
(2000) NSW ADT 77
, 22 June 2000, unreported. See also,
by way of analogy,
Brown v Members of the Classification Review Board of the
Office of Film and Literature Classification
(1998) 154 ALR 67.
, supra, is, of course, distinguishable. It was decided by
reference to the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which has no
counterpart in Australia. Further, the Canadian law in question was very
different from the provisions of
of the RDA. It prohibited, on pain of
imprisonment, the wilful publication of a “statement, tale or news”
that the publisher
“knows to be false and that causes or is likely to
cause injury or mischief to a public interest”. The Court held that
provision infringed
of the Charter, which provides:
“Everyone has the following fundamental freedoms:
(b) freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom of the
press and other media of communication”.
The Court also held, by majority, that the law was not saved by
of the Charter, which provides:
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
guarantees the
rights and freedoms set out in it subject only to such reasonable limits
prescribed by law as can be demonstrably
justified in a free and democratic
The majority held that the law did not amount to a reasonable limit under
of the Charter because it was not shown to relate to an objective of pressing
and substantial concern so as to warrant overriding
a Charter guarantee. The
test of an “objective of pressing and substantial concern” is quite
different from, and stricter
than, the Australian test, namely that the law in
question be “reasonably appropriate and adapted to serve a legitimate end
the fulfillment of which is compatible with the maintenance of the
constitutionally prescribed system of representative and responsible
government”. Further, the conclusion of the majority in
that the law in question was too broad to be justified as a measure to promote
social and racial harmony, was based in part on the
existence of a separate
prohibition on hate propaganda in the Canadian Criminal Code. Moreover, and
rather unhelpfully for any argument
that Part IIA of the RDA should be regarded
as constitutionally objectionable, in 1990 that Canadian prohibition on hate
by the Canadian Supreme Court (by majority) as
being consistent with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms: see
(1991) 61 CCC (3d)1, another case relating to anti-Semitic
propaganda (see further below).
For these reasons, I will proceed on the basis that Part IIA of the RDA is
valid. However, in approaching the construction and application
of Part IIA I
will bear in mind the existence of the constitutional freedom of political
communication. I will also bear in mind
that the value
currently given by the
common law to freedom of expression generally is high, and that this
circumstance supports
a conservative
approach to the construction of statutes
which would impair or abrogate it: see
supra, at 76-77 per French
J. On the other hand, I think I must accept that Parliament has taken into
account free speech values and
balanced them against other values in formulating
the provisions of Part IIA of the RDA and s.18D thereof in particular: compare
Ballina Shire Council v Ringland
(1994) 33 NSWLR 680
Wagga Aboriginal Action Group v Eldridge
(1995) EOC 92-701
at 78,265-78,266;
see also S Akmeemana and M Jones, “Fighting Racial Hatred”, in Race
Relations Commissioner (ed)
Racial Discrimination Act
(AGPS, Canberra 1996) pp. 129-181, M Jones, “Free Speech Revisited: The
Implications of Lange and Levy” (1998) Vol 4(1)
AJHR, 188; and see
generally the various articles on racial vilification collected at (1994) 1 AJHR
at pp 141-369, esp K Mahoney,
“Hate Vilification Legislation and Freedom
of Expression: Where is the Balance?”
[1994] AUJlHRights 21
(1994) 1 AJHR 353.
There was little dispute between the parties as to what Mrs Scully
has done by way of the distribution and sale of literature. Based
admissions contained in her then solicitors’ letter dated 4 March 1997
sent to the Race Discrimination Commissioner
in response to the
Commissioner’s letter dated 11 February 1997, I find that Mrs Scully
placed or was responsible for placing
copies of certain material which had been
attached to the original complaint in letterboxes in the Launceston area after
1995, namely the material described as follows in the
Commissioner’s letter:
“(a) “The Inadvertent Confession of a Jew”
(d) “The Jewish Khazar Kingdom”
(e) “Russian Jews Control Pornography”
(f) “The Most Debated Question of Our Time – Was There Really A
Holocaust?”.
(g) Untitled list of book synopses on which it is written “Books on
Sale at Hart St Markets”.
(h) Untitled excerpt which begins with the words “The arguments against
classroom sex education can best be summarized under
three heads ...”
(i) Untitled excerpt on which it is written “Our Christian –
Israelite Laws”
(j) Untitled excerpt on which it is written in long hand
(i) "THE WHITE CHRISTIAN NATIONS ARE THE TRUE SEED OF ISRAEL. ‘THE
SYNAGOGUE OF SATAN – WHO SAY THEY ARE JUDEAN –
BUT ARE LYING
FRAUDS’ ARE TRYING TO FORCE THE WHITE RATE TO MONGRELIZE. For good books
come to the Hart St Market – Sundays
8.30 – 2 pm
(SHOWGROUND)”.
Based on admissions in Mrs Scully’s then solicitors’ letter of 4
March 1997, I further find that Mrs Scully wrote the
long hand text referred to
above as (j)(i) and that she distributed or sold the above-listed material, or
some of it, at the Hart
Street Market in Launceston. All of this material was
included in the exhibits tendered by the complainants.
The complainants also claimed that Mrs Scully was responsible for the
distribution and/or sale of certain other material attached
to the complaint,
namely a document (designated as (b) in the Commissioner’s letter)
entitled “A Lesson in Culture”
and another (designated (c)) entitled
“MFP: What are Japan’s Motives?”. However, by her
solicitors’ letter,
Mrs Scully denied knowledge of the first of these and
claimed that she could not comment on the second because a copy of it had not
been supplied to her. Although “A Lesson in Culture” contained some
material similar to other material admittedly distributed
by Mrs Scully, the
complainants were unable to adduce any clear evidence that Mrs Scully was
responsible for distributing it and
I do not find that she was. The document
entitled “MFP – What are Japan’s Motives?” contains
handwritten
annotations which appear to be in Mrs Scully’s handwriting and
I find that she did distribute it. I note that Mrs Scully has
underlined the
names of three individuals mentioned in the article, including that of Mr David
Rockefeller of Chase Manhattan Bank,
and has written “3 Jews” in the
margin next to their names. In a photograph of Mr Rockefeller, Mrs Scully has
“Jew” across his forehead. She has also underlined the word
“bankers” in the caption beneath the photograph.
Also annexed to the
complaint was an excerpt from a document objecting to sex education in schools
which Mrs Scully admitted distributing,
but I see nothing in that document which
might support the present complaint under
of the RDA.
Putting aside documents (b) and (h) but including document (c), I accept the
submission of Mr Rothman that each of the relevant publications
has a consistent
and seemingly overriding theme; and that the theme relates to the actions of
Jews as such and the characteristics
of Jews as such.
Mr Rothman puts forward a list of the imputed attributes of Jews as conveyed
by the publications. The list is as follows:
(a) that they are anti-democracy, anti-freedom, pro-tyranny;
(b) that the philosophy and teachings and practice of Jews is based upon a
learning (the Talmud) which:
. ought to be stamped out;
. promotes sodomy and paedophilia;
. is worse than a satanic cult;
(c) that contemporary Jewry is due for a terrible judgement because of its
racial origin and that the law commands all to own guns
and to stamp out Judaism
and, by implication, contemporary Jewry;
(d) that Jews, by their nature, are anti-decent living in the sense that
they, by their nature, control pornography both in America
and Russia;
(e) that Jews exhibit a moral attitude which is antithetical to Australian
values (described as “anti-Christian”);
(f) that the ethnic group who live as Jews have perpetuated and are
perpetuating a myth for their own political purposes, being the
perpetrated by the leaders of the Nazi Party in Germany, which allegation by the
respondent imputes to Jews that they are
fraudulent, liars, immoral, deceitful
and part of a giant conspiracy to defraud the world (or the remainder of
(g) that part of the conspiracy of world Jewry was the Bolshevik revolution
in 1917 and that Jews perpetrated the purges in the Soviet
Union thereafter;
(h) that Jews are seeking to control the world, or already have gained such
control with the intention of destroying “White
civilization” and that Jews are “lying frauds ... trying to force
the White race to mongrelize.”
I accept that this is a fair characterization of the imputations in the
relevant publications, and I accept that the publications
have a consistent
theme being the vilification of Jews as such.
It was not in dispute that Jews in Australia should be regarded as a group
with common ethnic origins for the purposes of
of the RDA. As Mrs
Scully’s former solicitors themselves noted (letter dated 4 March 1997, p
10), the Court of Appeal of New
Zealand has held in
King-Ansell v Police
[1979] 2 NZLR 531
that Jews in New Zealand formed a group with common ethnic
origins for the purposes of the
Race Relations Act
1971 (NZ). The
reasoning of Richardson J in that case was applied by the House of Lords in
Mandla v Dowell-Lee
[1982] UKHL 7
[1983] 2 AC 548
, a case under the
Race Relations
1976 (UK) concerning the position of Sikhs in England. The NSW Equal
Opportunity Tribunal followed the New Zealand and English decisions
Phillips v Aboriginal Legal Service
(1993) EOC 92-502
and held that being
“Jewish” amounted to being “of a certain race” for the
purposes of the
Anti-Discrimination Act
(NSW). See further S
Akmeemana and M Jones, “Fighting Racial Hatred”, in Race Relations
Commissioner (ed)
Racial Discrimination Act
(AGPS, Canberra
1996) pp 173-174. Finally, the Explanatory Memorandum for the
Racial Hatred
(Cth) expressly notes (at pp 2-3) that the term “ethnic
origin” has been “broadly interpreted” in comparable
King-Ansell
in particular),
and proceeds:
“It is intended that Australian courts would follow the prevailing
definition of ‘ethnic origin’ as set out in
King-Ansell
This would provide the broadest basis of protection for peoples such as Sikhs,
Jews and Muslims.
The term ‘race’ would include ideas of ethnicity so ensuring that
many people, of, for example, Jewish origin would be
Accordingly, I find that Jews in Australia form a group with a common ethnic
origin for the purposes of
of the RDA.
In her written submissions in reply to those of Mr Rothman, Mrs Scully states
“emphatically”, in regard to the contents
and claims of the
leaflets, that she genuinely believes that the “claims of improper, evil
behaviour, by certain Jews, are
true”. She says that she knows that there
are (and have been) “many decent Jews” in the world and that her
are not of them but of those “Talmudic/Zionist/Communist Jews
responsible for the evil behaviour and the extremes of deceit
“holocaust” myth) referred to in my leaflets”. She says she
makes a clear distinction between “Talmudic/Zionist/Communist
and “good” Jews. I reject this argument. For the most part, at
least, the leaflets make no such distinction.
They attack Jews generally. In any
event, the so-called distinction would hardly lessen the offensiveness, to Jews
especially, of
the imputations conveyed by the leaflets. The message remains
that Jews, in particular, are people who by their very nature and culture
or have been, drawn to or involved in the alleged evils of Communism, Zionism
and Talmudism.
In the complaint, and in the evidence given by the complainants’
witnesses, it was asserted that the material distributed by
Mrs Scully had
caused a great deal of distress to Jewish and other recipients. There was no
challenge to this assertion, nor any
evidence to the contrary. I accept it.
It was further asserted that, on her own published admission (see the
newspaper article attached to the complaint), Mrs Scully was
involved in a
“campaign” of disseminating anti-Jewish propaganda. Mr Jones deposed
that as Executive Vice-President of
the Council he receives on a regular basis
telephone calls, letters and electronic communications from individuals
complaining of
anti-Jewish propaganda distributed in Tasmania by Mrs Scully. It
was not disputed by Mrs Scully that she had regularly and frequently
distributed
material of the same general kind as the abovementioned relevant material in the
period between the commencement of
of the RDA, 13 October 1995, and the
date of lodgement of the complaint, 7 August 1996. Indeed she admits that she
has continued
to do so. In the circumstances I accept that her activities are
properly described as a campaign of disseminating anti-Jewish propaganda.
3.2 Section 18C of the RDA
In my opinion, Mrs Scully’s acts
fall within s.18C of the RDA.
Section 18C is set out above. It must be read together with s.18B, which
provides that where an act is done for 2 or more reasons
it is sufficient for
the purposes of
that one of the reasons is the race, colour or national
or ethnic origin of a person (whether or not it is a dominant reason or a
substantial reason for doing the act). In the present case, the complainants
rely upon the reason of “ethnic origin”.
I will return to this.
It is clear that Mrs Scully’s distribution of the material represents
an act done “otherwise than in private” within
the meaning of
Under paragraph (a) of s.18C(1), it must be shown that the act is
“reasonably likely, in all the circumstances, to offend, insult,
or intimidate
another person or a group of people”. This sets up an
objective test or standard, because of the words
“reasonably
Bryant v Queensland Newspapers Pty Ltd
President Sir Ronald Wilson, 15 May 1997, unreported;
Shron v Telstra
Corporation Limited,
HREOC, Commissioner Innes, 10 July 1998, unreported;
De La Mare v Special Broadcasting Service
; HREOC, Commissioner
McEvoy, 18 August 1998, unreported. Although the test is objective, it may be
that the alleged vilifier must
take the other person or group as he or she finds
them: compare
Jordan v Burgoyne
[1963] 2 QB 744
at 748-9. However, given
the inflammatory tone of the publications and the extreme nature of the
imputations conveyed by the material
in question in the present case, I do not
find it necessary to decide to what extent allowance for unusual sensitivity may
be made generally.
In my opinion, taking into account the abovementioned imputations against
Jews which I have accepted are conveyed by the leaflets
in question and the
inflammatory tone of the leaflets, it is reasonably likely that Mrs
Scully’s public campaign of distributing
such leaflets, unsolicited, in
letterboxes in the Launceston area and selling and offering them for sale at a
public market in Launceston,
would, in all the circumstances, offend, insult,
intimidate Jewish persons who received the material or who
became aware of the campaign, especially those living in or near Launceston.
evidence of the complainants’ witnesses as to the actual effect on them of
the campaign is consistent with and confirmatory
of the proposition that the
material was, objectively, “reasonably likely” to offend etc. I note
that in their letter
of 4 March 1997 (which Mrs Scully adopted in her final
submissions) the respondent’s then solicitors admit that some, at least,
of the publications would or may fall within s.18C of the RDA. In my opinion,
paragraph (a) of s.18C(1) is satisfied.
In arriving at this conclusion, I do not overlook Mrs Scully’s claims
that her campaign should be seen as an effort by her to
defend the honour and
reputation of the Russian and German people against alleged misinformation and
alleged historical inaccuracy
spread by others. However, some of the material in
question does not even mention the Russian or German people, and even where it
does, the content of the material and its inflammatory tone (of outright
hostility towards and vilification of Jews) are such that
the material would
remain deeply offensive to many Jewish people even if they could also see in it
expressions of a genuine belief
in the truth of the statements made or
expressions of a genuine belief that the Russian or German people had been
misrepresented.
The next question is whether Mrs Scully’s acts were done “because
of the ... ethnic origin of the other person or some
or all of the people in the
group” within the meaning of paragraph (b) of s.18C(1). As mentioned
above, it is enough that ethnic
origin be one reason for the act. It need not be
the dominant reason or even a substantial
reason: s.18B.
Bryl and Kovacevic v Nowra and Melbourne Theatre Company
Commissioner Johnston, 21 June 1999, unreported (“
complainants alleged that Mr Nowra, by writing the play “Miss
Bosnia”, and the Melbourne Theatre Company,
by producing and presenting it
to the public, offended, insulted, humiliated and intimidated a group of about
40 people “loyal
to the lawful republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina”. They
claimed that this was contrary to s.18C of the RDA because the characters
play were portrayed in an offensive manner on account of their national and
ethnic origin.
The Commission dismissed the complaint
under s.25X of the RDA on
the basis, in part, that it could not be shown that any offensive
conduct of the
respondents was done “
because of race, national origin, etc.
In that case, Commissioner Johnston rejected the respondents’
submission that the relevant inquiry was as to the motive of the
respondents.
Referring to
Australian Legal Rights Movement Inc v South Australia (No. 1)
[1995] SASC 5224
(1995) 64 SASR 551
at 557, the Commissioner held that an act could be said
to be because of race even if race was not the motivating factor. However,
having regard to the judgment of Weinberg J in
Macedonian Teachers
Association of Victoria Inc v HREOC and State of Victoria
[1998] FCA 1650
(1998) 91 FCR 8
(appeal to Full Court dismissed:
State of Victoria v Macedonian Teachers
Association Inc and HREOC
[1999] FCA 1287
(1998) 91 FCR 47)
, the Commissioner held that the
phrase “because of” was not a synonym for “based on”,
and that it required
the establishment of a causal connection between the
conduct and the element of race (or national or ethnic origin). It was not
in the case before him, the Commissioner held, that race was merely part
of the circumstances that formed the background against
which the events and
incidents of the play were written. The Commissioner continued:
“On this narrower approach the inquiry becomes, relevantly: was
national or ethnic origin a cause which contributed to the conduct
in writing or
presenting the play?”
Applying this “narrower” test, the Commissioner concluded:
“Even if I accept that a consequence of the presentation of the play is
that some members of the Bosnian community in Australia
have experienced offence
and insult as a result of the play it is clear that that is not enough to
satisfy this requirement. Something
more by way of evidence needs to be produced
to indicate that race, or national or ethnic origin was a causative factor that
contributed
to the writing or putting on of the play (see legal discussion
Speculation and conjecture aside, I find nothing in the materials furnished
to the Commission that could be identified with this element.
characters in the play have a particular racial, national or ethnic background
is not sufficient to satisfy this requirement.
It cannot be said, in my view,
that those background factors caused the conduct of writing and performing the
play. Since I would
not be able to make such a finding if the complaint went to
hearing, I must accede to the application to dismiss the complaint on
that it is misconceived. The complainants could not, on the materials presented
to the Commission, make out their claim
under section 18C so far as the need to
show race or national origin was a factor in the acts of each of the
respondents.”
The Commissioner then went on to make findings, for the sake of completeness,
that the complainants would have failed by reason of
s.18D in any event.
With respect, I think that the approach taken in
to the operation
and effect of the phrase “because of” in s.18C may not always be
appropriate. I would agree that it is
necessary to show a relationship of cause
and effect between the act complained
of and the race, colour, national or
ethnic origin
of a relevant person or group of people. But, at least in a case
where the very
thing complained of is the vilification of a person
or group of
persons expressly by reference to their race or ethnic origin, it
is important
not to over-analyse the case so as to
discern a further or separate requirement
that that act of racial/ethnic vilification
be engaged in because of the
race/ethnicity
of the victim(s). To do so may introduce a double requirement
which is not actually contained
in s.18C(1) on a fair reading of it.
Compare, in
relation to the expression “by reason of” as used in other parts of
the RDA and
Sex Discrimination Act
(Cth), the observations of
Lockhart J in
HREOC v Mount Isa Mines Ltd
(1993) 46 FCR 301
and 324-325, and see, in particular, the examples there mentioned by his Honour
of certain kinds of “inherently
discriminatory” or “obviously
discriminatory” criteria adopted by alleged discriminators.
Perhaps the key is to characterize the “act” or
“acts” appropriately. In the present case, the relevant act
distribution of material which vilifies certain persons (done repeatedly as part
of a public campaign). The Jewishness of
the persons vilified is not a mere
“background factor” (cf.
). It brought about the
vilification. The authors of the documents (and Mrs Scully is amongst them to
the extent of her annotations
and highlighting on the documents) disparaged the
persons referred to in them because those persons were Jews. Further, by
distributing,
selling and offering to sell the documents, Mrs Scully became
responsible for their contents. She became a party to the disparaging
particular persons and groups of persons because they are Jews. In my opinion,
paragraph (b) of s.18C(1) is also satisfied.
3.3 Section 18D of the RDA
Mrs Scully has claimed, in her final
submissions and previously, that by virtue of the operation of s.18D of the RDA
any actions of
hers which might otherwise have infringed s.18C of the Act were
not unlawful. The terms of s.18D are set out above. In my view, s.18D
section which provides for an “exception or exemption” within the
meaning of s.25W. (That section is also set out
above). In my view, s.25W
applies in this case, with the result that I am not required to have regard to
the exception or exemption
provided for in s.18D.
By virtue of s.25W, s.18D need not be considered unless there is
“evidence before the Commission” that that section is
applicable. I note that Parliament has used the expression
“evidence”, as distinct from the wider expression
“evidence or
other material” which appears in certain other Commonwealth legislation,
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review)
ss.476(1)(g)
(4)(a) of the
Migration Act
(Cth). This does not mean that
legally admissible
evidence is
required. The Commission is not a court and is not bound by the rules of
evidence and may inform itself on any matter
in such manner as it thinks fit:
s.25V(1)(a). However, the use of the word “evidence” rather than
“evidence or
other material” suggests that a mere claim is not
Further, in my view, to be “evidence before the Commission” a
thing or statement would need to have been received and
accepted as evidence by
the Inquiry Commissioner at the inquiry. The Commission has a discretion as to
what it will treat as evidence.
In conformity with the principles of natural
justice and with its obligations under s.25E(1) of the RDA, the Commission may
to receive material where to receive it, at a particular stage or at
all, would be unfair to one or more of the parties; for example,
party or parties would have no proper opportunity to cross-examine the witness
concerned, or otherwise to test or comment
on the statement or thing proffered.
Witness statements or other documents filed by a party pursuant to directions
of the Commission do not necessarily become “evidence
Commission” at the inquiry. The main purpose of such directions is to give
each party advance notice of the nature
of the evidence
relied upon by the other party or parties (so as to give each party an adequate
opportunity to assemble their own evidence
and to prepare to meet the case
against them). However, in the absence of a specific direction to the contrary
given by the Inquiry
Commissioner, any witness statements or other documents
would not become “evidence before the Commission” unless and
they were accepted as such at the formal inquiry. Where there is a dispute about
the authenticity or accuracy of any document
or witness statement, the
Commission will usually require that the document or witness statement be
appropriately verified (as far
as reasonably possible) by the party relying on
it before the Commission will receive it as “evidence”. A disputed
by a person who is available to be called as a witness will not
generally be treated as evidence unless the witness verifies it on
affirmation and attends for cross-examination at the hearing if required.
I am not prepared to depart from these principles in the present case. I
think that they should apply with full vigour in a case,
like the present, where
the relevant “exception or exemption” is one which calls for the
Commission to be satisfied that
statements which would otherwise be unlawful
were made “reasonably and in good faith”, and to be satisfied, to
that s.18D(1)(b) and (c) are relied on, that the relevant
“genuine purpose” requirements are met (among other things).
are cumulative requirements, partly objective (“reasonably”) and
partly subjective (“in good faith”,
“genuine purpose”).
They involve matters which will usually be peculiarly within the knowledge of
the respondent.
In the present case, the need for actual evidence of reasonableness, good
faith and genuineness of purpose (among other things) was
heightened further by
the inflammatory tone and extreme nature of the publications concerned, together
with the width of the range
of subject matters which became vehicles for
anti-Semitic slurs. Whether looked at individually or together, the leaflets do
bear on their face the appearance of reasonableness, good faith and
genuineness of purpose. Rather, the leaflets appear to be
defame and injure Jews, whether or not they have any other purpose. If they are
so intended, reasonableness, good faith and genuineness
of purpose would not be
found for the purposes of
of the RDA; compare, in the defamation
Laughton v The Bishop of Sodor and Man
(1872) LR4PC 495 at
504-5, 508-510,
Bellino v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1996] HCA 47
at 205 (per Brennan CJ dissenting) and at 228 (per Dawson, McHugh and
Gummow JJ).
Mrs Scully was given every opportunity to present her case as she saw fit. At
the interlocutory hearing on 27 August 1998 the complainants
had made an
application for rulings which would have prevented Mrs Scully from calling
witnesses to give evidence along the lines
of their witness statements. But they
did not press this application after I gave indications during argument that I
was not inclined
to make any such rulings. Thereafter, timetables were set to
accommodate Mrs Scully and her witnesses. Four days were set aside for
hearing, with more time to be made available if necessary. Then, on the first
scheduled hearing day, and without even the courtesy
of prior notice, Mrs Scully
announced that she had not brought her witnesses and would be taking no further
part in the hearing.
She gave as a reason that she had not been assured that
“truth was a defence”. But Mrs Scully had been aware for some
that I was not prepared to give any advance rulings either way on the scope of
the s.18D “defences”. She knew
that the hearing was to be at large.
I note that in her final submissions Mrs Scully now claims that the
Commission should summon the five persons who were to be her witnesses
from them in person in support of her claims and should order, pursuant to s.25T
of the RDA, that their fares and accommodation
be paid by the Commonwealth. It
must have been obvious to Mrs Scully that any such request should have been made
before the scheduled
hearing, not afterwards. It is possible that the real
reason, or one reason, why no formal evidence was heard from Mrs Scully and
witnesses is that they did not wish to face questioning on their claims. I note
that on the few occasions of which I am aware
where purveyors of anti-Semitic
propaganda have endeavoured to justify their materials in court
on the facts
and the merits
, they have been singularly unsuccessful: see eg
supra, at 12, 74;
supra, esp at 207-215, 254 and,
in relation to “Holocaust denial” in particular, see
Penguin Books Limited and Lipstadt,
unreported, High Court of Justice (UK)
Queen’s Bench Division, Gray J, 11 April 2000.
In any event, in my view, there is nothing which amounts to “evidence
before the Commission” (within the meaning of s.
25W) that any part of Mrs
Scully’s campaign of anti-Jewish propaganda has been carried on
“reasonably and in good faith”,
for “genuine” purposes
and otherwise in such a way that s.18D is or may be applicable. Hence, I
conclude that I am not
required to have regard to s.18D any further.
In case I am wrong in that conclusion I propose to consider, substantively,
whether s.18D is applicable on the material before me.
Text books suggest that
the onus of proof in relation to a provision like s.18D lies on the respondent:
see CCH Equal Opportunity
Reporter, para 84-700; C Ronalds,
Discrimination
Law and Practice
, 1998, pp 137, 182. The abovementioned provisions of s.25W
appear to be at least consistent with this view.
Moreover, although proceedings before the Commission are called
“inquiries” and the procedure to be adopted is within
the discretion
of the Commission, there is clear authority that an inquiry under s.25A of the
RDA is “an adversarial, not an
inquisitorial, proceeding”:
[1995] FCA 1134
(1995) 129 ALR 455
at 467 per Drummond J.
relating to a complaint of alleged racial discrimination as defined in
of the RDA, but the same principles should apply to a proceeding under s.25A
relating to a complaint under
of the RDA (like the present proceeding).
Durmmond J referred to the complainant having an “onus of proof” in
to “the matters that must be established before the Commissioner
can reach a conclusion that unlawful discrimination has occurred”
467), and see also the cases there cited.
was referred to with
approval by Weinberg J in
Macedonian Teachers Association v HREOC and the
State of Victoria
[1998] FCA 1650
(1998) 91 FCR 8.
On appeal (
The State of Victoria v
Macedonian Teachers Association
[1999] FCA 1287
(1999) 91 FCR 47
at 50), the Full Court
expressed some doubt about the use made of
by Weinberg J in
relation to questions concerning the
of proof, but no doubt was
thrown on the underlying assumption that
was correct in respect of
there being a burden of proof on the complainant. Nothing was said expressly in
any of these cases about
any burden on respondents, but I think that it follows
from the characterisation of proceedings under s.25A as adversarial rather
inquisitorial that, depending on the proper construction of the relevant
statutory provisions, a burden of proof may fall on
a respondent in relation to
a particular issue or issues: see
Vines v Djordjevitch
[1955] HCA 19
(1955) 91 CLR 512
at 519-520; compare
Minister for Immigration v Hughes
[1999] FCA 325
(1999) 86 FCR 567.
In my view, on the proper construction of s.18D (in its context), it is for
the respondent to show that s.18D applies. A complainant
is not required to show
that s.18D does not apply. In this sense, the burden of proof under s.18D is on
the respondent.
Since the rules of evidence do not apply before the Commission, the actual
requirements of the “burden of proof” in proceedings
Commission may not be precisely the same as in curial proceedings. Authorities
relating to the review by tribunals of
administrative decisions indicate that
the concept of a legal onus of proof (as understood in ordinary civil
litigation) may not
be applicable in such reviews: see
McDonald v Director
General of Social Security
[1984] FCA 57
(1984) 1 FCR 354
Bushell v Repatriation
[1992] HCA 47
(1992) 175 CLR 408
at 425 per Brennan J,
Minister for
Immigration v Hughes
[1999] FCA 325
(1999) 86 FCR 567.
But that is mainly because
such proceedings, unlike the present, are of an inquisitorial, rather than
adversarial, nature. Even in
such proceedings, as a matter of common sense,
where facts are peculiarly within the knowledge of a party to an issue, a
by that party to produce evidence as to those facts may properly lead to
an unfavourable inference being drawn. The same may be said
of a case where a
good deal of evidence pointing in one direction is before the relevant
decision-maker and any intelligent observer
can see that unless contrary
material comes to light that is the way the decision is likely to go: see
, supra, per Woodward J at 358. And, in the same vein, see
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Eshetu
CLR 611 at 673 per Callinan J.
In any event, I consider that the risk of non-persuasion of the matters
referred to in s.18D falls on the respondent and that the
respondent is
responsible for adducing evidence or other material upon which a finding in the
respondent’s favour under s.18D
can be made.
I have considered all of the (voluminous) material filed by or on behalf of
Mrs Scully, as well as the material filed by the complainants.
Having done so, I
am not satisfied that Mrs Scully’s activities are rendered lawful by
I am not satisfied that Mrs Scully’s campaign of distributing
anti-Jewish propaganda was done “reasonably and in good
or in the course of, the doing of any of the things listed in paragraph (a) or
(b) or (c) of s.18D. The observations
made above concerning the failure of Mrs
Scully to adduce any formal evidence, despite the particular and obvious need
do so and despite the ample opportunity she was given, have obvious
relevance for present purposes also.
I have already found that Mrs Scully’s actions were reasonably likely
to “offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate”
Jews as such and hence
that they fell within s.18C. It was not necessary for the purposes of s.18C to
determine whether Mrs Scully’s
actions were deliberately intended to bring
imputations
made, the intemperate and inflammatory tone of the leaflets and the
great variety of subject matters which have been made vehicles
imputations against Jews combine, in my opinion, to suggest a lack of the
reasonableness and good faith required by s.18D
and also (so far as paragraphs
(b) and (c) of s.18D are concerned) a lack of the requisite
“genuineness” of purpose.
I note that Mrs. Scully has not denied the
quote attributed to her in the newspaper article attached to the complaint to
that she does what she does:
“Because I believe in the truth. People should know the truth”.
“There’s always someone to blame”.
In my view, the RDA generally, including
, proceeds on the general
basis that deliberate racism in public affairs is not to be tolerated: compare
Article 4 of the Convention
scheduled to the Act. In other contexts, the phrase
“in good faith” may simply mean “honestly” or
“sincerely”:
see eg the Macquarie Dictionary,
edition. However, I do not think that a racial
vilifier can be heard to say that he or she is acting “in good
for the purposes of s.18D merely because he or she honestly or
sincerely believes that persons of the race (or ethnic group) concerned
inferior or evil by nature and that they should be made to suffer for that
reason: compare
R v Keegstra
supra, at 62 per Dickson CJC, but compare
Hellenic Council of NSW v Apoleski
, Equal Opportunity Tribunal of
NSW, No. 10 of 1995, unreported, 25 September 1997.
Even if I am wrong in that regard, there is the additional requirement in
s.18D that the conduct be done “reasonably”
(as well as the other
requirements of s.18D). I accept Mr Rothman’s submission that some
guidance as to the import of the requirement
of reasonableness may be gained by
analogy with the law of defamation and in particular by reference to cases
concerning the defence
of “reasonableness in the circumstances” in
Defamation Act
(NSW). I accept that it has been held
that relevant considerations in determining reasonableness include:
(a) the reasonableness of the assertions made;
(b) the care taken by the publisher prior to publication to establish the
truth of the assertions;
(c) the basis of the publisher’s belief in the assertions and in this
. the amount of information obtained by the publisher, usually through its
journalists;
. the nature of the information obtained;
. the means by which that information has been checked for accuracy;
. the circumstances, being all of the circumstances, in which the information
was obtained and in particular the special knowledge
of the informant who has
provided the information;
(d) whether the person against whom the allegation has been made has been
given an opportunity to respond to it.
Austin v Mirror Newspapers Ltd
(1985) 3 NSWLR 354
Australian Broadcasting Commission
[1984] 3 NSWLR 241
at 250-251,
v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd (No. 2)
(1991) 23 NSWLR 374
at 387-388. (With
respect, I would not apply to s.18D of the RDA the decision of the Equal
Opportunity Tribunal of NSW in
Hellenic Council v Apoleski
, supra, to the
effect that the reasonableness or unreasonableness of the assertions themselves
is necessarily irrelevant to the question
whether the acts complained of were
done “reasonably”.)
Mrs Scully did not make herself available to be questioned on matters
analogous to or comparable with those listed above, or at all.
Further, nothing
in the material actually lodged by Mrs Scully persuades me that her actions have
been carried out “reasonably”.
The material is unverified and
lacking in persuasiveness. It is of the same “stridently
anti-Semitic” character as the
leaflets. If anything, it is worse. I give
it no weight in terms of supporting Mrs Scully’s claims as to the
of her assertions about Jews or certain Jews. In my view, it
only damages Mrs Scully’s claims that her actions were carried
“reasonably and in good faith” and for a “genuine”
Although it is unnecessary to go further, for the sake of completeness I
record that I am not satisfied that any of the leaflets in
question was an
“artistic work” within the meaning of s.18D(a). Nor am I satisfied
that Mrs Scully’s activities
were carried out for any “genuine
academic, artistic or scientific purpose or any other purpose in the public
within the meaning of s.18D(b). By enacting
of the RDA,
the Australian Parliament has indicated that, under our law, courts and
tribunals should be slow to accept that in particular
circumstances the
promulgation of hate propaganda has a purpose “in the public
interest”. In this regard I note what
was said by Dickson CJC (writing for
the majority) in
R v Keegstra
, supra, at 44:
“The message of the expressive activity covered by s. 319(2) [a
provision which prohibits, subject to certain qualifications,
promotion of hatred against any identiable group] is that members of
identifiable groups are not to be given equal standing
in society, and are not
human beings equally deserving of concern, respect and consideration. The harms
caused by this message run
directly counter to the values central to a free and
democratic society, and in restricting the promotion of hatred Parliament is
therefore seeking to bolster the notion of mutual respect necessary in a nation
which venerates the equality of all persons”.
“The nature of Parliament’s objective is supported not only by
the work of numerous study groups, but also by our collective
knowledge of the potentially catastrophic effects of the promotion of hatred
And again, at 48:
“... in my opinion, there can be no real disagreement about the subject
matter of the messages and teachings communicated by
the respondent, Mr.
Keegstra: it is deeply offensive, hurtful and damaging to target group members,
misleading to his listeners,
and antithetical to the furtherance of tolerance
and understanding in society”.
Finally, at 49:
“There is very little chance that statements intended to promote hatred
against an identifiable group are true, or that their
vision of society will
lead to a better world. To portray such statements as crucial to truth and the
betterment of the political
and social milieu is therefore misguided.”
, supra at 227-230, 269.
I note that those responsible for the drafting of the
Racial Hatred
(Cth) were aware of
R v Keegstra
, supra. During debate on
the Bill before the Legal and Constitutional Committee of the Senate on 17
February 1995, a senior government
legal counsel quoted a passage from p 59 of
the judgment of Dickson CJC concerning the meaning of (racial)
“hatred” (see
Hansard, Senate L & C, 17 February 1995, p 278).
It is true that, ultimately, Parliament rejected those parts of the
Hatred Bill
(Cth) which would have introduced criminal sanctions for
racially based threats and for the incitement of racial hatred. But
that substantial guidance as to what may be encompassed by the phrase
“public interest” in the present context
may nevertheless
from a consideration of the observations of Dickson CJC in
R v Keegstra
supra, especially where, as here, the material complained of is of such an
extreme nature that it answers the description “hate
propaganda”.
See also, generally, the various articles on racial vilification referred to
above (at the end of the section
of the RDA and the
implied constitutional freedom of political communcation”).
So far as paragraph (c)(i) of s.18D is concerned, I would not regard leaflets
of the kind in question here, even if they were “fair
and accurate”,
as amounting to “reports” (of anything) within the meaning of
s.18D(1)(c)(i). As to whether they
are reports of “any event or matter of
public interest”, I note Mr Rothman’s submission that the meaning of
phrase “event or matter of public interest” is illuminated by
the judgment of the High Court in
supra. That case concerned the
interpretation of certain statutory provisions of the State of Queensland which
defined a “lawful
excuse” for the publication of defamatory matter.
Central to the definition was the phrase “a subject of public
The majority of the Court held that broad topics, such as
“the world-wide conflict between Communism and non-Communism”
“organized crime and corruption in Queensland” were not within the
statutory concept. The subsection in question protected
a defamatory imputation
made in the course of or for the purposes of discussing the conduct of a person
whose conduct, inherently,
expressly or inferentially, invited public criticism
or discussion. The subject of public interest could not be some general
abstraction
unrelated to the conduct of particular individuals. There is no
doubt that the language of paragraph (c) of s.18D borrows heavily
language of the law of defamation. However, I prefer to leave for a case in
which it needs to be decided the question whether
the phrase “any event or
matter of public interest” in s.18D(c) should be interpreted as narrowly
as was the phrase in
question in
supra: compare
Council of NSW v Apoleski
Macedonian Youth Association
Equal Opportunity Tribunal of NSW No. 10 of 1995, unreported, 25 September 1997;
Hellenic Council of NSW & Anor v Apoleski
, Equal Opportunity Tribunal
of NSW, No.s 9 and 11 of 1995, unreported, 25 September 1997.
As to s.18D(c)(ii), I doubt that any of the publications represents a
“comment” at all. Further, the requirement that
the comment be
“fair” seems to be additional to the requirement that it be an
expression of a “genuine belief”
held by the person making the
comment. Hence the defamation cases relating to the defence of “fair
comment” may not be
directly applicable: compare Gillooly,
Defamation in Australia and New Zealand
, 1998, at p 133. In any event, I
would not be satisfied that the attacks on Jews contained in the leaflets
represent “fair
comment on any matter or event of public interest”
even if this expression should be interpreted in accordance with the common
defence of “fair comment”: see Gillooly, op cit at pp 124-134. No
broader interpretation seems likely to be correct.
Hence, in my view, paragraph
(ii) of s.18D(c) would seem to be inapplicable in any event.
For these reasons, I find that s.18D does not apply to the conduct of Mrs
Scully, which I have found to be in breach of s.18C.
3.4 Conclusion
I conclude that the complaint has been
substantiated.
OF DETERMINATIONS
Section 25Z(1)(b) of the RDA provides for the
kinds of determination which the Commission may make after holding an inquiry
and finding
the complaint substantiated. The complainants seek determinations
under sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) of s.25Z(1)(b) only. Those provisions
authorize determinations of the following kinds:
“(i) a declaration that the respondent has engaged in conduct rendered
unlawful by this Act and should not repeat or continue
such unlawful
(ii) a declaration that the respondent should perform any reasonable act or
course of conduct to redress any loss or damage suffered
complainant;...”
The complainants expressly decline to seek monetary compensation (for which
provision is made by sub-paragraph (iv) of s.25Z(1)(b)).
There is no difficulty to the extent that a declaration is sought, under
sub-paragraph (i), that Mrs Scully has engaged in conduct
rendered unlawful by
the RDA. I propose to make such a declaration. I mean to encompass in it every
act of distribution, sale or
offering for sale of the particular anti-Semitic
publications listed above which I have found were distributed by Mrs Scully
13 October 1995 and 7 August 1996.
The complainants also seek what they describe as a “restraining
order” under the second limb of sub-paragraph (i). I have
considerable thought to the question of whether any and what kind of
“order” should be made in this respect. Bearing
in mind the high
value placed on freedom of expression by the common law, as mentioned above (see
, supra, at 76-80 per French J), and also the general principles
governing injunctions issued by courts (see eg
Redland Bricks Ltd v Morris
[1970] AC 652
Mikasa (NSW) Pty Ltd v Festival Stores
[1972] HCA 69
(1972) 127 CLR
Sinnapan v State of Victoria
[1995] VicRp 27
[1995] 1 VR 421
at 436-444, and
State of Victoria v Sinnapan (No. 2)
[1995] VicRp 52
[1995] 2 VR 242)
, I have been
concerned that any restraint should be reasonably clear and should not be too
wide. Further, I am conscious of the reluctance
of courts to grant injunctions
(especially interlocutory injuctions) to restrain threatened or proposed
defamation:
National Mutual Life v GTV
(1989) VR 247
Finance v de Vries
(1975) 1 QB 703
at 724-5, Gillooly, op cit at p
On the other hand, I recognize that the Commission is not a court and does
not make “orders” as such; that, rather, sub-paragraph
25Z(1)(b)(i)
provides for the making of a “declaration” that the respondent
“should not” repeat or continue
the unlawful conduct, that
determinations made by the Commission are not binding or conclusive between the
parties (s.25Z(2) and
Brandy v HREOC
[1995] HCA 10
(1995) 183 CLR 245)
unlike injunctions issued by courts, determinations of the Commission are not
liable to be enforced by way of contempt
proceedings. Even in the field of
defamation, a final injunction will generally be granted if the
plaintiff’s cause of action
is proved, future publication is likely and
future publication will constitute an actionable wrong (ie. will not be
protected by
privilege or otherwise): Gillooly, op cit at p 320-321. Further,
appeal courts have extended a substantial degree of liberality in
relation to
the framing of orders and declarations by tribunals in anti-discrimination
matters, even where such orders or declarations
are binding on the parties: see
Waters v Public Transport Corporation
[1991] HCA 49
(1991) 173 CLR 349
, esp at 397,
Sinnapan (No. 2)
, supra, at 266-267, 272. Nevertheless, s.25ZC provides
for an application to be made to the Federal Court to enforce a determination
made by the Commission. Although a proceeding in the Court proceeds by way of a
, and the Court may make “such orders as it thinks
fit (including a declaration of right)”, I think it behoves the Commission
not to make determinations of a kind which are too far removed from orders of
the kind which the Court itself might be willing to
In the present case, once certain specified conduct of the respondent is
declared to have been unlawful, I think it would be appropriate
declare, simply, that the respondent should not repeat or continue such unlawful
conduct: compare the simple order made
by the Equal Opportunity Tribunal of New
South Wales in
Wagga Wagga Aboriginal Action Group v Eldridge
, supra, at
78,268-9 and compare also the injunction upheld by the High Court in
(NSW) Pty Ltd v Festival Stores
supra, see esp at 631-632 per Barwick CJ).
This declaration would mean that Mrs Scully should cease the unlawful
distribution, sale or offering for sale of further copies of
the literature on
which the primary declaration was based or any other similar literature the
distribution, sale or offering for
sale of which is reasonably likely, in all
the circumstances, to offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate persons of Jewish
origin. The restraint extends only to the “unlawful” doing of
these things, because, first, it is only meant to cover
conduct which breaches
s.18C of the RDA and, second, because I consider that I should not, by a
declaration, purport to foreclose
the possibility that a particular future act
of distribution, etc of a particular publication, even of the character
mentioned, might
not, in particular circumstances, be able to be justified by
Mrs Scully by reference to s.18D of the Act or otherwise.
The complainants also seek a declaration that the respondent should apologise
for her unlawful conduct. I have hesitated about granting
this form of relief.
The respondent has shown little or no sign of remorse for her actions and I have
no confidence that any apology
she may give pursuant to a declaration (or a
court order) would be genuine or sincere. A similar situation was one of the
that an apology was not ordered in
Lynton v Maugeri
, although another reason in that case was that an award of damages was to
In the field of defamation, at common law, courts do not, save perhaps in
rare cases, order unwilling defendants to correct, or apologise
for, slanders or
libels: see Gillooly, op cit at p 331, although a failure to apologise may
affect the quantum of damages: ibid,
287-288, 298-299; and statutory provision
is made in some jurisdictions for the publication by news media of retractions
or replies:
see eg s.25 of the
Defamation Act
However, the situation is different in the field of discrimination law.
Ronalds notes in
Discrimination Law and Practice
, 1998, at p 201 that an
apology is a form of order which is being made with increased frequency in
discrimination matters. As the
learned author mentions, public apologies were
Bull v Kuch
(1993) EOC 92-518
Wagga Wagga Aboriginal
Action Group v Eldridge
, supra, and
Krepp v Valcic (trading as Capel
(1993) EOC 92-520.
I have had particular regard to the remarks of Commissioner Castan QC in
Bull v Kuch,
supra. In that case, Commissioner Castan QC regarded the
refusal by the respondents to rent a caravan to the complainants because
were Aboriginal as a serious and blatant case of racial discrimination and he
judged that the respondents were not genuinely
remorseful or contrite. In these
circumstances, the Commissioner determined that the case was appropriate to be
resolved by a significant
public apology and a substantial payment of damages
for the pain and humiliation inflicted on the complainants because of their
In my view, the present case is comparable. As no damages are sought, an
apology is all the more appropriate. The complainants have
put forward a
particular form of words for a letter to Mr Jones which would involve not only a
broad apology but also a broad undertaking
on the part of Mrs Scully to cease
distributing anti-Jewish material. In my opinion, taking into account (among
other things) the
other declarations that the Commission will make, it is
unnecessary and inappropriate to include the requested undertaking. Otherwise,
and subject to certain other verbal modifications, I propose to declare that an
apology as sought should be given.
The complainants also seek an order that the respondent, at her own expense,
undertake a course of counselling by a conciliation officer
of the Commission as
to her rights and responsibilities under the RDA. Whilst I express the hope that
the respondent will, through
these proceedings or otherwise, come to a better
understanding of her responsibilities under the RDA, I do not propose to make
such order. I am informed that the Commission does not provide courses of
the kind contemplated. In any event, I would not have regarded
it as necessary
or appropriate to include a further requirement along these lines.
For these reasons, I propose to make a decision as follows:
The Commission:
(a) finds that the complaint has been substantiated;
(b) declares that the respondent, Mrs Olga Scully, by distributing
anti-Semitic literature in letterboxes in Launceston, Tasmania,
and by selling
or offering to sell such literature at a public market in Launceston, has
engaged in conduct rendered unlawful by
Part IIA of the RDA;
(c) declares that the respondent, Mrs Olga Scully, should not repeat or
continue such unlawful conduct;
declares that the respondent, Mrs Olga Scully, should apologise
for her unlawful conduct by writing to the complainants a letter of
the following terms:
“Mr. Jeremy Jones
Executive Vice President
Executive Council of Australian Jewry
146 Darlinghurst Road
DARLINGHURST NSW 2010
I, Mrs Olga Scully, do hereby unreservedly apologise to you and to the Hobart
Hebrew Congregation for my conduct in distributing anti-Semitic
literature in
letterboxes in Launceston, Tasmania, and by selling or offering to sell such
literature at a public market in Launceston
in contravention of the
Discrimination Act
DATED this 21st day of September 2000
ANTHONY CAVANOUGH QC
Inquiry Commissioner
I certify that this and the preceding thirty-five (35) pages is a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of Mr Anthony Cavanough QC,
Commissioner.
Hearing Solictor:
RTF format (158 KB)
Signed PDF/A format