URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/FCCA/2017/316.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Downey & Beale [2017] FCCA 316 (2 February 2017)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2017] FCCA 316
Catchwords:
FAMILY LAW – Final property
adjustment – where the parties have reached an agreement regarding all
financial issues between
them, save one issue with respect to the ownership of
an (dog breed omitted) named (name omitted).
Legislation:
Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit Court Rules 2001
Companion Animals Act 1998
Evidence Act
Aboriginal Protection and Restrictions of the Sale of
Opium Act 1987
Cases cited:
Dred Scott v. Sandford
[1856] USSC 9
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka
[1954] USSC 42
347 U.S. 483
Stanford v Stanford
[2012] HCA 52
Other Articles
Lesley Petrie, “
Animal Law: Animals as Property and the
Implications for Veterinary Practice
”, Flinders Law School,
Proceedings of the AVA Annual Conference, Adelaide 2011.
Maja Visic, Jade
Henderson, Brooke Gilbey, “
Animals as Property under the
Respondent:
File Number:
PAC 4165 of 2016
Judgment of:
Judge Harman
Hearing date:
2 February 2017
Date of Last Submission:
2 February 2017
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
2 February 2017
REPRESENTATION
for the Applicant:
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Maatouks Law Group
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Mr Mitchell of Johnsons Solicitors and Attorneys
(1) By consent Final Property adjustment Orders are made in accordance with the
Terms of Settlement executed by the parties marked
Exhibit ‘A’
attached hereto.
(2) Direct the solicitor for the Respondent to provide a typescript of the Terms
of Settlement made today in word format direct to
my Associate by email within 7
days of today’s date.
(3) Dismiss the Application in case filed 23 November 2016 and the Response
thereto filed 31 January 2017.
(4) Leave is granted to the wife to withdraw and discontinue without penalty as
to costs, her Application for Contravention filed
31 January 2017.
(5) Dismiss the Application of Mr Beale for an Order adjusting interest in
property with respect to the chattel comprised of an (dog
breed omitted) named
“(name omitted)”.
(6) Pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
, the wife shall be
and is hereby declared to be the owner of (name omitted) as and against the
husband and consistent with Order
6 made above.
(7) As far as necessary, the husband will do all things necessary to cause the
former matrimonial dog, “(name omitted)”,
registration to be
transferred into the wife’s name alone.
(8) All outstanding Applications and Responses are withdrawn and dismissed and
all issues are removed from the list of matters awaiting
EXHIBIT ‘A’
(1) That the interim Consent Orders of the 11
October 2016 be
(2) That the Husband will within 42 days of the date of these Orders, do all
acts, and things necessary to refinance the ‘(omitted)
Mortgage (No:
(omitted)) into his name alone.
(3) That simultaneously with Order 2 above:
(a) The Wife
will do all things and acts necessary to transfer to the Husband all her right
title and interest in the former matrimonial
A (title reference (omitted)) here after referred to as ‘the
(b) The Husband
will pay into the Wife’s Solicitor Trust Account the sum of
$125,000.00.
(4) That the Husband shall be entitled to sole occupancy of the property from
the date of these Orders and will be solely responsible
and indemnifying the
Wife in relation to all mortgage payments and outgoings in relation to the
(5) In circumstances where the Husband fails to comply with Orders 2 and 3b
(a) The Husband
shall provide vacant possession of the property with 7 days ensuring that the
property is a fit and reasonable state
of repair having regard to the condition
of the property at separation.
(b) The parties
shall each take all necessary steps and execute all necessary documents to cause
the property
to be sold by auction forthwith and at the earliest date
with the reserve to be set by the selling agent.
(c) The parties
appoint Byles Anjos Solicitors to act on the sale.
(d) The parties
appoint (omitted) Real Estate to act on the sale.
(e) That the
proceeds of sale be disbursed as follows:-
of Agent’s commission and advertising expenses.
of legal Costs.
to the Wife of $30,000.00
balance to be equally divided between the parties.
(f) That in the
event the Husband falls to sign any documents or vacate the property as ordered
above with 7 days of a written request,
the Wife has the right to sign all
documents to give effect to these Orders and take possession of the
(6) That each party will be entitled to retain all other items, chattels,
superannuation, Jewellery, and items of personality in
their names and
possession.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment under the pseudonym
Downey & Beale
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Law Act 1975
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT
OF AUSTRALIA
PAC 4165 of 2016
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
proceedings involve a claim for property adjustment between a husband and wife,
Ms Downey, the wife and Applicant, and Mr Beale,
the husband and Respondent.
parties have been in active dispute with each other with respect to their
financial issues for only a little time. The proceedings
were commenced by an
Initiating Application filed 5 September, 2016. Accordingly, the matter has
been before the Court for only
four months.
matter commenced with an Application brought on short notice. It was alleged at
that time that Interim relief was necessary to
secure and protect the position
of both parties but principally the wife.
is the second occasion that the matter comes before the Court. On the first
occasion the matter was before the Court, 11 October
2016, an unusual step was
taken – not unusual perhaps by reference to
Circuit Court Rules 2001
but by the fact that the diary permitted that step
to be taken. The proceedings were listed for Final Hearing to occur 3 August
2017. For reasons that will become apparent, that date is no longer required.
number of Interim and Interlocutory Orders were made by consent 11 October 2016
principally relating to the wife being permitted
to inspect the parties’
proceedings were listed for Hearing and a direction that the parties attend
mediation with a private Family Dispute Resolution
Practitioner agreed between
the parties. Since that time, there has been ongoing negotiation.
the matter was last before the Court the husband has made enquiry as to his
ability to refinance the mortgage encumbering the
to the wife. The husband has obtained preliminary finance approval. On that
basis, the husband has
filed an Application in Case seeking suspension or
discharge of the Orders made by consent on the last occasion and requiring that
the home be sold. It is that Application which sees the matter return before the
Court today.
attention need be given to the Application in a Case nor its efficacy as the
parties have spent the day, a significant period from
approximately 10am until
nearly 4pm, negotiating. With the assistance of their Counsel and their
attorneys, the parties have reached
an agreement with respect to all financial
issues between them, save one.
have been made by consent which deals with the majority of the estate of the
parties, if one defines “
” by reference to monetary
value. The Orders made by consent will permit the husband to refinance the
mortgage encumbering the
The Orders made by consent conclude with an Order (at Order 6 of the Minute
Order) that “...
each party will be entitled to retain all other items,
chattels, superannuation, Jewellery, and personality
in their names and possession
”. That Order is
made with the reservation by the husband regarding the one issue extant between
the parties and which is to
be determined by the Court.
the matter is listed today for mention and directions only, the parties have
provided their consent via their Counsel to allow
the Court to hear and
determine on a final basis the one issue outstanding. That issue would, on one
view of the case (the husband’s),
represent an exception to Order 6 of the
Consent Orders. On another view (the wife’s) the issue is whether an
Order should
be made requiring the husband to effect a transfer of registration
to her of a specific chattel. That chattel is a sentient creature
being an (dog
breed omitted) named (name
is to be observed, at least in the English-speaking world, that as recently as
Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation, there
were four classes of sentient
creature who were capable of being the property of
Firstly, people (especially
people of colour) bonded into
, who in many circumstances
were not permitted to own property of their own and were seen in many contexts
and in many jurisdictions
as the property of their husband upon marriage (and
prior to that the property of their fathers). Even when no longer considered
property it was still some few years before women obtained the vote. Thirdly,
and, fourthly, animals
including companion animals such as (name omitted). The latter category, sadly,
remain classified as property
of their owners rather than having some more
temporal existence with consequent
is the dispute between these parties. The husband seeks an Order, perhaps an
exception to Order 6 of the Orders already made
by consent, that the wife
transfer to him ownership of (name omitted). The wife seeks that Order 6 would
include and incorporate
(name omitted)’s ownership and that she, having
his possession, would be declared that creature’s owner and thus the
seeks that the husband transfer to her registration of the animal, pursuant to
the provisions of the
Companion Animals Act 1998
that is contained within these reasons is intended to depart from legal
principle, nor intended to be in any way flippant.
I am conscious of that,
opined by Roger Caras, “
dogs are not our whole life, but they make our
lives whole
”. I am completely empathetic with the importance this
issue holds for the parties and conscious that the parties and each
of them may
consider this sentient creature, this living being, as fundamentally important
law describes the manner in which this case is to be determined. (name omitted)
is a chattel and his ownership is to be determined
by the Court as an issue of
ownership of property.
party, by their respective Initiating Application or Response, sought certain
Orders and a declaration that each party retain
all property in their respective
possession. Those documents were filed on 5 September 2016 and 10 October 2016
respectively.
one view, (name omitted) being in the wife’s possession at the point in
time when the Initiating Application and Response
were filed, the nett effect of
the relief that each party sought was to declare (name omitted) as the property
of the wife. That
is especially so as at the point that each party filed their
respective Application, (name omitted)’s ownership was not registered.
parties have not given detailed evidence in these proceedings. There is some
brief evidence contained in the Affidavit of the
wife, sworn or affirmed 2
September 2016 and filed 5 September 2016, and similarly brief Affidavit
evidence by the husband in his
Affidavit sworn or affirmed 10 October 2016 and
filed 10 October 2016. I am not critical of the brevity of the evidence. Those
were filed by the parties in compliance with their obligation under
Federal Circuit Court Rules 2001
to provide sufficient information to
the Court to understand their dispute. The documents were also intended to allow
agitation of
Interim issues. They were not intended to set out the totality of
evidence that the parties would give if the matter proceeded to
a Final Hearing.
However, it is the evidence that is available.
the consent of the parties, that evidence has been supplemented – if it
might be so described – by submissions put
by Counsel. Those submissions
have included a relation of the instructions of each of the parties. Neither
takes exception that
material is related from the bar table rather than by the
parties on oath. Neither party seeks to cross-examine the other. Thus,
case can be dealt with by reference to the evidence as it presently stands and
application of legal principles thereto.
the High Court of Australia has made clear in
Stanford v Stanford
, the first step in any determination of the property interests of parties
and adjustment thereto is to determine the nett assets
and liabilities of the
parties. In that regard there is no dispute. Neither party seeks to apportion a
value to (name omitted) and
appropriately so. They do not argue that his worth
is monetary. His worth is their love and affection for the creature as they
Court is also required, as the High Court of Australia again made clear in
Stanford v Stanford
, to determine for the purpose of any controversy with
respect to property adjustment whether an Order should be made and whether
just and equitable for it to be so. I accept – and the parties do not
seek to dissuade me – that the Court has
the Orders that are sought, whether, as sought by the wife, an Order in aid of a
property adjustment
Order or declaration or whether, as the husband seeks, a
separate Order as to delivery up of the property that is (name omitted).
issue of justice and equity or even appropriateness might be viewed in a broader
context in this case. Whilst there is no dispute
that the Court has
of that jurisdiction, it must
be determined whether any change should occur to
ownership as it presently exists as regards (name omitted).
is difficult to determine who, in fact, purchased (name omitted) let alone who
is (name omitted)’s “
.” There is no controversy
that the $300 fee paid for (name omitted)’s purchase was paid by the
husband. However, payment
of a fee does not, of itself, determine ownership or
determine the Order, if any, which might be made by this Court in adjustment
interests in property.
the parties are very much agreed that payment was made by the husband the
parties are very much at odds as to the circumstances
in which that payment was
wife’s evidence with respect to (name omitted)’s acquisition and
that which would be relevant to the circumstances
of his upbringing – if
it might be so described – is set out in paragraphs 7 to 11 and 50 to 56
of her Affidavit. The
wife describes that the parties met in January 2011, were
engaged in January 2012 and that in February 2013 they purchased a property
Property A. They did not immediately move into that property. In fact, they
did not move into the property at all before their
separation from each other.
The property would appear to have been either tenanted or used for some other
parties were married on (omitted) 2014. The parties agreed that they did not
cohabit or at least not on a fulltime basis prior
to marriage. From the date of
marriage until the date of their separation, either 12 or 18 March 2016, the
wife asserting the earlier,
the husband the later date (but nothing turns upon
that) the parties lived together at the home of the wife’s parents. This
would appear to have been as the property at Property A was being renovated. It
would seem from the balance of evidence in the case,
indeed from the
controversies between these parties on the first return date that the property
is still in a state of partial completion
or renovation.
relevance of the above chronology, at least in the wife’s case, is that
she asserts that (name omitted), the dog, was purchased
after the parties had
met and whilst they were dating each other rather than cohabiting and that, as a
consequence of the parties
not cohabiting until marriage, that from the date of
purchase of young (name omitted) he remained living with her and her parents
her parents’ home and was thus in her possession.
paragraphs 50 to 56 of the Affidavit, dealing specifically with (name omitted),
the wife describes that she had desired in September
2011 to adopt a puppy. She
describes that she looked for a dog online for some time and ultimately
discovered (name omitted). Something
to go and see him. She describes that it was her intention to buy the dog and
intention that he would be hers and stay with her at her (her
parents’) home. The wife asserts that her then fiancé
subsequent husband came with her to see the dog and offered to pay for (name
omitted) to gift him as an early birthday present
for the wife. The wife was
born on (omitted) and (name omitted) was purchased some few months before the
wife’s birthday.
dog was paid for – there is no dispute – by the husband and taken
The wife asserts that (name
omitted) went home with her and that she paid for all vaccinations, operations,
food and accessories
for (name omitted) as he was living with her and her
parents since adoption, i.e., continuously since September 2011.
wife describes that the first time that she was aware of any contrary allegation
by the husband was receipt by her, through her
attorneys, of correspondence from
the husband’s attorneys dated 6 May 2016. That correspondence is annexed
to the wife’s
Affidavit material, and the relevant portion thereof at page
10 of the Affidavit reads:
instructed that your client is refusing to make available for collection our
client’s dog, a (dog breed omitted) named
(name omitted), which is
currently residing at your client’s parents’ property
and is the wife].
Our client purchased this pet five years ago, and it went
with him to your client’s house when he moved in with your
wife then asserts:
omitted) has never been Mr Beale’s dog and has always lived with me and my
the wife would suggest the dog had never lived with the husband and has always
lived with her.
husband for his part, in answering those portions of the wife’s Affidavit,
offers the following at paragraph 20, (that relating
specifically to the
purchase and care of (name omitted)):
that (name omitted) is Ms Downey’s pet. (name omitted) has always been my
pet dog. Ms Downey did come with me the
day I purchased (name omitted), however,
I did not purchase him as a gift for Ms Downey. He did live with us at Ms
parents’ house because that is where we lived
relation to the wife’s allegations at paragraphs 7 to 11 as to the
chronology of the relationship between the parties, the
husband is silent, save
to assert that the parties separated on 18 March 2016. Thus, I accept the
wife’s evidence in paragraphs
7 to 10 of her Affidavit as unchallenged.
That, of course, does not place the dog in the wife’s possession. It
simply describes
where the wife lived and, following marriage, where the parties
lived together.
wife tenders in her case a bundle of bank statements and other documents
relating to the payment of expenses regarding (name omitted).
They include
payment of vet’s bills, purchase of items for the dog at (omitted) and
similar expenditures clearly relating
to a pet. Documents produced in relation
to the dog’s attendance upon vets are issued in the name of Ms Downey. In
there are five such documents. Each of the documents refers to Ms Downey
”. One can assume that the dog described in those
documents is, in fact, (name omitted). No issue is taken that it is not.
one is to commence with identifying the present legal and equitable ownership of
the property of these parties, one must first
determine who is the owner of
(name omitted) before determining whether any Order for adjustment of ownership
should be made.
is to be remembered that the husband asserts that he is and has always been
(name omitted)’s owner. The wife similarly asserts
she is and has always
been (name omitted)’s owner. Some guidance as to
” is given by the
Companion Animals Act 1998
(NSW). That Act imposes certain obligations upon owners of companion
animals, including a dog such as (name omitted), including,
at section 9 of the
Act, to register the dog’s ownership within six months of acquisition.
There is no dispute that this did
not occur, irrespective of who acquired (name
omitted) or had his possession, although it is not fatal to any claim asserted
and to the extent that there might be some suggestion of wrongdoing –
certainly it is described as a criminal offence
to fail to register a companion
animal – a section 128 certificate (
Evidence Act 1995
issued to each of the parties regarding the totality of their evidence and is
done so of the Court’s own motion. One
would hope that there would be no
call upon that certificate in defence of any action.
11 of the Act similarly describes that certain changes must be notified with
respect to ownership or occurrence of certain
events. Those obligations would
not appear to assist as there had not been registration prior to 4 November,
2016, that being some
little time after these parties separated. On any version
of events the parties had already been separated for nearly eight months
(name omitted) was registered for the first time.
one might take registration of ownership as demonstrating some tacit
corroboration of an assertion of ownership. However,
in circumstances whereby
the registration has occurred:
months after separation; and
there is clear notice of a claim of ownership by the wife, she having asserting
same in an Affidavit sworn or affirmed on 9 September,
2016 and served sometime
prior to 10 October, 2016;
I do not propose to draw such
Registration
after separation and notice of the wife’s claim and undertaken for the
first time some years after (name omitted)’s
acquisition might well be
seen as self-serving.
party sought, in their substantive Application and Response, any Order that
would affect ownership or transfer of ownership
of (name omitted). All that was
sought was a general declaration of ownership of any property in the possession
of each party.
The nett effect of such relief, if granted on the Application of
either party, would have been a declaration that the dog remained
the property
of the wife, who had his possession at all relevant times.
Companion Animals Act 1998
(NSW) provides a definition of
”, being the person by whom an animal is ordinarily
kept or the registered owner. Certainly, by that definition as at 4 November,
2016 the registered owner was the husband. At any time prior to 4 November,
2016, the person by whom the animal was ordinarily kept
was the owner. That was
clearly the wife as there is no controversy that following the marriage of the
parties that (name omitted)
lived with the parties jointly and that following
separation (name omitted) lived with the wife.
Ultimately,
on the evidence that is available and applying the rules of evidence thereto, I
accept that the wife is and was the owner
of the dog. That is not to suggest
that the husband is disbelieved. However, the direct evidence I have available
from the wife,
on oath, is that referred to in her above Affidavit, including
the chronology of the relationship of the parties. That does not determine
whom the dog lived. However, in combination with paragraphs 50 to 56, I am
satisfied that the wife’s evidence should
be preferred.
reference in correspondence annexed to the wife’s material is the only
direct reference to the dog’s ownership by
the husband and it is a mere
issue remains whether an Order should be made adjusting interests in the
property that is (name omitted). It is difficult to
appropriately apply the
balance of the legislative provisions that is an assessment of contribution and
section 75(2)
factors. It beggars belief to contemplate how
section 75(2)
Family Law Act 1975
would be of assistance in this determination,
unless one were to place some value upon love and affection. One would hope, in
neoliberal world that we have not yet come to the point where even love and
affection are commoditised.
regard to section 79 of the Act and the issue of contribution, it is readily
apparent that there is very little that would
be of assistance. There is no
dispute that the husband contributed the funds to purchase (name omitted) prior
to the marriage of
the parties. That much is clear. Contributions can be
determined with certainly as to the acquisition of the asset. But there are
also clearly determinable contributions to the maintenance and improvement of
the asset. On the wife’s case – and it
is inferentially if not
directly corroborated by the material that is tendered in her case – the
wife has contributed to (name
omitted)’s care directly and financially as
well as directly and non-financially. The various vet bills with respect to the
dog dated 18 October and 26 November 2011 together with March 2012 and January
2013 are addressed to the wife at her address at her
parents’ home. That
is not conclusive proof that this is where the dog lived, but clearly it
demonstrates that the wife was
responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the
dog to the extent of attending to such vet appointments and payment thereto. In
those circumstances, clearly the wife has made a contribution to this creature,
even if she did not initially pay to acquire him.
is also the issue of the wife’s evidence that, irrespective of who paid
for the creature, it was purchased for her as
a gift. I need not venture into
the territory of jurisprudence regarding gifts and equitable relief. I am
already satisfied the
wife was the owner of the creature, has had possession of
the creature and has contributed to the creature in such a fashion that
could not assert that it is appropriate for any Order to be made varying
I have indicated, section 75(2) of the Act could not assist in this
determination. If (name omitted) was a service animal, a Seeing
Eye dog for
example, these factors might come into play. There is no argument that they do.
Each party argues their case on the
basis of ownership and as I have determined
that the wife is the owner at law (or was at the time that each party filed
their Application
or Response) that is the end of the matter.
is no basis for any adjustment. Indeed, if satisfied that an Order should be
made, the best that one could do – no doubt
entirely unsatisfactorily to
both parties – would be to find contributions equal and to affect the
division of the asset. Neither
party seeks it. They each seek to retain the
entirety of the chattel and appropriately so. The wife owns (name omitted) at
and shall retain him.
those circumstances and for those reasons I am satisfied that there should be no
Order made with respect to an adjustment of interests
in the chattel comprising
the (dog breed omitted) (name omitted). On that basis, (name omitted) would
remain in the possession and
ownership of the wife.
am satisfied that I need do nothing further than to take the two
the Application for an Order with respect to (name omitted). (name
omitted)’s ownership would then be addressed
by paragraph 6 of the Minute
of Consent Orders in accordance with which Orders have already been made;
Order 7 of the Orders that are proposed in the Minute of Order, an Order which
has not been made by consent. However, I am satisfied
that Order 7 is purely a
machinery Order to give effect to the declaration which precedes it and which
further assists the parties
to identify and fully comply with their obligations
Companion Animals Act 1998
certify that the preceding fifty-one (51) paragraphs are a true copy of the
reasons for judgment of Judge Harman
February 2017
Animals such as dogs are
personal property: chattels. As described by Lesley Petrie, Adjunct Lecturer in
Animal Law Flinders Law
School – South Australia in “
Animal Law:
Animals as Property and the Implications for Veterinary Practice
Animals are property. That is, animals are ‘things’ over
which legal persons hold legal rights
”. Further, see the excellent
summary of law in the area by three QUT students Maja Visic, Jade Henderson and
Brooke Gilbey
in their paper “
Animals as Property under the
”, 2013 including (footnotes omitted) “
Under the law in
Australia and many other jurisdictions animals are afforded a status similar to
that of inanimate objects, whereby
they are the subject of absolute
As a result of this proprietary status,
animals are not afforded legal rights and are simply regarded as
use, exploitation, dispossession and, ultimately, the dehumanising of First
Nations peoples and Indigenous inhabitants of
invaded and colonised lands has
built the present wealth of many nations, institutions and
individuals.
That is not to
suggest that slavery and similarly inhuman, racist and discriminatory practices
ceased completely in the United States
or other jurisdictions in 1863. In the
antebellum United States, direct and bonded slavery was quickly replaced with
Jim Crow Laws
and segregation following
Dred Scott v. Sandford
[1856] USSC 9
(1857) and continuing until
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka
[1954] USSC 42
347 U.S. 483
(1954), and beyond, which were and the effects of which remain no
less debilitating to communities of difference as evidenced by
the Black Lives
Matter movement. First Nations tribes were dispossessed upon white colonisation
and the subject of genocidal practices
as evidenced by the Trail of Tears and
the Bended Knee Massacre amongst way too many examples continuing even after the
great Civil
War conflagration ended (and the Sioux continue to have their treaty
rights disrespected at Little Rock). In Australia
Blackbirding
”, Missions, Protectorate Offices, payment in
rations or withholding of wages continued for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
and other Islander and Asian folk, including, child migrants until the
1960s and similarly in Canada, New Zealand and every part
of the world reached
by the English Colonial invaders. In South Africa, Apartheid was introduced
(borrowing heavily from the Queensland
Aboriginal Protection and Restrictions
of the Sale of Opium Act 1897
) and continuing until 1994. Just as the
preamble to the United States Declaration of Independence opening “
hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men are created equal
was rendered vile and deceptive by the reality that many of its authors and
signatories owned slaves, so the espoused humanitarian
beliefs of the English
speaking world betrayed the racism of legislation and policy of the majority.
And that is not to ignore the
struggles for equality still faced by women in the world and especially the
ongoing address of reproductive
health and freedom reflected by, for example,
the recent Women’s Marches in the
The conception of the
innocence of childhood
” is a relatively recent concept. The
exploitation of children as labourers (bonded or otherwise) continued until well
century, including the horrific experiences of the
Stolen Generations and child
Again, this is not to
suggest that struggles to achieve full, complete and effective equality does not
continue for many. As Phil
Ochs sang, “
There’s many kinds of
slavery and we’ve found many more
” (“What are you fighting
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (300 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter