Application by New South Wales Minerals Council (No 4) [2021] ACompT 5 (18 November 2021)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by New South Wales Minerals
Council (No 4)
[2021] ACompT 5
Decision of the Commonwealth Treasurer under
Competition
and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) not to declare services at the Port of Newcastle
made on 16 February 2021
File number:
ACT 1 of 2021
JUSTICE O'BRYAN (Deputy President)
DR D ABRAHAM
PROF K DAVIS (Member)
Date of determination:
Catchwords:
– whether Tribunal is empowered
to award costs in a review under
of a decision under
not to declare a service – principles to be applied in considering the
making of a costs order – whether application
for review was unmeritorious
– costs not awarded
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION
– meaning of the phrase “proceedings for a review of a
declaration under
section 44K
” – meaning of the phrase “a
person who has been made a party to proceedings” – circumstances in
Court justified in construing a provision as if it contained additional
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Cases cited:
ABN AMRO Bank NV v Bathurst Regional Council
[2014] FCAFC 65
(2014) 224 FCR 1
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
Application by Glencore Coal Pty Ltd
[2016] ACompT 6
Application by New South Wales Mineral Council
[2021] ACompT 2
Application by New South Wales Minerals Council (No 2)
[2021] ACompT
Application by New South Wales Minerals Council (No 3)
[2021] ACompT
Application by New South Wales Minerals Council
[2021] ACompT
Berenguel v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] HCA 8
264 ALR 417
Carr v Finance Corporation of Australia Ltd (No 2)
(1982) 150 CLR
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Hadgkiss
169 FCR 151
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
Financial Services Council Ltd v Industry Super Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 92
(2014) 222 FCR 455
Kelly v The Queen
[2004] HCA 12
(2004) 218 CLR 216
Knightsbridge Estates Trust Ltd v Byrne
[1940] AC 613
Pilbara Infrastructure v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2012] HCA 36
Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Competition
[2017] FCAFC 124
(2017) 253 FCR 115
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
Quikfund (Australia) Pty Ltd v Airmark Consolidators Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 70
[2019] HCA 35
373 ALR 214
Re Duke Eastern Gas Pipeline Pty Ltd
[2001] ACompT 3
Re Glencore Coal Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2016] ACompT 7
309 FLR 358
Riley v Commonwealth
[1985] HCA 82
(1985) 159 CLR 1
Sydney Airport Corporation v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2006] FCAFC 146
155 FCR 124
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
Taylor v The Owners – Strata Plan No 11564
(2014) 253 CLR 531
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Date of hearing:
Decided on the papers
Counsel for New South Wales Minerals Council:
N De Young QC with D Tynan
Solicitor for New South Wales Minerals Council:
Clifford Chance LLP
Counsel for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
D Roche with P Strickland
Solicitor for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
Clayton Utz
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 1 OF 2021
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW LODGED BY NEW SOUTH WALES
MINERALS COUNCIL UNDER
SUBSECTION 44K(2)
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT
(CTH) OF THE DECISION OF THE DESIGNATED MINISTER UNDER
SUBSECTION 44H(1)
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT 2010
NEW SOUTH WALES MINERALS COUNCIL
DETERMINATION
JUSTICE O’BRYAN (Deputy President)
DR D ABRAHAM
PROF K DAVIS (Member)
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES THAT
1. There be no order as to the costs of the application.
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
A. INTRODUCTION
1 In this proceeding, the New South Wales Minerals
) applied to the Tribunal under
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
) for a review of the
decision of the designated Minister, the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP, Treasurer of
the Commonwealth of Australia
), made under
on 16 February 2021, not to declare a service at the Port of Newcastle
) provided by Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd (
service comprises the provision of the right to access and use all the shipping
channels and berthing facilities required for
the export of coal from the Port,
by virtue of which vessels may enter a Port precinct and load and unload at
relevant terminals
located within the Port precinct, and then depart the Port
shipping channel service
). The Treasurer’s decision was
consistent with the final recommendation of the National Competition Council
) made under
of the Act on 18 December 2020.
2 In its determination dated 4 August 2021 (
Determination
Tribunal affirmed the Treasurer’s decision not to declare the shipping
channel service and provided its reasons:
Application by New South Wales
Minerals Council (No 3)
[2021] ACompT 4
Application by NSWMC (No
3 On the assumption that NSWMC would not be successful in its application for
review, PNO applied for an order under
of the Act that NSWMC pay its
costs of this proceeding. At the hearing, PNO and NSWMC made submissions as to
whether the Tribunal
should exercise a discretion to award costs against NSWMC
and in favour of PNO. Neither party addressed the question whether
empowered the Tribunal to award costs in a review of a decision not to declare a
service under
, as opposed to a review of a declaration under
4 In its reasons for the Determination, the Tribunal expressed doubt that it
has power under
to make an order for costs in this proceeding,
which is a proceeding for review of the Treasurer’s decision not to
the shipping channel service under
(and not a proceeding for a
review of a declaration under
As neither party had addressed the
question of power during the hearing, the Tribunal afforded PNO and NSWMC the
opportunity to make
further written submissions on the question of power and any
supplementary submissions on the exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion
(should the Tribunal reach the view that it has power to make an order for
5 Each of PNO and NSWMC filed submissions on the question of the
Tribunal’s power to award costs. PNO also filed an affidavit
solicitor, Mr Bruce Lloyd, who gave evidence that PNO had incurred legal costs
of approximately $633,000 plus GST in the proceedings.
PNO sought an order that
NSWMC pay PNO this amount within 28 days. PNO subsequently also filed
submissions in reply to address a
further argument raised by NSWMC.
6 The following is the Tribunal’s reasons in respect of its
determination as to costs. In accordance with
of the Act, the reasons below
concerning the power of the Tribunal to make an order for costs in this
proceeding under
(section B) have been prepared by O’Bryan J as
the presiding member, whereas the reasons below concerning the exercise of the
Tribunal’s discretion to order costs (section C) have been prepared by the
Tribunal as a whole. In section B, the Tribunal
has concluded that it has power
to award costs against NSWMC in this proceeding under
of the Act. In
section C, the Tribunal has concluded that it is not appropriate to make an
order for costs.
B. STATUTORY POWER TO AWARD COSTS
The legal framework
7 Division 2 of
is titled “Declared services”. As the title implies, it concerns the
process for declaring services under
8 Subdivision B of Div 2 is titled “Declaration by the designated
Minister”. Again, as the title implies, it concerns
the process by which
the designated Minister may declare a service (or decide not to declare a
service), as well as reviews of such
decisions by the Tribunal.
9 The decision of the Treasurer, which the Tribunal was required to
reconsider in this proceeding, was made under
which relevantly provides as
44H Designated Minister may declare a
(1) On receiving a declaration recommendation, the designated Minister must
either declare the service or decide not to declare
10 Thus, the Treasurer (as designated Minister for the purposes of the
decision) was empowered to make one of two decisions, expressed
as declaring the
service or deciding not to declare the service.
11 The word “declaration” is defined by
for the purpose of
as “a declaration made by the designated Minister under Division
Section 44K
of the Act provides that a review application may be brought
in relation to those two kinds of decision. The relevant sub-sections
44K Review of declaration
(1) If the designated Minister declares a service, the provider may apply in
writing to the Tribunal for review of the declaration.
(2) If the designated Minister decides not to declare a service, an application
in writing for review of the designated Minister’s
decision may be made by
the person who applied for the declaration recommendation.
(3) An application for review must be made within 21 days after publication of
the designated Minister’s decision.
(4) The review by the Tribunal is a re‑consideration of the matter based
on the information, reports and things referred to
13 It can be seen that the language of subss (1) and (2) of
the language of
, referring to the alternative decisions able to be
made by the Treasurer (as designated Minister) as declaring the service or
not to declare the service.
14 The Tribunal’s power to award costs in respect of a review
proceeding under
is conferred by
which relevantly provides as
follows (emphasis added):
44KB Tribunal may order costs be awarded
(1) If the Tribunal is satisfied that it is appropriate to do so, the Tribunal
may order that a person who has been made a party
to proceedings for a
of a declaration under
section 44K
pay all or a specified part of the costs
of another person who has been made a party to the proceedings.
(3) If the Tribunal makes an order under subsection (1), it may make further
orders that it considers appropriate in relation to
the assessment or taxation
of the costs.
(4) The regulations may make provision for and in relation to fees payable for
the assessment or taxation of costs ordered by the
Tribunal to be paid.
(5) If a party (the first party) is ordered to pay some or all of the costs of
another party under subsection (1), the amount of
the costs may be recovered in
the Federal Court as a debt due by the first party to the other
15 On its literal terms,
refers only to a proceeding for a review
of a declaration; it does not refer to a proceeding for a review of a decision
not to declare
a service. The present proceeding is of the latter kind. There
was no declaration and, accordingly, this proceeding does not involve
of a declaration. Therefore, a literal reading of
would suggest that the
Tribunal is not empowered to make an order for costs in this proceeding.
16 The question that arises for determination is whether
construed such that it empowers the Tribunal to make an order for costs in
proceedings for a review of a declaration under
and in proceedings for
a review of a decision not to declare a service under
Tribunal is not otherwise empowered to make an order for costs in respect of a
proceeding brought under
17 The Tribunal notes that
was considered by a differently constituted
Tribunal in
Re Glencore Coal Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2016] ACompT 7
309 FLR 358
Re Glencore (No 2)
). Like the present proceeding,
Re Glencore
concerned a proceeding under
for review of a decision made
by the designated Minister (the Acting Federal Treasurer) not to declare the
shipping channel service
at the Port. Glencore was successful in its application
for review and applied for an order of costs against PNO. The Tribunal
declined to order costs but proceeded on the assumption that it was
empowered to do so, stating (at [5]):
was inserted to provide the Tribunal with
a discretion to order costs in reviews of decisions of the Minister to declare,
to declare, a service under
18 As noted by this Tribunal in
Application by NSWMC (No 3)
appears that no party in
Re Glencore (No 2)
questioned the power of the
Tribunal to make an order for costs under
in a proceeding for
review of a decision not to declare a service. For that reason,
Re Glencore
does not provide guidance on the question to be determined.
The parties’ submissions on the question of power
PNO’s submissions
19 PNO submitted that once
regard is had to statutory context and purpose, as is required, it becomes clear
that the phrase “review
of a declaration under
section 44K
refers to both a review of a decision to declare a service and a review
of a decision not to declare a service. In this regard PNO
submitted that four
key pieces of context must be considered.
20 First, PNO submitted that the Tribunal should have regard to the
explanatory memorandum to the amendment which introduced
PNO argued that
the explanatory memorandum shows that the intended purpose of
empower the Tribunal to deal with the costs of any review proceeding conducted
by the Tribunal under
21 Second, PNO submitted that the Tribunal should have regard to the
immediate context provided by
, including its heading, “Review of
declaration”. PNO submitted that this heading relates to a section that
two kinds of review applications that can be brought – a review
of the Minister’s decision to declare a service, and
a review of the
Minister’s decision not to declare a service – and therefore
contemplates that both kinds of review fall
within the notion of a “Review
of declaration”. PNO argued that this indicates that references to the
phrase “review
of a declaration” in other parts of the legislation
– without more – should not necessarily be construed as being
limited to reviews of decisions to declare a service.
22 Third, PNO submitted that there are other textual indicators that support
a broader construction of the phrase “review of
a declaration”
of the Act. PNO argued that, in contrast to
refers to a review of a declaration “under
section 44K
”, three other
provisions in
refer to a review of a declaration “under
subsection 44K(1)
(2). PNO argued that if the phrase “review of a declaration”
referred only to reviews of decisions to declare
a service, the words
subsection 44K(1)
” in these provisions would be unnecessary.
PNO submitted that the more expansive reference to
an opposite intention, namely that it is meant to apply to any review of a
declaration decision brought under
23 Fourth, PNO submitted that
uses shorthand expressions of a kind
similar to “review of a declaration” elsewhere throughout the Part.
PNO pointed
, which use the phrase “declaration
recommendation” in relation to any recommendation provided by the NCC to
the designated
Minister – whether that be to declare, or not to declare,
the relevant service. PNO submitted that this reflects an approach
more generally of using shorthand expressions that refer to more than the
ordinary meaning of the expression.
NSWMC’s submissions
24 NSWMC submitted that the statutory text in
read in context of
is clear. The Tribunal’s power
to award costs is expressly limited to “proceedings for a review of a
declaration”.
The word “declaration” in
used in the statutory sense of
NSWMC argued that
does not confer power on the Tribunal to order costs in this proceeding for
review of the Minister’s decision not
to declare a service under
which does not involve a “declaration” at all.
25 NSWMC submitted that whilst historical considerations and extrinsic
materials are relevant to the process of statutory construction,
they cannot be
relied on to displace the clear meaning of the statutory text. In the
circumstances, NSWMC submitted that there is
no room in the statutory text for
the contrary argument advanced by PNO.
26 In response to PNO’s construction of
, NSWMC made four key
(a) The heading in
cannot be used to defeat the
clear meaning of the statutory provisions. While headings may be taken into
account in the process of
statutory construction, the High Court has recognised
that headings are “not always reliable and do not form part of a statute,
and so may not govern what follows in the provision”:
373 ALR 214
(b) In respect of PNO’s argument that there are other provisions in
which refer to subs 44K(1) expressly in relation to a review of a
declaration, NSWMC submitted that none of the provisions relied
on use the same
language as
– each refer to “an application to review a
declaration under
”. NSWMC further submitted that, if the
legislature had intended
to apply to both types of proceedings under
, the section could easily have referred to “proceedings for a
review under
” or expressly to both types of proceedings.
(c) In respect of PNO's reliance on other shorthand expressions used in
such as the words “declaration recommendation” in
submitted that PNO has overlooked the fact that “declaration
recommendation” is a defined term in
recommendation made by the [National Competition] Council under
(d) In respect of PNO’s reliance on statements made in the explanatory
memorandum, NSWMC submitted that these statements cannot
displace the clear
language in the statute. Further, NSWMC argued that the passages relied on by
PNO do not support PNO’s argument
and that, whilst not strictly necessary,
it is possible to discern a reason why Parliament chose to limit the power in
to proceedings for a review of a declaration and not to proceedings for
a review of a decision not to declare a service. NSWMC argued
that imposing a
potential liability on an applicant for declaration (access seeker) for payment
of the service provider’s costs
would disincentivise applications for
review of decisions not to declare a service which runs contrary to
involving “very significant economic decisions where the
costs of making a wrong decision are likely to be high” (Competition
Policy Review, Final Report (March 2015), p 74).
27 NSWMC advanced a further submission that if, contrary to NSWMC’s
submissions, the Tribunal finds that
applies to this proceeding, the
is expressly confined to costs orders against “a person
a party to proceedings” (emphasis added). NSWMC
argued that the power does not extend to NSWMC, as the applicant. NSWMC argued
that this conclusion is supported by the text and context. As to text, the
notion that the applicant makes itself a party to the
proceedings by commencing
the proceedings is not readily embraced in the ordinary meaning of the words
“who has been made a
party to the proceeding”. As to context,
44K(6B)(a)(iv)
relevantly provides that notice of any assistance requested by
the Tribunal of the Council should be given to “any other person
been made a party to the proceedings for review”. NSWMC submitted that
this section draws the distinction between,
on the one hand, an applicant and,
on the other hand, “a person who has been made a party to
proceedings”.
PNO’s submissions in reply
28 In reply to NSWMC’s argument concerning the
meaning of the phrase “a person who has been made a party to
proceedings”,
PNO submitted that, by commencing proceedings for review
, an applicant is made a party to the proceedings. PNO argued that
NSWMC’s construction of
is contrary to the text and context of
the provision and inconsistent with the object of the provision, as revealed by
the relevant
legislative materials. On NSWMC’s construction, the Tribunal
would be unable to order costs against an unsuccessful applicant
for review, and
instead would be confined to ordering costs against a person who has been given
leave to participate in the review,
but who is likely to have played a lesser
role than the applicant.
Applicable principles of statutory interpretation
29 The applicable principles of statutory
interpretation are well known. The task of statutory construction must begin
with the text
of the provision in question, considered in its context (including
legislative history and extrinsic materials) and with regard to
its purpose:
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v
Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
Commissioner of
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club
(1997) 187 CLR 384
CIC Insurance
Project Blue
Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Commissioner of Taxation
, the High Court said at [39] (quoting
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
‘This Court has stated on many occasions that the
task of statutory construction must begin with a consideration of the
[statutory]
text.’ So must the task of statutory construction end. The
statutory text must be considered in its context. That context includes
legislative history and extrinsic materials. Understanding context has utility
if, and in so far as, it assists in fixing the meaning
of the statutory text.
Legislative history and extrinsic materials cannot displace the meaning of the
statutory text. Nor is their
examination an end in
31 More recently, the majority of the High Court in
(Kiefel CJ,
Nettle and Gordon JJ) stated as follows (at [14], citations omitted):
The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning
of a statutory provision is the text of the statute whilst, at the same time,
regard is had to its context and purpose. Context should be regarded at this
first stage and not at some later stage and it should
be regarded in its widest
sense. This is not to deny the importance of the natural and ordinary meaning of
a word, namely how it
is ordinarily understood in discourse, to the process of
construction. Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise that,
understood in its statutory, historical or other context, some other meaning of
a word may be suggested, and so too, if its ordinary
meaning is not consistent
with the statutory purpose, that meaning must be
32 Context in its widest sense includes consideration of the mischief which
the statute was intended to remedy. As was stated by Brennan
CJ, Dawson, Toohey
and Gummow JJ in
CIC Insurance
... if the apparently plain words of a provision are
read in the light of the mischief which the statute was designed to overcome
of the objects of the legislation, they may wear a very different appearance.
Further, inconvenience or improbability of result
may assist the court in
preferring to the literal meaning an alternative construction which, by the
steps identified above, is reasonably
open and more closely conforms to the
legislative intent.
33 This approach is also required by
Acts Interpretation Act
), which states that “the interpretation that
would best achieve the purpose or object of the Act ... is to be preferred to
each other interpretation”.
34 The permissible extent to which a court may depart from the statutory
text, including by reading a statutory provision as if it
contained additional
words or omitted words, was considered by the High Court majority (French CJ,
Crennan and Bell JJ) in
Taylor v The Owners – Strata Plan No 11564
(2014) 253 CLR 531
) at [38]-[40] (citations omitted):
The question whether the court is justified in reading a
statutory provision as if it contained additional words or omitted words
involves a judgment of matters of degree. That judgment is readily answered in
favour of addition or omission in the case of simple,
grammatical, drafting
errors which if uncorrected would defeat the object of the provision. It is
answered against a construction
that fills “gaps disclosed in
legislation” or makes an insertion which is “too big, or too much at
variance with
the language in fact used by the legislature”.
Lord Diplock’s three conditions (as reformulated in
Inco Europe Ltd v
First Choice Distribution
) accord with the statements of principle in
Cooper Brookes
and McColl JA was right to consider that satisfaction of
each could be treated as a prerequisite to reading
as if it contained
additional words before her Honour required satisfaction of a fourth condition
of consistency with the wording
of the provision. However, it is unnecessary to
decide whether Lord Diplock’s three conditions are always, or even
necessary and sufficient. This is because the task remains the
construction of the words the legislature has enacted. In this respect
not be sufficient that “the modified construction is reasonably open
having regard to the statutory scheme” because
any modified meaning must
be consistent with the language in fact used by the legislature. Lord Diplock
never suggested otherwise.
Sometimes, as McHugh J observed in
Newcastle City
Council v GIO General Ltd
, the language of a provision will not admit of a
remedial construction. Relevant for present purposes was his Honour’s
observation, “[i]f the legislature uses language which covers only
one state of affairs, a court cannot legitimately construe
the words of the
section in a tortured and unrealistic manner to cover another set of
circumstances”.
Lord Diplock’s speech in
Wentworth Securities
laid emphasis on the
task as construction and not judicial legislation. In
Inco Europe
Nicholls of Birkenhead observed that even when Lord Diplock’s conditions
are met, the court may be inhibited from interpreting
a provision in accordance
with what it is satisfied was the underlying intention of Parliament: the
alteration to the language of
the provision in such a case may be “too
far-reaching”. In Australian law the inhibition on the adoption of a
construction that departs too far from the statutory text has an added
dimension because too great a departure may violate the separation
of powers in
Constitution
Consideration
35 Two questions are raised for determination. The
first is whether s 44KB(1) should be construed as applicable only to proceedings
for review of declarations (which are made under s 44K(1)), or whether s 44KB(1)
should be construed as applying to proceedings for
review of decisions not to
declare a service (which are made under s 44K(2)). If the answer to the first
question is that s 44KB(1)
is only applicable to proceedings for review of
declarations (which are made under s 44K(1)), the section has no application to
present proceeding and it is unnecessary to consider the second question. If
the answer to the first question is that s 44KB(1) is
also applicable to
proceedings for review of decisions not to declare a service (which are made
under s 44K(2)), it is then necessary
to determine the second question which is
whether an applicant for review, in this case NSWMC, is a person who has been
made a party
to the proceeding.
36 In relation to the first question, and as observed by the Tribunal in
Application by NSWMC (No 3)
(at [272]), on its literal terms s
44KB(1) refers only to a proceeding for a review of a declaration; it does not
refer to a proceeding
for a review of a decision not to declare a service. The
language of s 44KB(1) mirrors the language of s 44K(1).
37 As the authorities referred to above affirm, however, the process of
assigning meaning to a legislative provision is not confined
to an examination
of the literal or grammatical meaning of the statutory text. An examination of
the statutory purpose, in so far
as it can be discerned from the statute and
relevant extrinsic materials, and an examination of the statutory context in
provision appears, may demonstrate that the provision was intended to
have a different meaning to its literal or grammatical meaning.
statutory definition (in this case, the definition of the word
“declaration”) is only an aid to construction
of the statute, and is
not to be used if the purpose and context of the statute requires otherwise:
ABN AMRO Bank NV v Bathurst Regional Council
[2014] FCAFC 65
(2014) 224 FCR 1
(Jacobson, Gilmour and Gordon JJ): citing
Kelly v The Queen
[2004] HCA 12
) at [84] and [103] (McHugh J);
Services Council Ltd v Industry Super Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 92
(2014) 222 FCR 455
Knightsbridge Estates Trust Ltd v Byrne
[1940] AC 613
Purpose of s 44KB
38 In considering the purpose of s 44KB(1), a
primary consideration is whether the legislature may have had a reason to
confine the
power to award costs to proceedings for review of declarations (made
under s 44K(1)) and to exclude from the scope of the power proceedings
review of decisions not to declare a service (made under s 44K(2)).
39 In that regard, it can be observed that proceedings for review of
declarations (made under s 44K(1)) are proceedings initiated
putative service provider seeking to overturn a decision to declare the service.
Conversely, proceedings for review of decisions
not to declare a service (made
under s 44K(2)) are proceedings initiated by the original applicant for
declaration (typically the
access seeker, while recognising that, under s 44F,
the original applicant can also include the designated Minister) seeking to
a decision not to declare the service. It is relevant to consider
whether that difference in the two forms of proceeding might inform
legislative intention to confine the power to award costs to proceedings of the
former kind.
40 Section 44KB was introduced by the
Trade Practices Amendment
(Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
(Cth), together with s 44KA which empowers
the Tribunal to stay the operation of a declaration in its discretion. The
Explanatory
Memorandum to the
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure
Access) Bill 2009
Explanatory Memorandum
) described the
mischief both provisions were intended to remedy as follows (at [5.7]-[5.8],
emphasis added):
5.7 Currently, any decision to declare a service is
automatically stayed by an appeal to the Tribunal. This creates a strong
for service providers to commence appeals and then delay their
completion, creating undue delay. To address this concern, it has
recommended by the NCC in its Annual Report 2007-08 that the Tribunal be
empowered to determine whether a stay is appropriate.
5.8 Unlike most court proceedings, and unlike matters arising in the Tribunal in
relation to the regulation of gas pipelines, there
are no provisions for costs
to be paid or awarded with respect to applications to the Tribunal for
of a decision-maker’s decision in relation to a declaration
application
. Requiring unsuccessful applicants to pay costs should reduce
incentives for delaying tactics, frivolous review applications or other
inappropriate behaviour. This amendment was proposed by the NCC in its Annual
Report 2007-08 as a means to reduce the substantial
costs and delays currently
experienced during review proceedings.
41 The concern expressed at [5.7] is that, if a service is declared, service
providers have an incentive to delay the commencement
of the declaration by
commencing a proceeding to review the declaration, causing undue delay.
Parliament sought to address that concern
by conferring a discretion on the
Tribunal whether to stay the declaration pending the outcome of the review
proceedings.
42 The concern expressed at [5.8] is that, unlike court proceedings, the
Tribunal had no power to award costs which might otherwise
incentives for delaying tactics, frivolous review applications or other
inappropriate behaviour”. Two aspects
of [5.8] should be noted. First, the
Explanatory Memorandum observed that the Act contained no provisions for costs
to be paid or
awarded with respect to applications to the Tribunal for review of
a decision-maker’s decision
in relation to a declaration
application
. That language clearly covers both kinds of review referred to
in s 44K (reviews of a declaration and reviews of a decision not to
Second, the Explanatory Memorandum focussed on the effect of requiring
unsuccessful applicants
to pay costs, observing that it should reduce
incentives for delaying tactics, frivolous review applications or other
inappropriate
behaviour and that this amendment was proposed by the NCC in its
Annual Report 2007-2008 as a means to reduce the substantial costs
currently experienced during review proceedings. The focus of the proposed
amendment appeared to be the award of costs
against unsuccessful applicants (as
opposed to unsuccessful respondents to an application) with the aim of reducing
incentives for
delaying tactics, frivolous review applications or other
inappropriate behaviour.
43 The Explanatory Memorandum summarised the effect of ss 44KA and 44KB as
follows (at [5.13]-[5.14], emphasis added):
5.13 The Tribunal has a discretion to decide whether a
decision to declare a service should be stayed upon an application for review
that decision under section 44K.
5.14 The Tribunal has a discretion to order that a party pays all or part of the
costs of another party in a
review of a declaration decision under section
44 It can be observed that at [5.8] and [5.14] the Explanatory Memorandum
described the power to award costs in proposed s 44KB in
two ways, both of which
differed from the statutory language: [5.8] referred to a review of a
decision-maker’s decision “in
relation to a declaration
application” while [5.14] referred to a review of a “declaration
decision under section 44K”.
Both expressions are apt to include decisions
not to declare a service under s 44K(2). Other references in the Explanatory
to the power to award costs in proposed s 44KB also use the
description of a “declaration decision” (see the table under
and [5.49]).
45 The NCC Annual Report 2007-2008 that informed the Explanatory Memorandum
contemplated the need for reform of the process for reviewing
declaration
decisions, noting that the provisions in force at the time “limit[ed] the
scope for the Tribunal to progress matters
one or more party
review has an incentive to delay” (p19, emphasis added). The Report went
on to observe that:
Unlike most court proceedings and some other matters
arising in the Tribunal, there are no provisions for costs to be paid or awarded
in relation to a review of a declaration decision by the Tribunal
contrast the NGL contains provisions for the Tribunal to award costs in a
review.) Costs provisions similar to those in the
NGL could usefully be applied
for reviews of declaration decisions. This would discourage conduct designed to
waste time and provide
an additional incentive to ensure parties comply with
Tribunal directions. The Council notes that under the NGL the Tribunal must
make an order requiring the original decision maker (including the Council and
the relevant Minister) to pay costs unless they
cause delays or otherwise act
inappropriately.
46 As far as can be discerned from the Explanatory Memorandum, the purpose of
the power to award costs in s 44KB is to reduce incentives
for delaying tactics,
frivolous review applications or other inappropriate behaviour in review
proceedings. There is more than a
suggestion in the Explanatory Memorandum that
the proposed amendment was largely motivated by the behaviour of service
who may have commenced review proceedings with the aim of delaying the
effect of a declaration. It might be thought that service
providers, facing the
statutory consequences of declaration, have a greater incentive to bring
unmeritorious review proceedings in
comparison to access seekers, in order to
delay the effects of declaration. There is also more than a suggestion in the
Explanatory
Memorandum that the proposed amendment was focussed on unsuccessful
applicants rather than unsuccessful respondents to a review proceeding,
reflecting the fact that respondents do not initiate the review proceedings.
Despite those suggestions, however, the Explanatory
Memorandum does not contain
any clear statement that the power to award costs would be intentionally
confined to proceedings for
review of declarations (made under s 44K(1)), and
would not extend to proceedings for review of decisions not to declare a service
(made under s 44K(2)). Nor does the Explanatory Memorandum contain any clear
statement that the power would be intentionally confined
to the award of costs
against unsuccessful applicants (as opposed to unsuccessful respondents).
47 It follows, in my view, that all that can be safely gleaned from the
extrinsic materials is that the purpose of the power to award
costs in s 44KB is
to reduce incentives for delaying tactics, frivolous review applications or
other inappropriate behaviour in review
proceedings. There is otherwise no clear
indication that the power was intended to be limited to an award of costs
against service
providers in proceedings for review of declarations made under s
Contextual considerations
48 In discerning the intended meaning of s 44KB,
there are two key contextual indicators that favour a broader interpretation of
provision (to include proceedings for review of decisions not to declare a
49 First, when referring specifically to the review of a decision to declare
a service (as opposed to the review of a decision not
to declare), the
legislature has sought to make that clear by referring to a declaration
“under subsection 44K(1)”. The
use of the phrase occurs in:
(a) s 44KA(1), which refers to the Tribunal’s
ability to stay the operation of a declaration when an application for a review
of a declaration has been made;
(b) s 44W(4A), which provides that the Tribunal must not make an access
determination in relation to a service where an application
for a review of a
declaration has been made; and
(c) ss 44ZZCBA(1) and (2), which relates to deferral of access arbitrations when
an application for a review of the declaration has
50 This choice in legislative drafting suggests that, if the legislature had
intended the power to award costs in s 44KB to be limited
to the review of a
decision to declare a service, s 44KB would have used the same language as
appears in ss 44KA(1), 44W(4A) and
44ZZCBA(1) and (2). Instead, the legislature
chose different language, referring to proceedings for a review of a declaration
s 44K, not confined to s 44K(1). While the legislative intention would
have been clearer if the phrase “declaration decision”
were used (as
in the Explanatory Memorandum) as opposed to “declaration”, the
reference to s 44K rather than 44K(1) provides
a substantial indication that
both forms of review proceeding were intended to be covered.
51 This approach to construction is supported by the
expressio unius est
exclusion alterius
maxim, that where legislation includes provisions
relating to similar matters in different terms, it is reasonable to assume that
there is a deliberate intention to deal with them differently. While this maxim
is to be applied with caution, it may serve, as in
the present case, to bolster
an available interpretation rather than to produce a result in itself: D C
Pearce, Statutory Interpretation
in Australia (LexisNexis, 9th edition, 2019) at
[4.43] citing
Carr v Finance Corporation of Australia Ltd (No 2)
150 CLR 139
Riley v Commonwealth
[1985] HCA 82
(1985) 159 CLR 1
strength of the application of this maxim in the present circumstances is
reinforced by the fact that ss 44KA and 44KB,
with their respective references
to “subsection 44K(1)” and “section 44K”, were
introduced at the same time
and the difference in their drafting is therefore
less likely to be the product of inadvertent inconsistency: cf
Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Hadgkiss
(2007) 169 FCR 151 at [15] per
52 The second matter of context is the headings used in Div 2 to
(in which s 44KB is found). Since the passing of the
Acts Interpretation
Amendment Act 2011
(No 46 of 2011)
(Cth), s 13 of the AIA now
provides that all material in an Act forms part of the Act. Headings to parts,
divisions, subdivisions
and sections in all Commonwealth legislation are
therefore part of the legislation, and regard can be had to such headings for
purposes of interpretation:
Quikfund (Australia) Pty Ltd v Airmark
Consolidators Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 70
(2014) 222 FCR 13
) at [81] per
Allsop CJ, White and Wigney JJ;
Berenguel v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2010] HCA 8
264 ALR 417
Statutory Interpretation
at [4.59], [4.71]. NSWMC’s reliance on
at [40] in this regard is misplaced: that case concerned the construction
of a NSW statute to which
Interpretation Act 1987
applied (stipulating that headings of a provision do not form part of a
53 As noted earlier, the heading to Div 2 of
is “Declared
services”. The heading to Subdiv B of Div 2 is “Declaration by the
designated Minister”. The
heading of s 44H is “Designated Minister
may declare a service”. The heading to s 44K is “Review of
declaration”.
It can be observed that each of those headings refers only
declaration
of a service, even though s 44H concerns decisions to
not to declare
a service and s 44K concerns the review of
decisions to declare or
not to declare
a service. The use of headings in
that form suggests that, unless the context indicates otherwise (as it does in s
44I(2)), the phrase
“review of a declaration” is an umbrella term
that refers to both types of review proceedings contemplated under s 44K.
Construction of s 44KB(1) in light of context and
54 In my view, the purposive and contextual
considerations referred to above support the conclusion that s 44KB(1) empowers
the Tribunal
to award costs in proceedings for review of declarations (which are
made under s 44K(1)) and proceedings for review of decisions
not to declare a
service (which are made under s 44K(2)). The purpose of the power to award costs
in s 44KB is to reduce incentives
for delaying tactics, frivolous review
applications or other inappropriate behaviour in review proceedings. While
service providers
may have greater incentives to engage in such conduct, the
extrinsic materials do not provide clear support for a conclusion that
legislative purpose was limited to review proceedings brought by service
providers. Contextually, the common use of the word
“declaration” to
describe decisions to declare or not to declare, and the reference to review
proceedings under s 44K
as opposed to s 44K(1), provide contextual support
for reading the power as applicable to both types of review proceedings under
55 The Tribunal rejects NSWMC’s submissions that the clarity of the
statutory text in s 44KB(1) provides no room for an alternative
construction. It
can be accepted that the statutory text is unfortunate. It would have been far
clearer if the subsection had referred
to “proceedings for a review of a
declaration
under section 44K”. The insertion of the word
“decision” would make clear that the subsection is referring to
concerning declaration made under s 44K (being decisions to declare or
not to declare). In the view of the Tribunal, the subsection
should be construed
as if the word “decision” was implicitly read in, consistently with
the principles of construction
. The error in drafting is
plain and the word to be supplied (“decision”) can be identified
with exactitude. This construction
is consistent with the language in fact used
by the legislature and enhances the consistency of language in
A person who has been made a party to the
proceedings
56 It is necessary to address NSWMC’s further
submission that if s 44KB(1) does apply to these proceedings, the Tribunal does
not have the power under s 44KB(1) to order costs against NSWMC because it is
not “a person who has been made a party to the
proceedings” within
the meaning of s 44KB(1).
57 The phrase “a person who has been made a party to the
proceedings” is used in a number of provisions within Div 2 of
of the Act (specifically ss 44K(6B), 44KA and 44KB), but it is a somewhat
unfortunate phrase. As explained in
Application by New South Wales Minerals
[2021] ACompT 2
Application by NSWMC (No 1)
is no express legislative provision that confers power on the Tribunal to
“make” a person a “party”
to a review proceeding under
Div 2. Rather, as observed in that decision (at [61]-[62]):
(a) reg 22B of the
Competition and Consumer
Regulations 2010
(Cth) stipulates that in a review under s 44K(1) of a
declaration of a service, the person who applied for the declaration
recommendation
may participate in the review, in addition to the service
provider and in a review under s 44K(2) of a decision not to declare a
the service provider may participate in the review, in addition to the person
who applied for the declaration recommendation;
(b) subpara 44K(6B)(a)(iv) assumes that the Tribunal has power to make a person,
other than the applicant for review, the provider
of the service and the person
who originally applied for the declaration recommendation, a party to the
proceeding for review.
58 Despite the absence of express powers to make a person a party to a
proceeding under Div 2, for the reasons given in
Application by NSWMC (No
, the Tribunal has an implied power to grant leave to a person to
participate in the review so as to be heard on the review (see at
Further, and again for the reasons given by the Tribunal in
Application by
NSWMC (No 1)
, a person who has and exercises the right to participate in the
review proceeding may properly be described as a party to the proceeding
[58]-[62]).
59 If the Tribunal exercises an implied power to grant leave to a person to
participate in the review, the person would properly be
regarded as a
“person who has been made a party to the proceedings”. The person
would have been made a party by reason
of the Tribunal’s grant of
60 So too, reg 22B of the
Competition and Consumer Regulations 2010
(Cth) stipulates that, relevantly, in a review under s 44K(2) of a decision not
to declare a service, the service provider may participate
in the review, in
addition to the person who applied for the declaration recommendation. If the
service provider elects to so participate,
the service provider would properly
be regarded as a “person who has been made a party to the
proceedings” by force of
that regulation.
61 The question raised by NSWMC’s contention is whether NSWMC, as the
person who applied for the declaration recommendation
and the applicant on the
review, is a “person who has been made a party to the proceedings”.
While the statutory phrase
is awkward, the legislative purpose as revealed in
the extrinsic materials and other contextual considerations require an
affirmative
answer to the question.
62 As to the legislative purpose, [5.8] of the Explanatory Memorandum makes
clear that s 44KB was enacted with unsuccessful review
applicants in mind.
Further, at [5.14] and in the table beneath [5.14], the intended effect of the
section was expressed in broader
terms, as allowing the Tribunal to order that a
party to the proceedings of a review of a declaration decision under s 44K
costs of another party to the review. As submitted by PNO, there is no
apparent reason why the Tribunal would only be empowered to
order costs against
a party to the proceeding other than the applicant, when it would be expected
that any such person would have
a lesser role in the proceeding. Such a
limitation would seem perverse. A further consequence of NSWMC’s
construction would
be that an applicant on the review could neither be ordered
to pay costs, nor seek to recover costs (as the section provides that
order is made in favour of “another person who has been made a party to
the proceedings”).
63 Two matters of statutory context point away from NSWMC’s
construction. First, as submitted by PNO, the more natural construction
44K(6B)(a) is that each of the persons listed at subparas (i) to (iv) is to be
regarded as a person who has been made a party
to the proceedings. The reference
in subpara (iv) to “any other person who has been made a party to the
proceedings”
suggests that the persons referred to in subparas (i) to
(iii) (which include the applicant on the review) are also persons who have
made parties to the proceedings. Second, s 44KA(2) confers power on the Tribunal
to stay the operation of a declaration “on
application by a person who has
been made a party to the proceedings”. The person most likely to seek a
stay of a declaration
is the service provider who, in the case of a review of a
declaration, would also be the applicant on the review. It is implicit
legislature considered that the service provider, as applicant, would be a
“person who has been made a party to the
proceedings”.
64 For those reasons, the Tribunal considers that the preferred construction
of “a person who has been made a party to the proceedings”
the context of s 44KB(1) includes the review applicant who, by commencing
proceedings for review under s 44K, is made a party
to the proceedings.
C. SHOULD AN AWARD OF COSTS BE MADE
65 Having determined that the Tribunal has power to
award costs against NSWMC in these proceedings, it is necessary to consider
such an order should be made.
Applicable principles
66 The Tribunal’s discretion to award costs
under s 44KB is unconfined, save that it must be exercised consistently with the
purpose of the power and taking account of relevant facts and circumstances of
the proceedings. As discussed above, the extrinsic
materials make clear that the
purpose of the power is to reduce incentives for delaying tactics, frivolous
review applications or
other inappropriate behaviour in review proceedings.
67 As was stated by the Tribunal in
Re Glencore (No 2)
(at [10]), the
principles concerning the award of costs in
inter partes
litigation in
the courts are generally not applicable to the power to award costs in
proceedings of a tribunal. Indeed, in tribunal
proceedings there is typically no
presumption that an award of costs will be made and the ordinary practice is not
to award costs.
In that proceeding, the Tribunal endorsed (at [12]) the earlier
statement of the Tribunal in
Re Duke Eastern Gas Pipeline Pty Ltd
; ATPR 41-827 (
Re Duke Eastern Gas
) at [7]-[8] (made in
respect of a power to award costs under
of the Gas Pipelines Access Law
in respect of a proceeding to review a decision of the Minister that a
particular gas pipeline be
covered under the
National Third Party Access Code
for Natural Gas Pipeline Systems
Whether the statutory criteria for coverage of a
pipeline are met will often be, as the present case illustrates, a matter on
there can be different points of view and legitimate differences of
opinion. It is important that the Tribunal be acquainted with
all factors which
are potentially relevant to its determination. Responsible intervention by
interested parties who have a worthwhile
contribution to make ought not to be
discouraged by fear of adverse costs orders. The review process benefits from
such participation.
Nor should a pipeline operator be discouraged from
exercising its statutory right of review by fear that costs orders may be made
against it if unsuccessful, potentially in favour of multiple parties. For these
reasons, the adoption of a general rule applicable
in the case of
litigation to the proceedings before the Tribunal would not be
conducive to the effective discharge by the Tribunal of its statutory
Costs orders should only be made in proceedings before the Tribunal where there
are circumstances which justify the making of an
order. The fact that a
particular outcome of proceedings before the Tribunal may be seen as conducive
(or not conducive) to the commercial
interests of a party, would not ordinarily
provide, of itself, a sufficient reason for making a costs order for (or
against) that
party. In principle, the power to order costs should be exercised
sparingly, and not so as to discourage participation in the review
Generally the power to award costs should be reserved for cases where a
party’s participation in the proceedings before
the Tribunal materially
and unnecessarily increases what would otherwise have been the costs of those
proceedings.
68 After endorsing the above statement of principles, the Tribunal in
Glencore (No 2)
continued (at [15]):
Once it is accepted that the proceedings in this matter
are not the equivalent of
inter partes
litigation, for reasons which are
apparent, the Tribunal considers that the discretion to order costs against a
party should not
be exercised unless there is, in the particular circumstances,
a reason to do so arising out of the nature of the issue or issues
raised or put
[sic, out] of the conduct of that party in the conduct of the matter. As in
, it is important for the Tribunal to have the benefit of the
identification of all factors relevant, or potentially relevant, to
determination. The determination may have effect on a much wider group than the
parties. That was said to be a feature of the
present case: if the declaration
were made, others may take advantage of it. That process, generally speaking, is
facilitated or
supported by responsible intervention by interested parties and
should not be discouraged by fear of adverse costs orders. In particular,
NCC submitted, the Tribunal’s ability to assess the application for review
may be impeded if cost disincentives hinder
or prevent a service provider from
fully and properly participating in the review. Nor should a potential applicant
for review be
discouraged from exercising its statutory right of review by fear
of costs orders, if it is unsuccessful, except if the matters it
raises are not
substantial or there is an unsatisfactory feature of the way its case is
presented. Consequently, given the nature
of the jurisdiction, the Tribunal
reaffirms that the adoption of a general rule applicable in the case of
litigation to proceedings before the Tribunal would not be conducive
to the effective discharge by the Tribunal of its statutory
69 Each of the parties accepted the foregoing as a correct statement of the
applicable principles.
PNO’s submissions
70 PNO’s primary submission in support of an
order for costs was that NSWMC’s application for review was unmeritorious
and NSWMC ought to have known that it would not succeed. In that respect, PNO
relied on two principal matters.
71 First, one of the members of NSWMC, Glencore, had previously brought an
application for review of an earlier decision not to declare
the shipping
channel service at the Port. That application was the subject of the decision of
the Tribunal (differently constituted)
Application by Glencore Coal Pty
[2016] ACompT 6
Re Glencore (No 1)
). That application was
determined by the Tribunal on the basis of the law prior to its amendment by the
Competition and Consumer Amendment (Competition Policy Review) Act 2017
2017 Amendment Act
). Specifically, applying declaration criterion
(a) as interpreted by
Sydney Airport Corporation v Australian Competition
[2006] FCAFC 146
(2006) 155 FCR 124
, the Tribunal was required to consider whether
access to the shipping channel service would promote a material increase in
competition,
and answered the question in the affirmative. The Tribunal declared
the service, and the Tribunal’s decision was upheld on
of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2017] FCAFC 124
72 As discussed in
Application by NSWMC (No 3)
, criterion (a) was
amended in a significant way by the 2017 Amendment Act (at [45]-[46]). Prior to
the amendment, the criterion required
a comparison of the future state of
competition in the dependent market with a right or ability to use the service
and the future
state of competition in the dependent market without any right or
ability, or with a restricted right or ability, to use the service.
the amendment, the criterion requires a comparison of access on reasonable terms
and conditions as a result of a declaration
of the service and the circumstances
that would be likely to prevail with respect to access in the absence of
declaration.
73 Relevantly for present purposes, in
Re Glencore (No 1)
Tribunal also expressed its view on whether criterion (a) would have been
satisfied if it were interpreted as requiring that
access to the shipping
channel service, as a result of declaration, would promote a material increase
in competition; that is, in
a similar manner to its amended form following the
enactment of the 2017 Amendment Act. The Tribunal concluded that criterion (a)
would not have been satisfied in respect of the shipping channel service at the
Port if it had that meaning (see at [157]). On that
basis, PNO submitted that
NSWMC had the benefit of, effectively, an indicative determination of the
Tribunal on the question that
was raised in this proceeding.
74 Second, PNO submitted that NSWMC did not adduce any evidence on the
application to show that either the Tribunal’s indicative
determination in
Re Glencore (No 1)
was wrong or that facts and circumstances had changed
since the decision in
Re Glencore (No 1)
. To the contrary, PNO argued
that its subsequent introduction of the open access arrangements for the
shipping channel service, including
its offer of the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds,
only strengthened the conclusion expressed by the Tribunal in
Re Glencore (No
. The Tribunal’s reasons in this proceeding (as recorded in
Application by NSWMC (No 3)
) demonstrate that NSWMC’s application
for review in this proceeding lacked merit. In that regard, PNO referred to the
findings made by the Tribunal in this proceeding:
(a) that NSWMC was unable to refer the Tribunal to any
evidence adduced by it before the NCC that would contradict the NCC’s
assessment that the coal tenements market is effectively competitive (at
(b) there was no substantive evidence before the NCC that PNO’s pricing
under its open access arrangement or the Pro Forma
Pricing Deeds was having any
detrimental impact on investment and competition in the coal tenements market
(at [240]);
(c) NSWMC’s principal argument in relation to the impact of declaration on
the coal tenements market, that declaration would
remove hold-up risk for coal
tenement investment and thereby promote a material increase in competition, was
not supported by any
empirical evidence (at [246]) or any financial analysis of
the impact of the rates of the navigation service and wharfage charges
returns in the coal mining sector in the Hunter Valley (at [251]); and
(d) NSWMC did not provide financial data to the NCC to support its assertions
that there would be investment uncertainty without
declaration (at
75 PNO also submitted that it incurred unnecessary costs associated with
NSWMC’s interlocutory application under ss 44K(6) and/or
44ZZOAAA(5) of
the Act for the Tribunal to issue a direction or request for the certain
documents referred to by the NCC to be provided
to the Tribunal for the purposes
of the review proceedings (see
Application by New South Wales Minerals
Council (No 2)
[2021] ACompT 3).
PNO submitted that the application was made
late and demonstrated that NSWMC’s application was ill-considered.
NSWMC’s submissions
76 In response, NSWMC advanced three principal
submissions.
77 First, NSWMC submitted that its application for review was not
unmeritorious. It argued that the Tribunal’s earlier decision
Glencore (No 1)
(at [157]) under the predecessor provisions of Part IIIA was
not determinative of the present application. The present application
first application made since the law was amended by the 2017 Amendment Act and
there were important legal issues that were
determined in this application as to
the proper construction of the new declaration criteria (for example, the
meaning of the expression
“promote a material increase in
competition”). Whilst the new declaration criteria were addressed by the
NCC in its recommendation
to revoke the declaration of the shipping channel
service, the revocation determination was not able to be reviewed by the
NSWMC referred to the fact that the ACCC sought to intervene in
NSWMC’s application on the basis that it disagreed with the
approach of
the NCC to criteria (a) and (d) (the Tribunal refused the ACCC’s
application to intervene in
Application by New South Wales Mineral
[2021] ACompT 2).
NSWMC also referred to the fact that the Tribunal
concluded that the NCC’s decision was partly based on an erroneous
to criterion (a) (referring to
Application by NSWMC (No 3)
[145]-[148]). As to the factual circumstances, NSWMC said that, since the
Tribunal’s decision in
Re Glencore (No 1)
, PNO had further
increased the navigation service charge and had refused to negotiate
collectively with coal producers in respect
of that charge.
78 Second, NSWMC submitted that the contention that its application lacked
merit was not a sufficient basis to make a costs order
under s 44KB(1). In that
regard, NSWMC relied on the statements made by the Tribunal in
Eastern Gas
(at [8]), approved by the Tribunal in
Re Glencore (No 2)
(at [10]), to the effect that the power to award costs should be reserved
for cases where a party’s participation in the proceedings
Tribunal materially and unnecessarily increases what would otherwise have been
the costs of those proceedings. NSWMC submitted
that its conduct of the
proceeding did not warrant the imposition of an adverse costs order.
79 Third, NSWMC submitted that its application under ss 44K(6) and/or
44ZZOAAA(5) of the Act for certain documents, referred to by
the NCC, to be
provided to the Tribunal for the purposes of the review proceedings was
ultimately successful in respect of a number
of documents.
Consideration
80 The question whether to award costs against NSWMC
in favour of PNO is finely balanced.
81 Contrary to NSWMC’s submission, the extrinsic materials to the
enactment of s 44KB make clear that the purpose of the power
includes deterring
frivolous review applications. Costs may be awarded against a review applicant
if the application lacks merit
such that it might be described as frivolous or,
to adopt the language of the Tribunal in
Re Glencore (No 2)
matters it raises are insubstantial. Costs may also be awarded against a party
if their conduct in the review proceedings
materially and unnecessarily
increases what would otherwise have been the costs of the proceedings.
82 The issues the subject of these proceedings were extensively canvassed in
earlier decisions and proceedings concerning the declaration
of the shipping
channel service at the Port. Those earlier decisions and proceedings are
summarised in
Application by NSWMC (No 3)
and involved an ultimately
successful application for declaration by Glencore (see at [74]-[76]) and the
revocation of the declaration
by the NCC following the enactment of the 2017
Amendment Act (see at [84]-[85]). The earlier Tribunal’s reasons in
Glencore (No 1)
expressed the view that, if criterion (a) required
assessment of whether declaration (that is, access on terms brought about by
declaration)
would promote a material increase in competition, the criterion
would not be satisfied (at [157]).
83 Given the history of previous decisions and proceedings concerning the
possible declaration of the shipping channel service at
the Port, it would be
expected that NSWMC’s renewed application to the NCC for declaration would
have been based on additional
evidence, not considered in the earlier decisions,
demonstrating that a different conclusion should be reached. However, NSWMC
to adduce evidence in support of its main contention in the review. As
the Tribunal explained in giving its reasons for dismissing
application for review (
Application by NSWMC (No 3)
at [7]), the
principal contention advanced by NSWMC to the NCC and maintained in the review
before the Tribunal was that, without
declaration of the shipping channel
service, companies considering investments in the coal tenements market in the
Hunter Valley
region would face uncertainty with respect to future prices to be
charged by PNO for the shipping channel service, resulting in increased
investment risk and causing investment delay. Despite that, as the Tribunal
found (at [8]):
NSWMC’s principal contention to the NCC was not
supported by any empirical evidence concerning the coal tenements market. NSWMC
failed to present to the NCC any financial or quantitative evidence concerning
the coal tenements market conditions, structure, prices
or expected returns. No
financial evidence was presented as to how investment decisions are made in the
coal tenements market and
how Port charges figure in investment decisions.
Instead, NSWMC relied on assertions by a limited number of existing coal mining
companies to the effect that investment decisions would be affected if the
shipping channel service were not declared, supported
by a theoretical economic
report from Synergy Consulting.
84 As submitted by PNO, NSWMC brought its interlocutory application under ss
44K(6) and 44ZZOAAA(5) of the Act at a late stage of
the proceeding. The
question of what materials were able to be considered by the Tribunal in the
proceedings ought to have been addressed
by NSWMC at a much earlier stage of the
proceeding. Instead, the parties to the review were required to engage in an
urgent interlocutory
dispute not long before the commencement of the hearing.
85 Notwithstanding those matters, the Tribunal has determined that it is not
appropriate to award costs against NSWMC in favour of
PNO in this proceeding.
86 The object of Part IIIA is to promote the economically efficient operation
of, use of and investment in the infrastructure by which
services are provided,
thereby promoting effective competition in upstream and downstream markets. By
reason of declaration criterion
(c) in s 44CA, declaration only applies to
facilities of national significance. In
Pilbara Infrastructure v Australian
Competition Tribunal
[2012] HCA 36
(2012) 246 CLR 379
, the plurality observed (at [98])
that Part IIIA is intended to operate in a way that will contribute to national
economic efficiency.
The national access regime in Part IIIA therefore serves an
important national economic policy objective. Further, as observed by
members of the Competition Policy Review in their final report dated March 2015
(at p 74): “[d]ecisions to declare a service
under Part IIIA, or determine
terms and conditions of access, are very significant economic decisions where
the costs of making a
wrong decision are likely to be high”. For that
reason, and as stated by the Tribunal in
Re Glencore (No 2)
discretion to order costs in s 44KB should not be exercised in a manner that may
discourage potential applicants for review
from exercising their statutory right
of review by fear of costs orders. The power should be exercised sparingly.
87 While NSWMC’s application for review was unsuccessful and aspects of
its application can be criticised for lacking substance,
overall the application
raised questions of importance that required careful consideration by the
Tribunal. Three matters can be
noted in that regard.
88 First, the declaration criteria now located in s 44CA were amended by the
2017 Amendment Act with effect from 6 November 2017.
As discussed by the
Tribunal in
Application by NSWMC (No 3))
at [36]-[60], each of criterion
(a) and (d) were the subject of material revision. The amendments gave rise to a
number of arguments
the Tribunal (see at [128]-[152]). The Tribunal considers that the questions
raised in relation to the meaning of the declaration criteria were properly
raised by each party, and the Tribunal’s decision
might have been
different if different conclusions were reached about those issues. Further, the
proceeding before the Tribunal raised
an important question about whether, and
in what circumstances, criterion (a) would be satisfied if the facility owner
(service provider)
is not vertically integrated, which was considered by the
Tribunal (at [153]‑[169]). The Tribunal considers that the arguments
advanced by the parties on that issue were properly raised and, again, the
Tribunal’s decision might have been different if
different conclusions
were reached.
89 Second, following the NCC’s revocation decision in July 2019, there
was a material change in circumstances concerning the
terms on which PNO offered
the shipping channel service. As summarised by the Tribunal in
Application by
NSWMC (No 3)
...in December 2019 (and subsequent to the revocation
decision), PNO published on its website new “open access” rates
the navigation service and wharfage charges for vessels using the shipping
channel service taking effect from 1 January 2020.
The “open access”
rates published by PNO, available to any coal vessel entering the Port, are a
navigation service charge
of $1.0424 per gross tonne and a wharfage charge of
$0.0802 per revenue tonne. In addition to publishing “open access”
rates on its website, PNO also published, and offered on a standing basis, the
Pro Forma Pricing Deeds. As noted earlier, the Port
User Pricing Deed was
published in December 2019 but was replaced by the Producer Pricing Deed and
Vessel Agent Pricing Deed in March
2020. The Pro Forma Pricing Deeds were
offered as an agreement in respect of the navigation service charge and wharfage
charge pursuant
to s 67 of the PAMA Act which could be entered into by,
relevantly, coal producers or vessel agents. The Pro Forma Pricing Deeds
10 year term. Under each of the three deeds, PNO offered a navigation service
charge of $0.8121 per gross tonne and a wharfage
charge of $0.0802 per revenue
tonne, subject to an annual price adjustment (the greater of CPI increases and
4%) and other adjustment
90 The terms and effect of the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds were the subject of
detailed argument in the proceeding. The Tribunal considers
that the arguments
advanced by the parties were properly raised and, again, the Tribunal’s
decision might have been different
if different conclusions were reached.
91 Third, while NSWMC brought its interlocutory application under ss 44K(6)
and 44ZZOAAA(5) of the Act at a late stage of the proceeding,
the provisions of
the Act governing the Tribunal’s review, and particularly the material
that may be considered by the Tribunal,
have not previously received detailed
consideration by the Tribunal or the Federal Court. It was unfortunate that
NSWMC focussed
on those issues at a late stage of the proceeding. However, while
its late application caused inconvenience, the Tribunal is not
persuaded that
costs would have been saved if the issues were raised at an earlier stage of the
proceeding.
92 Overall, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the matters raised by NSWMC on
the review application were so insubstantial, or its
conduct of the application
was so unsatisfactory, that an order for costs ought to be made against it.
Accordingly, the Tribunal
is not satisfied that it is appropriate to make a
costs order against NSWMC.
I certify that the preceding ninety-two (92)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination herein of
the Honourable
Justice O'Bryan, Dr D Abraham and Prof K
Dated: 18 November 2021
RTF format (540 KB)
Signed PDF/A format