Terminals Pty Ltd Trading AS Quantem Bulk Liquid Storage & Handling [2025] FWCFB 260 (11 November 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 260
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Intractable bargaining workplace determination
Terminals Pty
Ltd Trading AS Quantem Bulk Liquid Storage &
(B2024/1131)
Quantem Bulk Liquid Storage and Handling (Queensland) Workplace
Determination 2024
Storage Services
DEPUTY PRESIDENT CLANCY
COMMISSIONER LEE
COMMISSIONER FOX
MELBOURNE, 11 NOVEMBER 2025
Intractable bargaining workplace determination
On 29 September 2025, we issued a
in which we
concluded that with the exception of the part-time employee clause, the terms of
the draft intractable bargaining workplace
determination filed by Terminals Pty
Ltd T/A Quantem Bulk Liquid Storage & Handling (
submissions in this matter dated 28 November 2024 (
Quantem’s Proposed
Determination
are all agreed terms within the meaning of
s 274(3)(a)
Fair Work Act
). The consequence of our decision is that the part-time
employee clause is the only matter “still at issue” within the
of the Act and we therefore outlined the following:
“As to the terms of the part-time employee clause to be
included, our provisional view is that the terms of clause 4.6 in the
UWU’s Proposed Workplace
Determination
be included in the workplace determination we make as the part time employees
clause, having regard to the considerations
of the Act. In
these circumstances, and noting that each of the other requirements in
of the Act appear to have been met, our provisional view is that a
workplace determination reflecting the terms of Quantem’s
Workplace Determination ought to be made, save that clause 4.6 should be
expressed in the terms of clause 4.6 in the UWU’s
Proposed Workplace
Determination.”
The parties were afforded the opportunity to provide any written
submission in response to our provisional view. The United Workers’
) subsequently advised that having conferred, the parties had agreed
that the workplace determination should reflect Quantem’s
Workplace Determination and had reached a consent position as to the content of
part-time employee clause. The UWU provided
a copy of the clause which the
parties submit should be included and advised:
“The clause contains a minor amendment to clause 4.6 of
the UWU’s Proposed Workplace Determination, in which the phrase
“hours as mutually agreed” is replaced with the phrase “Core
Hours or Additional Hours” in clause 4.6(g).
The parties consider this
phrasing is more specific but otherwise reflects, in practice, the part-time
employee clause provisionally
endorsed by the Full Bench for inclusion in the
proposed workplace
determination.”
Further advice was received from the lawyers acting for
confirmed, on behalf of both parties, their consent position regarding the
content of the part-time employee clause and outlined
a request that we issue a
workplace determination in the terms agreed (and provided) by them, in the event
we did not wish to hear
further from them.
Consideration
Section 270(1)
of the Act requires that an intractable bargaining
workplace determination complies with
of the Act. Noting that
Quantem’s Proposed Workplace Determination is expressed to cover Quantem,
certain employees of it engaged
at its Pinkenba terminal and the UWU as their
bargaining representative, we are satisfied that it does so. We are also
(and note that the parties agree) that Quantem’s Proposed
Workplace Determination includes the ‘core terms’ detailed
of the Act. In addition, we are satisfied that the parties have reached the
requisite agreement in relation to the ‘mandatory
the Act and note that these are also included.
Sections 270(1)(a)
(2) of the Act further require that the
terms that have been agreed between the parties must be included in the
workplace determination.
Section s.274(3)(a)
relevantly outlines that an
‘agreed term’ for an intractable bargaining workplace determination
is a term that the bargaining
representatives for the proposed enterprise
agreement concerned had agreed, at the time the application for the intractable
declaration concerned was made, should be included in the agreement.
As outlined above, we have previously concluded that except
for the part-time
employee clause, the terms of Quantem’s Proposed Workplace Determination
are all agreed terms within the
s.274(3)(a).
Section 270(3)
Act provides that a workplace determination must also include terms that the
Commission considers ‘deal with the matters
that were still at
issue’ and in this regard, we have previously expressed the view that the
part-time employee clause was
the only matter ‘still at issue’ for
the Commission to arbitrate. As we have outlined, the parties have now arrived
a consent position regarding the content of the part-time employee clause and
having considered the terms of that clause, we are
satisfied that no issues in
relation to the requirements in
of the Act arise.
In deciding whether to include the part time clause proposed by the
parties in the workplace determination we make, we must take into
account the
of the Act. We do not consider that any of the
weigh against the inclusion of the part time clause proposed by the parties.
That it represents a consent position is a compelling
merit consideration
and we also observe that the proposed clause has a number of features
resembling those in the part-time employees clause in the relevant
modern award,
Storage Services and Wholesale Award 2020
. In terms of employer
interests, we note that a part time employee’s hours may be increased
beyond their ‘Core Hours’
in order to meet operational needs but
that any such ‘Additional Hours’ must be agreed in writing before
the next scheduled
shift and must not result in the total hours worked being in
excess of the proposed full time hours over a 4-week cycle. We also
all time worked in excess of ‘Core Hours’ or ‘Additional
Hours’, as the case may be, must be paid
at overtime rates. As such, it is
apparent that the proposed clause takes into account the interests of both
Quantem and its employees
(s.275(c)).
We also apprehend that a consequence of
part time employees working additional hours to meet operational needs might
improve productivity
and we do not understand the existing enterprise
agreement to have had similar arrangements or benefits as far as part time
was concerned
(s.275(ca)).
Nor do we consider there are public
interest considerations that would weigh against the inclusion of the clause
(s.275(d)).
Finally, we are not persuaded that either the
considerations are determinative and nor do we consider that the part time
clause will have any discernible impact on the incentives
to continue bargaining
at a later time
(s.275(h)).
Attached to this decision is the workplace determination which
reflects Quantem’s Proposed Workplace Determination and the part
clause now proposed by the parties. It is entitled the
Quantem Bulk Liquid
Storage and Handling (Queensland) Workplace Determination 2024
Workplace Determination
). Further to our provisional view,
having had regard to the position of the parties, for the reasons we have
outlined above and in
accordance with
of the Act, we make an intractable
bargaining workplace determination in the terms set out in the Workplace
Determination. Pursuant
of the Act, the
Determination
operates from 11 November 2025.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
CB 2625 and
Email from the
UWU dated 10 October 2025.
Email dated 17
October 2025.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<AG531080 PR793639>
RTF format (372 KB)
Signed PDF/A format