Hysential Pty Ltd [2020] ADO 2 (19 June 2025)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Registered design number
202414139 -
Fluid Hygiene Dispenser
- in the name of Hysential Pty
Benjamin Goldsworthy
REPRESENTATION:
Steven Ugrinovski and Neeraj Aumer
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) – request for amendment –
considered under reg 9.05 of the
Designs Regulations 2004
no clerical error or obvious mistake – amendment under reg 9.05 not
allowable – request for amendment refused.
matter concerns a request made under the
Designs Regulations 2004
to amend a registered design
(‘Design’), the details of which I extract below:
Design number
: 202414139
: Hysential Pty Ltd (‘Owner’)
: Fluid Hygiene Dispenser
: 20 June 2024
Certificate of examination issued
: 22 October 2024
Representations:
see Schedule 1 (‘Representations’)
Design was registered on 28 July 2024. The Owner requested examination of the
Design. On 17 September 2024, the Owner requested
that the Design be amended to
substitute the representations at Schedule 1 to these written reasons. On 18
September 2024, a delegate
of the Registrar of Designs (‘Registrar’)
replied in writing in the following terms, giving the Owner four weeks to
Problem with Supporting Documentation
The request was to amend the design right to correct an error. However, no
supporting documentation has been provided to clearly show
that a clerical error
or obvious mistake occurred. This means there is not enough information for the
amendment to be made.
What you can do
Please submit the relevant supporting document, making sure it clearly
demonstrates a clerical error or obvious mistake.
22 October 2024, the Design was examined, and a certificate of examination was
issued to the Owner. On 22 October 2024, the Designs
Office contacted the Owner
by letter noting that as the deadline for responding had passed without any
response, the request for
amendment had been refused.
26 October 2024, the Owner requested to be heard on the refusal to amend the
Representations. The hearing request was accompanied
by a letter outlining the
proposed substitutions to be made to the Representations
(‘Letter-1’).
offer further clarification regarding the requirements for amendments under the
Act, a delegate of the Registrar contacted the
Owner on 12 December 2024 by
letter and thereafter by telephone. Thereafter, the Designs Office set the
matter down for a hearing.
14 February 2025, I directed that the Owner file any evidence and/or written
submissions by 5 March 2025. The Owner did not file
any documents by this
12 March 2025, as a delegate of the Registrar, I heard this matter by video
conference. The Owner was represented by Steven Ugrinovski
and Neeraj Aumer,
employees of the Owner. At the hearing I noted that they had not submitted any
evidence to the Designs Office,
as nothing to date had been provided in the form
of a declaration.
the hearing, I considered it reasonable and appropriate in the circumstances to
afford the Owner an additional opportunity to
provide any evidence in a
declaratory format and if they desired any related written submissions.
the day of the hearing, I requested that the Owner provide any evidence and/or
submissions by 4 April 2025. On 4 April 2025, the
Owner filed a declaration of
Steven Ugrinovski, CEO of the Owner, of the same date (‘Ugrinovski’)
and a letter from Steven
Ugrinovski (‘Letter-2’).
29 April 2025, I notified the Owner that I intended to decide the matter unless
the Owner requested an additional oral hearing.
The Designs Office did not
receive any response from the Owner.
am to decide this matter as a delegate of the Registrar with reference to all
materials on the file as well as the submissions made
orally at the
Letter-1, the Owner submitted the following:
I am writing to
formally request an amendment to the fluid dispenser design submitted under
202414139 initially filed on 20 Jun 2024.
Due to an oversight, the initial
submission does not accurately represent the intended design features.
The revised design submission includes the following important modifications,
as illustrated in the attached images:
These changes more accurately represent the intended design features and
improve the overall performance and appearance of the dispenser.
request that the newly attached design file be accepted as a replacement for the
previously submitted file.
hearing request filed by the Owner relevantly states:
I am writing
to formally request a hearing in response to the recent refusal of the amendment
for the fluid dispenser design under
202414139 initially filed on 20 Jun[e]
2024, was refused, and I would like the opportunity to discuss the design
modifications in
personal hearing.
As previously submitted, the amended design reflects adjustments to the lip
design in the front view and a modification in the number
of bottom projection
rows, which I believe are essential to the functionality and aesthetics of the
dispenser. I am confident that
a hearing will allow for a thorough explanation
of these changes and their significance to the overall design.
relevantly states:
We respectfully request the allowance of an
amendment under
Regulation 9.05
, to correct the registered design by
substituting the correct design file
, which was the version
intended for registration. The current record does not reflect our actual
design, and the error was entirely
clerical and unintentional.
The differences between STV001-01 (incorrect) and STV001-02 (intended) are
immediately apparent in the attached comparative drawings.
In STV001-02, the lip
structure is shorter and more narrow, and the arrangement and form of the dots
on the front face have been
modified. These changes were finalized and approved
before filing and were not the result of any post-filing design revision or
development.
The file STV001-01 was an earlier working draft mistakenly
submitted due to filename similarity and folder misidentification.
We believe this amendment clearly falls within the scope of
, as it addresses a filing error rather than an attempt to broaden or
evolve the design. It reflects what was intended at the time
of the original
submission and is therefore appropriate for correction under this
regulation.
Ugrinovski simply repeats what was stated in Letter-2.
Consideration
Owner has made a request under reg 9.05 to amend the details of the Design as
appearing on the Register. Regulation 9.05 has as
its focus amendment of entries
on the Register, which would include the representations of a registered
Regulation 9.05
149(1) provides that:
The Governor‑General may make
regulations prescribing matters:
(a) required or permitted to be prescribed; and
(b) necessary or convenient to be prescribed for carrying out or giving
effect to this Act; and
(c) necessary or convenient for the conduct of any business relating to
the Designs Office.
149(2)(e) further provides that:
‘Without limiting subsection
(1), that subsection includes the power to make regulations:
making provision for and in relation to the amendment of an entry in the
Register to correct a clerical error or an obvious mistake,
or for any other
9.05 provides:
9.05 Correction of Register
(1) The Registrar may, of his or her own motion, amend an entry in
the Register to correct a clerical error or an obvious mistake.
(2) The Registrar may, on request made in the approved form, amend
an entry in the Register:
(a) to correct a clerical error or an obvious mistake; or
(b) if a name or an address entered in the Register has been
changed—to change the name or address.
(3) If the Registrar proposes to amend an entry in the Register,
the Registrar may notify the proposed amendment to a person who
is entered in
the Register as having an interest in the design.
(4) If a proposed amendment of an entry would materially alter the
meaning or scope of the entry, the Registrar must publish, in
Official Journal
, a notice of the request to amend the
(5) A person may oppose the amendment by filing a notice of
opposition, in an approved form, within one month from the publication
notice under subregulation (4).
Note: For the circumstances in which an extension of time can be sought,
see section 137 of the Act.
(6) The Registrar must give a copy of the notice of opposition to
the person who requested the amendment as soon as practicable.
(7) If the amendment is not opposed, the Registrar must amend the
entry as requested.
(8) If the amendment is opposed, the Registrar must amend the
entry if the Registrar decides to do so, subject to a decision of a
tribunal or
prescribed court in relation to the opposition.
Clerical error
R v Commissioner of Patents, Ex parte Martin
’), the High Court of Australia considered the
meaning of the words ‘clerical error’ in the context of a proposed
amendment to the Register of Patents, where the patentee had erroneously
described themself as the
, Fullagar J observed the following of the words
‘clerical error’:
That expression is, no doubt, one of a
somewhat elastic character ... In the New Oxford Dictionary one meaning
attributed to the word
“clerical” is “Of or pertaining to a
clerk or penman: esp. in ‘clerical error’, an error made in writing
anything out”. According to Webster, one meaning of the word
“clerical” is “Of or relating to a clerk or
and an example given is “clerical error, an error made in copying or
writing”. Probably no one would
deny that a clerical error may produce a
significant, and even profound, effect as for example, in a case in which a
writer or typist
inadvertently omits the small word “not”. But the
characteristic of a clerical error is not that it is in itself trivial
unimportant, but that it arises in the mechanical process of writing or
transcribing.
Williams ACJ added that:
error, I would think, occurs where a person either of his own volition or under
the instructions of another intends to
write something and by inadvertence
either omits to write it or writes something
summary, a clerical error comes about when a person intends to write one thing
and mechanically instead writes something
Distillers Co
Ltd’s Application
noted that it is necessary to consider the intention of the relevant
draftsperson. The designer in the application for the
Design is specified as
being Mr Ugrinovski. An error
be considered to have arisen if the
Representations are not in harmony with his intention, depending on the
circumstances and, importantly,
what evidence is put before the Registrar.
the hearing, the representatives informed me of the existence of registered
design number 202414521 (‘202414521’) which
was filed after the
application for the Design. They drew my attention to an adverse examination
report regarding 202414521 that
had been received because of the presence of the
Design and submitted that I should apply the grace period in respect of this
For clarity, I note that these proceedings concern solely the issue of
the request for the amendment to the Design and I confirm
that this decision is
not concerned with the examination of 202414521.
Owner submits that there has been a clerical error because it filed the
incorrect representations in the application for the Design.
Broad assertions
are made that what was originally approved and intended to have been filed are
the new representations. What appears
to be the crucial element here is that an
error must have arisen in the ‘mechanical process of writing or
transcribing’.
Transcription, as a verb, means to make a copy of in
writing. I accept that the filing of a document by, for example, unintentionally
dragging or selecting a file to be uploaded in filing an application might
qualify as a relevant mechanical process which could involve
the problem with the evidence of the Owner is that there are broad statements
only, which lack details and any supporting
evidence. There is no corroborating
material or exhibits which support such a claim. The filing of two identical
designs hints at
an error of some kind. However, that error, if it was such a
thing, could equally pertain to 202414521 as it could to the Design.
Furthermore, whilst the Owner states that, ‘[d]ue to an oversight, the
initial submission does not accurately represent the
intended design
features’, there is no specific explanation of what the exact oversight
was and how it occurred. I have no
evidence, for example, of the internal
approvals and instructions to which Mr Ugrinovski refers. Nor do I have the full
regarding the conception, drafting and filing strategy for the Design
and 202414521. Letter-2 refers to file names and folders containing
the artwork
for each of the designs in the Representations and proposed representations as
being similar. However, there is no evidence,
such as screen captures of file
properties data concerning any relevant folders, when those folders were created
and when the artwork
was created.
the statements made in the evidence and before me are general and without
specification or corroboration of an originally
intended filing and thereafter a
filing which has been attended by a clerical error. Whilst there may have been
an error of some
kind, the evidence does not relevantly establish one. The
evidence rises no higher than mere assertions which are general in nature.
Accordingly,
I am not satisfied that there has been a clerical error on the evidence before
Obvious mistake
avenue for amendment under reg 9.05 is where there has been an ‘obvious
mistake’. The words ‘obvious mistake’
have a legal
meaning which has been the subject of past decisions which I mention throughout
my discussion below. That a mistake
must be ‘obvious’ provides that
the obviousness must attend to both the mistake and its potential correction,
these things are obvious by looking at the document that is to be
In particular, the
mistake must be obvious on the face of the document proposed to be amended. The
test is considered from the point
of view of ‘the instructed
obvious mistake is one such that ‘the instructed public can, from an
examination of the specification, appreciate the existence
of the mistake and
the proper answer by way of
correction’
and is to be
distinguished from a mistake that has been ‘obviously made’. As
Graham J observed in
General Tire and Rubber Company (Frost’s)
, the intention behind such provisions is that in general
‘something which was not originally an infringement should not be
by amendment except in a very clear
the hearing the representatives again referred to 202414521 and its identical
representations to the Design. They claimed that
202414521 and the Design are
identical and that, on its face, there obviously has been some kind of mistake
because a person would
easily reach the conclusion that a party would not have
intended to file for the same design twice. The representatives assert that
there is an obvious mistake and the representations should be substituted.
decisions involving incorrectly filed subject matter have often not allowed such
an amendment as an ‘obvious
There is nothing
on the face of the Register in the Representations that would even suggest to an
instructed reader that there has
been error, let alone that one that is obvious
on the face of the Representations, or how such an error would be corrected. It
for example, not obvious when and which of the applications for the two
designs carried with it the intention to file the Design.
The specific nature of
the mistake mentioned is also overall not at all clear on the face of the
Register. The Design was registered
on 28 July 2024. On 17 September 2024, the
Owner filed its request for amendment of the Design. Tellingly, it took the
Owner several
months itself to recognise that it wished to amend the
Representations for the Design. On comparison of the differences between the
Representations and the proposed substitutes, the proposed changes are arbitrary
such that a person viewing the Register could not
have anticipated them.
Accordingly, the proposed changes are not obvious.
review of the material before me, I am not satisfied that there has been an
obvious mistake which would qualify under reg 9.05.
am not satisfied that either of the alternative requirements of reg 9.05 are met
by the request for amendment.
refuse the request for amendment of the Design under reg 9.05.
Benjamin Goldsworthy
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
Unless I have otherwise
specified, throughout these written reasons a reference to a section of an
enactment is a reference to a
section in the
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) and a
reference to a regulation of an enactment is a reference to a regulation in the
Designs Regulations 2004
I need not extract the images
of the proposed representations to which the Owner seeks to amend the
Representations of the Design.
Emphasis in original.
[1953] HCA 67
(1953) 89 CLR
381 (Williams
ACJ, Webb, Fullagar, Kitto and Taylor JJ).
ibid. See also
Johnson & Johnson v Self Care Corporation Pty Ltd
[2014] ATMO 111
Officer Murray), [16]-[29] and
Oddbins Limited v Oddbins Corporate
Beverage Suppliers Pty Limited
[2001] ATMO 1 (Hearing
Officer Thompson), in
the context of similar words occurring under the
Trade Marks Act 1995
[1953] 70 RPC 221
(Lloyd-Jacob J).
General Tire and Rubber
Company (Frost’s) Patent
[1972] 12 RPC 259, 277-8 (Graham J)
General Tire
Holtite Ltd v Jost (Great Britain)
[1979] RPC 81
, 91 (Lord Diplock).
General Tire
General Tire
General Tire
See, for example,
Wilson's Patent
[1968] RPC 197 (Lloyd-Jacob
Union Carbide
Corporation (Hostettler's) Application
[1969] RPC 530 (Lloyd-Jacob
both involved incorrect formulae being filed in patent applications.
RTF format (15.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format