'AYT' and Department of Health, Disability and Ageing (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 182 (10 November 2025)
‘AYT’ and Department of Health, Disability and Ageing (Freedom
of information)
[2025] AICmr 182 (10 November 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of
Alice Linacre, Freedom
of Information Commissioner
Department of Health, Disability and Ageing
Decision date
Freedom of Information — Whether a practical refusal reason exists
— Whether work involved in processing the request would
substantially and
unreasonably interfere with the performance of the Agency’s functions
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I affirm the
access refusal decision of the Department of Health, Disability and Ageing (the
Department). I am satisfied
that the work involved in processing the
applicant’s request would substantially and unreasonably divert the
resources of the
Department from its other operations for the purposes of s
24(1)(b) of the FOI Act.
decision discusses whether a practical refusal reason applies to the
applicant’s revised request. It finds that a practical
refusal reason
exists because the considerable volume of documents involved means that
processing the revised request would substantially
and unreasonably divert the
Department from its other operations. It is primarily of interest to the parties
involved due to the
documents sought.
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
October 2022 the applicant applied to the Department for access to a variety of
information relating to the approval and safety
of 3 COVID-19 vaccines.
Department initiated a request consultation process (s 24AB) on the basis that a
practical refusal reason existed because processing
the applicant’s
request would substantially and unreasonably divert its resources from its other
operations (s 24AA(1)(a)(i)).
applicant revised their request 3 times in response to feedback from the
Department, settling on a revised request that sought
access to 4 categories of
information. These are:
version of the risk management plan for one COVID-19 vaccine (category one)
version of the Periodic Safety Update Report for that vaccine (category 2)
‘pharmacovigilance and risk minimisation activities’ (category 3),
the first 10
evaluations of deaths reported for individuals under 40 involving that vaccine
(category 4).
Department refused access to the applicant’s revised request on the basis
that processing it would substantially and unreasonably
Department’s resources from its other operations (ss 24 and
24AA(1)(a)(i)).
applicant submits that processing their revised request would not substantially
and unreasonably divert the Department’s
resources from its other
operations on the basis that the request consultation process was insufficient
and the Department has not
substantiated its practical refusal reason.
applicant also raised issues about whether the Department has acted contrary to
Public Service Act 1999
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
Criminal Code Act 1995
, and its model litigant obligations. The applicant
sought a referral of the Department’s refusal decisions to the
Commonwealth
Ombudsman under s 89 of the FOI Act. However, these issues do not
fall within the scope of my powers under s 55K of the FOI Act in
relation to
making a decision in an IC review.
the review, the applicant posed questions to the Department about assertions it
made about adverse event reporting and a particular
COVID-19 vaccine. As set out
in the FOI Guidelines, the right of access under the FOI Act is to documents,
not information such as
answers to questions on a
only issue to be decided in this Information Commissioner review (IC review) is
whether the work involved in processing the applicant’s
request would
substantially and unreasonably divert the resources of the Department from its
other operations.
an IC review of an access refusal decision, the agency bears the onus of
establishing that its decision is justified, or that I
should give a decision
adverse to the applicant.
making my decision, I have had regard to the following:
Department’s decisions of 7 December 2022 and 17 January 2023
the Guidelines
issued by the Australian Information Commissioner under s 93A of the FOI
to which agencies must have
regard in performing a function or exercising a power under the FOI
parties’ submissions.
Whether the Department was entitled to refuse access for a
practical refusal reason (s 24)
24 of the FOI Act sets out the requirements an agency or Minister must satisfy
to refuse access to documents because of a
practical refusal reason. In deciding
on this issue, I am required to consider:
request consultation process has been undertaken in accordance with s 24AB of
the FOI Act, and if so
whether I am
satisfied that the work involved in processing the applicant’s request
would ‘substantially’ divert
the resources of the agency from its
other operations, and
whether I am
also satisfied that the work involved in processing the applicant’s
request would ‘unreasonably’ divert
the resources of the agency from
its other operations.
Whether a request consultation process was undertaken (s
a request consultation process to have been undertaken for the purposes of s
24(1)(a) of the FOI Act, the applicant must have
been notified in accordance
with s 24AB(2) of the FOI Act. If the applicant contacts the relevant contact
person, then the agency
must ‘take reasonable steps to assist the
applicant to revise the request so that the practical refusal reason no longer
(s 24AB(3)). What constitutes ‘reasonable steps’ is
informed by s 24AB(4)
and the FOI
Guidelines,
but it must be
considered on a case-by-case
applicant submits that the request consultation process was invalid as the
Department named a ‘contact team’ rather
than a contact person in
the request consultation notice, the Department did not provide them with
constructive alternatives for
their request, and the Department provided
contradictory estimates (from 242,205 pages in total to 89,207 pages for just
Department maintains that its request consultation notice sufficiently set out
the name of a contact person for the purposes of
s 24AB(2)(c) of the FOI Act
the Assistant
Secretary’s full name was set out in the request consultation notice,
the request
consultation notice was provided to the applicant by an email which provided the
first names of the FOI team members,
and specified the name of a particular team
member in that email.
the Department’s request consultation notice was signed by the Assistant
Secretary (who was named), it specifically advised
the applicant that if they
wished to refine the scope of their request they could contact the ‘FOI
is not contentious that under the current scheme of the FOI Act, a request
consultation notice that fails to name a contact person
fails to satisfy the
requirements of s 24AB of the FOI
By failing to provide the
name of a contact person, the Department failed to comply with s 24AB(2)(c) of
the FOI Act.
the course of the IC review, the Department maintained that its request
consultation notice complied with s 24AB(2)(c) of the
FOI Act. While I do not
agree, I consider this procedural defect was subsequently cured during the
extended consultation process,
where the applicant was able to correspond via
email directly with an identifiable Departmental representative.
relation to the other issues raised by the applicant about the request
consultation process, I consider that the Department adequately
engaged with the
applicant to provide them with information and suggestions about a proposed
request. The material at issue here
is highly technical. Based on my review of
the consultation documents the Department provided lengthy explanations about
of the applicant’s original request, the internal processes
behind aspects of the applicant’s request, as well as making
suggestions
for how the applicant could revise their request by removing certain categories
of information.
also do not consider the Department’s page estimates to have been
contradictory such that it undermined the request consultation
process. The
initial estimate of an amount in excess of 242,205 pages of material was in
reference to the applicant’s original
request. The subsequent estimates of
approximately 89,000 pages for category 3 and 1,920 pages for categories 1,2,
and 4 are significantly
less than what the Department initially estimated for
the original request which reflects the narrowed scope of the applicant’s
revised request.
these reasons, I am satisfied a valid request consultation process was
undertaken based on the totality of the evidence before
me. It is not necessary
for me to conduct a request consultation process with the applicant in this IC
Whether a practical refusal reason exists (s
24AA(1)(a)(i))
determining whether a practical refusal reason exists for the purposes of s
24AA(1)(a)(i) of the FOI Act I must first consider
whether I am satisfied that
the diversion of the Department’s resources from its other operations
would be substantial. If
I am satisfied that it would be, I must then consider
if that substantial diversion would be
‘unreasonable’.
answering this question, I have had regard to the relevant mandatory factors
listed in s 24AA(2) of the FOI Act but I have not
considered the factors set out
in s 24AA(3) of the FOI
Whether the work involved in processing the request would
substantially divert the resources of the Department from its other
summary, the Department continues to submit that processing the
applicant’s revised request would substantially divert its
resources from
its other operations. In particular, the Department estimates there are at
83,721 documents
(equalling 89,207 pages) in relation to category 3 requiring consultation with
40 third parties, and
13 documents
(equalling 1,920 pages) in relation to categories 1, 2, and 4 requiring
consultation with 1 third party.
estimates that processing category 3 would take 6,231 hours consisting of:
approximately
2,974 hours for examining relevant material (2 minutes per page)
approximately
2,825 hours for redacting partially disclosable material (2 minutes per
80 hours for
third party consultations (2 hours per consultation)
4 hours to write
a statement of reasons, and
approximately
349 hours to create a document schedule (4 minutes per document).
estimates that processing categories 1, 2 and 4 would take 107 hours consisting
20 hours to
64 hours for
examining relevant material (2 minutes per page)
16 hours for
redacting partially disclosable material (2 minutes per page)
3 hours for
third party consultation, and
4 hours to write
a statement of reasons.
the total time estimated to process the applicant’s revised request is
6,338 hours.
applicant submits that the Department’s estimate is overinflated because
it ignores the impact of the passage of time in
relation to material becoming
publicly available, it has exaggerated the consultation requirements, the
sampling has been inadequate,
and the Department has not considered efficiencies
(such as staged releases, aggregated analyses, reliance on prior FOI processing,
or an extended processing period), nor provided evidence to substantiate its
time estimates.
relation to category 3, the applicant maintains that the revised request was
limited to only the following documents relating to
pharmacovigilance and risk
minimisation activities:
specific adverse
reaction follow-up forms
enhanced passive
surveillance
observed vs
expected analyses
reviews of adverse events of interest
E2B reports
reports, and
Consideration
is apparent from the Department’s submissions and sampling evidence that
processing the applicant’s revised request,
particularly category 3, would
be a substantial diversion of the Department’s resources. As a whole the
applicant’s revised
request would require the Department to examine a
total of at least 91,127 pages of which at minimum about 83,500 pages from
3 would need to be examined and redacted in
Despite the further
clarification provided by the applicant in relation to category 3, I am
satisfied those pages would still fall
within the scope of the specific
documents the applicant listed summarised above at paragraph [30].
have considered that the sampling undertaken by the Department (approximately
15% of the documents in category 3 and the sampling
exercise in relation to
documents within categories 1, 2, and 4) in the context of the time estimate
provided. I note that the time
estimate may include duplication in drafting a
statement of reasons, duplication in examining and redacting the material and
consultation
where it may not have been reasonably practical for the Department
to undertake that consultation with third
Even at a significantly
reduced processing time of 2 minutes per page for
examination and
redaction, this would still take the Department approximately 2,786 hours just
to examine and redact documents that
fall within the scope of part of category
3. This is a substantial diversion of the Department’s resources by
Whether the work involved in processing the request would
unreasonably divert the resources of the Department from its other
summary, the applicant submits that processing their revised request would not
be an unreasonable diversion of the Department’s
resources because there
is a significant public interest in the material being sought and transparency
to the Department’s statutory role.
accept that there is a public interest in the release of the documents being
sought by the applicant. Vaccine safety and efficacy
is a public interest issue,
and release would provide access to government held documents. I also
acknowledge that the Department
that should not
necessarily find processing larger FOI requests unreasonable.
considering
unreasonableness, I have considered the
Department’s submissions that processing the applicant’s revised
request would
be an unreasonable diversion of its resources because:
unreasonably divert the resources of specialist staff members (particular staff
from the Therapeutic Goods Administration)
from their ordinary tasks, and
interest in the release of the information and evidence supporting the safety
and efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines is already
promoted through the proactive
publishing of Australian Public Assessment
regularly publishing
COVID-19 vaccine safety reports, and the Database of Adverse Event
Notifications.
particular, the matter involves a very substantial diversion of resources (over
2,500 hours) that would divert the attention of
specialist staff within the
Department from their usual functions for a significant period. The diversion of
resources in this matter
is so substantial that despite the public interest in
the documents, processing these documents would be an unreasonable diversion
resources even for a very large agency.
find that the Department has established that a practical refusal reason exists
for the purposes of s 24(1)(b) of the FOI Act because
processing the
applicant’s request would be a substantial and unreasonable diversion of
its resources from its other operations.
The Department was authorised under s
24(1)(b) of the FOI Act to refuse access to the documents in accordance with the
Alice Linacre
Freedom of Information Commissioner
Relevant provisions of the FOI Act, FOI Guidelines, and
Whether a request consultation process was undertaken (s
24AB of the FOI Act relevantly states:
What is a request consultation process ?
(1) This section sets out what is a
request consultation
for the purposes of section 24.
Requirement to notify
(2) The agency or Minister must give the applicant a written notice stating
the following:
(a) an intention to refuse access to a document in accordance with a
(b) the practical refusal reason;
(c) the name of an officer of the agency or member of staff of the Minister
(the contact person) with whom the applicant may consult
during a period;
(d) details of how the applicant may contact the contact person;
(e) that the period (the
consultation period
) during which the
applicant may consult with the contact person is 14 days after the day the
applicant is given the notice.
Assistance to revise request
(3) If the applicant contacts the contact person during the consultation
period in accordance with the notice, the agency or Minister
reasonable steps to assist the applicant to revise the request so that the
practical refusal reason no longer exists.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3),
reasonable steps
includes the following:
(a) giving the applicant a reasonable opportunity to consult with the
(b) providing the applicant with any information that would assist the
applicant to revise the request.
Extension of consultation period
(5) The contact person may, with the applicant's agreement, extend the
consultation period by written notice to the applicant.
Outcome of request consultation process
(6) The applicant must, before the end of the consultation period, do one of
the following, by written notice to the agency or Minister:
(a) withdraw the request;
(b) make a revised request;
(c) indicate that the applicant does not wish to revise the request.
(7) The request is taken to have been withdrawn under subsection (6) at the
end of the consultation period if:
(a) the applicant does not consult the contact person during the
consultation period in accordance with the notice; or
(b) the applicant does not do one of the things mentioned in subsection (6)
before the end of the consultation period. [emphasis
in original]
The FOI Guidelines relevantly state:
Where an agency or minister considers that a practical refusal reason may
exist, they must undertake a request consultation process
with the FOI applicant
before making a decision to refuse the request (s 24AB).
The agency or minister must give the applicant a written notice that
an intention to
refuse access to a document in accordance with a request
the practical
refusal reason
the name and
process, and details of how the applicant
may contact them
consultation period during which the applicant may consult the contact person is
14 days after the day the applicant is given
the notice (s
Agencies and ministers are only obliged to undertake a request consultation
process once for any particular request (s 24AB(9)). However
the fact that an
agency or minister has received a revised request does not absolve them of the
obligation to undertake ‘reasonable
steps’ for the purposes of s
24AB(3) of the FOI Act.
If an applicant contacts a contact officer during the consultation period,
the contact officer must take reasonable steps to help
them revise the request
so that the practical refusal reason no longer exists (s 24AB(3)). For example,
a contact officer could provide
a breakdown of the time estimated for each step
of the process, explain the difficulties the agency would have dealing with the
and suggest what would be a reasonable request in the
circumstances.
Whether a practical refusal reason exists (ss 24 and
Section 24 of the FOI Act enables an agency or
Minister to refuse access to a document where the agency has undertaken a
request consultation
process in accordance with s 24AB of the FOI Act, and after
that process the agency or Minister is satisfied that the practical refusal
reason still exists.
Subparagraph 24AA(1)(a) of the FOI Act lists the following practical refusal
(1) For the purposes of section 24, a practical refusal reason exists in
relation to a request for a document if either (or both)
of the following
(a) the work involved in processing the request:
(i) in the case of an agency--would substantially and unreasonably divert
the resources of the agency from its other operations;
(ii) in the case of a Minister--would substantially and unreasonably
interfere with the performance of the Minister's functions;
Subsection 24AA(2) of the FOI Act lists matters which a decision maker must
consider where relevant in deciding whether or not a practical
refusal reason
exists. It is a non-exhaustive list.
Subsection 24AA(3) of the FOI Act states:
(3) In deciding whether a practical refusal reason exists, an agency or
Minister must not have regard to:
(a) any reasons that the applicant gives for requesting access; or
(b) the agency's or Minister's belief as to what the applicant's reasons are
for requesting access; or
(c) any maximum amount, specified in the regulations, payable as a charge
for processing a request of that kind.
As set out in
‘ACW’ and Australian National Maritime
[2023] AICmr 4
’), a decision
maker must consider the following 3 elements in determining the issue of whether
a practical refusal reason exists
for the purposes of s 24AA(1)(a)(i) of the FOI
First, I must
determine whether a request consultation process has been undertaken in
accordance with s 24AB of the FOI Act. In many
cases, this element of the
decision-making task may be dealt with briefly because it is clear that a
relevant process has been validly
conducted and no agreement as to validity
arises between the parties to the IC review.
Secondly, if I
determine that a request consultation process has been validly undertaken, I
must determine whether I am ‘satisfied’
that the work involved in
processing the applicant’s request (as revised, if at all, during the
request consultation process)
would ‘substantially’ divert the
resources of the agency from its other operations.
Thirdly, if I am
satisfied of a substantial diversion of resources, I must determine whether I am
also ‘satisfied’ that
the work involved in processing the
applicant’s request would ‘unreasonably’ divert the resources
of the agency
from its other
operations.
To be ‘satisfied’ for the purposes of s 24(1) of the FOI Act that a
practical refusal reason exists, a decision maker
must ‘feel’ an
‘actual persuasion’ that the reason exists. They cannot be satisfied
simply as a result of
a ‘mere mechanical comparison of probabilities
independently of any belief in its
Moreover, a
decision maker’s ‘satisfaction’ as to the existence of a
practical refusal reason cannot be arbitrary
or capricious; it must be formed
‘according to law and not
A diversion of an agency’s resources will be considered to be
‘substantial’ if the diversion can be characterised
or of substance’ rather than
The FOI Guidelines explain:
In deciding whether a practical refusal reason exists, an agency or minister
must have regard to the resources required to perform
the following activities
specified in s 24AA(2):
identifying,
locating or collating documents within the filing system of the agency or office
of the minister
examining the
deciding whether
to grant, refuse or defer access
consulting with
other parties
redacting exempt
material from the documents
making copies of
notifying an
interim or final decision to the applicant.
Other matters that may be relevant in deciding whether a practical refusal
reason exists include:
the staffing
resources available to an agency or minister for FOI processing
processing the request requires the specialist attention of a minister or senior
officer, or can only be undertaken by one
or more specialist officers in an
agency who have competing responsibilities
the impact that
processing a request may have on other work in an agency or minister’s
office, including FOI processing
whether the FOI
applicant has cooperated in framing a request to reduce the processing
whether there is
a significant public interest in the documents requested
other steps
taken by an agency or minister to publish information of the kind requested by
an applicant
as to a request
to a minister — other responsibilities of the minister and demands on the
minister’s time, and whether
it is open to the minister to obtain
assistance from an agency in processing the
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
FOI Guidelines at [2.47].
FOI Act s 55D(1).
Sections 24, 24AA, and 24AB as
set out in Annexure A.
See, Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner
, Guidelines issued by the Australian Information
Commissioner under
Information Act 1982
(FOI Guidelines).
Set out in Annexure A.
Australian National Maritime Museum (Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 4
as set out in Annexure A.
See [3.231].
Justin Warren and Department
of Human Services (Freedom of information)
[2019] AICmr 22
and Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2013] AICmr 33
Warren and Department of Human Services (Freedom of information)
[2019] AICmr 22
Jack Waterford
and Department of Human Services (Freedom of information)
[2019] AICmr 21
Diane Lee and
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (No. 2) (Freedom of
information)
[2024] AICmr 179
– [16]; and
‘AOR’ and Department of Health and Aged Care (Freedom of
information)
[2024] AICmr 219
Australian National Maritime Museum (Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 4
as set out in Annexure A.
As set out in Annexure
Based on the
Department’s evidence relating to the other material that would likely be
redacted in part, I expect the actual
number would be higher.
In circumstances where there
are 40 or more third parties, it would not be reasonably practicable for the
Department to consult with
all of the third parties.
APS Agencies
– size and function | Australian Public Service Commission
The Department referred to
the Therapeutic Goods Administration’s website at
Public Assessment Reports (AusPAR)
The Department referred to
the Therapeutic Goods Administration’s website at
of Adverse Event Notifications (DAEN)
FOI Guidelines at [3.223],
[3.225], [3.228], and [3.230].
Australian National Maritime Museum
[2023] AICmr 4
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 361 (Dixon J)
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Bayly
[1952] HCA 31
(1952) 86 CLR 506
at 510 (Williams J). See
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v
[1999] HCA 21
(1997) 197 CLR 611
Langer and Telstra
Corporation Ltd
(‘Langer’) applied in
Cambridge; Chief Executive
Officer, Services Australia and (Freedom of information)
[2021] AATA 1142
Farrell; Chief Executive Officer,
Services Australia and (Freedom of information)
[2020] AATA 2390
, noting that at the time of the decision
, the reference to processing a request ‘substantially and
unreasonably’ diverting the resources of an agency was contained
rather than s 24AA. However, there is nothing in the terms of s 24 as enacted at
that time which would negate the application
of the view reached by Forgie DP in
the context of s 24AA(1).
FOI Guidelines at [3.200]
– [3.201] (footnote omitted).
RTF format (22.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format