Fairfax Printers Pty Ltd re Fairfax Printers Enterprise Agreement 2010 [2012] FWAA 10460 (27 December 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for approval of a variation of an enterprise agreement
Fairfax Printers Pty Ltd
(AG2012/13904)
FAIRFAX PRINTERS ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT 2010
Graphic Arts
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HAMBERGER
SYDNEY, 27 DECEMBER 2012
Application to vary the Fairfax Printers Enterprise Agreement 2010.
An application has been made for approval of a variation of the
Fairfax Printers Enterprise Agreement 2010
(the Agreement). The application was made pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
(the Act) by Fairfax Printers Pty Ltd.
The application was not lodged within 14 days after the variation was made. Pursuant to
s.210(3)(b)
I consider it fair to extend the time for making this application to 4 December 2012.
The Agreement is varied as follows:
1. Delete from clause 6(a) the words “24 February 2013” and insert “30 June 2014”.
2. Delete from clause 6(c) the words “renegotiation for a replacement agreement to later than 3 months prior to the expiry of
this Agreement” and replace with “discussions relating to the closure of Fairfax Printers and the termination or amendment
of the agreement no later than one month prior to the expiration of this agreement.”
3. Delete clause 13 and insert the following:
13. Learning and Training
a) Fairfax Printers is committed to the continual development of Team Members and teams based on the learning of both technical and
personal skills.
Internal Training
b) A combination of Management Utilised Hour (MUH) and ordinary rostered hours of work will be used to ensure Team Members are provided
with relevant training, and sufficient resources are available to facilitate release of Team Members to attend training.
c) Team Members will undertake on the job and off the job training and assessments.
External Training/Outplacement
d) Fairfax Printers provides Permanent Team Members with external paid training leave of up to 42 hours during the life of this agreement.
Training hours will be made up of 18 MUH hours and an additional 24 normal rostered hours. Training hours will be pro rata for Part
Time Team Members.
e) The external training/outplacement provided by this Clause is:
i) Training/outplacement over and above the training provided by Fairfax Printers;
ii) Relevant to the Permanent Team Members outplacement or training requirements generally initiated by the Team Member.
f) The application for external training/outplacement requires the Permanent Team Member and the Manager to agree on arrangements
for training leave. At the earliest opportunity, Permanent Team Members need to apply by providing the Manager, in writing:
i) a summary of the proposed course/activity;
ii) demonstrate the course’s direct or future relevance to their outplacement needs
iii) provide a schedule of when the time will be taken; and
iv) provide an estimate of the per annum cost of fees, textbooks, software and equipment, and the envisaged training leave requirements.
g) A total amount of $1400.00 will be provided per Permanent Team Member during the life of this agreement, in the event that a Permanent
Team Member does not utilise the outplacement funding the remaining funds will be paid in addition to any redundancy benefit.
h) A total amount of $1400.00 will be provided for Apprentices during the life of this agreement. In the event that the apprentice
does not utilise the outplacement funding the remaining funds will be paid in addition to any termination payment.”
4. Delete clause 21(d) and insert the following:
“d) Apprentices
Fairfax Printers is committed to the implementation of an apprenticeship training program.
i) Apprentices will work and train during a 38 hour week, Monday to Friday, day shift roster.
ii) In general, apprentices in their 1st and 2nd Years of training will work with and in addition to a team and will be accompanied
by a Team Member until the completion of their TAFE training or the attainment of their electrical license where applicable.
iii) Apprentices in their 3rd or final year of training may be used as part of a team to fill-in for long term absences (i.e. periods
of greater than 6 weeks).
iv) By mutual agreement, as part of their continual training, an apprentice may perform shift work or overtime from time to time providing
it does not compromise their training, occupational health, safety and environment considerations or licensing requirements where
applicable.
v) Apprentices will be utilized in a manner consistent with the principles of safe, legal and logical work.
vi) An Apprentice Training Committee will continue to operate , consisting of 3 elected Departmental Team Member Union Representatives
from the relevant trades, up to 3 Management representatives from the relevant departments and 1 Human Resources Representative and
will have the following charter of responsibility:
1. Develop, oversee and monitor the implementation of an overall Training Program for Apprentices;
2. Provide mentoring support and act as points of contact for apprentices during their period of employment as apprentices at Fairfax
3. Conduct quarterly reviews of apprentices work and training progress;
4. Develop and encourage the attainment of experience external to Fairfax Printers at other commercial premises in order to enhance
learning outcomes and breadth of experience for apprentices; and
5. To assess business needs for the trade composition of the January 2013 apprentice intake, by no later than October 2012.
vii) The intent of the parties is to provide mentoring and support for apprentices at an informal level in order to avoid formal conduct,
performance or disciplinary issues arising.
viii) Where an issue arises in relation to any conduct, performance or disciplinary action, the relevant Committee Union Representative
will be the first point of call.”
5. Delete clause 22(d) and insert the following:
“d) Voluntary Redundancy Entitlements
i) Voluntary redundancy payments consist of the ‘Base Redundancy Benefit’ of two weeks’ salary plus one month’s
salary for each completed year of continuous service and a pro-rata payment for any continuous service of less than a year thereafter.
ii) An additional Redundancy benefit of Two Months salary.
iii) All outstanding annual leave entitlements will be paid and pro-rata long service leave will be paid after five years’ continuous
iv) For the purpose of this agreement. Continuous service means the period during which the Permanent Team Member has served the Company
in an unbroken contract of employment. For the purpose of calculating a Permanent Team member’s continuous service, conversion
from casual employment to a Permanent Team member position will be deemed to have been unbroken service.
v) Redundancy benefits in this agreement are in lieu of any statutory or other “notice” period or payment requirements.”
6. Delete clause 22(e) and insert the following:
“e) Compulsory Redundancy Entitlements
Should Fairfax Printers make a Permanent Team Member compulsory redundant on or before February 24 2013, Fairfax Printers will pay
a Redundancy benefit of the Permanent Team member’s salary of:
i) Two weeks salary plus one month’s salary for each completed year of continuous service and a pro-rata payment for any continuous
service of less than a year thereafter.
ii) An additional redundancy benefit of two months salary or a payment equivalent to the remainder of salary until February 24, 2013,
whichever is greater.
Should Fairfax Printers make a Permanent Team Member compulsorily redundant after 24 February 2013 and prior to March 1 2014; Fairfax
Printers will pay a Redundancy Benefit of the Permanent Member's salary, of:
i) Two weeks salary plus one month’s salary for each completed year of continuous service and a pro-rata payment for any continuous
service of less than a year thereafter
ii) An additional Redundancy benefit of Six Months salary.
Should Fairfax Printers make a Permanent Team Member compulsorily redundant after 1 March 2014; Fairfax Printers will pay a Redundancy
Benefit of the Permanent Member's salary of:
i) Two weeks salary plus one month’s salary for each completed year of continuous service and a pro-rata payment for any continuous
service of less than a year thereafter.
ii) An additional Redundancy benefit of Two Months salary.”
7. Delete clause 22(f).entirely.
8. Renumber the subsequent clauses as follows: 22(g) “Alternative Employment” will become 22(f), clause 22(h) “Exemptions”
will become 22(g), clause 22(i) “Transmission of Business” will become 22(h).
9. Delete clause 27(b) and insert the following:
“b) Reduction of Rates for Components not Worked
Team Members (other than apprentice team members) who at the commencement of this agreement were engaged as Permanent Team Members
will not have components of Salary varied due to operational changes at Fairfax Printers.”
10. Delete clause 56 and insert the following:
56 Meal room
A Meal room with indoor and outdoor eating area, including vending machines will be provided.”
11. Under “Schedules” at the end of the agreement delete
“Increases to Salaries”. Renumber each of the subsequent five pages of tables of pay rates as
I am satisfied that each of the requirements of
as are relevant to this application for approval have been met.
The application is approved and the consolidated version of the Agreement, as varied, is attached to this decision.
The variation operates from 27 December 2012. The nominal expiry date of the Agreement is 20 June 2014.
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code J, AE879130 PR532273>
No downloadable files available