'AYR' and Department of Home Affairs (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 177 (24 October 2025)
‘AYR’ and Department of Home Affairs (Freedom of
information)
[2025] AICmr 177 (24 October 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of Alice Linacre, Freedom of
Information Commissioner
Department of Home Affairs
Decision date
Freedom of Information — Whether disclosure would have an adverse
effect on the proper and efficient conduct of the operations
of an agency
— Whether contrary to public interest to release conditionally exempt
documents — (CTH)
Freedom of Information Act 1982
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the decision of the Department of Home Affairs (the Department) of 10 February
substitute my decision that:
the material
which the Department no longer maintains is conditionally exempt under
s 47E(d) of the FOI Act, is not conditionally
exempt, and
the material
that the Department maintains is conditionally exempt under s 47E(d) of the
FOI Act, is conditionally exempt under that
provision and release would be
contrary to the public interest at this time.
28 days of this decision:
the Department
must provide the applicant with a copy of the documents, edited under s 22 of
the FOI Act only to the extent necessary
to delete material I have found to be
exempt or material that is irrelevant to the scope of the applicant’s
request, and
the Department
must advise whether it has fully implemented my decision or whether it will be
seeking review of the decision by the
Administrative Review
decision discusses whether certain fields of information in a tool for assessing
the applicant’s placement in either immigration
detention or in the
community, while the Department resolves their immigration status, are exempt
under s 47E(d) of the FOI Act.
This decision adopts an approach to this type of
information that is consistent with previous Information Commissioner review (IC
review) decisions.
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
11 October 2021, the applicant applied to the Department for access to a
document titled
Community Protection Assessment Tool
(CPAT) dated 12
August 2020.
Department did not make a decision within the statutory timeframe for the
applicant’s request. Under s 15AC(3)(a) of the
FOI Act, the Department was
taken to have made a decision refusing the applicant’s request for
documents. On 25 January 2022,
the applicant sought IC review of the
Department’s deemed refusal decision.
10 February 2022, the Department made a purported decision which identified one
document in response to the applicant’s
The Department decided to
refuse access to the document in full, on the basis that its release would have
a substantial adverse effect
on the proper and efficient conduct of the
operations of the Department (s 47E(d) of the FOI Act). The Department also
deleted certain
information on the basis it was irrelevant to the scope of the
applicant’s request (s 22 of the FOI Act).
the course of this IC review, the Department withdrew its s 47E(d) exemption
claim over some material. On this basis, I have
not considered this material
further in this IC review. The Department still maintains that the remainder of
the material redacted
under s 47E(d) is exempt under that
In response, the
applicant broadly contests the application of s 47E(d) to any material in the
document. In relation to the material
that the Department deleted under s 22 as
being irrelevant to the scope of the request, the applicant agrees that this
material is
irrelevant.
issue to be decided in this IC review is therefore whether the material that the
Department maintains is conditionally exempt
under s 47E(d) of the FOI Act is
conditionally exempt under that provision, and if so, whether giving the
applicant access to the
conditionally exempt material at this time would, on
balance, be contrary to the public interest (s 11A(5)).
an IC review of an access refusal decision, the agency bears the onus of
establishing that its decision is justified or that I
should give a decision
adverse to the applicant.
making my decision, I have had regard to the following:
Department’s decision of 10 February 2022 and reasons for that
the document at
the Guidelines
issued by the Australian Information Commissioner under s 93A of the FOI
to which agencies must have
regard in performing a function or exercising a power under the FOI Act (FOI
Guidelines),
parties’ submissions.
Certain operations of agencies exemption (s
Department has maintained the s 47E(d) exemption over the ratings attributed to
the applicant within the following fields of the
CPAT: ‘removal
ready’, ‘engagement with status resolution’, ‘harm
indicators’, ‘identity’
and ‘vulnerability and
strengths’. The Department has also redacted headings and assessments in
the ‘summary’
document will be conditionally exempt if its disclosure would, or could
reasonably be expected to, have a substantial adverse effect
on the proper and
efficient conduct of the operations of an agency (s 47E(d)).
The parties’ submissions
Department submits that the document at issue (the CPAT) is a decision support
tool to assist Status Resolution Officers (SROs)
assess the most appropriate
placement of an unlawful non-citizen while status resolution is
The ratings assessments
made by SROs in CPATs are key factors in the Department’s determination of
a placement recommendations
for individuals. The automatically calculated
assessments in the ‘summary’ section of the CPAT are determined by
summary, the Department further submits that disclosure of the material at issue
would have an adverse impact on its ability to
manage its Status Resolution
Program, thereby having a substantial adverse impact on its operations. It
claims that it is crucial
for it to be able to accurately identify and address
the risk factors that individuals may pose to the community. Release of the
material would compromise its ability to undertake reliable CPAT assessments
because it would allow individuals to identify factors,
or a combination of
factors, that would increase the likelihood of an individual receiving a less
restrictive placement
recommendation.
reduce the capacity of the Department to rely on the CPAT as an effective method
by which to assess the level of risk
an individual poses to the Australian
Department seek to rely on previous IC review decisions, which have found that
material of the nature at issue in this matter
is exempt under s 47E(d) of the
summary, the applicant submits that:
they are unclear
why they were held in immigration detention for as long as they were and that
they are entitled to understand the
justification for their detention over many
information
concerning the reasons for their detention is directly relevant to proceedings
regarding the validity of the Minister's
refusal of their protection visa
application
they should be
entitled to access this information under the doctrine of procedural
Department’s general submissions about individuals attempting to
manipulate the system or threaten violence are not sufficient
to justify a
system that makes decisions in secret and denies the fundamental right to see
and respond to the case against oneself.
Consideration
Department submitted that former Freedom of Information Commissioner Hardiman
found headings in the ‘summary’ field
of the CPAT to be exempt under
s 47E(d) in
Foundation House and Department of Home Affairs
(Freedom of
information)
Foundation House
). I have considered that decision and I
accept that the material before me is analogous to the material that was before
Freedom of Information
Commissioner.
The Special
Advisor in ‘
, referring to
Foundation House,
the same finding in relation to headings in the ‘summary’ field in
that matter.
relation to the remaining material claimed to be exempt by the Department, which
comprises various ratings categories and assessments
‘summary’ field as referred to above, I consider that this material
is analogous to the material at issue before
the former Special Advisor in
'ALM' and Department of Home Affairs (Freedom of information)
), which comprised of ratings and summary
assessments.
the Special Advisor’s reasoning in ‘
former Freedom of Information Commissioner’s reasoning in
, I accept that disclosure of the material in the ratings fields and in
the summary fields, in combination with the material already
released to the
applicant, would have a substantial adverse effect on the Department’s
operations in the manner claimed. In
particular, I am satisfied that disclosure
would release information about the methods the Department uses to undertake its
assessments
and how those assessments may be impacted by particular
Finding (s 47E(d))
am satisfied that the material claimed to be exempt by the Department under
s 47E(d) is conditionally exempt.
Whether access would be contrary to the public interest (s
found the material at issue to be conditionally exempt under s 47E(d), I am
required to consider whether it would be contrary
to the public interest to give
the applicant access to conditionally exempt material at this time.
requirements of the public interest test are set out at
have considered the relevant mandatory factors listed in s 11B(3) of the FOI
Act. I have not considered the irrelevant factors
as set out in s 11B(4) of the
In considering the
public interest, I have had regard to the parties’ submissions.
applicant’s submissions are set out above at [17].
Department submits that access to the material at issue would promote the
objects of the FOI Act and would allow the applicant
access to their own
personal information. However, the Department considers that the following
factors weigh strongly against disclosure:
reasonably be expected to compromise its capacity to make reliable
recommendations about the placement of individuals, and
any adverse impact on
its capacity to assess the risk posed by individuals to the community could
reasonably be expected to prejudice
security, law enforcement, public health or
public safety
maintaining the
detention network is one of its key management functions. There is a strong
public interest in ensuring the safety
of detainees, staff and visitors within
the network, and the appropriate placement of detainees within the network is a
in ensuring that safety, and
disclosure of
material revealing its methods for reviewing the placement of individuals and
monitoring their status could reasonably
be expected to result in these methods
becoming less effective, and requiring it to develop alternative methods which
would incur
have considered the parties’ submissions and an unedited copy of the
material at issue. I agree with the public interest factors
favouring disclosure
raised by the parties. In particular, I consider there is a strong public
interest in ensuring the fair treatment,
and affording of, procedural fairness
to people who are subject to detention. This approach is consistent with the
reasoning of both
the former Freedom of Information Commissioner in
Foundation House
and the Special Advisor in
based on the evidence before me, and consistent with the findings in
Foundation House
, I consider that the
factors the Department has identified above (at [25]) weigh strongly against
disclosure. Even though I accept
that disclosure of the material would promote
the objects of the FOI Act, advance the fair treatment of individuals, namely
the applicant,
and provide them with their personal information, I give greater
weight to the public interest factors against disclosure. In particular,
consider that disclosure of this material could reasonably be expected to
prejudice security, law enforcement, public health and
public safety, and
prejudice the Department’s operations. I consider that these factors
significantly weigh against disclosure,
and I am satisfied that at this time, on
balance, they outweigh the factors favouring disclosure.
Finding (s 11A(5))
am satisfied that the material at issue is conditionally exempt under s 47E(d)
of the FOI Act, and its disclosure would be contrary
to the public
Freedom of Information Commissioner
Relevant provisions of the FOI Act, FOI Guidelines, and
Section 11A(4) of the FOI
Act states the agency or Minister is not required by this Act to give
the person access to the document
at a particular time if, at that
time, the document is an exempt document.
Certain operations of agencies exemption (s 47E(d))
Section 47E(d) of the FOI Act states
a document is conditionally exempt if its disclosure under
this Act would, or could reasonably
be expected to have a substantial adverse
effect on the proper and efficient conduct of the operations of
As discussed in the FOI
and in IC review
a document is
conditionally exempt under s 47E(d) if its disclosure would, or could reasonably
be expected to, have a substantial
adverse effect on the proper and efficient
conduct of the operations of an agency.
With respect to the term ‘substantial adverse effect’, the FOI
Guidelines also explain:
The term ‘substantial adverse effect’ broadly means ‘an
adverse effect which is sufficiently serious or significant
to cause concern to
a properly concerned reasonable person’. The word
‘substantial’, in the context of substantial
loss or damage, has
been interpreted as including ‘loss or damage that is, in the
circumstances, real or of substance and not
insubstantial or nominal’.
A decision maker should clearly describe the expected effect and its impact on
the usual operations or activity of the agency in
the statement of reasons under
s 26 to show their deliberations in determining the extent of the expected
effect. It may sometimes
be necessary to use general terms to avoid making the
statement of reasons itself an ‘exempt document’ (s
Further, in
Re James and Others and Australian National
, Deputy President Hall explained:
As a matter of ordinary English, I think that the expression “the conduct
of the operations of an agency” is capable
of extending to the way in
which an agency discharges or performs any of its functions.
Public interest test
Section 11A(5)of the FOI Act states the agency
or Minister must give the person access to the document if it is
conditionally exempt
at a particular time unless (in the circumstances)
access to the document at that time would, on balance, be contrary to the public
Section 11B(3) of the FOI Act sets out a non-exhaustive list of public
interest factors favouring disclosure for consideration, those
factors being
where disclosure of the document would do any of the following:
(a) promote the objects of the FOI Act
(b) inform debate on a matter of public importance
(c) promote effective oversight of public expenditure
(d) allow a person access to their personal information.
Section 11B(4) of the FOI Act also lists the following irrelevant factors
that must not be taken into consideration when deciding
whether access would, on
balance, be contrary to the public interest:
(a) access to the document could result in embarrassment to the Commonwealth
Government, or cause a loss of confidence in the Commonwealth
(b) access to the document could result in any person misinterpreting or
misunderstanding the document
(c) the author of the document was (or is) of high seniority in the agency to
which the request for access to the document was made
(d) access to the document could result in confusion or unnecessary
In addition to the factors set out at s 11B(3) of the FOI Act, the FOI
Guidelines set out a further non-exhaustive list of public
interest factors in
favour of disclosure, as well as public interest factors against
disclosure.
The FOI Guidelines explain:
To conclude that, on balance, disclosure of a document would be contrary to
the public interest is to conclude that the benefit to
the public resulting from
disclosure is outweighed by the benefit to the public of withholding the
information. The decision maker
must analyse, in each case, where on balance the
public interest lies based on the particular facts at the time the decision is
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
Section 54Y of the FOI Act
applies to the Department’s decision of 10 February 2022.
Under s 54Y of the FOI Act, the Information
Commissioner must deal with the applicant’s IC review application of the
Department’s
deemed decision as if it was an IC review application of the
Department’s purported decision.
Refer Department’s
submissions dated 20 August 2025.
Refer applicant’s
submissions dated 8 September 2025.
FOI Act s 55D(1).
Sections 11A and 47E(d) as set
out in Annexure A.
See, Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner
, Guidelines issued by the Australian Information
Commissioner under
Information Act 1982
(FOI Guidelines).
Set out in Annexure A.
Placement refers to whether a
non-citizen resides in the community or is in immigration detention.
The Department submits that
as it has withdrawn its exemption claims for the material in the comments
fields, the disclosure of the
individual ratings would enable the ratings and
comments information to be linked, which would indicate which factors have
in the SRO assessing the applicant as having a particular rating.
The Department relies on the
decision of the former FOI Commissioner Leo Hardiman in
Foundation House and
Department of Home Affairs
(Freedom of information)
(16 December 2022) (
Foundation House
) and the decision of
the former Special Advisor Toni Pirani in
'ALM' and Department of Home
Affairs (Freedom of information)
(3 July 2024).
at [14], [46]-[51] and [61]. See also documents released on the
Department’s disclosure log in that matter
https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/foi/files/2022/fa-171200810-OR1-document-released.PDF
'ALM' and Department of
(3 July 2024) at [17].
Listed in Annexure A.
at [6.90] – [6.92], and [6.112] – [6.118] and
the cases referenced there.
Williams and Department of Defence (Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 26
Refugee Advice & Casework Service
and Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 16
Christis Tombazos and Australian
Research Council (Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 14
‘ACF’ and Australian
Public Service Commission (Freedom of information)
[2022] AICmr 73
Rex Patrick and Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet (No. 2) (Freedom of information)
[2022] AICmr 66
'ZA' and Department of Veterans
Affairs (Freedom of information)
[2021] AICmr 83
Australian Society for Kangaroos
and Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation trading as AgriFutures
Australia (Freedom
of information)
[2019] AICmr 31
‘PR’ and Comcare
(Freedom of information)
[2019] AICmr 2.
FOI Guidelines
[6.18] – [6.19] (footnotes omitted).
At page 699.
FOI Guidelines at [6.229]
FOI Guidelines at [6.238]
(footnote omitted).
RTF format (22.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format