URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/SSATACSA/2011/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Turner v Turner [2011] SSATACSA 12 (21 June 2011)
Gloria TURNER
SECOND PARTY:
Peter TURNER
OTHER PARTY:
Child Support Registrar
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
A decision made by an objections officer on 1 April 2011 to allow an
objection to an original decision made on 6 December 2010, with
the effect that
the child support assessment in respect of Angela Turner terminated from 19
March 2010.
The members of the Tribunal were: XXXXXXXX, Presiding Member
XXXXXXXX, Member
The application was heard on 21 June 2011. Mrs Turner spoke to the Tribunal
by conference telephone. Mr Turner spoke to the Tribunal
by conference
telephone. A representative of the Child Support Registrar was not in
attendance.
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
On 21 June 2011 the Tribunal decided to set aside the decision under review
and substitute its decision that the child support assessment
in respect of
Angela Turner terminates from 6 December 2010.
The application for review is therefore successful.
DATE OF DESPATCH
4 July 2011
REASONS FOR DECISION
Turner is the parent liable to pay child support to Mrs Turner for Angela born
1 November 2010 Mr Peter Turner contacted the Child Support Agency (the Agency)
to advise that the child Angela had entered into
a de facto relationship when
her boyfriend John Barry had moved into Mrs Gloria Turner’s home on 6
March 2010.
Turner again contacted the Agency on 11 November 2010 to again advise that
Angela Turner was living in a de facto relationship
with John Barry.
Agency contacted Mrs Turner on 17 November 2010 to discuss the possible
terminating event and were advised that the child Angela
was still living at
Angela had a boyfriend but that
he only stayed at her home two or three nights
per week and they were not living in a domestic relationship.
Turner was contacted by the Agency on 2 December 2010 to advise that Mrs Turner
disputed that Angela was living with her boyfriend
in a genuine domestic
relationship and requested evidence from Mr Turner about his claims. Mr Turner
advised that Angela and her
boyfriend may be moving out of Mrs Turner’s
2 December 2010 Mr Turner’s representative contacted the Agency advised
that Angela’s boyfriend had moved to Mrs Turner’s
Angela’s birthday in 2010 and was living there full time, had been sharing
an upstairs bedroom with Angela, had been
paying expenses for both himself and
Angela and making decisions regarding their own welfare and that Angela was
Agency again contacted Mrs Turner on 2 December 2010 who advised that as of 6
December 2010 Angela would be moving out of her
pay Angela’s bond. Mrs Turner was asked to provide evidence regarding
6 December 2010 an officer acting as a delegate of the Registrar of the Agency
made a decision to end the child support assessment
for Angela from 6 December
7 December 2010 the Agency received a fax from Mrs Turner which included a third
party statement from John Barry which confirmed
that he would be moving in with
Angela and living in a de facto relationship from 6 December 2010.
11 February 2011 the Agency received a letter from Mr Turner objecting to the
decision to end the child support assessment for
Angela from 6 December 2010
instead of 19 March 2010. This was on the basis that Angela had been in a
genuine domestic relationship
with John Barry from 19 March 2010 when Mr Barry
had moved into Mrs Turner’s house. He also stated that the letter provided
by Mrs Turner that purported to be from Mr Barry was not written by him and he
had only signed it. Mr Turner also provided a letter
from Mr Barry who advised
that he had been living with Angela since 19 March 2010 and been paying Mrs
Turner $200 per fortnight in
board which continued until 6 December 2010 at
which time he moved into a new home with Angela. Mr Barry also stated that he
felt pressured to sign the statement received by the Agency on 7 December
2010 and that he had not written the letter but had dictated
and signed it. This
letter was sent to Mrs Turner for her comment. The Agency also advised Mr Turner
that his letter of objection
was lodged out of time.
21 February 2011 Mrs Turner contacted the Agency and advised she would be
providing a written response which she did on 2 March
2011. In that letter Mrs
Turner states:
She believed
that Mr Barry had signed the statement provided by Mr Turner under duress;
Mr Barry did
stay at her home during the period March 2010 to December 2010 but this was only
for a few days a week;
Angela did fall
pregnant during this period;
This should have
nothing to do with her child support;
Angela and Mr
Barry declared themselves to be in a de facto relationship to Centrelink on 6
December 2010.
31 March 2011 the Agency made a decision to allow Mr Turner’s request for
an extension of time in which to lodge an objection
and letters were sent to
both parties to advise of that decision.
April 2011 an officer acting as a delegate of the Registrar of the Agency made a
decision to end the child support assessment
for Angela from 19 March 2010
considering that it was on that date that Angela entered into a genuine domestic
relationship with
Turner lodged an application for review of that decision with this Tribunal on
21 April 2011.
CONSIDERATION
The legislative framework and issues for the Tribunal to determine.
legislation relevant to this decision is contained in the
Child Support
(Assessment) Act 1989
(the Act). Child support legislation is interpreted by
the Agency’s officers with the aid of the CSA Guide (the Guide). The
Tribunal is not bound by law to apply policy set out in the Guide, but provided
the policy is consistent with the legislation, it
is required to have regard to
it and, in the ordinary course, follow it (
Re Drake and Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
(1979) 2 ALD 634).
child support formula will take into account the cost of care when a parent has
a least 14% care (52 nights over a 12 month period).
The formula will also take
into account certain events described as “child support terminating
events” that can affect
the assessment.
this case the Agency wrote to Mr and Mrs Turner on 24 February 2010 to advise
that child support had been extended past Angela’s
18th birthday to 18
December 2010 because she would still be in full time secondary education until
that date. As at 24 February
2010 Mrs Turner’s care and cost percentage
was assessed by the Agency at 100% and the child support payable to Mrs Turner
Mr Turner for Angela was assessed as $4,490.00 per annum.
this case Mr Turner sought to have the child support terminated from 19 March
2010 on the basis that he believed Angela entered
into a genuine domestic
relationship with Mr John Barry on that date and that Mr Barry had assumed
financial responsibility for Angela.
He considers that this is a terminating
event as far as his liability to pay child support to Mrs Turner for Angela is
of the Act deals with terminating events. It requires the Registrar of the
Agency to give effect to the occurrence of a child support
terminating event
upon notification of such an event:
74 Registrar to give
effect to happening of child support terminating events etc.
(a) child support is payable for a child; and
(b) the Registrar is notified of, or otherwise becomes aware of:
(i) the happening of a child support terminating event in relation to the
child, a liable parent, or a carer entitled to child support,
or all 3; or
(ii) the happening of an event or change of circumstances that affects
the annual rate at which the child support is payable under
the Registrar must immediately take such action as is necessary to take
account of the happening of the event or change of circumstances
(whether by
amending any administrative assessment or otherwise).
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) is to be taken to prevent the Registrar
from taking such action as the Registrar considers appropriate
to take account
of the likely happening of an event or change of circumstances of which the
Registrar is notified or otherwise becomes
aware (whether by amending any
administrative assessment or otherwise).
of the Act gives the definition of a “terminating event”:
Interpretation—happening of child support terminating
(1) A child support terminating event happens in relation to a child if:
(a) the child dies; or
(b) the child ceases to be an eligible child under regulations made under
subsection 22(1)
(c) the child turns 18; or
(d) the child is adopted; or
(e) the child becomes a member of a couple; or
(f) none of the following subparagraphs applies any longer in relation to
(i) the child is present in Australia;
(ii) the child is an Australian citizen;
(iii) the child is ordinarily resident in Australia; or
(g) the circumstances described in subsection 30AA(1) of the Registration
and Collection Act apply in relation to the child.
Note: Paragraph(1)(c) may be affected by section151C (which deals with
continuing administrative assessments and child support agreements
child’s 18th birthday in certain situations).
5 of the Act provides the following definition of a “member of a
member of a couple
(a) a person who is legally married to another person and is not living
separately and apart from the other person on a permanent
or indefinite basis;
(b) a person who is living with another person as the partner of the
other person on a genuine domestic basis although not legally
married to the
other person; or
(c) a person whose relationship with another person (whether of the same
sex or a different sex) is registered under a law of a State
or Territory
prescribed for the purposes of section 22B of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
as a kind of relationship prescribed for the purposes of that section, and is
not living separately and apart from the other person
on a permanent or
indefinite basis.
Turner told the Tribunal that Angela was at school in 2010 attending local high
school and enrolled in a course. She met John
Barry about 6 March 2010 at her
brother Mark’s workplace. After that Mr Barry would come to the house with
Mark. They started
to see each other and then Mr Barry would stay a couple of
nights a week. They became boyfriend and girlfriend a few weeks after
Her daughter invited Mr Barry to her birthday party when she turned 18. Mr Barry
was living with his mother. When Angela
turned 18 they were living in a three
bedroom house and there was not much room. She and her family moved on 7 May
2010. While they
were living in the previous house Mr Barry would not stay over
the whole night as he had to go to work at 2.00am. After they moved
he regularly
stayed over two or three times a week. Angela never stayed over at his
mother’s house.
Turner also told the Tribunal that Mr Barry never paid her board and never made
any financial contribution to the household. Her
daughter became pregnant at the
end of 2010 and the baby is due mid 2011.
Turner said that the letter she provided the Agency which was signed by Mr Barry
was written by her son as Mr Barry had difficulty
reading and writing. Mr Barry
had asked her to get someone to write the letter and he would sign it. Mr Barry
was not working regularly.
He had work on and off and towards the end of May
2010 he was probably working four days per week. He was receiving Centrelink
so he did not have a lot of money. Her daughter and Mr Barry did not
share a bank account and she was unsure if they do so now. Angela
and Mr Barry
moved into their own home on 6 December 2010. Angela is now in receipt of youth
allowance and rent assistance and has
to declare Mr Barry’s income from
employment to Centrelink. In addition Mrs Turner has to still declare her own
income to Centrelink
in order for Angela to get paid.
Turner told the Tribunal that she was maintaining Angela financially in 2010
until she moved out of home. Angela did not contribute
to bills or to the
household expenses. Mrs Turner was responsible for paying all the bills. Angela
continued to go to school throughout
2010 and finished her year 12. After that
she went to Centrelink and registered to look for work.
Turner told the Tribunal he could not remember how he found out about the
relationship between Angela and Mr Barry. It was probable
that he heard about it
from one of the children. He must have found out a few days prior to contacting
the Agency to notify about
Angela’s domestic relationship. He generally
did not get to see the children and has had minimal contact with Angela. He has
not had any discussions with her about her relationship with Mr Barry.
Turner indicated he did not have any evidence about his daughter’s
relationship until he spoke with Mr Barry after which
he notified the Agency. Mr
Barry told him he paid Mrs Turner $200 per fortnight. His daughter Angela told
him she didn’t want
to be involved in this dispute. He knew that Angela
had a boyfriend. He has seen her on her 18th birthday and intermittently after
that. In October 2010 she told him she was pregnant. She had met him on Anzac
Day last year. The only evidence he has about his daughter’s
relationship
is the letter that John Barry signed. He does not know more than what is in that
letter. He did not really know what
was going on.
knows the first letter signed by John Barry is a lie. He understands that a de
facto or domestic relationship means that Mr Barry
and Angela were sharing the
same bed, sharing expenses and income. He believes that Mr Barry was supporting
Angela in 2010 but he
really does not know. Mr Barry does not talk to him and
neither Mr Barry nor Angela have told him that Mr Barry was financially
his daughter.
Turner told the Tribunal that she is still supporting her daughter. She believes
that Mr Turner told Mr Barry that he had to sign
the letter and that Mr Barry
told her he was pressured into signing it. She did not ask Mr Barry to give
evidence at today’s
Turner told the Tribunal that she provided funds to help Mr Barry and her
daughter to set up their new home. She paid one quarter
of bond of $240 and one
week’s rent. She paid a total of $480. She gave them pots, pans, linen,
towels, beds, a bedside table,
a coffee table, a jug, basic things to set up a
house. Mr Barry had a washing machine. Although there is 10 years difference
Mr Barry and her daughter, they got on like a house on fire. He is a
drinker but he does not hit her. Before they moved out together,
things were
getting more and more serious. She would have described their relationship as
boyfriend and girlfriend, not like a husband
and wife. Now he supports her the
best way he can. She continues to help them financially. Now they are in a de
facto relationship,
like a normal couple.
Tribunal asked both parties whether they had asked Mr Barry to give oral
evidence to the Tribunal, given that he had provided
two inconsistent statements
in this matter. Mr Turner stated that he did not because he doesn’t speak
to Mr Barry and Mrs Turner
stated that she did not because she didn’t want
to involve him further.
relation to the letters signed by Mr Barry the first is dated 7 December 2010 in
which he advised that as of 6 December 2010 he
and Angela would be moving into
their own accommodation and living together in a de facto relationship. It was
provided to the Agency
by Mrs Turner. The second letter is dated 10 February
2011 in which Mr Barry states that he and Angela had been living together since
19 March 2010 and he had been paying Mrs Gloria Turner $200 per fortnight board.
Mr Barry states that Mrs Turner had pressured him
into signing the first letter
after Mark Turner wrote it. The Tribunal notes the consistent evidence by both
parties that Mark Turner
wrote both letters and that Mr Barry apparently has
difficulty reading and writing.
the Tribunal was unable to question Mr Barry about the letters and their
veracity, and in view of the contradictory nature of the
information contained
in the letters the Tribunal has given these letters little weight.
Tribunal accepts Mrs Turner’s evidence that her daughter Angela met Mr
Barry before her 18th birthday while she was undertaking
year 12 at school,
noting that this was not disputed by Mr Turner.
Tribunal also accepts that during the course of the year her relationship with
Mr Barry progressed to the point where he would
frequently stay over at Mrs
Turner’s house. During this time Mr Barry was working but not full time
and would leave for work
at about 2.00 am. The Tribunal accepts Mrs
Turner’s evidence that Mr Barry was also registered for Centrelink
benefits as he
was not working full time.
Tribunal also accepts that during 2010, Mrs Turner continued to support her
daughter financially to allow her to complete her
school year and that at the
end of the school year, Angela registered as for youth allowance as a job
seeker. In making this assessment,
the Tribunal acknowledges that Mr Turner
maintains that that Mr Barry took over the financial responsibility for his
upkeep from about her 18th birthday although he has stated that
he had little knowledge of events at the time. In the chronology
of events this
would have been very soon after the commencement of their relationship and would
indicate a very serious commitment
by a person who was not in a financial
position to be able to undertake such a responsibility. While there is no doubt
that Mr Barry’s
intentions towards Angela were serious indeed, it was
still in the initial stages of their relationship. On balance the Tribunal
prefers Mrs Turner’s evidence that she continued to be responsible for her
daughter’s welfare and support.
Turner admitted that he had no direct knowledge as to the progress of the
relationship as he had not had direct discussions with
his daughter, Mrs Turner
or Mr Barry.
relation as to when Angela became independent of her parents’ support, the
Tribunal’s view is that in spite of Mr John
Barry having increasingly
stayed over at Mrs Turner’s house from March 2010, this is not in itself
indicative that he assumed
total financial and emotional responsibility for
Angela as she continued to reside in her mother’s house and continued with
her studies and her normal life. The assertion that Mr Barry was paying board to
Mrs Turner is disputed by Mrs Turner and in the
Tribunal’s view is not in
itself indicative that Mr Barry had taken on full financial responsibility for
Angela. Relationships
between two people rarely progress towards total
dependency, financially, emotionally or otherwise within days or weeks of
one another. Clearly by December 2010 the relationship had progressed to
the point where they were prepared to make such a commitment
to each other as
demonstrated by their moving in together into separate accommodation and to
commence living as a couple in a genuine
domestic relationship.
the basis of the evidence before it, the Tribunal made the following findings of
Mr Turner and
Mrs Turner are the separated parents of Angela Turner born 1992.
Angela is in the
sole care of Mrs Turner.
Angela Turner
met John Barry in March 2010 and they formed a relationship a few weeks later.
Mrs Turner moved
on 7 May 2010 and from that point John Barry regularly stayed overnight on an
average of two to three nights per
Angela and John
Barry moved into their own accommodation on 6 December 2010 and declared
themselves as a couple to Centrelink on that
notified the Agency on 2 December 2010 that Angela and Mr Barry would be moving
into their own accommodation on 6 December
continued to meet Angela’s financial costs until Angela moved out of her
was in receipt of youth allowance on the basis that she lived at home and her
payment was affected by her mother’s earnings.
Based on these findings,
the Tribunal concludes that Angela commenced living with Mr Barry on a genuine
domestic basis on 6 December
2010 and that she became a member of a couple with
Mr Barry on that date. Pursuant to
of the Act, a terminating event
occurred on 6 December 2010. Section 74 requires that the Registrar take such
action as the Registrar
considers appropriate to take account of the likely
happening of the terminating event.
The Tribunal’s determination
On 21 June 2011 the Tribunal decided to set aside the decision under review
and substitute its decision that the child support assessment
terminates from 6 December 2010.
The application for review is therefore successful.
Presiding Member for the Tribunal
The publication of Social Security Appeals Tribunal child support
decisions is authorised under
subsections 16(2AB)
(2AC) of the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act
Personal particulars of parties to an appeal and their children are
removed to protect their privacy. Names used in all published
decisions are
pseudonyms. Reasons for decisions are published in full (with any information
which may identify involved individuals
to a member of the public removed) to
ensure that the full context and basis for the decision can be understood. The
Social Security
Appeal's Tribunal's decisions in relation to child support
matters demonstrate the application of the Child Support legislation to
individual circumstances of the case being decided. Different fact situations
or subsequent changes to legislation may result
in different outcomes.
The CSA reviews all SSAT decisions to identify opportunities to improve
its services and ensure its processes and policies are robust
and accurate. The
CSA publishes further information about SSAT decisions on their website
www.csa.gov.au/publications/1313.aspx#ssat
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (177 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter