La Perouse Local Aboriginal Land Council v Quarry Street Pty Ltd [2025] HCA 32 (3 September 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, STEWARD AND JAGOT JJ
LA PEROUSE LOCAL ABORIGINAL LAND
ANOR APPELLANTS
QUARRY STREET PTY LTD &
ANOR RESPONDENTS
La Perouse Local Aboriginal Land Council v Quarry Street
[2025] HCA 32
Date of Hearing: 13 March 2025
of Judgment: 3 September 2025
aside the orders made by the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales on 10 May 2024 and, in lieu thereof, order
(a) the appeal be dismissed; and
(b) the appellant pay the second and third respondents' costs of and
incidental to the appeal.
first respondent pay the appellants' costs of and incidental to the
On appeal from the Supreme Court of New South
Representation
B W Walker SC with O R Jones for the appellants
(instructed by Chalk & Behrendt, Lawyers & Consultants)
with C J Beshara for the first respondent (instructed by Hall &
Z C Heger SC with O J Ronan for the second respondent (instructed
by Crown Solicitor for
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
La Perouse Local Aboriginal Land Council v Quarry
Street Pty Ltd
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples –
Land rights – Claimable Crown lands – Where land claimed under
Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983
(NSW) ("Act") subject to
lease granted by Crown – Where lessee had not undertaken purposeful
activity on land – Where
"claimable Crown lands" in
means lands vested in Crown that are "not lawfully used" – Whether land
"lawfully used" for purpose of
merely because land
subject to existing lease from Crown.
Words and phrases – "actual
use", "claimable Crown lands", "constructive use", "Crown lands", "doctrine of
concurrent leases",
"estate or interest in land", "exploitation of rights to
land", "land", "land claim", "land vested", "lands", "lands vested", "lawfully
used or occupied", "lease", "occupation", "occupied", "physical area",
"possession", "purposeful interaction", "remedial or beneficial
legislation",
"reversionary interest", "rights to land", "rights to the physical area",
"used", "vested".
Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983
, Sch 4, cl 8.
Conveyancing Act 1919
Crown Land Management Act 2016
Crown Lands Act 1989
(1), Sch 7.
Crown Lands Consolidation
(NSW), s 5(1).
Interpretation Act 1987
(3), Sch 4.
Native Title Act 1993
Real Property
GAGELER CJ.
The central question in this appeal from a decision of the Court of Appeal of
the Supreme Court of New South
concerns the scope and
operation of
Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983
(NSW) ("the
"). The purposes of the
are expressed to include "to provide land
rights" for Aboriginal
and "to vest land"
in Aboriginal Land Councils.
is headed "Land rights". Division 2 of
"Claimable Crown lands". Within Div 2 of
is headed "Claims to Crown
lands". The section pursues those two purposes concurrently.
permits an Aboriginal Land Council established under
to make "a claim for
An Aboriginal Land
Council can do so by lodging a written claim describing or specifying "the lands
in respect of which it is made"
with the Registrar appointed under
The section goes on
to require the Registrar to refer such a
to the Minister or
each Minister administering any provisions of the
Crown Lands Consolidation
(NSW) ("the
Western Lands Act 1901
") under which "lands are able to be sold or leased" ("the
Crown Lands Minister").
Legislative
developments since the enactment of the
have involved the repeal and
substantial reenactment of the
. Those legislative
developments mean that the continuing references in
need to be read in accordance with
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW) ("the
Interpretation Act
"). The references
are accordingly to be taken
to have referred in the period from 1990 to 2018 to the
Crown Lands Act
(NSW) ("the CLA") and the
and to have referred since 2018
compendiously to the
Crown Land Management Act 2016
(NSW) ("the
consequence of the Registrar referring a claim made by an Aboriginal Land
Council to the Crown Lands Minister is and has always
been to require the
Minister to make a binary decision under
. The Minister
must grant the whole or a part of the claim if "satisfied" that "the whole of
the lands claimed is claimable Crown
lands" or "part only of the lands claimed
is claimable Crown lands".
Conversely, the Minister must refuse the whole or a part of the claim if
"satisfied" that "the whole of the lands claimed is not
claimable Crown lands"
or "part of the lands claimed is not claimable Crown
the Crown Lands Minister grants the whole or a part of a claim, upon being
satisfied that the whole or relevant part of the
lands claimed is claimable
Crown lands, the Minister is required to make that grant by transferring the
whole or relevant part of
those lands to the claimant Aboriginal Land
Except where the
transfer is of lands within a category of claimable Crown lands which is subject
to certain provisions formerly
contained in the
and now contained in the
, which are of no present
requires that "any transfer of lands to an Aboriginal Land Council under
[s 36] shall be for an estate in fee simple but shall be
subject to any native
title rights and interests existing in relation to the lands immediately before
the transfer". If and to the
extent the transfer would not otherwise be
authorised by the
or an applicable successor
transfer of the lands in accordance with [s 36] shall be deemed to have been
authorised by whichever of those Acts the lands
were subject to immediately
expression "claimable Crown lands" is defined in s
to mean "lands vested in Her
Majesty" (that is to say, lands vested in the Crown in right of New South
) which meet
specified conditions when a claim is made. The first of those conditions,
specified in
, is expressed to be that the lands "are able to be
lawfully sold or leased, or are reserved or dedicated for any purpose, under the
] or the [WL
]". The second condition, specified in
that the lands "are not lawfully used or occupied". Other conditions, specified
s 36(1)(b1)
and (c) respectively, are that the lands "do not comprise lands"
which, "in the opinion of a Crown Lands Minister, are needed or
are likely to be
needed as residential lands" and "are not needed, nor likely to be needed, for
an essential public purpose". The
remaining conditions, specified in
and (e) respectively, are that the lands are not the subject of
"an application for a determination of native title" or "an approved
determination of native title ... (other than an approved determination that no
native title exists in the lands)" under the
Native Title Act 1993
Native Title Act
short but important question at the centre of this appeal concerns the second of
those specified conditions. The question is
whether lands vested in the Crown in
right of New South Wales are "used" within the meaning of
merely by reason of those lands being the subject of an existing lease from
the Crown. If so, then the prior grant by the Crown Lands
Minister of a lease
from the Crown under the
or successor legislation is
enough to prevent lands vested in the Crown from being claimable Crown lands,
irrespective of the purpose
of the lease and irrespective of whether the purpose
of the lease is being fulfilled.
correct answer to that question is "no". Lands vested in the Crown are not
"used" within the meaning of
merely by reason of the
existence of an unexpired lease of those lands from the Crown. That is because
the "use" of "lands" vested
in the Crown in right of New South Wales to which
refers is limited to physical deployment of
physical lands.
the analysis of the reasoning of the Court of Appeal undertaken by Jagot J, I
move immediately to the concepts of "land",
"lands" and "use" and to the
relationship between those concepts in the context of the
Land and lands
the word "property",
word "land" can be employed in two quite distinct senses. One is to refer to a
physical thing: in the case of "land", to refer
to "the land itself" as a
"topographical"
comprising a "solid portion of the earth's
precisely, "the concrete physical mass, commencing at the surface of the earth
and extending downwards to the centre of
the earth" defined at the surface of
the earth to be within described or specified "metes and
The other is to
refer to a legal or equitable right in relation to that physical thing: in the
case of "land", to refer to a legal
or equitable "estate" or "interest" in such
a portion of the earth's
the different senses of the word "property", the different senses of the word
"land" are often conflated in legal discourse.
That is nothing new: "[t]he world
of the common lawyer has always been a curious blend of the physical and the
abstract, a commixture
of the earthily pragmatic and the deeply
conceptual".
of the physical and the abstract is to be seen in the generic definition of
"land" in the
Interpretation Act
: "land includes messuages, tenements and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, of any tenure or description, and
whatever may
be the estate or interest
The generic
definition is of long standing and is widespread, having been derived, albeit
only in part, from Lord Brougham's
for shortening the Language used in
Acts of Parliament 1850
having first
appeared in
for shortening Acts of the Legislative Council 1852
(NSW) ("the New South Wales Acts Shortening
having been
reenacted in the
Interpretation Act 1897
and having been
replicated in the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) ("the
Commonwealth
Acts Interpretation Act
and in the interpretation legislation of other States and
Territories.
generic definition of "land", now in the Interpretation Act, applies to the word
"land" as used in that or another Act of the
New South Wales Parliament "except
in so far as the contrary intention appears" in that Act or the other
The definition needs
to be read in conjunction with the further generic definition of "estate", which
likewise first appeared in
the New South Wales Acts Shortening
and which the
Interpretation Act likewise applies to the word "estate" as used in that or
another Act of the New South Wales Parliament
except in so far as the contrary
intention appears. The generic definition is that "estate includes interest,
charge, right, title,
claim, demand, lien and encumbrance, whether at law or in
as it is to be no more than inclusive, the generic definition of "land"
implicitly treats "the physical substance" as "the
natural and primary meaning
of the word" and operates as "merely extending" that natural and primary
The references
to messuages (houses together with their
) and corporeal
hereditaments ("substantial and permanent
) are references
to physical characteristics of the physical land. The reference to incorporeal
hereditaments ("creatures of the mind"
which "exist only in contemplation"
examples of which are easements and profits à
) is a reference
to legal or equitable rights in relation to the same physical land, as are the
references to any tenure and to any
estate or interest in the land. The
reference to incorporeal hereditaments therefore imports into the definition
"every interest
which in law is, or savours of,
The reference to
tenements is more obscure, the term originally and possibly still referring only
to types of buildings
having at one stage been said "in its original, proper and legal sense" to
signify "everything that may be holden, provided it
be of a permanent nature;
whether it be of a substantial and sensible or of an unsubstantial ideal
generic definition of "land" is displaced in the context of the entirety of the
by the contrary intention which appears from the presence of the more
specific definition of "land" in
. Read with the chapeau to
, the more specific definition is as follows: "In this Act, except in so
far as the context or subject-matter otherwise indicates
or requires: ... land
includes any estate or interest in land, whether legal or equitable".
more specific definition of "land" in
resembles the
generic definition in the Interpretation Act in implicitly taking as its
starting point that the natural and primary
meaning of a reference to "land" in
a provision of the
is limited to physical land. Where it applies, the
definition extends such a reference to "land" in a provision of the
beyond physical land to refer also to a legal or equitable "estate" or
"interest" in land, its employment of the word "estate" in
that context needing
further to be understood in light of the generic definition of that word in the
Interpretation Act as encompassing
"interest, charge, right, title, claim,
demand, lien and encumbrance". But the terms in which the definition of "land"
is introduced make clear that the extended meaning has no application
to a reference to "land" in a provision of the
where the context or
subject-matter of the provision indicates that the reference does not extend
beyond the natural and primary
meaning of "land" as a physical entity.
are numerous references to "land" in provisions of the
in respect of
which the extended meaning supplied by the definition in
applicable. Most of those provisions are within Divs 4, 4A and 5 of
subject-matter of Div 4 of
, as indicated by the heading to that division,
is "Land dealings by Aboriginal Land Councils". Regulating that subject-matter,
4 refers throughout to "land" and to "dealings" with "land" in contexts
which readily bear the extended meaning in
Divisions 4A and 5
also contain provisions referring to "land" or to "dealings" with "land" in
contexts which bear the extended
confirmed in relation to the provisions of Divs 4 and 4A by a note to the
definition of the expression "deal with land"
for the purpose of Divs 4 and 4A
which draws attention to the definition of "land" in
and repeats the
terms of that definition.
Other references to "land" to which the meaning as extended by the definition in
can be seen to be applicable are within
in provisions
concerning the powers and functions of Aboriginal Land Councils and
administrators.
contrast to those other provisions,
contains numerous
indications that its frequent references to "lands" and occasional references to
"land" do not extend beyond land
as a physical entity and therefore do not
attract the application of the extended meaning in
The strongest
indication inheres in the subject-matter of
which, adopting the description
in the heading to the section, is "claims to Crown lands": "claimable Crown
lands" being a category
of "lands vested" in the Crown in right of New South
Wales which the Crown Lands Minister is obliged by the section to grant, on
application, to a claimant Aboriginal Land Council by transferring those lands
"for an estate in fee simple".
begin with, the word employed in the expression "claimable Crown lands" in
, and in the definition of that expression in
vested" in the Crown in right of New South Wales meeting specified conditions,
is not "land" but "lands". In many legislative
contexts, reference to a word in
the plural form will include reference to the word in the singular
In this context,
however, the legislative choice to employ the plural form has a significance
beyond the semantic. The significance
lies in the purposeful consistency at the
time of enactment of the
of the choice of the expression "claimable
Crown lands" and of the definition of that expression as a category of "lands
in the Crown in right of New South Wales, with the standard expression
of "Crown lands" and the standard definition of that expression
vested" in the Crown in right of New South Wales which then appeared in both the
standard expression of "Crown lands", defined as "lands vested" in the Crown in
right of New South Wales, can be traced to the
expressions and definitions first
adopted by the Parliament of New South Wales in the
Crown Lands Alienation
Crown Lands Occupation Act 1861
The expression
"Crown Lands" had there been adopted as a different way of referring to "Waste
Lands of the Crown", which had been
defined in similar terms in the
Australian Colonies Waste Lands Act 1842
Australian Colonies Waste Lands Amendment Act 1846
and which had been
understood to refer in that context to "the mass of general undisposed of land
in the Colony".
the enactment of the
, it had been observed that "[t]he underlying object
of the Crown lands legislation from 1861 onwards was to control the Crown
prerogative
of disposing of the waste lands of the Colony at will and to provide
the subjects of the Crown with a statutory right, upon the performance
conditions, to have a grant of land from the
Consistently with
that observation, the word "vested" in the reference to "lands vested" in the
Crown in right of New South Wales
in the standard definition of "Crown lands"
had been held to have a "legal meaning" not confined to "vested in possession"
to include land the subject of a perpetual lease in respect of which the
Crown was still the legal owner of the
That holding
is consistent with the "lands" so "vested" in the Crown – that is to say,
the subject-matter in respect of which
the Crown has an existing legal interest
– being physical
What is more, the
underlying object to which both the
continued to be
directed made it beyond question that the reference to "lands vested" in the
Crown in right of New South Wales in
the standard definition of "Crown lands" in
, as in all predecessor legislation, was to physical
land located in New South Wales in respect of which the Crown held "radical
from which radical title estates and interests were able to be "carved
by Crown grants made
under the authority of those Acts or other legislation.
before the enactment of the
Property (Crown Land
Titles) Amendment Act 1980
(NSW) inserted a new
Property Act 1900
(NSW) ("the
Real Property Act
Property Act
provided and continues to provide for the Registrar-General to
"bring under" the provisions of that Act any
that was, was in
the course of being or was capable of being "sold, leased, dedicated, reserved
or otherwise disposed of or dealt
with ... by or on behalf of the Crown" under
any of a number of specified Acts, which included the
Registrar-General was and remains empowered to do so by creating a folio in the
Land Titles Register recording "The State of
New South Wales" as the proprietor
of the land
event "the estate to which that recording relates is an estate in fee
The effect of
registration was and is to make the State of New South Wales the holder of the
registered estate in fee
The relevant
emanation of the State of New South Wales for the holding of the registered
estate in fee simple, subject to applicable
legislative provision to the
contrary, was and remains the Crown in right of New South
enough, the same concept of "Crown lands" as "lands vested" in the Crown in
right of New South Wales as was manifested in
time of enactment of the
was carried over into the definition of
"claimable Crown lands" in
. The "Crown lands" rendered
claimable through the application of the definition in
were to be a
subset of the "Crown lands" referred to in the
land located in New South Wales in respect of which the Crown held radical title
and in respect of any portion of which
the State of New South Wales might or
might not be the holder of an estate in fee simple depending on whether the
Registrar-General
had brought that portion under the
Real Property Act
was to require the transfer to an Aboriginal
Land Council, from the totality of the physical land located in New South Wales
time to time as would continue to comprise "Crown lands", such of that
physical land as the Aboriginal Land Council might claim and
as the Crown Lands
Minister might be satisfied met each of the conditions necessary to constitute
claimable Crown lands at the time
of claim. The transfer was to be "for an
estate in fee simple", necessarily involving the carving out of an estate in fee
from the radical title by way of the grant itself if an estate in fee
simple had not already been created by registration under the
Real Property Act
definition of "land" in
was no more applicable to the
definition of "claimable Crown lands" in
than was the
generic definition of "land" in the Interpretation Act applicable to the
standard definitions of "Crown lands" in the
simple reason that the "lands" in each case were limited to "lands" vested in
the Crown in right of New South Wales in respect
of which the Crown held either
the radical title or through registration an estate in fee simple.
Furthermore,
the end point of
being that "lands" which the Crown Lands
Minister is satisfied are claimable Crown lands are transferred to the claimant
Land Council for an estate in fee simple, the transfer of lands for
an estate in fee simple is wholly inconsistent with the "lands"
claimed and so
transferred being understood in accordance with the definition of "land" in
so as to include "
estate or interest in land,
whether legal or equitable" (emphasis added). An estate in fee simple is "the
most extensive in quantum,
and the most absolute in respect to the rights which
it confers, of all estates known to the law", conferring "the lawful right to
exercise over, upon, and in respect to, the land, every act of ownership which
can enter into the
imagination"
"for almost all practical purposes, the equivalent of full ownership of the
could not operate in accordance with its terms to require a
transfer of "claimable Crown lands" for an estate in fee simple were
"lands" to be read to include the singular "land" and interpreted in accordance
to include any legal or equitable "estate or
interest" in land because a legal or equitable estate or interest in land
falling short
of an estate in fee simple would be incapable of sustaining a
transfer for an estate in fee simple. No transfer from the Crown for
in fee simple could be possible, for example, were the Crown merely the lessee
of a leasehold estate or the holder of an
easement or a profit à prendre.
Nor would such a transfer be possible if the Crown merely held an "estate"
understood according
to the extended meaning of that word in the Interpretation
to include any "interest, charge, right, title, claim, demand, lien
[or] encumbrance". The lesser cannot include the greater.
the generic definition of "land" in the Interpretation Act, the specific
definition of "land" in
can therefore have no application
to extend the meaning of the word "lands" in
. The words
"lands" and "land" are employed in
according to their
natural and primary meaning to refer only to physical land.
same conclusion can be couched in language drawn from that of Gummow J in
Risk v Northern
the relevance of the generic definition of "land" in the
Commonwealth Acts
Interpretation Act
to the resolution of the issue in that case concerning the
territorial reach of the word "land" in the expressions "Crown land" and
"unalienated Crown land" in the
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory)
(Cth). The conclusion is that the concern of
referring to "lands" and "land" in the context of "claimable Crown lands" is not
with the identification of "particular interests
in realty" but instead with the
identification of "a portion of the surface of the earth".
correctness of the conclusion that the "lands" vested in the Crown in right of
New South Wales to which the definition of "claimable
Crown lands" in
refers are confined to physical land is confirmed by the language
and, even more so, the substance of the conditions specified in
(e) that those lands "do not comprise lands" that are the subject of an
application for a determination of native title that
has been registered under
Native Title Act
or of an approved determination that native title exists
Native Title Act
. An application for a determination of native title
that has been registered under the
Native Title Act
involves an assertion that a
person or persons "hold native title in relation to a specified area of land or
the registered
particulars of which must include "the area of land or waters covered by the
Correspondingly,
an approved determination that native title exists under the
Native Title Act
involves a determination that "native title exists in relation to a particular
area ... of land or
The definition
of "land" for the purposes of the
Native Title Act
is expressed in terms which
make clear that it is concerned only with physical
That is consistent
with the definition of "native title" for the purposes of the
Native Title Act
which relevantly refers to "the communal, group or individual rights and
interests of Aboriginal peoples ... in relation to land
or waters", where "the
rights and interests are possessed under the traditional laws acknowledged, and
the traditional customs observed,
by the Aboriginal peoples" and "the Aboriginal
peoples ..., by those laws and customs, have a connection with the land or
and where "the rights and interests are recognised by the common law of
Australia".
would be a nonsense for the concept of native title as first recognised by the
common law of Australia and as "recognised,
and protected, in accordance with"
Native Title Act
be sought to be applied to anything other than physical land or waters. Not
being "an institution of the common law" but having
its origin in and being
given its content "by the traditional laws acknowledged by and the traditional
customs observed by the [I]ndigenous
inhabitants of a
territory",
native title
is a concept that is wholly incapable of meaningful application to a legal or
equitable estate or interest in land because
a legal or equitable estate or
interest in land is the abstract creation of a different system of law.
completeness, it needs to be explained how continuing to construe the references
to "lands" and "land" in
according to their natural and
primary meaning to refer only to physical land has been and remains consistent
with reading references
in that section to the
accordance with s 68(3) of the Interpretation Act, to have referred, in the
period from 1990 to 2018, to the CLA and the
and to have referred since
2018 compendiously to the
from the nomenclature of the
, the CLA referred to "Crown land" instead
of "Crown lands" but defined "Crown land" in relevantly identical terms to the
of "Crown lands" in the
as "land that is vested in the
the commencement of the
, "land" that had been "Crown land" under the CLA
became "Crown land" under the
and thereby became
"vested in the Crown ... as an estate in fee
irrespective of
registration under the
Real Property
As to the meaning of
"land", the
contains the general definition that "[i]n this Act ...
land includes any waters on or under the surface of the
making clear that
"land" is confined to its natural and primary meaning of physical land.
result is that, at the time of the enactment of the
and at all times
since, the reference to "lands" in the definition of "claimable Crown lands" in
has been confined to the natural and primary meaning of
"land" so as to refer only to physical land. The reference has not been extended
through application of the definition of "land" in
include any legal or equitable estate or interest in land. The view that "lands"
is extended by the definition of "land" in
to include a
legal or equitable estate or interest in land, adopted in the Court of Appeal
and defended by the respondents in argument
on the appeal to this Court, is
acknowledged that the word "lands" in the definition of "claimable Crown lands"
and throughout
is and always has been
confined to physical land, it cannot seriously be questioned that the words
"used" and "occupied" in the reference
to lands "not lawfully
used or occupied" are and always have been confined to physical use or
occupation. The argument of the respondents
that, although "occupied" in
can be confined to physical occupation of the physical land,
can be extended to legal utilisation of a legal or
equitable estate or interest only needs to be stated to be recognised as
unsustainable.
is no reason to read "used" in
differently from the
same word appearing in the reference to "land which is vested in the Crown ...
and is used for a public
which had been
interpreted in
Randwick Corporation v
two decades before the enactment of the
to refer to "the actual use to
which the land is put by the persons who in law control it for the time
attribute such a meaning to "used" in
conforms with
the understanding of that word in
expressly adopted by
the Court of Appeal in each of
Daruk Local Aboriginal Land Council v Minister
Administering the
Crown Lands Act
Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v New South Wales Aboriginal Land
First Nowra Brickworks Claim
Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v La Perouse Local Aboriginal Land
consistent with the meaning implicitly attributed to that word by this Court in
Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v New South Wales Aboriginal
Land Council
Wagga Wagga Motor Registry Claim
South Wales Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
Berrima Gaol Claim
as "occupied" was explained in
and confirmed in
to mean "'actually occupied' in the sense of being occupied in fact and to more
than a notional degree", in respect of which "[p]hysical
acts of occupation, the
exercise of control, maintaining of lands are all factors which are
so "used" was
explained in
to mean "'actually used' in the sense of being used in
fact and to more than a merely notional
Neither the
Wagga Wagga Motor Registry Claim Case
Berrima Gaol Claim Case
involved any departure from that conception of "use" as substantial physical
Wagga Wagga Motor Registry Claim Case
involved consideration and
rejection of an argument that lands were "used" by reason either of a decision
having been made to sell
the lands or of steps having been taken to achieve that
end. The plurality adopted the language of Fullagar J in
Council of the
City of Newcastle v Royal Newcastle Hospital
Royal Newcastle
highlighting the fallacy of assuming that "deriving an advantage from the
ownership of land is the same thing as using the
Berrima Gaol Claim Case
did not require consideration of whether lands
were in any way "used" within the meaning of the
. Rather, to the extent
now relevant, the outcome in that case turned on the majority's consideration
and rejection of the proposition
that lands which had been the subject of
continuous physical possession could be characterised as lands which were not
"occupied".
Writing separately as a member of the majority in that case, I noted
that the explanations in
First Nowra Brickworks Claim
conformed to the distinction between the overlapping concepts of "use"
and "occupation" spelt out by Kitto J in
Royal Newcastle Hospital
the essential distinction being to the effect that the concept of "occupation"
is that of "conduct amounting to actual possession,
and some degree of
permanence" whereas the concept of "use" is that of "physical acts by which the
land is made to serve some
That being so,
as the ultimate outcome in
Royal Newcastle Hospital
itself illustrates,
physical acts by which the land is made to serve a particular purpose might well
be passive.
the meaning of
, and conformably with the distinction
so recognised, physical "lands" are accordingly "used" only if and to the extent
those lands
are physically deployed.
Disposition
agree with the orders proposed by Jagot J. The effect of those orders is to
restore the first instance judgment of Preston CJ in
the Land and Environment
Court of New South Wales.
AND STEWARD JJ. The present appeal concerns part of a land claim lodged on
19 December 2016 under
Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983
(NSW) ("the
") by the second appellant, the New South Wales
Aboriginal Land Council ("the NSW ALC"), in respect of the "Paddington Bowling
being Lot 5 of Deposited Plan 1156846 in the State of New South
Wales ("the Land").
The registered proprietor of the Land is the State of New South Wales ("the
addresses land rights. Where a claim for land is made under the
, the Crown Lands
("the Minister") shall, if satisfied that the land is "claimable Crown
lands", grant the claim by transferring "the whole or that
part of the lands
claimed" to the claimant Aboriginal Land Council ("the Land Council") or,
where the claim is made by the NSW ALC,
to a Local Aboriginal Land Council
nominated by the NSW ALC.
definition of "land" in the
is important. It is defined, "except in
so far as the context or subject‑matter otherwise indicates or requires",
"any estate or interest in land, whether legal or
equitable".
"[C]laimable Crown lands" are then defined in
"... lands vested in Her Majesty that, when a claim is made for the lands under
this Division:
(a) are able to be lawfully sold or leased, or are reserved or dedicated for
any purpose, under the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
Western Lands Act 1901
not lawfully used
or occupied,
(c) are not needed, nor likely to be needed, for an essential public purpose,
and ..." (emphasis added)
Any transfer of lands to a Land Council under
an estate in fee simple, subject to any native title rights and interests
existing in relation to the lands immediately before
the date of the claim by the NSW ALC, the Land was subject to
Reserve 1024528 for community and sporting club facilities and tourist
facilities and services,
and a registered lease granted by the Minister on behalf of the State of New
South Wales
to Paddington
Bowling Club Ltd (then subject to a Deed of Company Arrangement)
("the Club") for 50 years from 1 December 2010 ("the
Crown Lease").
The terms of the Crown Lease included that the initial rent was $52,000 per
annum and was subject to CPI adjustments
and periodic reviews to market; the
lessee was given the right to occupy and use the premises for the purpose
of "Community and Sporting
Club Facilities, Tourist Facilities and Services,
Access" ("the Permitted Use"); the lessee was not required to use the site
those purposes but the lessee was prohibited from using the site for any
other purpose; and no assignment, sublease, mortgage or
other dealing with
the Crown Lease was permitted except with the consent of the
December 2011, the Crown Lease was assigned by the Club to CSKS Holdings
Pty Ltd ("CSKS") pursuant to a registered dealing. By
15 October 2015, the
Paddington Bowling Club was described as a "forgotten wasteland" that was
"overgrown and neglected", with "[d]ecaying
furniture and broken umbrellas"
and "abandoned bowling greens, which [were] overrun with weeds". CSKS did
not use the Land for the
Permitted Use. The bowling greens were unattended.
The clubhouse was in disrepair.
10 April 2016, an officer of the Department of Primary Industries
("the Department") required CSKS to remedy alleged breaches of
Lease in relation to the state of repair of the clubhouse and grounds on the
Land within 28 days and foreshadowed the potential
forfeiture of the Crown Lease
("the Notice"). On 22 April 2016, CSKS's solicitors responded to the Notice
by denying that any of
the alleged breaches constituted a breach of the Crown
Lease which would justify its forfeiture and requesting that it be given until
31 July 2016 to respond to the Notice. The Department did not respond
to that letter.
6 May 2016, CSKS's solicitors again wrote to the Department in response to the
Notice. That letter stated that CSKS did not admit
that any of the items
listed in the Notice constituted a breach of the Crown Lease sufficient to
enable the Crown to terminate the
Crown Lease. The letter also stated that
"the property [was] unoccupied and it [was] not intended that the property
[would] be used
for public purposes without substantial renovation and
refurbishment" and that CSKS considered that its "only real obligation
to keep the building structurally sound and waterproof". However, the
letter went on to state that "in order to prevent any attempted
forfeiture of the [Crown] Lease, [CSKS] ha[d] engaged contractors to rectify the
matters ... raised or to provide certification
from a suitably qualified expert
that the item [was] not presently a major structural defect". Enclosed with
the letter were the
identified reports and a response to each of the matters
listed in the Notice. During May and June 2016, CSKS and the Crown negotiated
letter to CSKS's solicitors that it "remain[ed] available
to discuss with [CSKS]
alternative uses of the [L]and".
1 February 2018, the Crown Lease was assigned by CSKS to the first respondent,
Quarry Street Pty Ltd ("Quarry Street"), with the
consent of the Crown.
The assignment was registered in April 2018. One condition of
the assignment was that Quarry Street acknowledged
that the Land was
subject to undetermined Aboriginal land claims and that, if the Land or any part
of it was transferred to a Land
Council pursuant to a claim under the
the Crown Lease (or the relevant part of the Crown Lease) would terminate on the
date of the transfer.
claim lodged on 19 December 2016 was determined by the Minister on 10
December 2021 on the basis that he was satisfied that the
Land (being part of
the claim) was "claimable Crown lands" within the meaning of that term under
and was then required to grant the claim by transferring the
Land to the La Perouse Local Aboriginal Land Council, the first appellant.
a further amended summons filed on 17 May 2023, Quarry Street sought an order
preventing the transfer of the Land, an order in
the nature of certiorari to
quash the Minister's determination and an order that the application be remitted
to the Minister to be
determined according to law.
primary judge (Preston CJ of the Land and Environment Court ("the LEC"))
dismissed the proceeding. The question on appeal to
the Court of Appeal of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales was whether the primary judge erred in failing
to find jurisdictional
error in the decision of the Minister to grant the claim
in respect of the Land by reason of the Crown Lease and the material before
Minister regarding the Crown's receipt of rent and its exhibition of a
landlord's concern about CSKS's compliance with the Crown
were two issues on appeal: first, whether it was open to the Minister to be
satisfied that the Land met the criterion in
requiring the Land to be able to be lawfully sold or leased or subject to a
reservation where the Land was subject to the Crown Lease
and, second, whether
it was open to the Minister to be satisfied that the Land met the criterion in
requiring the Land not to be lawfully used
or occupied.
relation to the second issue, being the only issue relevant to this appeal, the
Court of Appeal (White JA, Adamson and Stern JJA
agreeing) allowed
Quarry Street's appeal on the basis that the phrase "lawfully used or
occupied" in
was not a composite phrase requiring actual
physical occupation and use of the Land. Having adopted that construction, the
of Appeal found that the Land was lawfully used and therefore not
claimable because of the Crown's lease of the Land for value pursuant
Crown Lands Act 1989
(NSW), which authorised the
Minister to lease such land for any purpose compatible with the public interest
and to apply the rental
proceeds for public purposes. The Court of Appeal
reached that conclusion based on the precise terms for which the Crown Lease
The Court of Appeal held that, in those circumstances, the only
conclusion that was reasonably open to the Minister was that the
Land was "used"
and, therefore, that it was not "claimable Crown lands" within the meaning of
appeal should be dismissed. As will be explained, a Crown lease may constitute
"use" of land and, in light of the acts, facts,
matters and circumstances of
this case, the only conclusion that was reasonably open to the Minister was that
the Land was "used"
within the meaning of
Can land be "used" within the meaning of
by reason of a lease?
an Act has a remedial or beneficial purpose, that purpose may be relevant to its
construction.
this, it must be acknowledged that legislation "rarely pursues a single purpose
at all costs" and, as here, a statutory provision
may "strike[] a balance
between competing
interests".
balance that is struck between those interests must ultimately be determined by
reference to the text of the provision,
read in context.
Examination
of the text of
, considered in context, reveals
that the word "used" is not confined to physical or practical uses of land and
may include the use
of land by a landlord in granting a lease. That construction
is confirmed by the improbable and impracticable consequences of the
alternative
construction for which the appellants ("the Land Councils")
Meaning of "used" and "land"
ordinary meaning of the word "use" is (like its cognate, "used")
sense that it is a term of "wide import" and its meaning "depends to a
great extent on the context in which it is
application to land, the ordinary meaning of "use" is not limited to uses of
land which involve physical or practical activity
on the land. In
the City of Newcastle v Royal Newcastle Hospital
, for example, the hospital
"used" vacant bushland adjoining the hospital by leaving it undeveloped "for
[its] own special
preserve the "natural therapeutic qualities" of the land for its
pursuit of a "use in a less direct form" than "actual physical occupation and
enjoyment".
explaining that decision, Gibbs J observed in
Parramatta City Council v
Brickworks Ltd
that "it is not necessary, to constitute a present use
of land, that there should be a physical use of all of it, or indeed of any
owner of land may be said to "use" their land, within the ordinary meaning of
that term, by leasing it to another person, especially
where they derive an
income or some other benefit by doing so. In
Ryde Municipal Council v
Macquarie University
, Gibbs A-CJ accepted that a person who "owns land
may be said to use it for his own purposes notwithstanding that he permits
else to occupy it, even under a
observed that that is "almost beyond argument when the owner's purpose is
to acquire income".
His Honour continued by observing that "an owner of premises who leases
them is making use of those premises by employing or applying
them for the
purpose of letting".
In that case, the question whether the land was in fact used by the tenant for a
particular purpose arose because the rating statute
in issue required
the relevant use or occupation to be for a particular
is no basis in the text of
or its context to construe the word "used"
more narrowly so as to require physical use of land. Three aspects of
the text are relevant.
relevantly requires that the
land be "lawfully used". It does not specify use of the land of a particular
kind or "for" a particular
purpose. This case may be distinguished from cases
decided in different statutory contexts where the relevant question was, by
whether the "dominant use" of land (by reference to specified
activities) meant that it was used "for primary
production",
land was "used exclusively for or in connection with" public charitable
land was used "for a public
Second, the
is not expressly limited to particular
the land; it refers to "lands" which are "used or occupied". Third, the
term "used" in
appears in conjunction with the term "lands", the
singular form of which is defined in
to include "any
estate or interest in land, whether legal or equitable" – that is, rights
those features together, it is necessary to examine any uses of
the concurrent interests in land (including, as here, both
the use of the
reversionary interest of a landlord and the use by a tenant in possession). The
landlord's reversionary interest is
capable of being "used" without any physical
or practical activity on the land. Indeed, where the Crown's interest is the
in land, the only way it can "use" that estate is to grant a
leasehold or other right or interest in relation to it, which reinforces
conclusion that the lease of land may constitute "use".
as the grant of a lease for a specified period of time on specific terms may
constitute "use" of the Crown's interest in land,
so too may the ongoing
operation of that lease for the term of the lease. The lease may, commonly will,
and in this case did, impose
conditions on use by the tenant in possession.
The lease may, and here did, provide for forfeiture if the tenant did not
comply with
the terms of the lease. The landlord's use of the land constituted
by leasing it does not end with the grant of the lease. The landlord's
continues for the term of the lease. The rights and duties created and conferred
by the lease record the ongoing use of the fee
simple by the landlord and the
duties the tenant owes the landlord are the price for which the landlord
gives up exclusive possession
to the land. That is an ongoing use by the
landlord of the land and its rights to the land for the whole of the term of the
The landlord continues to use its rights in the land in accordance with
the terms of the lease so long as the lease remains on foot.
identifies certain rights and interests in land to which
a transfer of land under
is subject. If a lease were not capable
of being a "use", one would expect a transfer of land to be subject to any lease
, yet a lease is not listed in
Land Councils submitted that the definition of "land" in
was to be read as referring to the piece of physical land and
not extending to any estate or interest in the land. That submission
rejected. First, "land" is expressly defined to include "any estate or interest
in land", and there is nothing in the context
of the provision to suggest
that meaning is displaced. Second, and in any event, the passage in
The Commonwealth v New South Wales
stating that "land" referred
to "the concrete physical mass" (in the context of explaining why metals
present in the land form part
on which the
Land Councils relied is no obstacle to the conclusion that "land" in
includes a landlord's reversionary interest: a landlord can
be said to deploy the concrete physical mass of land by leasing it to
to the Land Councils' further submission, there is no tension in
the concept of "land" having a particular meaning when
employed in
connection with the term "used" as compared to the term "occupied" in
s 36(1)(b).
Those terms have separate
definition of "land" applies throughout the
subject to a contrary
intention, and so it may apply distributively. There is therefore no difficulty
that an "estate or interest"
is not usually described as "occupied". Equally,
the fact that, when the term "land" or "lands" is used throughout
different aspects of its meaning have significance does not demand a particular
conclusion as to the aspects of its meaning which
are engaged when the term is
employed in the particular context of
s 36(1)(b).
it may be accepted that one purpose of the definition of "land" as applied to
might be to clarify that "the particular legal
characterisation of the Crown's holding in claimed land does not give rise to
doubt that the land is eligible to be claimed". That, however, does not
preclude the defined term from also being used to assist
in determining
which potential "uses" of land are relevant.
conclusion that the construction of the term "used" in connection with land in
is not limited to physical use is not denied by examining how
the term "Crown lands" (or the singular form, "Crown
defined or understood in other Acts or historical contexts. Reference to
historical or other uses of the term "Crown lands"
in other contexts does not
establish that that term refers only to physical land and not estates or
interests in land.
Those historical or other uses of the term shed no relevant light on whether the
definition of "land" in the
applies according to its terms. More
particularly, they provide no foundation for concluding that the
reveals any contrary intention to applying the definition in the Act according
to its terms when considering whether land is "used"
within the meaning of
Lease may be use of land under
Land Councils' submissions that a lease cannot constitute use of land for the
purposes of
should be rejected.
there is no incongruity in the qualifying and disqualifying conditions for
"claimable Crown lands". The Land Councils contended
that it would be incoherent
if a qualifying condition for a land claim in
(that the land is
"able to be lawfully ... leased") were also a disqualifying condition, namely
that the land is in fact used by
being leased. There is no incongruity in the
treating the existence of a lease as a disqualifying condition for land
claims while providing that lands "able to be" leased are
claimable. Those are
different concepts. It may be accepted that it would be incongruous if the mere
notional occupation of land
(such as by reference to the fiction that the Crown
occupies land regardless of its
) were sufficient
to exclude land from liability to claim. But the grant of a Crown lease in
exchange for substantial rent and in
pursuit of a reserved purpose is not a mere
notional or constructive use.
the fact that any transfer of land to a Land Council under
will be for an estate in fee
concerns the
nature of the title to be transferred to the Land Council. It has no bearing on
what constitutes use of the land prior
to the transfer. On the contrary,
the fact that the
describes what is being transferred when a land claim
is granted as the "fee
a "lease in
perpetuity"
that the extended definition of "land" is being used.
the Land Councils referred to the existence of 29 different types of leases or
licences under Crown lands legislation when
was enacted, which
varied in their terms and conditions, as support for their narrower construction
of "use". They contended that
the decision of the Court of Appeal "suggests"
that the mere existence of a lease could amount to "use" without an inquiry
nature or operation of the particular lease. The issue in this appeal
is whether this Crown Lease, which required payment by the
lessee in exchange
for exclusive possession and whose terms were enforced by the Crown, amounted to
use of the Land within the meaning
question does not raise for consideration any question about whether other forms
of lease of a different character and in a
different factual situation would
constitute use of land within the meaning of
the Land Councils contended that the transitional provision in cl 8 in Pt 2
of Sch 4 to the
would be rendered otiose if a lease could constitute
"use" within the meaning of
. That provision
provides that:
"Where, but for this clause, any lands would be claimable Crown lands as defined
, those lands shall not, if they were, on the appointed day, the
subject of a lease, licence or permissive occupancy, be claimable
Crown lands as
so defined until the lease, licence or permissive occupancy ceases to be in
The Land Councils contended that, since that transitional provision preserves
existing leases from the definition of "claimable Crown
lands" until they cease
to be in force, that provision would have been unnecessary if a lease could
constitute "use" of land. That
argument should be rejected. It is not unusual
for transitional provisions to be included out of caution and Parliament is
"surplusage".
event, the transitional provision employs a composite expression which reflects
the range of tenure under the
Crown Lands Consolidation
which will necessarily result in land being "used" by its owner. The provision
has relevant work to do in respect of gratuitous
licences and permissive
occupancies, in relation to which the Crown does not obtain a profit or lose the
right to engage in activities
on the land, unlike in the case of a lease
requiring the payment of rent and conferring exclusive possession on a
Improbable consequences
text and context tend strongly in favour of the conclusion that "used" in
s 36(1)(b) is not confined to physical or practical
uses of land and may
include the landlord's use of the land by granting a lease. The correctness of
that construction is reinforced
by the improbable and impracticable consequences
of the Land Councils' construction, which suggest that it is unlikely to have
consequence of the Land Councils' construction would be that the Crown's
fee simple would be liable to claim under the
whenever its tenant
ceases to conduct activities on Crown land. The Crown's fee simple would
therefore depend on the diligence of
a tenant in pursuing the permitted purpose
under the lease. Further, as the Minister submitted, frequent monitoring would
be required,
not only of tenants but also potentially of Crown land managers, to
ensure that Crown land was practically "used" to more than a
notional degree.
And even assuming such monitoring was feasible, the Crown's fee simple would be
liable to claim in the period in
which the Crown allowed existing tenants time
to remedy any inactivity in breach of the lease, and during the period in which
sought to install a new tenant. All of that assumes that the relevant Crown
lease, unlike the Crown Lease in issue in this appeal,
contained a
term prohibiting tenants from inactivity which the Crown could seek to
Land Councils' construction would also mean that, during periods of development
or structural work by private tenants, Crown land
may be at risk of claim. Such
risk may discourage the deferred use of land by private tenants while they
engage in offsite preparatory
work which may, in turn, discourage investment in
the redevelopment of Crown land in pursuit of the purpose for which the land was
further matters should be considered. Quarry Street submitted that, if land
subject to a lease was claimable Crown lands, and
part of the land covered by a
Crown lease was transferred to a Land Council, then the Land Council would
receive the fee simple subject
to the existing leasehold interest, which would
pose practical difficulties not contemplated by the
. It may be
accepted that, following a successful claim in relation to part of the land
covered by the lease, the
does not provide for how a tenant's
rights under a lease are to be affected where they would have two landlords in
respect of different
parts of the land subject to the lease. It is
unnecessary to resolve that issue. It is, however, at least arguable that
Conveyancing Act 1919
(NSW) would apply in
such a case so that, on "severance" of the reversionary estate, the rent would
run with the reversionary estate
in the land and conditions of the lease in
respect of the severed parts of the estate could be apportioned to those
the Court of Appeal White JA observed:
"For the [Land Councils], it was submitted that the Minister could avoid claims
by [Land Councils] by entering into a 'paper lease'
where the Crown had ceased
its use of lands but had not made a decision as to whether to sell lands that
were surplus to the Crown's
requirements. [Quarry Street] submitted that [a Land
Council] could procure a lessee from the Crown not to use all or part of the
lands leased so as to make a claim for land not physically used.
Parliament would not have contemplated that either the Minister or [a Land
Council] would abuse his, her, or its position either,
in the case of
the Minister, to defeat a land claim that was properly available or,
in the case of [a Land Council], to procure a
transfer of land to
which it was not entitled. These are 'extreme examples and distorting
possibilities' that are not useful guides
construction".
phrase "paper lease" appears to be an adaptation of the phrase
"paper subdivision", a term used to describe a "subdivision of
may be effected without the necessity for any building
subdivision that does not facilitate any change to the buildings or works on the
land or the nature of the occupation of the
land and simply creates lots
capable of separate
The possibility that the Crown might enter into a "paper lease" (namely, a
lease not contemplating any real use of the land by the
tenant) as a form of
sham was rightly rejected by the Court of Appeal as a basis for construing
"used" in s 36(1)(b) to mean "physical
of the cases on which the Land Councils relied concerned a claim to land leased
by the Crown. Rather, the Land Councils' argument
proceeded by seeking to draw
analogies with those cases. That argument paid insufficient heed to the
plurality's observation in this
Minister Administering the
v NSW Aboriginal Land Council
Wagga Wagga
") that "nothing
that was said in the earlier decisions of the Court of Appeal, and nothing that
is said in these reasons, should
be understood as attempting some exhaustive
definition of when land is not lawfully used or occupied or of what is relevant
occupation that will take lands outside the definition of claimable Crown
different terms, it is important and necessary to recall what was said by
Windeyer J, albeit in a different context: the Court
should read its
previous judgments "in relation to the circumstances of each case and to the
arguments which were then adduced" and
"[t]o select passages from them and to
subject their words to detailed analysis as if they provided a definitive
exegesis of [the
relevant provision] can be most
misleading".
Court's decision in
Wagga Wagga
is important for other reasons. It is
true that the plurality observed that there "can be no doubt that sale of the
land would amount
to exploitation of the land as an asset of the owner" and that
it did not follow that "exploitation, by sale, amounts to lawful use
of the land
let alone its lawful
occupation".
thing to conclude, as the plurality did in
Wagga Wagga
owner in possession does not "use" land where it takes steps to sell the land
but does not otherwise make any use of the
The sale of
land, involving as it does the disposing of the asset, is more akin to an
anti-use. It is quite another thing for the
Crown to lease land which has been
reserved for a public purpose to a private tenant on terms that permit the
tenant to use the land
for that purpose, in exchange for the ongoing payment of
substantial rent.
the plurality did not say that use requires physical activity on the land,
nor is that a necessary consequence of the plurality's
reasoning. Significantly,
the plurality described the applicable inquiry as "identifying the acts, facts,
matters and circumstances
which are said to deprive the land of
the characteristic of being 'not lawfully used or occupied'" and then
measuring "those acts,
facts, matters and circumstances against an understanding
of what would constitute use or occupation of the
That is the
task. Unsurprisingly, the inquiry will vary from case to case because the acts,
facts, matters and circumstances will
vary from case to case. The decided cases
must be read paying close attention to what was said in
Wagga Wagga
for example, the passage from Gibbs J's reasons in this Court's decision in
Parramatta City Council
that "it is not necessary, to constitute a
present use of land, that there should be a physical use of all of it, or indeed
demonstrates that this is only part of the inquiry of whether a use falls within
the terms of
s 36(1)(b).
The answer is determined by applying the
approach explained by the plurality in
Wagga Wagga
, to which reference
has just been made.
the Court of Appeal of New South Wales in
Daruk Local Aboriginal Land Council
v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
, Priestley JA (with whom
Cripps JA agreed) considered that the word "used" in
"'actually used' in the sense of being used in fact and to more than a merely
notional degree".
Priestley JA was not suggesting that the "use" inquiry is concerned only with
practical activity on the land, as is confirmed by
his Honour's rejection of
the argument that "members of the public made use of [the relevant part of]
the land by looking at
That argument was rejected on the basis that there was no evidence to
support that conclusion, not because such activity would not
Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v La Perouse Local Aboriginal
Land Council
"), Basten JA (Beazley, McColl and Macfarlan
JJA agreeing) considered that "transitory physical activities on land do not
necessarily
amount to use or
occupation".
the statement is not absolute and nor could it be. The reference to
"necessarily" makes that clear. Moreover, it does not
follow that their
Honours were of the view that physical activity is necessary to establish "use".
Wagga Wagga
, the focus on "physical
activities"
place on the land is explained by the fact that the Crown was the owner in
possession of the land.
New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering
Crown Lands Act
Berrima Gaol
"), the plurality referred to
statements by Priestley JA in
that the "occupied" limb could not be
satisfied by constructive occupation, that "mere proprietorship could not
suffice" and that
"[p]hysical acts of occupation, the exercise of control and
maintaining the lands were all factors which are
Honours went on to conclude that the words "used" and "occupied" "require
an examination of activities undertaken upon the
does not follow from those statements that only physical activities on land may
constitute "use". It may be accepted that,
where the Crown is in possession of
land, an examination of activities undertaken on the land is required; it is
quite a different
proposition to say that physical activity on the land is
required where the Crown is a landlord not in possession.
possibly to the first instance decision of the LEC in
New South Wales
Aboriginal Land Council – Little Bay v Minister Administering the
Land Management
the cases do
not foreclose the conclusion that a Crown lease may constitute "use" under
s 36(1)(b).
That is unsurprising because, to the extent that the cases
have considered whether a lease of land amounts to "use" of the land,
done so by reference to the activities of the
was the position in
, where a land claim was granted in part in
respect of land the subject of a lease to a surf lifesaving club. Under a
term of the
lease, the club was required not to use the curtilage to a
building on the land except for the purposes of
In granting
the claim in part in relation to the curtilage, the trial judge concluded that
the lease was relevant to establish that
the occupation and use were lawful but
did not consider it "appropriate to consider the [l]ease divorced (either
actually or notionally)
from the facts, matters and circumstances of the actual
use or actual occupation of the [c]laimed [l]and by" the surf lifesaving
the extent that the decision in
concerned the question of
whether the land was "used or occupied" from the perspective of a lessee, the
stated legal
are largely
unexceptional. But to the extent that it is suggested that that decision governs
the issues raised in this appeal, that
contention must be rejected.
The stated principles relating to "use" are necessarily incomplete;
the principles do not consider the
use of land by a lessor or the fact that
does not necessarily require physical activity on the
So much is clear
from the statement by the trial judge that her Honour did not consider it
appropriate to consider the lease divorced
(either actually or notionally) from
the facts, matters and circumstances of the actual use or actual occupation
of the claimed land
by the tenant.
the plurality's warning in
Wagga Wagga
against reading the decided
cases as attempting some exhaustive definition of "used" applies also to cases
decided in different statutory
contexts. The risk is illustrated by
the following observations of Windeyer J in
Randwick Corporation v
"If, instead of considering in what ways the land might lawfully be used, we
consider how in fact it is used and has been used, the
respondents are in no
less difficulty. There is no suggestion that they and their tenant the club are
not acting in accordance with
the trusts and conditions of the grant and in
accordance with the
Australian Jockey Club Act
But is the land used
for a public reserve?
'This provision', as Dixon J, as he then was, said in
a similar matter, 'looks to the actual use ... of the land'. The only way
which the trustees use the land is by leasing it to the club, to be used by
it as a racecourse in accordance with the grant and the
Australian Jockey
. Indeed the land is not really used by the trustees at all, for
they have parted with the use and occupation of it for the term of
When the Act speaks of land used for a public reserve it is
referring to the actual use to which the land is put by the persons who
control it for the time being.
The question in
was whether the land was "used"
particular purpose – a public reserve. As a matter of construction,
that context gave the word "used" a particular meaning.
There is no requirement
that land be used for a particular
Land was lawfully "used" within the meaning of
then were the acts, facts, matters and circumstances which were said to deprive
the Land of the characteristic of being "not
lawfully used or occupied" and,
having identified "those acts, facts, matters and circumstances", how did they
measure "against an
understanding of what would constitute use or occupation of
the [L]and"?
noted above, on 11 December 2009, the Land was reserved pursuant to
Crown Lands Act
for the purpose of "Community and sporting club
facilities and tourist facilities and services". Under
, the Minister was empowered to grant a lease over a Crown reserve
"for any ... purpose the Minister thinks fit". However, the Minister
empowered to grant a lease unless the Minister was satisfied that it was "in the
public interest" to do so and the Minister
had "had due regard to the principles
of Crown land
management".
principles relevantly included that public use and enjoyment of appropriate
Crown land be
encouraged,
where appropriate, Crown land be used and managed in such a way that both the
land and its resources are sustained in
Crown land relevantly be leased in the best interests of the
Minister exercised his power under
Crown Lands Act
the Crown Lease with the Club for a term of 50 years from 1 December 2010.
The lessee was given the right to occupy and use the premises for a purpose
broadly consistent with the reserved purpose, namely "Community
and Sporting
Club Facilities, Tourist Facilities and Services, Access". The Minister was
entitled to substantial rent under the Crown
Crown Lands Act
, the proceeds from the Crown Lease were "to be
applied as directed by the Minister". Without limiting that discretion, the
could be paid into the Consolidated Fund or the Public Reserves
Management Fund, or to a relevant government
30 December 2011, the Crown Lease was transferred from the Club to CSKS. As at
the date of the claim, CSKS was not using the Land
for purposes permitted by the
Crown Lease but was nonetheless required to pay substantial rent to the Crown.
The Crown took steps
to secure CSKS's compliance with the conditions of the
Crown Lease and CSKS advised the Crown that it had undertaken and completed
steps to comply with the lease terms. At the same time, the Crown invited CSKS
to engage with it about proposed alternative uses
of the Land.
was no dispute between the parties that CSKS's activities, such as they were,
did not constitute "use" of the Land. However,
that is not the end of
the inquiry. The Crown reserved the Land for a public purpose and put a
tenant into possession under a lease
whose terms required the tenant to pay
substantial rent and permitted the tenant to use the Land for purposes which
were broadly
consistent with the reserved purpose and no other purpose. That is
not to say that any lease will constitute "use" of land for the
purposes of
. For example, a lease in respect of which no
rental income is required to be paid and there is no real prospect of the land
being used for the purpose permitted under the lease would not be
sufficient. But those are not the facts in this appeal. The Crown
was entitled
to receive substantial rent from the Crown Lease, it sought to enforce the
tenant's compliance with the lease terms
and the tenant advised the Crown and
provided reports to the Crown to substantiate that it had taken steps to
remediate alleged breaches
of the Crown Lease.
conclusion was reasonably open to the Minister
a court is required to assess whether an exercise of statutory power is
unreasonable, the question is whether the decision
is unreasonable having regard
to the scope of the power and the available
That inquiry
may be outcome-focused: it is not necessary to identify a particular error of
be that the decision lacks evident and intelligible justification or that it
falls outside of "a range of possible, acceptable
outcomes which are defensible
in respect of the facts and
the Minister in making the decision to approve the claim in relation to the Land
was information to the effect that the Crown
conferred exclusive possession on
CSKS in exchange for substantial rent, that the Crown permitted CSKS to use the
Land for a purpose
broadly consistent with the reserved purpose, and that the
Crown had recently sought to enforce compliance with the terms of the
Lease, in response to which CSKS advised the Crown that it had undertaken and
completed steps to comply with the lease terms.
In light of those acts, facts,
matters and circumstances and the others already referred to, and once it is
apparent that a Crown
lease may constitute "use" of land, the only conclusion
that was reasonably open to the Minister was that the Land was "used" within
the meaning of
those reasons, the appeal should be dismissed, with the Land Councils to pay
Quarry Street's costs of the appeal. Otherwise,
there should be no order as to
costs, given that the Minister does not seek his
The issues in this case: fundamentals of "property" and "land"
Roman jurists of the classical period of Roman law consistently spoke of things,
including physical (corporeal) things, as
until the 17th century, after more than a millennium of dogmatic slumber, that
it was appreciated that the law is generally
concerned with rights (or, more
precisely, legal relations) between people and that a physical thing is
relevantly the object of
a person's rights. Thus, Grotius wrote that "law exists
between persons, to whom the right belongs, and between things, over which
right extends".
even today confusion persists because words like "property" and "land" are
commonly used as shorthand to describe a person's
right to some thing or a
person's right to land.
Court attempted to resolve that confusion in
case, Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Kirby and Hayne JJ reiterated the
understanding that had persisted for more than four centuries
elsewhere in the law", the noun "property" in the relevant legislation "does not
refer to a thing; it is a description
of a legal relationship with a
Their Honours
added that "[m]uch of our false thinking about property stems from the residual
perception that 'property' is itself
and pointed
out, quoting Bentham, that "in common speech" in a phrase like "the object of a
[person's] property", "the words 'the
object of' are commonly left
A fifth member
of this Court, Gummow J, quoted from Hohfeld, saying that although
"property" is sometimes "employed to indicate the
physical object to which
various legal rights, privileges, etc, relate" the word is used "with far
greater discrimination and accuracy"
to denote the "legal interest ...
appertaining to such physical
issues in this appeal cannot be understood without distinguishing between things
and rights to things. In particular, the starting
point to resolving the central
issue in this appeal is the distinction between land and rights to land. That
distinction arises in
the context of the question whether derelict land that is
the subject of a lease from the Crown (being the body politic of the State
New South Wales
excluded from the definition of "claimable Crown lands" in
Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983
(NSW) because it is "land[] ... not
lawfully used or occupied" within the meaning of that phrase in
s 36(1)(b).
The central issue, put simply, is whether "land" is "used" when it is the
subject of a lease.
starting point is whether the Parliament of New South Wales neglected more than
four centuries of basic understanding in
Aboriginal Land
so that, despite dealing with both the physical thing that is
land and the legal relations with that physical thing, the Parliament
intended "land" to have a meaning that described only the physical thing, to the
exclusion of legal rights to the thing.
The Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court
of New South Wales effectively concluded that the Parliament of New South Wales
make such a basic error. The Court of Appeal was plainly correct on this
point. The Parliament of New South Wales: (i) defined "land"
in a manner that included rights to land; and (ii) used "land" in
in a manner that was undeniably concerned with rights to
dispositive question for the appeal is then whether land (which includes rights
to land) can be "used or occupied" within
not merely by a
purposeful interaction with the physical land but also by a continuing
exploitation of rights to land at the date
of the claim by an extant lease. The
Court of Appeal held that since "land" included rights to land, the continuing
exploitation
of rights was a use of land. In other contexts, such an expanded
meaning of "used" has been accepted. Textually, such a meaning of
"used" is also
open, although there is some strain to conclude that a lessor's rights continue
to be used after the point at which
the lease is created.
Ultimately,
however, and contrary to my initial views formed after the benefit of
outstanding argument from all parties and consideration
of the powerful judgment
of the Court of Appeal, I conclude that, in the context of
"use", like "occupation", refers only to a purposeful interaction with land (in
the physical sense). Contrary to the first respondent's
notice of contention,
that test was not satisfied in this case. The appeal must be
The relevant provisions of the
Aboriginal Land Rights
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
relevantly provides
Claims to Crown lands
(1) In this section, except in so far as the context or subject-matter otherwise
indicates or requires:
claimable Crown lands
means lands vested in Her Majesty that, when
a claim is made for the lands under this Division:
(a) are able to be lawfully sold or leased, or are reserved or dedicated for any
purpose, under the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
Lands Act 1901
(b) are not lawfully used or occupied,
(b1) do not comprise lands which, in the opinion of a Crown Lands Minister, are
needed or are likely to be needed as residential
(c) are not needed, nor likely to be needed, for an essential public purpose,
(d) do not comprise lands that are the subject of an application for a
determination of native title (other than a non-claimant application
unopposed application) that has been registered in accordance with the
Commonwealth
Native Title Act
(e) do not comprise lands that are the subject of an approved determination of
native title (within the meaning of the Commonwealth
Native Title Act
than an approved determination that no native title exists in the lands)."
relevantly provides that "except in so far as the context or subject-matter
otherwise indicates or requires", "
includes any estate or
interest in land, whether legal or equitable" and "
means a claim for land made under
section 36".
relevantly provides that the Crown Lands Minister shall grant the claim by
transferring the whole or part of the lands claimed to
the Local Aboriginal Land
Council nominated by the New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council if the Crown
Lands Minister is satisfied
that either: "(i) the whole of the lands claimed is
claimable Crown lands"; or "(ii) part only of the lands claimed is claimable
Crown lands". In these proceedings, the second respondent is the Crown Lands
Minister (as defined in
administering the
Crown Land Management
(NSW) (namely, the Minister for Planning and Public Spaces) ("the
Minister").
transitional provision in Sch 4,
, cl 8 provides
"Where, but for this clause, any lands would be claimable Crown lands as defined
, those lands shall not, if they were, on the appointed day, the
subject of a lease, licence or permissive occupancy, be claimable
Crown lands as
so defined until the lease, licence or permissive occupancy ceases to be in
The appointed day was 10 June
The facts of this case
1962 until 1 December 2010, land that is the subject of this appeal,
falling in the area of the first appellant, La Perouse
Local Aboriginal
Land Council ("La Perouse"), included an area ("the Land") which was the
subject of a special lease for recreation
(bowling) and the erection of
buildings (a clubhouse). The Land was "Crown land", which in this case meant
that the State of New
South Wales was registered as proprietor, holding an
estate in fee
lessee was Paddington Bowling Club Ltd. On 1 December 2010, a new lease
("the Lease") was granted to Paddington Bowling Club
Ltd for a term of 50 years.
The Minister was required to grant the Lease on 1 December 2010 only:
(i) upon being satisfied that it
was in the public interest to do so; and
(ii) with due regard to the principles of Crown land
management.
Lease granted on 1 December 2010 was to occupy and use the Land for the
purposes of "Community and Sporting Club Facilities,
Tourist Facilities and
Services, Access" and not for any other purpose. The rent was $52,000 per annum
with annual adjustments based
on the consumer price index and periodic reviews
to market. The Lease, by cl 39, required the consent of the Minister to
assignment.
30 December 2011, the Lease was assigned to CSKS Holdings Pty Ltd ("CSKS"). At
that time, Paddington Bowling Club Ltd was either
the subject of a deed of
company arrangement or under administration. Apart from an area of the Land,
comprising tennis courts, a
shed, and fencing at the northern end of the Land
which was used by the Wentworth Tennis Club under an oral sublease, CSKS
no purposeful activity on the Land. CSKS did not attend to the bowling
greens. The clubhouse also fell into disrepair.
is not clear when the bowling greens fell into desuetude but a news article
dated 15 October 2015, contained in the Minister's
brief which was in evidence
before the primary judge, described Paddington Bowling Club as "a forgotten
wasteland" which had been
"overgrown and neglected four months after it closed"
with "abandoned bowling greens, which are overrun with weeds". An inspection
report commissioned by the State of New South Wales dated 16 October 2015,
and another dated 15 September 2017, were described in
an attachment to the
briefing paper to the Minister as showing the clubhouse and grounds to be "in
poor condition with little to
no maintenance". Both inspection reports
identified major structural defects in the buildings.
10 April 2016, an officer of the Department of Primary Industries ("the
Department") wrote to CSKS alleging various breaches of
the Lease, generally
concerning the maintenance of the premises, and requiring that cause be shown in
writing for why the Lease should
not be forfeited. The solicitor for CSKS
replied, accepting that the property was "unoccupied" and saying that it was
"not intended
that the property will be used for public purposes without
substantial renovation and refurbishment".
22 April 2016, the solicitor for CSKS wrote to the Department denying that
there had been any breach of the Lease that would justify
its forfeiture and
saying that CSKS had engaged a structural engineer and other building experts to
advise about the work that needed
to be done on the property. The solicitor
acknowledged that "the property is not currently occupied" and that the property
"is unlikely
to be occupied again as a licensed premises, at least in the
foreseeable future". In a further letter on 6 May 2016, the solicitor
that contractors had been engaged to rectify the matters raised in the
Department's letter although since "it is not intended
that the property will be
used for public purposes without substantial renovation and refurbishment, we
cannot see how many of the
items actually needed to be rectified".
19 December 2016, the second appellant, the New South Wales Aboriginal Land
Council ("the NSWALC"), lodged a "bulk" land claim
to various areas, including
the Land, under
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
February 2018, the Lease was assigned to the first respondent, Quarry Street Pty
Ltd. The Minister consented to that assignment
subject to various conditions and
the assignment was registered on 24 April 2018. One of the conditions of
the Minister's consent
was that if the Land or any part of the Land was
transferred to an Aboriginal Land Council pursuant to a claim under the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
then the Lease or the relevant part of the
Lease would terminate on the date of transfer.
10 December 2021, the Minister determined various claims made by the
NSWALC, including the claim with respect to the Land. The
Minister allowed the
claim in respect of the Land, concluding that it was claimable Crown land. The
transitional provision in the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
, cl 8 defers the operation of
on a lease, licence, or
permissive occupancy that existed at the appointed day. Here, the transitional
provision did not defer the
operation of
because the existing lease at
the date of the claim (19 December 2016) had been granted on
1 December 2010, after the appointed day
(10 June 1983). The
Minister's decision records that it was proposed that title would be transferred
to La Perouse "unless advised
otherwise by [the] New South Wales Aboriginal
Land Council".
The decisions of the primary judge and of the
Court of Appeal
primary judge in the Land and Environment Court of New South Wales
(Preston CJ) dismissed the application by Quarry Street for
judicial review
of the decision of the Minister. The primary judge found that the use and
occupation by the Wentworth Tennis Club
of the tennis courts and associated
areas was unlawful. The primary judge also rejected Quarry Street's assertion
that CSKS had not
given up possession of the tennis courts and associated areas.
No appeal was brought from those conclusions of the primary judge.
Street also submitted that the Minister denied procedural fairness to Quarry
Street by failing to consider its claim that
the existence of a lease by the
State of New South Wales to CSKS and, later, to Quarry Street meant that the
criterion in
was not satisfied. The primary judge held that the
Minister had considered Quarry Street's claim. There was no appeal from that
conclusion.
Alternatively, Quarry Street claimed, the decision of the Minister
should be quashed on the ground of error of law, by finding that
the criterion
was not satisfied because the Land was lawfully used by the
existence of the Lease. The primary judge also rejected this alternative
argument. That conclusion was ultimately the subject of Quarry Street's appeal
to the Court of Appeal. The issue on appeal reduced
to whether it was not
reasonably open to the Minister to allow the claim because the grant of the
Lease of the Land by the State
of New South Wales in 2010, or the factual
circumstances relating to the Land at the time of the claim, inevitably meant
Land did not meet either the criterion in
or the criterion
s 36(1)(b).
Court of Appeal (White JA; Adamson and Stern JJA agreeing) held that
the criterion in
was satisfied because: (i) the concern of
is with lands that are "able" to be sold or
leased, not lands which are the subject of a contract for sale or lease; (ii)
the doctrine
of concurrent leases means that the existence of a lease does not
preclude the Land from being leased again; and (iii) if the Land
were able to be
would be met, independently of the Land being able to
the criterion in
was satisfied because the
Land were of a nature that they were capable of being the subject of a lease.
The ground of appeal to this Court did not extend
to that finding.
, the Court of Appeal concluded that the Land failed to satisfy
this criterion; it was "lawfully used or occupied". The Court of Appeal
that the "occupation" of land could not be satisfied merely by exploitation of
rights to land.
the Court of Appeal held that the mere entry into the Lease by the State of New
South Wales and CSKS was a relevant use of land
s 36(1)(b).
Minister's decision involved jurisdictional error on the basis of
unreasonableness because no other conclusion was legally
meaning of "land"
Legal meanings of "land" as a physical area or as rights to that
Blackstone recognised, "land" is a "word of a very extensive
signification".
be used to describe a physical (in the sense of
) area. More
commonly, "land" is used to describe rights to a physical area. When describing
"land", lawyers speak of the "maxim"
of the law that "the word 'land' includes
not only the face of the earth, but every thing under it, or over
or of land and
"the whole physical mass of the
as a "concrete
physical mass, commencing at the surface of the earth and extending downwards to
the centre of the earth ... to denote
the surface and everything above and below
These statements
are not kindergarten errors of geology: treating air as physical land. They are
statements of a legal proposition
the physical thing that is land include rights to the air above it.
within the same Act, the word "land" is used in both of these different senses.
Jennings Construction Ltd v Burgundy Royale Investments Pty Ltd [No
Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ observed that the
Workmen's Liens
(SA) had used "land" in such alternating senses: "[i]n
some provisions, 'land' clearly means the physical entity ... But in other
sections ... the context shows that the term means the estate or interest in
land of an owner or occupier."
other occasions, "land" is expressed in terms that appear to include both the
physical thing and rights to the thing, although
the terms are really only
intended to denote the rights to the physical thing. For instance, the inclusive
definition of "land" in
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW), Sch 4,
describes land as including "corporeal" (physical) things and "incorporeal"
(non-physical) things: "messuages, tenements
and hereditaments, corporeal and
incorporeal, of any tenure or description, and whatever may be the estate or
interest therein".
That confused amalgam of both physical and non-physical has
been rightly said to be concerned with "interests", namely with rights
physical thing that is
The meaning of "land" in the context of
order to understand whether "land" in
Aboriginal Land
is used to describe either or both of (i) a physical area,
or (ii) a right to that physical area, a starting point is the definition
of "land" in
as including "any estate or interest in land, whether
legal or equitable". That definition is plainly concerned to include rights
the physical area of land within the meaning of "land". There is no significance
in the use of the singular in the definition
of "land" in
use of the plural "lands" in
Indeed, immediately after the
definition of "land",
provides that "land claim" means "a claim for
land [singular] made under
section 36".
And throughout
section uses "land" and "lands" interchangeably (eg,
transferred" and
"[a] transfer of lands").
same approach of interchangeable use of the singular and the plural was taken in
Western Lands Act 1901
(NSW) and the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act
(NSW), which were the legislation relating to Crown lands in force at
the time of the introduction of the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
introduction of the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
, the terms "Crown land"
and "Crown lands",
"land" and "lands",
and "land vested" and "lands
interchangeably throughout the entirety of that predecessor legislation. For all
these reasons, it is entirely unsurprising
that no counsel at any stage in this
proceeding sought to make any purely semantic point about the difference between
the singular
Consistently
with the definitions of "land" and "land claim" in
lands "vested in Her Majesty". The concept of "vesting" of land can, and can
only, refer to the vesting of rights to land.
Hawkins v Minister for Lands
Dixon J held that land could be vested in the Crown even if a lease in
perpetuity had been granted by the Crown so that the Crown
no longer had an
immediate right to possession. The land was not "vested in possession" because
the Crown had no right to immediate
possession of the land. But the reason that
the land was nevertheless held to remain "vested" in the Crown in that case was
the Crown retained a reversionary interest in relation to the land. As
Dixon J said: "[n]o doubt the reversionary interest in the
Crown is slight
and it may be said to be technical. But a rent is reserved, there are special
conditions, the interest is capable
of surrender and, for non-payment of survey
fees, of forfeiture."
The reversionary interest was a sufficient right for the land to remain "vested"
in the Crown. The expression "vested" was plainly
used by Dixon J as a
descriptor of the legal relationship between the Crown and the land. It
described the rights of the Crown to
the land. Exactly the same point was made
by Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Kirby and Hayne JJ later, in
considering the language of "property" in fauna that is "vested in the Crown":
"it is a description of a legal relationship
with a thing". To treat the
"vesting" as being of the physical thing itself, rather than of rights to the
physical thing, is to make
an error that has not been made by discriminating
lawyers for four centuries.
consistently with the definitions of "land" and "land claim" in
uses "land" in a sense that includes "rights to land".
describes land being "sold", land being "leased", and land being
"dedicated" or "reserved" for a purpose. Each and every one of these
concepts is
concerned with rights to land. It is elementary that a "sale of land" is a sale
of an estate in, or title
to, land. Registration regimes for ownership of
land are based upon titles, bought and sold. So too, it is elementary that a
of physical land is a lease of rights to land. The legal term "lease" is
commonly thought of as shorthand for a leasehold estate
although, strictly,
leases were not part of the feudal system of estates. It is, by definition,
impossible to sell or lease "land"
without selling or leasing rights to land.
too, a dedication or reservation involves the creation of rights to land and
corresponding duties in relation to the physical
At the time of
the land claim in this case, on 19 December 2016, the provisions of the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
(NSW) to which reference was made
in s 36(1)(a) were to be read as references to the
Crown Lands
Crown Lands Act
conferred power on the relevant Minister to
Such a dedication or reservation would not change the physical land. Rather, it
would create rights and duties in relation to
focus upon rights to land in
is further reinforced by the
reference to the land being "able" to be sold or leased and the land being
"lawfully" sold or leased.
It would be nonsense to speak of physical land,
separately from the rights to that land, being "able" to be sold or leased or
sold or leased. The legal ability to sell or lease is concerned with
the rights to land. That was the essence of the Court of Appeal's
reasoning in
refusing Quarry Street's ground of appeal in relation to
is not the subject of the ground of appeal in this Court.
the other hand, "land" in
is not limited to rights to land. It also
includes the physical sense of land. The definition of "land" in
an inclusive definition. It includes rights to land but does not exclude the
physical sense of land. The use of "land" in that
sense is evident in
s 36(1)(b1)
, which respectively relate to the need for
lands as "residential lands" or for "an essential public purpose". These
paragraphs are
concerned with the purposes for use of the physical land. So too,
ss 36(1)(d)
(1)(e) refer to "lands" in the physical sense of
being the objects of rights, namely native title.
The meaning of
"lawfully used or occupied" in
Two available interpretations
refers to both the physical thing and the rights to that
physical thing, the central issue in this case becomes whether the expression
"lawfully used or occupied": (i) is confined only to a purposeful
interaction with land (in the physical sense); or (ii) also extends
continuing exploitation of
to the land at the date of the claim,
such as by an extant lease (although not the sale of those rights; a disposal is
). "The word
'used' is, of course, a word of wide import and its meaning in any particular
case will depend to a great extent upon
the context in which it is
some contexts, a reference to land being "used or occupied" will include a "use"
of rights to the land by the grant of a lease.
Ryde Municipal Council v
Court considered a provision concerning land vested in a university that is
"used or occupied" by the university "solely for
the purposes
majority, which concluded that there had been a use for the university's
purposes by a lease to tenants who conducted various
commercial businesses for
their own benefit and not on behalf of the university, Gibbs A-CJ
"A person who owns land may be said to use it for his own purposes
notwithstanding that he permits someone else to occupy it, even
under a lease.
That is almost beyond argument when the owner's purpose is to acquire income. In
the ordinarily accepted meaning of
the word a building is 'used' for the purpose
of acquiring income if rents are derived from it, and an owner of premises who
them is making use of those premises by employing or applying them for
the purpose of letting".
His Honour gave the example of premises used by a university by making them
"available as a residence for the vice-chancellor". The
lands would be "used" by
the university "in the ordinary and natural meaning of that word, if the
university grants a lease of the
land for the purposes of the
university".
the vice-chancellor chose not to enter into occupation of the premises that had
been made available under the lease, preferring
to occupy their own premises,
the land would nevertheless still have been used by the university for its
purposes by the grant of
other contexts, and even where the word "land" is used in a sense that includes
rights to land, the "use" of land has been held
to mean only a purposeful
interaction with land (in the physical sense). This is particularly so where the
use concerns a particular
prescribed purpose or object for which the physical
land is to be deployed. An example is
Stephen v Federal Commissioner of Land
the relevant provision was concerned with use or occupation of "all land owned
by or in trust for any person or society and
used or occupied by that person or
society solely as a site for ... a ... public recreation
The "land" to
which reference was made in the provision included "rights to land" since rights
are held on trust, not physical things.
But rights cannot be used as a "public
recreation ground". The "land" that was "used or occupied" for that purpose
could only be
the physical thing. As Isaacs CJ said, despite leasing part
of the relevant land, the leased land was not "used or occupied by the
the land at all".
as Dixon J said, not in dissent on this point, the provision "looks to the
actual use or occupation of the
Randwick Corporation v
Court considered whether a racecourse was "vested ... in a public body or in
trustees and is used for a public reserve" within
s 132(1)(c) of the
Local Government Act 1919
(NSW). Windeyer J, referring to the
statement by Dixon J above, said:
"But is the land used for a public reserve? 'This provision', as Dixon J, as he
then was, said in a similar matter, 'looks to the
actual use ... of the land'
... The only way in which the trustees use the land is by leasing it to the
club, to be used by it as
a racecourse in accordance with the grant ... Indeed
the land is not really used by the trustees at all, for they have parted with
the use and occupation of it for the term of the lease ... When the Act speaks
of land used for a public reserve
it is referring to the actual use to
which the land is put by the persons who in law control it for the time being."
Three interpretive red herrings
first interpretive red herring is the relative novelty of the interpretive
question of whether the "use" of land in
Aboriginal Land
includes the use of rights to the land. Until this case, it
appears that this point had not been directly raised before an appellate
in New South Wales. La Perouse and the NSWALC rightly do not purport to
marshal novelty as a standalone submission. The novelty
of a point says nothing
at all about the merit of the point. Judges could hardly drop their pens or shut
down their computers merely
because a point of interpretation had not been
noticed or had not been necessary to decide, particularly in cases that had been
with a sub-section of specialised legislation in a single State of
and the NSWALC submitted that the novel resolution of this issue by the Court of
Appeal might nevertheless have been contrary
to the result in three cases; it
was submitted that a conclusion that
extended to the use of
rights to land might have required those three cases to be decided
differently.
putting to one side the sparse or absent argument on this point in those cases
(and hence the weakness or lack of authority
of those cases for the
proposition
), at least
two of those cases might not have been decided differently. The first,
Brickworks [No 1]
, concerned the use of land by a "mining lease";
rights of a nature that may not have conferred exclusive
possession.
words, it was a licence. The grant of the licence is a personal right that does
not involve the creation of a right to the
land or the use of rights to the
land. In the third case,
, the relevant special lease was not on
foot at the time of the
unnecessary to decide whether or not the first instance decision in
would have been decided differently, and whether it was correctly
decided even to the extent that its focus was upon the actual use
of that part
of the land which was reserved for access to the surf club. That single
decision, where, at best, the point was asserted
rather than carefully
constitute even a ripple of authority.
second interpretive red herring, as the Court of Appeal correctly
interpretive principle of preferring a beneficial interpretation of beneficial
legislation. As four members of this Court
observed in
Minister Administering
Crown Lands Act
v NSW Aboriginal Land
evident from the text (including the preamble) and the extrinsic materials
preceding the enactment of the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
legislation that is "intended for beneficial and remedial purposes". In
particular, one intention, as stated in the Parliamentary
Debates, is to
"provide a substantial amount of resources for the 40 000 [Aboriginal
people] in New South Wales to secure land ...
[and] vastly increase the amount
of land owned by [Aboriginal people] in this
That principle
has real utility when assessing an interpretation of beneficial legislation that
would be detrimental to the persons
intended to benefit. But the principle says
nothing about the extent to which a provision is intended to benefit a
Court has described the interpretive principle as one that requires that
"remedial or beneficial legislation should be accorded
a 'fair, large and
liberal interpretation', rather than one which is literal or technical" and that
if a section "is ambiguous it
should ... be given a broad construction, so as to
effectuate the beneficial purpose which it is intended to
Despite the
reference to ambiguity, this interpretive principle, as Professor Pearce rightly
confined to circumstances of ambiguous words. Rather, the principle is an aspect
of the ordinary language technique by which
the meaning of all words is
understood by reference to their purpose, here a purpose that involves an
intention to benefit Aboriginal
reason that this interpretive principle is a red herring in this case is that
the beneficial purpose of
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
is not in doubt. The issue on this appeal concerns the
provides a benefit to Aboriginal people: "[w]here the problem is
one of doubt about the extent to which the legislation pursues a
stating the purpose [as a beneficial aim] is unlikely to solve the problem";
since legislation does not pursue its purposes
no matter what the cost, "[t]he
question is: how far does the legislation go in pursuit of that purpose or
third interpretive red herring is the spectre of the State of New South Wales
creating "paper leases"—leases conferred,
perhaps at a peppercorn rent,
for no purpose at all—merely to extinguish land claims over the paper
lease area. Such a speculative
possibility was rejected in the Court of Appeal
by White JA (with whom Adamson and Stern JJA agreed), who said that
the New South
Wales Parliament "would not have contemplated" that the Minister
would abuse their power in such a
best interpretation
three reasons, the best interpretation of "used" in
narrower meaning. Land is "used" by a purposeful interaction with land (in the
physical sense) at the date of the claim. Land
is not used merely by a
continuing exploitation of rights to land at the date of the claim.
the meaning of "used" is affected by the meaning of "occupied". It is
established that the meaning of "occupied" in
does not include
the mere exploitation of rights to land. The term means "'actually occupied' in
the sense of being occupied in fact
and to more than a notional
, land is not occupied merely because a person exploits a fee
simple estate in possession by giving up possession through the grant
lease: "[o]ccupation is matter of fact ... There must be something actually done
on the land".
for "something actually done" is best expressed as a purposeful interaction with
land (in the physical sense) (since, as
explained below, the physical action
which leads to the interaction with the land might take place on different
land). The purposeful
interaction is assessed at the date of the
meaning of "occupied" remains relevant to the meaning of "used" despite the
holding of this Court in
New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council v Minister
Administering the
Crown Lands
with longstanding authority in related
that the two
terms—"used" and "occupied"—"refer to different concepts and a
natural reading of the phrase is that either
a lawful use or a lawful occupation
of the land will defeat a claim". Although "used or occupied" is not a compound
phrase, the meaning
of each term in the phrase remains capable of affecting the
other term.
in 1983 when the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
was enacted, some Crown lands
applied may not have been the subject of rights held by
the State of New South Wales as a body politic. Although many of the claimable
Crown lands (like the Land in this case) are now likely to be lands where the
body politic of the State of New South Wales is registered
as the proprietor of
the land holding an estate in fee
this may not
have been as widespread in 1983 when the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
enacted. Without the exercise of sovereign power to create a fee simple over
Crown lands, the State of New South Wales may have
had only the misnomer of
"radical title", which is not title or rights to land at all but the existence
of a sovereign power.
It involves some strain to describe the exercise of sovereign power to create a
fee simple or leasehold estate as the use of rights
there is difficulty in describing the existence of a continuing lease as a
continuing use of the lessor's rights to land.
There is little difficulty in
describing a lessor's rights to land as being "used" to create a lease at the
moment of the grant.
The freehold estate in possession is "used" to create a
lease by giving up the right of exclusive possession which is subsequently
by the lessee. But it is very difficult to describe the lessee as continuing to
the lessor's
right of exclusive possession after the creation of the
lease. The lessor's right of exclusive possession, a right to exclude others,
has been lost; it does not continue during the term of the
The lessor has
a right of reversion in equity but that right of reversion is not "used" merely
by the continuation of the terms and
conditions of the common law lease. Indeed,
the same terms and conditions could be enforced under a sub-licence agreement to
rent or to perform work on land where the sub-licensor has only personal
rights under a licence agreement.
the continuing terms and conditions of a lease were not, and are not, a use of
the lessor's right of exclusive possession (which
no longer remains during the
term of the lease), it is difficult to describe the lessor, with only an equity
of reversion, as the
legal owner. Some statutes therefore preserved the notion
of a person remaining the holder of a fee simple in possession by extending
"possession" from the "ordinary sense of the
specific statutory
which includes
the receipt of rent and profits under the terms and conditions of a
There is no
such provision in the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
even where the State of New South Wales, as lessor, had a fee simple title to
the relevant land and "used" that title to create
a lease, at the later date of
the claim it is difficult to describe the continuing existence of leasehold
rights as a use of the
lessor's fee simple in possession. The demand for, and
receipt of, rent or income under the lease, or threatened action to enforce
terms of the lease,
could be described as a use of rights of possession, and therefore a use of the
freehold estate in possession, in a very specific
statutory sense where
possession had been given that extended
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
contains no such extended definition of
possession.
these three matters, it must be accepted that this interpretation could give
rise to difficult practical consequences. As
with ordinary language usage
concerning practical affairs, in general the more impracticable a consequence
that can reasonably be
expected to arise from one interpretation compared with
another, the less likely that it could be said that the impracticable
interpretation
care must be taken with such consequentialist reasoning in statutory
interpretation. Issues of practicability are not always
clear cut. Further, even
where clearly impracticable consequences might be reasonably anticipated, the
significance of those consequences
in the interpretive exercise may depend upon
whether they are consistent with the identified purpose of Parliament.
difficult consequence asserted by Quarry Street was said to arise if Crown land
were the subject of a lease which did not have
a provision, like that contained
in the Lease in this case, by which the lease would terminate upon transfer of
the land under
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
circumstances, Quarry Street asserted, the tenant would be faced with a lease
with terms that required payment of rent
to the former registered owner in
circumstances in which the land is owned by another person. Moreover, Quarry
Street argued, further
complications could arise where only part of the leased
land is the subject of a claim.
longstanding answer to this concern, at least where the entirety of the claimed
land is subject to a lease, lies in
Real Property Act
Conveyancing Act
(NSW). Although the purpose of
Real Property Act
has been the subject of much debate, it should be seen at least as operating
to ensure that the certificate of title of a registered
proprietor, including an
Aboriginal Land Council to whom land has been transferred under
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
, will be treated without more as evidence
of holding the reversionary rights to that land. Further, and relevantly, it
achieved "a
result, whether by accident or design, which anticipated by more
than fifty years the provisions of
Conveyancing
]". Those provisions of the
Conveyancing Act
ensure that "the rent
reserved by a lease and the benefit of the lessee's covenants, as well as the
obligations of the lessor's covenants,
shall run with the
reversion".
more difficult consequence, to which both Quarry Street and the Minister
referred in submissions, is the inability of the Minister
to monitor leases to
ensure that the tenant is engaged in a purposeful interaction with land (in the
physical sense). Even if the
State of New South Wales inserted a term in a lease
that required activity on the land, and even if the State of New South Wales
sought to enforce that term, a lack of vigilant monitoring could leave Crown
land in New South Wales liable to a claim under the
Aboriginal Land Rights
in any period prior to enforcement, particularly given the State's
obligations of procedural fairness to a tenant when enforcing any
partial answer to this difficulty, although not necessarily one that was
contemplated in 1983, was introduced in legislation enacted
in 2016 to deal with
the management of 580,000 Crown land parcels covering 33 million hectares
That partial
answer, as the Minister acknowledged in submissions, is the power of the
Minister to appoint qualified persons as Crown
land managers for dedicated or
reserved Crown land.
The Crown land managers become responsible for the care, control, and management
of the Crown land.
Indeed, an appointment as Crown land manager can be made of a "Local Aboriginal
Land Council under the
Aboriginal Land Rights
Ultimately,
however, I do not consider that this practical consequence is sufficient to
require the broader interpretation of
that extends the meaning
of a "use of land" to continuing interactions with rights to land at the date of
a claim. In particular,
by the transitional provision (set out above) in
, cl 8 of the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
New South Wales Parliament entirely addressed these issues over the transitional
period by preventing any lands from becoming
claimable Crown lands until any
lease, licence, or permissive occupancy, existing at the appointed day of
10 June 1983, ceased to
be in force. It was open to the Parliament of New
South Wales to have gone further and to have provided for such a consequence to
be ongoing, either limited to leasehold interests in land or extending also to
licences in relation to the land as was the case during
the transitional
The application of the meaning of "used" in
the reasons above, the best interpretation of "used" in
purposeful interaction with land (in the physical sense). That interpretation,
however, does not necessarily require physical
action to be taken on all, or
even any, of the land. As Lord Denning said in the Privy Council in
of the City of Newcastle v Royal Newcastle
"An owner can use land by keeping it in its virgin state for his own special
purposes. An owner of a powder magazine or a rifle range
uses the land he had
acquired nearby for the purpose of ensuring safety even though he never sets
foot on it. The owner of an island
uses it for the purposes of a bird sanctuary
even though he does nothing on it, except prevent people building there or
the birds."
In every case, all of the facts and circumstances are relevant to ascertain
whether at the date of the claim there is a purposeful
interaction with the
physical area of the land claimed.
Street argued, by a notice of contention, that apart from the existence of the
Lease, the Land was "used" by "the following
incontrovertible acts, facts,
matters and circumstances: (a) the payment of substantial rent by [CSKS] to the
[State of New South
Wales] ... and (b) the [State of New South Wales] taking
active steps to secure compliance with the Lease from at least 10 April
2016 ... and CSKS responding to avoid forfeiture of the Lease by undertaking
substantial repairs to the [State of New South Wales's]
satisfaction shortly
prior to the date of claim". Neither of these matters is sufficient to show that
the Minister acted legally
unreasonably in allowing the claim on the basis that
it was not legally open to the Minister to be satisfied of the criterion in
s 36(1)(b).
two matters upon which Quarry Street relies in its notice of contention might
support a conclusion that rights to the land were
being used, consistently with
the reasoning set out above of Gibbs A-CJ in
Ryde Municipal Council v
(i) any demand for, or receipt of, substantial rent paid by CSKS to the
State of New South Wales, and (ii) any steps taken to
enforce compliance
with the State's leasehold rights, might arguably be said to be a use of the
State's fee simple title to the land.
But demand for, or receipt of, rent and
demands for compliance with rights are not purposeful interactions with the
physical area
of the land claimed.
the payment of any rent and demands for compliance with any rights under the
Lease are excluded, the consequence is that at
the date of the claim there was
little or no evidence, and no findings, of any purposeful interaction with the
physical area of the
land claimed. It must be accepted, and was not in dispute,
that the uncontradicted evidence before the primary judge (described earlier
these reasons) established that CSKS was engaged in rectification work on the
Land at the date of the claim. The rectification
work was undoubtedly an
interaction with the Land. But there was no evidence that could establish that
the rectification work was
a purposeful interaction. Indeed, CSKS considered
that much of the rectification work was not needed because it was "not intended
that the property will be used for public purposes without substantial
renovation and refurbishment". Just as occupation only to
a "notional degree" is
insufficient to satisfy the meaning of occupation in
, so too an
interaction that is only for the notional purpose of maintaining the land in
compliance with a lease, so that it is
of being used, is
insufficient to satisfy the meaning of "used" in
s 36(1)(b).
Conclusion and costs
appeal should be allowed with Quarry Street to pay the costs of La Perouse
and the NSWALC. The orders made by the Court of Appeal
of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales on 10 May 2024 should be set aside and, in lieu thereof,
orders should be made to dismiss
the appeal to that Court and require Quarry
Street to pay the costs of La Perouse and the NSWALC.
this Court, La Perouse and the NSWALC also sought orders that the second
respondent, the Minister, also pay their costs. The Minister
was a necessary
party to the appeal to the Court of Appeal and to this Court. The Minister
accepts that in the Court of Appeal, the
Minister played an "active role". It
appears that this active role involved making submissions in support of
La Perouse and the NSWALC,
contending that the Court of Appeal should
uphold the determination made by the Minister. On that basis, it seems, costs
were ordered
against the Minister.
position was different in this Court. Senior counsel for the Minister began her
opening submissions with an emphatic statement
that the Minister did not contend
for any outcome in the appeal and that the factors to which the Minister pointed
were merely matters
for consideration in the interpretive exercise. The
Minister's well-presented submissions were both useful and relatively brief.
central factor upon which the Minister focused—the consequences of the
interpretation proposed by La Perouse and the NSWALC
(supported by the
Minister in the Court of Appeal)—was a matter of administration which the
Minister was the best placed person
to address. Those consequences favoured the
interpretation proposed by Quarry Street but, as explained above, the Minister
submissions about how those consequences were ameliorated.
Minister did not become a "protagonist" for Quarry Street, the party whom the
Minister had played an active role opposing in
the Court of Appeal. Further, at
no stage of the proceeding in this Court did the Minister seek the costs of this
The role of
the Minister on this appeal was not akin to one where submissions are made by a
tribunal that might compromise any "impartiality
which it is expected to
maintain in subsequent proceedings which take place if and when relief is
No order for
costs should be made against the Minister.
A novel question
case involves a novel question about the meaning and operation of
Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983
novel question is this. If:
(a) after the "appointed day" (10 June
as referred to
in cl 8 of Sch 4 to the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
the Crown in
right of the State of New South Wales ("the State"), represented by the Minister
Administering the "
Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
("the Crown
Lands Minister"
lawfully grants a lease of Crown land;
(b) at the time when a claim is made for the land the subject of the lease under
or (3) of the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
, that lease has not
been terminated, forfeited or abandoned,
is the land necessarily outside the scope of that part of
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
which provides that "claimable Crown lands"
means "lands vested in Her Majesty that, when a claim is made for the lands
Division: ... are not lawfully used"?
will be explained, this question is to be answered in the negative. The mere
fact that land is subject to a lease which has not
been terminated, forfeited or
abandoned at the time a claim is made for the land under
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
does not mean that the land is necessarily
outside the scope of that part of
Aboriginal Land
which provides that "claimable Crown lands" means "lands vested
in Her Majesty that, when a claim is made for the lands under this
Division: ... are not lawfully used". Properly construed, land is not
"lawfully used" within the meaning of
Aboriginal Land
if, when the claim is made, the land is not then actually used in
fact. For land to actually be used in fact as required by
land as a physical mass or tract of ground must be presently, and not in a mere
future or contingent sense, physically deployed
for a purpose, whether that
present physical deployment be active or passive, to more than merely a notional
degree. The mere existence
of a lease in respect of the land at the time a claim
is made does not, in and of itself, constitute an actual use of land in fact
understand how this is the determinative question in this appeal, reflected in
the appellants' sole ground of appeal (that the
Court of Appeal of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales "erred in concluding that the Minister was
that the land claimed by the appellants was not 'claimable Crown
lands' for the purposes of
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
is necessary to identify the relevant statutory provisions, the relevant facts,
and the confined nature of the proceeding before
the primary judge and the Court
Statutory provisions
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
relevant statutory provisions include the definitions of "land" and "land claim"
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
, which provides
"In this Act, except in so far as the context or subject‑matter otherwise
indicates or requires:
includes any estate or interest in land, whether legal or
means a claim for land made under section 36."
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
provides that:
"In this section, except in so far as the context or subject-matter otherwise
indicates or requires:
claimable Crown lands
means lands vested in Her Majesty that,
when a claim is made for the lands under this Division:
(a) are able to be lawfully sold or leased, or are reserved or dedicated for
any purpose, under the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
Western Lands Act 1901
(b) are not lawfully used or occupied,
(b1) do not comprise lands which, in the opinion of a Crown Lands Minister, are
needed or are likely to be needed as residential
(c) are not needed, nor likely to be needed, for an essential public purpose,
(d) do not comprise lands that are the subject of an application for a
determination of native title (other than a non-claimant
application that is an
unopposed application) that has been registered in accordance with the
Commonwealth
Native Title Act
(e) do not comprise lands that are the subject of an approved determination of
native title (within the meaning of the Commonwealth
Native Title Act
than an approved determination that no native title exists in the lands).
Crown Lands Minister
means the Minister for the time being
administering any provisions of the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
Western Lands Act 1901
under which lands are able to be sold or
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
provides that:
"A Crown Lands Minister to whom a claim for lands (being lands which are, or,
but for any restriction on their sale or lease, would
be, able to be sold or
leased under a provision of an Act administered by the Crown Lands Minister) has
been referred under subsection
(a) if the Crown Lands Minister is satisfied that:
(i) the whole of the lands claimed is claimable Crown lands, or
(ii) part only of the lands claimed is claimable Crown lands,
grant the claim by transferring to the claimant Aboriginal Land Council (or,
where the claim is made by the New South Wales Aboriginal
Land Council, to a
Local Aboriginal Land Council (if any) nominated by the New South Wales
Aboriginal Land Council) the whole or
that part of the lands claimed, as the
case may be, or
(b) if the Crown Lands Minister is satisfied that:
(i) the whole of the lands claimed is not claimable Crown lands, or
(ii) part of the lands claimed is not claimable Crown lands,
refuse the claim or refuse the claim to the extent that it applies to that
part, as the case may require."
relevant provisions within
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
include the following:
"(4A) The Registrar may refuse to refer a claim, or part of a claim, to the
Crown Lands Minister if the Registrar is satisfied that:
(a) the claim, or the part of the claim, relates to lands that are not vested
in Her Majesty, or
(5A) Where, under subsection (5), a Crown Lands Minister is not satisfied
that the whole or part of the lands claimed is claimable
Crown lands because the
lands are needed, or likely to be needed, for an essential public purpose, but
that the need for the lands
for the public purpose would be met if the claim
were to be granted in whole or in part subject to the imposition of a condition
(whether by way of covenant or easement or in any other form) relating to the
use of the lands, the Crown Lands Minister may, notwithstanding
that subsection,
where the condition is agreed to by the Aboriginal Land Council making the
claim, grant the claim under that subsection
subject to the imposition of the
(9) Except as provided by subsection (9A), any transfer of lands to an
Aboriginal Land Council under this section shall be for an
estate in fee simple
but shall be subject to any native title rights and interests existing in
relation to the lands immediately
before the transfer.
(9A) [Concerns lands under the
Western Lands Act 1901
of Sch 4 to the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
"Where, but for this clause, any lands would be claimable Crown lands as defined
, those lands shall not, if they were, on the appointed day, the
subject of a lease, licence or permissive occupancy, be claimable
Crown lands as
so defined until the lease, licence or permissive occupancy ceases to be in
noted, the "appointed day" as referred to in cl 8 of Sch 4 to the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
lands legislation
lands legislation, as referred to in
Aboriginal Land
, is also relevant. By "Crown lands legislation" what is meant is
Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
Crown Lands Act 1989
(NSW), and the
Crown Land Management Act 2016
the land claim in this case was made on 19 December 2016, the relevant
Crown lands legislation was the
Crown Lands
Crown Lands Act
, "Crown land" was defined to mean
"land that is vested in the Crown or was acquired under the Closer Settlement
Acts as in force
before their repeal, not in either case being: (a) land
dedicated for a public purpose, or (b) land that has been sold or lawfully
contracted to be sold and in respect of which the purchase price or other
consideration for the sale has been received by the Crown".
Crown Lands Act
, "Crown land shall not be occupied, used,
sold, leased, licensed, dedicated or reserved or otherwise dealt with unless the
occupation,
use, sale, lease, licence, reservation or dedication or other
dealing is authorised by this Act or the
Crown Lands (Continued Tenures) Act
[(NSW)]." By s 34(1), the "Minister may, in such manner and
subject to such terms and conditions as the Minister determines: (a) sell,
lease, exchange or otherwise dispose of or deal with Crown land, or
(b) grant easements or rights-of-way over, or licences or permits
respect of, Crown land, on behalf of the Crown". By s 34(6), s 34
"does not authorise the sale of Crown land which is reserved
for a public
purpose". By s 34(7), "Crown land the subject of a special purpose lease
within the meaning of Division 3A may be leased
under this section, but
only if the granting of a lease under this section is authorised by, and
complies with, the terms of the
special purpose lease." By s 34A(1),
"[d]espite any other provision of this Act, the Minister may grant a lease,
licence or permit
in respect of, or an easement or right-of-way over, a Crown
reserve for the purposes of any facility or infrastructure or for any
purpose the Minister thinks fit". By s 41, "[t]he term of a lease of Crown
land (including any option for the grant of a further
term) granted by the
Minister is not to exceed 100 years", and, by s 42, "[a] disposition
of Crown land by the Minister on behalf
of the Crown, expressed to be a lease,
is a lease even if exclusive possession of the land is not conferred on any
person". By s
84(1), the Minister could, "by notification in the Gazette,
revoke the whole or part of a dedication under this Act", subject to
procedural requirements and parliamentary disallowance. By s 87(1), "[t]he
Minister may, by notification in the Gazette,
reserve any Crown land from sale,
lease or licence or for future public requirements or other public purpose".
Crown Lands Act
provided that the Minister could declare
any "holding" to be forfeited on several bases, including if the "holder fails
with a provision of this or any other Act applying to, or a condition
attaching to, the holding". By
Crown Lands Act
means: (a) an incomplete purchase, a perpetual
lease, a term lease, a special lease or a permissive occupancy under the
Crown Lands (Continued Tenures) Act 1989
, or (b) a lease or licence
under this Act".
By s 130, forfeiture of a holding did not take
effect until, for land registered under the
Real Property Act 1900
the Minister caused a notification of the forfeiture to be entered in the
Register kept under that Act.
Section 169
Crown Lands Act
provided that a "person who has acquired land from
the Crown by way of purchase or exchange (other than a person who has acquired
land under a lease from the Crown by way of exchange) under this Act has an
estate fee simple in the land".
Overview of key effects of
statutory provisions
upshot of this is that, first, "claimable Crown lands", other than lands to
Western Lands Act 1901
(NSW) applies, are necessarily lands
vested in the Crown in right of the State capable of being transferred in fee
simple. It follows
Aboriginal Land Rights
says that the lands "are able to be lawfully sold or leased, or are
reserved or dedicated for any purpose, under the
Crown Lands Consolidation
", it means that the State can sell a fee simple interest in
the land or grant a lease in respect of the land.
"claimable Crown lands" under
Aboriginal Land Rights
are not confined to "Crown land" under the Crown lands legislation. This
follows from the fact that "land dedicated for a public
purpose" is not "Crown
land" under Crown lands legislation, but under
Land Rights Act
dedication of land is a qualifying condition for a land
subject to the Crown Lands Minister complying with the Crown lands legislation,
ultimately, all land vested in the Crown in
right of the State may be lawfully
sold, leased, reserved or dedicated for any purpose.
deposited plan 1156846
second appellant made land claims under
Aboriginal Land
in respect of the land in lot 5 in deposited
plan 1156846, being land registered under the
Real Property Act
3 September 2010 and 19 December 2016. Lot 5 is within the area
of the first appellant under the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
. The Crown
Lands Minister determined both claims on 10 December 2021.
Crown Lands Minister refused the claim in respect of lot 5 made on
3 September 2010. Relevantly, on the appointed day as referred
cl 8 of Sch 4 to the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
1983), lot 5 was the subject of a lease and that lease had not ceased to be
in force as at the date of this claim, 3 September
2010. Specifically,
special lease 1960/249, granted on 19 May 1962 to Paddington Bowling
Club Ltd for recreation (bowling greens)
and erection of buildings (club house),
remained in force until its expiry on 1 December 2010.
Crown Lands Minister granted the claim to lot 5 made on 19 December
2016. In accordance with
s 36(5)(a)(ii)
Aboriginal Land Rights
, the Minister was therefore satisfied that lot 5 was "claimable
Crown lands" in accordance with
of that Act.
noted, the special lease to Paddington Bowling Club Ltd expired on
1 December 2010. On that day, the Crown Lands Minister granted
lease to Paddington Bowling Club Ltd for access, community and sporting club
facilities, tourist facilities and services
. These purposes accord with the purposes specified in a
reservation of lot 5 under
Crown Lands Act
11 December 2009. The lease runs for 50 years and terminates on
30 November 2060. The lease provides for an initial rent of $52,000
year with periodic market rent reviews thereafter. Clause 39 of the lease
provides that the lessee will not deal with the lease,
including by assignment
or sub-lease, without the consent in writing of the Crown Lands Minister as
lessor. Clause 43 of the lease
provides that the lessee may abandon the
lease if the Crown Lands Minister as lessor gives written notice accepting
surrender of
the lessee's interest or forfeiture of the lease. Because this
lease was not in force on the appointed day as referred to in cl 8
Sch 4 to the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
(10 June 1983), that
clause had no application to the status of lot 5 for the purpose of the
claim made on 19 December 2016.
lease granted on 1 December 2010 was transferred with the consent in
writing of the Crown Lands Minister to CSKS Holdings Pty
Ltd on 30 December
2011. On 1 February 2018 the Crown Lands Minister also consented in writing
to a transfer of the lease from CSKS
to the first respondent, Quarry Street Pty
Ltd. Accordingly, as at the date of the claim made on 19 December 2016, the
Before the primary judge
a further amended summons filed on 17 May 2023, Quarry Street sought an
order for certiorari quashing the decision of the Crown
Lands Minister to grant
the claim made on 19 December 2016 in respect of lot 5 on grounds
including that the Crown Lands Minister
misconstrued or misapplied the
definition of "claimable Crown lands" in
Aboriginal Land
in failing to consider that lot 5, at the date of the claim,
was used by "the State of New South Wales for the purpose of letting
obtaining rental income ... and thus 'lawfully used or occupied'"
within the meaning of
of that Act.
primary judge, Preston CJ in the Land and Environment Court of New South
Wales, noted that "Quarry Street had argued in both
of its submissions [to the
Crown Lands Minister] that the Crown had inspected the land, on at least two
occasions, one in October
2015 and another in May 2016, in regard to
CSKS's obligations under the Lease to maintain the grounds. CSKS also had
conducted some
inspections in response to the Crown's allegations that it was
breaching the Lease's
conditions."
rejecting Quarry Street's submission that the Crown Lands Minister misconstrued
s 36(1)(b) (that the land not be lawfully used
or occupied), the primary
judge said "Quarry Street has not shown that the Minister's decision that the
land was not lawfully used
or occupied was not simply a factual
explained this point further,
"Certainly, however, it cannot be said that the only available inference that
should be drawn from the Minister's decision is that
the Minister found as
matter of law that the action of the Crown in leasing the land to CSKS could
never constitute a relevant use
for the purpose of paragraph (b) of the
definition of 'claimable Crown lands' in s 36(1) of the [Aboriginal Land
Rights] Act. Put
another way, it cannot be said that the decision the Minister
reached, after a full consideration of the material that was before
capable of explanation only on the ground of misconception or misconstruction of
what can constitute lawful use of land for
the purpose of paragraph (b) of
the definition of 'claimable Crown lands' in s 36(1) of the [Aboriginal
Land Rights] Act: see
Avon Downs Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
[1949] HCA 26
; (1949) 78 CLR 353 at 360;
[1949] HCA 26."
primary judge's reference to
Avon Downs Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
Dixon J's statement that a decision to be made on the decision-maker being
satisfied as to a specified matter is not beyond
judicial review as the
decision-maker must address themselves to the correct statutory question, must
not be affected by a mistake
of law, and must consider relevant considerations
and disregard irrelevant considerations in reaching the required state of
satisfaction.
Dixon J also said that, even if the decision-maker has not
given reasons for the decision, it may yet be that the decision is "capable
explanation only on the ground of some such
misconception".
primary judge's point was that it could not be inferred that the Crown Lands
Minister, in reaching the required state of satisfaction
that lot 5 was not
lawfully used or occupied as at 19 December 2016 (the date of the claim),
necessarily
construed those words to exclude either lawful use or lawful
occupation of that land by the State for the purpose of letting and/or
rental income. Rather, what could not be excluded is that the Crown Lands
Minister decided, as a matter of mere fact, that
the proved circumstances
relating to lot 5 as at 19 December 2016 did not amount to lawful use
or occupation of the land.
primary judge, accordingly, dismissed Quarry Street's summons seeking that the
Crown Lands Minister's decision be quashed.
Before the Court of
Street appealed. The relevant ground of appeal was that "it was not open to the
Minister to be satisfied that the land met
the criterion in
s 36(1)(b) ... because it was lawfully used by the Crown for the
purpose of leasing the land to CSKS for valuable
consideration".
Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales (White JA, in
reasons with which Adamson and Stern JJA agreed) allowed
the appeal and
granted an order quashing the decision of the Crown Lands Minister to grant the
claim in respect of lot 5. The Court
of Appeal said that "the authorities
on s 36(1)(b) have consistently construed the words 'lawfully used' as
referring to physical
activities on the
The Court of
Appeal reasoned, however, that: (a)
Aboriginal Land
provides that "except in so far as the context or subject-matter
otherwise indicates or requires – ...
any estate or interest in land, whether legal or
equitable";
(b) while the inclusive aspect of that definition of "land" ("includes any
estate or interest in land") could not apply to the concept
of land being
"occupied", "occupied" and "used" are separate concepts (as decided in
South Wales Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands
Berrima Gaol case
")), and that inclusive aspect therefore could apply to
the concept of land being "used"; (c) accordingly, "there is no reason not
to apply the definition of 'land' in
where the issue is the use, rather
than the occupation, of land"; and (d) "[f]or these reasons, the better
construction is that the
Minister used the interest held by the Crown in the
land by leasing it to CSKS. The fact that CSKS did not physically use the land
does not mean that the Minister did not use it by leasing it to CSKS for the
purpose stated in the
response to the primary judge's reasoning that "the Minister might not have
accepted the ... submission that the Crown, by leasing
the land to
CSKS in exchange for rent, was using the land for the purpose of leasing it
simply as a matter of fact", the Court of
Appeal said "[b]ut there was no
dispute about the facts. There was no issue that the Minister had entered into
the lease with CSKS
on the terms for which it provided. If that were a relevant
use of the land for the purposes of
, the Minister's decision to
the contrary was both an error of law and legally
unreasonable."
reasoning exposes several key errors.
Land not used – a
question of fact
saying that there was no dispute about the facts as the Crown Lands Minister had
"entered into the lease with CSKS on the terms
for which it provided", the Court
of Appeal is to be understood as concluding that that fact
alone – that the Crown Lands Minister
had "entered into the
lease with CSKS on the terms for which it
provided" – constituted the use of lot 5 when the claim was
made on 19 December 2016.
understand the significance of this conclusion, it is necessary to recall Mason
J's reasoning in
Hope v Bathurst City
concerning "whether facts fully found fall within the provisions of a statutory
enactment properly construed". As Mason J explained,
that is a question of
law only, unless the provision uses words "according to their common
understanding", in which event the question
In explaining
this, Mason J
Kitto J's observations in
NSW Associated Blue-Metal Quarries Ltd v
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
, in which his Honour said that in respect
of the question whether certain operations answered the description "mining
upon a mining property" within the meaning of an enactment:
(a) it was first necessary to decide, as a matter of law, if the
expressions
"mining operations" and "mining property" were used in the statute
"in any other sense than that which they have in ordinary speech";
(b) having answered that question in the negative, it was next necessary to
determine the "common understanding of the words" as
a "question of fact";
(c) having so determined, it was then necessary to ask "whether the
material before the Court reasonably admits
of different conclusions as to
whether the ... operations fall within the ordinary meaning of the
words as so determined; and that
is a question of law"; and
(d) accordingly, "[i]f different conclusions are reasonably possible, it is
necessary to decide which
is the correct conclusion; and that is a question of
it has subsequently been said that a distinction between meaning (as a question
of fact) and construction (as a question of
law) "seems artificial, if not
never been doubted that if different conclusions could be reached as to whether
facts as found fall within or outside of a
statutory provision, a conclusion one
way or another involves a question of fact, not law.
significance of the Court of Appeal's reasoning is that it exposes the premise
that the only fact relevant to the question whether
lot 5 was "used" as at
19 December 2016 was the existence and terms of the lease. The Court of
Appeal did not rely on any other fact,
including either: (a) the State's
communication to CSKS on 10 April 2016 that CSKS was required to remedy
"asserted breaches of the
lease in relation to the state of repair of the
clubhouse and grounds at the site, and foreshadowed the potential forfeiture of
lease"; or (b) the response from CSKS's solicitor on 22 April
2016, which denied the alleged breach of the lease and said that the
director of
CSKS had engaged a structural engineer and other building experts to advise him
in relation to what works needed to be
done on the property and that "[a]s you
are aware, the property is not currently occupied and poses no threat to public
is unlikely to be occupied again as a licensed premises, at least in
the foreseeable
difficulty with the Court of Appeal's reasoning is that, having correctly
accepted that the word "used" in respect of land in
is "protean"
and involves a core ordinary
the Court's
conclusion denies the possibility that the mere existence of a lease at the date
of a land claim (that is, a lease not
terminated, forfeited or abandoned at that
time) might be insufficient to establish that land the subject of such a lease
within the meaning of
Aboriginal Land Rights
. That is, the Court of Appeal's conclusion means that the mere existence
of a lease over land is necessarily sufficient, in each
and every case, to
establish that the land the subject of the lease is "used" within the meaning of
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
so that such land is
not "claimable Crown lands" irrespective of any other "acts, facts, matters and
circumstances which are said
to show that the land is [or is not] being
This follows
from the fact that although the Court of Appeal's reasons referred to "the
lease" and the "terms for which it provided",
those reasons do not identify any
such terms as relevant to or determinative of the conclusion. It is therefore
impossible to know
whether any particular term was or was not necessary to the
conclusion that the lease meant that lot 5 was being used as
at 19 December
response to discussion during the hearing before this Court, Quarry Street filed
a notice of contention to address this gap in
the Court of Appeal's reasoning.
The notice of contention asserts that it was not reasonably open to the Crown
Lands Minister to
be satisfied that lot 5 met the criteria in
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
at the date of the
claim "by reason not only of the existence at that date of a Lease granting
exclusive possession for value, but
also the performance of that Lease by the
lessor and lessee, as evidenced by the following incontrovertible acts, facts,
and circumstances": (a) "the payment of substantial rent by the
lessee ... to the Crown"; and (b) "the Crown taking active steps
to secure compliance with the Lease from at least 10 April
2016 ... and [the lessee] responding to avoid forfeiture of the Lease
by undertaking substantial repairs to the Crown's satisfaction shortly prior to
the date of claim".
to proposition (a), there was no finding of fact by the Crown Lands
Minister, the primary judge or the Court of Appeal that
CSKS, as lessee, had
been paying rent to the Crown as required by the lease up to the date of the
claim. At most, there was a finding
that the lease required the lessee to pay
rent of "$52,000 per annum ... subject to annual CPI adjustments and
three yearly reviews
Nor was there
any finding by the Crown Lands Minister, the primary judge or the Court of
Appeal that the Crown did anything other
than require CSKS, as lessee, to remedy
asserted breaches of the lease in relation to the state of repair of the club
house and grounds,
and foreshadow potential forfeiture of the
And there was
no finding by the Crown Lands Minister, the primary judge or the Court of Appeal
that CSKS as lessee responded by "undertaking
substantial repairs to the Crown's
satisfaction shortly prior to the date of claim". The only findings were the
facts of the communication
from the Crown to CSKS and from CSKS's solicitor to
the Crown described above.
notice of contention impermissibly conflates the content of material that was
available to the Crown Lands Minister when making
the decision about the claim
with purported findings of the Crown Lands Minister, the primary judge and the
Court of Appeal. But,
as the primary judge's reasons expose, the Crown Lands
Minister gave no reasons for the decision and made no findings other than
lot 5 was claimable Crown lands at the date of the claim. The primary judge
(understandably and correctly) made no material
findings beyond the fact of the
existence of the lease over lot 5 because the primary judge recognised that
the application was one
for judicial review only. And the Court of Appeal, as
said, made no such findings because the essence of its dispositive reasoning
that the mere fact of the existence of the lease "on the terms for which it
provided" sufficed to take lot 5 outside of
, which required
the land, to be claimable Crown lands, to be "not lawfully used" as at
19 December 2016.
consequence is that it is not open to Quarry Street in this appeal to assert as
incontrovertible acts, facts, matters and circumstances
either: the payment of
substantial rent by the lessee to the Crown; or the Crown taking active steps to
secure compliance with the
lease from at least 10 April 2016 (beyond the
fact of the letter of that date) and the lessee responding to avoid forfeiture
lease by undertaking substantial repairs to the Crown's satisfaction
shortly prior to the date of claim (beyond the fact of the letter
in response of
22 April 2016).
any event, if it were open to infer that the Crown Lands Minister must have
accepted as fact every assertion in the material made
available to the Crown
Lands Minister for the purpose of the decision, it would follow that the
relevant incontrovertible acts, facts,
matters and circumstances also included
the other assertions in that material, such as that: (a) lot 5 was being
"maintained and
prepared for sale"; (b) lot 5 was unoccupied and, as at
6 May 2016, was "not intended" to and could not be used for public purposes
"without substantial renovation and refurbishment"; (c) any use or
occupation of part of lot 5 by a purported sub-lessee of the lessee,
was not lawful; and (d) lot 5 was being held by CSKS "in a static state for
sale of the Lease with some transitory visits,
maintenance – which were reactive in nature to non-compliance
actions by the Crown
the material included that, as Quarry Street put in its written submissions,
"CSKS and the Crown were actively negotiating
land; the Crown encouraged CSKS to 'provide information requested' about that
and invited CSKS to
'discuss ... alternative uses of the land'". If
anything (on the same misconceived basis that all assertions in the material
available to the Crown Lands Minister were accepted to be facts by the
Minister), this material would have (or at least could have)
confirmed to the
Minister that the only act that was occurring at the date of the claim was the
payment of rent while CSKS tried
to work out what possible
lot 5 might be viable for the purpose of transferring the lease.
if these assertions are all incontrovertible acts, facts, matters and
circumstances at the date of the claim merely because
those matters are referred
to in the material that was available to the Crown Lands Minister, it would be
impossible to distinguish
the present case from this Court's reasoning in
Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v NSW Aboriginal Land
Wagga Wagga case
"). In that case Hayne, Heydon, Crennan and
Kiefel JJ held that the claimed land was not being "lawfully used and
occupied by the
Department of Lands in preparing the land for sale" at the date
of the claim.
Honours reasoned that, in circumstances where: (a) the Crown Lands Minister
had decided to sell the
(b) administrative steps were being taken to effect
(c) otherwise, apart from some "transitory visits" to the land for the
purpose of facilitating its sale (to survey the land and
for a real estate
inspection), "nothing was being done on the land when the claim was made, and
nothing had been done on the land
for a considerable time before the claim was
the land was
not being "lawfully used" within the meaning of
s 36(1)(b).
Honours put
"[A]part from the survey, and the agent inspecting the land, there was no
evidence of
else being done on the land in connection with the
proposed sale or for any other purpose. Everything that was being done towards
selling the land, apart from the survey and the agent's inspection, occurred at
places other than the land. Those steps concerned
the land in the sense that
they were directed towards its sale. They were steps directed to deriving the
advantages of disposing
of the asset and receiving the proceeds of sale. They
did not amount to a
of the land. The land was not being lawfully used
when the respondent claimed it."
to Fullagar J's observation in
Council of the City of
Newcastle v Royal Newcastle
Royal Newcastle Hospital case
") that it was a fallacy to assume
that "deriving an advantage from the ownership of land is the same thing as
using the land",
Honours said
"... taking steps towards selling the land may be directed to the owner deriving
the advantages of disposing of an asset and receiving
the proceeds of sale. But
identifying that the owner seeks to derive these advantages does not show that
the land is being used.
Rather, what are the acts, facts, matters and
circumstances which are said to show that the land is being used?"
the same reasoning to the material that was available to the Crown Lands
Minister when deciding the claim and on which Quarry
Street sought to rely for
the purpose of its notice of contention (albeit for purported facts not found by
the Crown Lands Minister,
the primary judge or the Court of Appeal), it would
follow that: (a) before and as at the date of the claim, CSKS, the lessee,
decided to "sell" (that is, assign or transfer) the lease; and (b) to
that end, by which the lessee sought to derive the advantages
of disposing of
the lease and receiving the proceeds of the assignment of the lease, nothing was
being done on the land other than
transitory visits for the purpose of
facilitating the intended assignment of the lease. On that basis, the
not be distinguishable. It would have to be held that the mere preparation of
lot 5 for the purpose of "sale" of the lease
did not constitute a "use" of
lot 5 when the claim was made on 19 December 2016.
position thus far, accordingly, may be summarised in these terms. The reasoning
of the Court of Appeal is irreconcilable with
the reasoning of this Court in the
Wagga Wagga
without considering the acts, facts, matters and circumstances which were said
to show that the land was being used, the
Court of Appeal held that the mere
existence of the lease "on the terms for which it provided" at 19 December
2016 necessarily meant
that the land was being used at that time. The notice of
contention asserts as incontrovertible acts, facts, matters and circumstances
things that may be taken to have been in the material made available to the
Crown Lands Minister when making the decision about the
claim but which on no
view were the subject of findings by the Crown Lands Minister, the primary judge
or the Court of Appeal. In
so asserting in the notice of contention, Quarry
Street otherwise disregards other things that were in the material made
to the Crown Lands Minister when making the decision, including that
the lessee, CSKS, had decided to "sell" the lease, that the
land could not be
and was not being used for any public purpose due to its state of disrepair, and
that the only thing being done
on the land was preparatory to the intended
"sale" of the lease.
exposes why, leaving aside all other issues, the primary judge was correct to
refuse to draw any inference about what the Crown
Lands Minister must or may
have found from the material made available to the Crown Lands Minister to
decide the claim.
also exposes why it is impossible, in this case, to have decided that, from the
material available to the Crown Lands Minister,
no conclusion was reasonably
open other than that the existence of the lease on the terms for which it
provided necessarily meant
the land was being used at the date of the claim.
Once it is accepted, as it must be, that other conclusions were reasonably open
depending on all the acts, facts, matters and circumstances relevant to the
statutory expression "not lawfully used", no order quashing
the decision of the
Crown Lands Minister granting the claim over lot 5 could be made. As the
Land Councils put it in their notice
of appeal, the Court of Appeal erred in
concluding that the Crown Lands Minister was
required to find
land claimed was not "claimable Crown lands".
if Quarry Street was entitled, on the one hand, to assert as incontrovertible
acts, facts, matters and circumstances that the
lessee had paid substantial rent
to the Crown and had undertaken substantial repairs to the Crown's satisfaction
shortly prior to
the date of the claim and, on the other hand, to ignore that
the lessee had decided to "sell" the lease and was taking steps to avoid
forfeiture of the lease to enable that "sale", the land otherwise not being used
for any purpose other than in accordance with the
sale at the date of the claim,
Quarry Street would confront other insuperable
difficulties.
"not ... used ..."
will be explained, on its proper construction, neither the mere grant nor the
mere continued existence of any estate or interest
in land, in and of itself,
takes land outside of the expression in
Land Rights Act
of "lands ... that, when a claim is
made ... are not ... used". Within
"lands ... when a claim is made ... are ... used" only
if, at that time, there is an actual use in fact of the physical mass or
of ground the subject of the claim in the sense described above (that is, the
land as a physical mass or tract of ground must
be presently, and not in a mere
future or contingent sense, physically deployed for a purpose, whether that
present physical deployment
be active or passive, to more than merely a notional
degree). The mere existence of an estate or interest in respect of that physical
mass or tract of ground does not satisfy that requirement. The question of
present actual use in fact is to be determined by reference
to the "acts, facts,
matters and
circumstances"
rationally capable of informing the answer to that question. The mere existence
of an estate or interest in the land, such as a lease,
to which the transfer
will be subject does not, in and of itself, answer the question.
Lands "vested in Her Majesty"
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
refers to "claimable Crown
lands" as meaning "lands vested in Her Majesty", it means lands vested in the
Crown in right of the State
able to be transferred for a fee simple interest.
Section 36(9)
relevantly provides that "any transfer of lands to an
Aboriginal Land Council under this section shall be for an estate in fee
To enable a transfer in fee simple of the lands, the Crown in right of
the State must first have the capacity to do so.
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
thereby accords with the common
law as it existed at the time the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
was enacted.
As Gageler J explained in the
Berrima Gaol
that time: (a) common law orthodoxy had caused the Supreme Court of New
South Wales to declare in 1847 that "the waste lands of
this Colony are, and
ever have been, from the time of its first settlement in 1788, in the
common law orthodoxy that the Crown was "the absolute beneficial owner of all of
the land in New South Wales from the time
of settlement in 1788" was not
overruled until
Mabo v Queensland [No 2]
, following which it was accepted
that the Crown held radical title over all such land, enabling the Crown to
grant estates and interests
(c) from the enactment of the
Crown Lands Alienation Act 1861
Crown lands legislation in New South Wales has provided to the effect that
"[a]ny Crown Lands may lawfully be granted in fee
simple or dedicated to any
public purpose under and subject to the provisions of [that] Act but not
otherwise".
context accords with the Preamble to the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
which states that the Act is to "make provisions with respect to the land rights
of Aboriginal persons, including provisions for
or with respect
to ... the vesting of land in [Aboriginal Land] Councils ..." and
records as follows:
(1) Land in the State of New South Wales was traditionally owned and occupied by
Aboriginal persons:
(2) Land is of spiritual, social, cultural and economic importance to Aboriginal
(3) It is fitting to acknowledge the importance which land has for Aboriginal
persons and the need of Aboriginal persons for land:
(4) It is accepted that as a result of past Government decisions the amount of
land set aside for Aboriginal persons has been progressively
reduced without
compensation:
BE it therefore enacted ... as follows".
Accordingly,
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
functions so that land "vested in Her
Majesty" can be transferred to become land "vested in" an Aboriginal Land
Council for an estate
in fee simple.
Textual and contextual
considerations
definition of "land" in
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
inclusive. That is, "
includes any estate or interest in land,
whether legal or equitable". This means that estates and interests in land,
while included
within the definition, are not exclusive of the common and
ordinary meaning of "land" in the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
, being the
physical mass or tract of ground constituting the land.
example, meaning 1a of "land" in the Oxford English Dictionary is the
"solid portion of the earth's surface, as opposed to
Meaning 1b is a "tract of land". Meaning 2a is "[g]round or soil ...".
Meaning 1 in the Macquarie Dictionary is "the solid substance
earth's surface". Meaning 2 is "the exposed part of the earth's
surface ...". Meaning 3 is "ground". Meaning 4 is
an area of ground together with any trees, crops or
permanently attached buildings and including the air above and the soil
A-JA (with whom Macfarlan and Ward JJA agreed) provided a clear exposition
of this common or ordinary meaning of "land" in
Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue v Metricon Qld Pty
In that case
the primary judge had to decide if certain land was used for primary production
as provided for in the
Land Tax Management Act 1956
Section 10AA(3)
provided that "
land used for primary production
means land the dominant use of which is for" specified purposes, such as
"cultivation". While it was common ground that the land
was used for one such
purpose (maintenance of animals), the issue was whether that was the dominant
use of the land.
primary judge had held that a use of land was not confined to physical use but
extended to "the doing of something with it for
a purpose, such as putting it to
advantage or turning it to
The primary
judge had accepted that a "land developer may use land that is stock in trade by
engaging in certain activities on the
land in preparation for its subdivision
and sale", but concluded that there was no such use in the case so that the
dominant use
was the use of the land for the maintenance of animals, being a
primary production
Barrett A-JA,
in the Court of Appeal, gave this
"Assume the owner of the fee simple leases a parcel of land to another who
devotes it entirely and exclusively to agriculture by
raising crops. Three
possible characterisations are available. First, it may be said that there are
two uses of the land, with the
lessee using it 'for' agriculture and the lessor
using it 'for' leasing. The second possible view is that there is one use only,
with the lessee using the land 'for' agriculture and the lessor also using it
'for' the agricultural purpose that the lessee's activities
entail. The third
possibility is again that there is one use only, with the lessee using the land
'for' agriculture and the lessor
not using it at all."
third possibility, Barrett A-JA noted, was based on the decision of the
Privy Council in
Commissioners of Taxation v Trustees of St Mark's
case the respondents, trustees of United Church of England land, had leased some
of the trust's land for residential buildings
to be erected. The Privy Council
held that, read in context, the statutory requirement for an exemption from land
tax, that the lands
be "'occupied or used exclusively for or in connection' with
public charitable purposes or a
"... point[s] ... to the use and occupation of the land itself, and do[es]
not primâ facie apply to the use or purpose to which
the rents and profits
derived from the land may be applied. A private dwelling-house is used and
occupied by the owner or lessee
of it as a residence for himself and his family,
and it would, in the opinion of their Lordships, be a forced construction to say
that it was used by the lessors for their own purposes because they apply the
rent which they receive in a particular way. If it
be said that the land is used
by the trustees, though not by the lessees, for the charitable purpose, the
answer would seem to be
that the land is, strictly speaking, not used by the
trustees at all. They have parted with the use and occupation of it during the
term of the lease. It is the money derived from the rents and profits which they
use and not the land."
the same approach to the land tax exemption, Barrett A-JA concluded that
the context pointed "strongly towards notions of
'use' and 'dominant use' that
pay attention to 'land' in the sense indicated by Isaacs J's reference in
Commonwealth v New South
'the concrete physical mass, commencing at the surface of the earth and
extending downwards to the centre of the earth, which
is to be recalled that while "land" was not defined in the
Management Act
, it is defined in the
Interpretation Act 1987
Sch 4, as "
includes messuages, tenements and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, of any tenure or description, and
whatever may be the
estate or interest therein". That is, the applicable
definition of "land" in
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v Metricon Qld
inclusive of estates and interests in land, as is the definition of "land" in
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
. Further, by
Interpretation Act
"[d]efinitions that occur in an Act or instrument
apply to the construction of the Act or instrument except in so far as the
or subject-matter otherwise indicates or requires". The same contextual
limitation on definitions appears in
Aboriginal Land
("[i]n this Act, except in so far as the context or
subject-matter otherwise indicates or requires") and in s 36(1) of that Act
this section, except in so far as the context or subject-matter otherwise
indicates or requires").
Accordingly,
while "land" in the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
includes "any estate or
interest in land, whether legal or equitable", the common or ordinary meaning of
"land" as a physical mass
or tract of ground is also within the scope of the
definition. Therefore, when
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
defines terms "[i]n this Act, except in so far as the context or subject-matter
otherwise indicates or requires" and s 36(1) says
"[i]n this section,
except in so far as the context or subject-matter otherwise indicates or
requires", it is not the case that a
"use" of land within the meaning of
s 36(1)(b) necessarily extends to land subject to an estate or interest in
the land, such as
a lease. The text, context and purpose of s 36(1)
indicates that land is used within the meaning of s 36(1)(b) only when
an actual use in fact of that physical mass or tract as described
(albeit that an actual use of land in fact does not necessarily
require physical
activity on land, as will be explained).
aspects of the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
confirm this construction.
overall framework within which
Aboriginal Land Rights
operates is that a land claim will be in respect of lands vested in Her
Majesty able to be transferred for a fee simple interest
and that, if granted,
the Crown Lands Minister is to transfer the claimed land to the claimant
Aboriginal Land Council "for an estate
in fee simple". As Deane, Dawson and
Gaudron JJ have
"While the theory of our land law is that the radical title of the Crown lies
between the physical land and a freehold estate in
it, the ownership of the
freehold estate has long been, for almost all practical purposes, the equivalent
of full ownership of the
land. As a result, the freehold estate is, as a matter
of legal and popular language, commonly treated as the land itself".
reflects the common law orthodoxy
"A fee simple is the most extensive in quantum, and the most absolute in respect
to the rights which it confers, of all estates known
to the law. It confers, and
since the beginning of legal history it always has conferred, the lawful right
to exercise over, upon,
and in respect to, the land, every act of ownership
which can enter into the imagination".
formula of words used in
, "are able to be lawfully sold or
leased, or are reserved or dedicated", assumes that the State owns a physical
mass or tract of
ground and is able, by transfer, to vest such ownership in an
Aboriginal Land Council.
Thereafter,
s 36(1)(b1)
refers to lands which, in the opinion of the Crown Lands
Minister, are not needed or likely to be needed as residential lands.
Section 36(1)(c)
refers to lands not needed, nor likely to be needed, for
an essential public purpose.
Section 36(1)(d)
refers to lands the subject
of a registered application for a determination of native title.
Section 36(1)(e)
refers to lands that are the subject of an approved
determination of native title (other than that no native title exists in the
backwards from
and (e), "land" is defined in
Native Title Act 1993
(Cth) in these terms: "
the airspace over, or subsoil under, land, but does not include waters". That
is, the concept of "land" in the
Native Title Act
is a physical mass or
tract of ground. Accordingly, "lands" the subject of a registered application
for or an approved determination
of native title in
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
must also be understood as a physical mass
or tract of ground subject to a registered application for a determination of
native title
or an approved determination that native title exists. Consistently
Native Title Act
provides that "[t]he
native title
native title rights and interests
means the communal, group or individual rights and interests of
Aboriginal peoples or Torres Strait Islanders in relation to land
where ...". Accordingly, land is the physical mass or tract of ground and
native title is a right or interest (analogous
to an estate or interest in land
at common law) in respect of that physical mass or tract.
s 36(1)(b1)
and (c), the concept of "lands" that may be needed or likely to
be needed as residential lands or for an essential public purpose
also involves
the physical mass or tract of ground so needed or likely to be needed. It would
make no sense to refer to an estate
or interest in land (such as a lease or an
easement) as being so needed or likely to be needed.
and (5) contemplate, respectively, that part of the land the subject
of a land claim may not be vested in Her Majesty or may not
be "claimable Crown
lands", in which event, respectively, that part of the land claim may not be
referred to the Crown Lands Minister
and cannot be granted by the Crown Lands
Minister. The concepts of the whole or "part" of the claim relating to lands, as
s 36(4A)(a)
, and the whole or part "of the lands claimed"
being or not being "claimable Crown lands", as referred to in
contemplate that the "land" in question is a physical mass or tract of ground.
The same conclusion follows in respect of
and (8), which
respectively concern "the whole or part of the lands claimed" and "any land the
subject of a claim" being needed,
or likely to be needed, in the case of
, for an essential public purpose or, in the case of
as residential land. In both cases, the need or likely need relates to the
physical mass or tract of ground, not the whole or a
part of any estate or
interest in the land.
language of
is also important. On the grant of a land claim, what
is to be transferred is the "lands ...
estate in fee
, accordingly, treats the land as the physical mass or tract of ground and
the transfer of that physical mass or tract as for an estate
in fee simple (in
contrast to some lesser freehold or non‑freehold estate or interest in the
land). This is consistent with
the fact that "land claim" is defined in
as a "claim
the claim is for a physical mass or tract of ground and, if granted, what is
transferred is the "most extensive in quantum,
and the most absolute in respect
to the rights which it confers, of all estates known to the law" in that
physical mass or tract
Section 36(9C)
(10) and (12) are also relevant. By
, land transferred to two or
more Aboriginal Land Councils under
may be transferred to them as
joint tenants or as tenants in common.
Section 36(9C)
therefore contemplates
that the "land" is a physical mass or tract of ground and the estate transferred
is the fee simple as a joint
tenancy or tenancy in common. By
transfer of lands under
operates to revoke any reservation or
dedication of the lands.
Section 36(10)
therefore contemplates that the "lands"
are a physical mass or tract of ground and the transfer has the effect of
revoking those
two interests in the lands. By
, a transfer of lands
is subject to specified estates and interests in respect of the
Section 36(12)
therefore contemplates that the "lands" are a physical
mass or tract of ground and the transfer is subject to the estates and interests
in respect of the lands which are specified in
most importantly, cl 8 of Sch 4 to the
Aboriginal Land Rights
specifically identifies those estates or interests in land which mean
that land subject to such an estate or interest is not "claimable
Crown lands".
By cl 8 of Sch 4, if land is subject to a lease, licence or permissive
occupancy, that fact alone does not take the
land outside of the scope of
"claimable Crown lands" unless two conditions are satisfied. First, the lease,
licence or permissive
occupancy must have been in force on 10 June 1983.
Second, the lease, licence or permissive occupancy must continue to be in force
at the time when a claim is made for the land.
8 of Sch 4 accords with the manifest object of the legislation, to make
available a pool of land vested in the State for land
claims which are to be
determined having regard to facts made relevant by the statute rather than
administrative discretions (including
the grant of estates or interests in land
after the appointed day of 10 June 1983). That legislative object would be
readily defeatable
if, contrary to cl 8 of Sch 4, the mere existence
of a lease, licence or permissive occupancy of land vested in the State, at the
time of a claim being made, operates to take the land outside of the scope of
"claimable Crown lands" for the duration of the lease,
licence or permissive
occupancy. This is particularly so given that, under the Crown lands
legislation, a "lease" of land need not
involve a grant of exclusive possession
and may be granted for a term of up to
8 of Sch 4, by only taking land subject to a lease, licence or permissive
occupancy that existed as at 10 June 1983 and continues
to exist as at the
date of the claim outside of the scope of "claimable Crown lands", evinces a
manifest statutory intention that
lands otherwise subject to a lease, licence or
permissive occupancy – being a lease, licence or permissive occupancy
after 10 June 1983 – may be "claimable Crown lands" depending
on other relevant acts, facts, matters and
circumstances.
hardly surprising. If land subject to a lease (or a licence or permissive
occupancy styled as a lease) were "used or occupied"
within the meaning of
by reason of nothing more than the existence of such an estate
or interest in the land, the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
could be made a
dead letter by executive action. Clause 8 of Sch 4 is irreconcilable
with any such construction of
s 36(1)(b).
statutory incoherence
"legislative instrument must be construed on the prima facie basis that its
provisions are intended to give effect to harmonious
goals. Where conflict
appears to arise from the language of particular provisions, the conflict must
be alleviated, so far as possible,
by adjusting the meaning of the competing
provisions to achieve that result which will best give effect to the purpose and
of those provisions while maintaining the unity of all the statutory
provisions."
lands "able to be lawfully sold or leased" and lands "reserved or dedicated" are
independent qualifying conditions for land
to be "claimable Crown lands" is
important. The former concerns legal capacity (to sell or lease). The latter
concerns a fact (of
reservation or dedication). If, as is the case, the fact of
the reservation or dedication is a qualifying condition and the capacity
or lease is also a qualifying condition, it makes no sense for the mere exercise
of the capacity to lease to be a disqualifying
condition by necessarily
constituting either the use or occupation of land within
s 36(1)(b).
and (b) would be incoherent and incongruent.
potential for incoherence and incongruence has long been recognised and
30 years ago, Priestley JA, with whom Cripps JA agreed, first
explained the potential for incoherence and
incongruity.
"Although at the time of its second reading the Bill which became the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
was vigorously criticised ... the
Minister's claim [in the second reading speech] that it went far beyond the
Commonwealth Act [the
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act
(Cth)] seems to have been well founded, at least in regard to who could
claim land, and what land could be claimed. This is of some
relevance in
construing the words of
In particular, it seems to me, the fact
that under the Commonwealth Act the setting apart of land for a public purpose
disqualifies
it from being claimable, whereas under the
Land Rights Act
reservation for any purpose under the
Crown Lands
Consolidation Act
condition, must have a bearing
on the meaning of s 36(1)(b). This is because reserved Crown land is ipso
facto lawfully occupied
in at least some senses of the word."
Priestley JA
"The juxtaposition of par (a) and par (b) of
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
makes it clear that occupation in the
foregoing broad sense [that is, 'the doctrine of acquisition of sovereignty of
territory "by
occupation (or 'settlement' to use the term of the common
] is not what
par (b) refers to or means. The word 'occupied' in par (b) must have a
more limited meaning. How should the limitation
be described?"
Priestley JA
conceived of the required limitation on the meaning of "occupied" in
as emerging from the distinction between "constructive
occupation" and "actual occupation", so that "occupied" in
"'actually occupied' in the sense of being occupied in fact and to more than a
notional degree".
Recognising that the same incongruity would otherwise arise in respect of the
concept of "used" in
, Priestley JA said that the same
"considerations in my opinion lead to the conclusion that 'used' in par (b)
means 'actually used'
in the sense of being used in fact and to more than a
merely notional
In so saying,
Priestley JA did not suggest that an actual use, in fact, of land to more
than a merely notional degree could not be
a passive use for a purpose
achievable by ensuring that people do not carry out activities on land.
authorities have not doubted this
Priestley JA was and remains correct that it would be self-defeating for
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
, on the one hand, to require "claimable
Crown lands" to be vested in Her Majesty (so that, at common law, the lands
would be occupied
by the Crown) and, on the other hand, to disqualify land from
being "claimable Crown lands" if it is "occupied" in this constructive
The same self-defeating consequence would follow if the mere existence of an
estate or interest in land such as or styled
as a "lease" suffices to make
necessary the conclusion that the land is "used" within the meaning of
s 36(1)(b).
is this very same potential paradox in legislative operation that underlies the
reasoning in the
Wagga Wagga case
. As Mason P said in the decision
of the Court of Appeal in that case, in respect of steps in the sale of land, a
"qualifying pre-condition
(compliance with para (a)) cannot in the same
breath constitute a disqualifying condition (pursuant to para (b)). Were it
statutory scheme would be
self-contradictory."
Court of Appeal in the present case recognised that "[i]t has always been
accepted that ... notional occupation [by land merely
being vested in
the Crown] is not sufficient to engage the exception in
s 36(1)(b).
otherwise, the Act would be a dead
The Court of
Appeal, however, relied on the uncontroversial proposition that "lawfully used
or occupied" in s 36(1)(b) is not a composite
phrase but is to be read as
meaning two separate concepts of "lawfully used" or "lawfully occupied" to
conclude that there was "no
reason not to apply the definition of 'land' in
s 4 where the issue is the use, rather than the occupation, of
This latter
proposition, however, does not follow from the former and creates the very same
incoherence and incongruence previously
function the remedial and beneficial purpose of the
Aboriginal Land Rights
might or might not have in construing any individual provision of that
is not to be construed in a way that renders the Act effectively incapable of
achieving the vesting of any land in Aboriginal
Land Councils by the merest
expedient, after 10 June 1983, of the grant of any estate or interest in
land in the State vested in
Her Majesty, including a "lease", thereby placing
such land outside the scope of "claimable Crown lands" for up to 100 years.
is not to be accepted that the New South Wales Parliament intended this
legislation to be so readily avoided in perpetuity.
land may be passive but not "constructive"
Court of Appeal's reasoning, adopted in the submissions of Quarry Street in this
appeal, also assumes that because a "use" of
land under s 36(1)(b) does not
necessarily involve the carrying out of any physical activity on the land, the
concept of "use" is
therefore broad enough to encompass the kind of mere
constructive or notional use that is involved in land merely being subject to
lease at the date of a claim.
example, the Court of Appeal said that the "fact that CSKS did not physically
use the land does not mean that the Minister did
not use it by leasing it to
CSKS for the purpose stated in the
The Court of
Appeal also said that "the authorities on s 36(1)(b) have consistently
construed the words 'lawfully used' as referring
to physical activities on the
This statement
overlooks the observations in the cases that the purpose of the use "will
dictate the degree of immediate physical
use required to decide whether [lands]
are actually used in more than a notional
In rejecting
the (false) concept that a "use" of land always requires the carrying out of
physical activity on land (which has never
been the law), the Court of Appeal
conflated a passive use of land with a mere constructive or notional use of
land. That conflation
is in error.
the context of s 36(1)(b), it has long been conventional that the correct
approach to "use" does not require any physical activity
on the land because the
fact of "use" depends on the purpose of the use. Accordingly, as observed by
Basten JA, with whom Beazley,
McColl and Macfarlan JJA agreed, in
Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v La Perouse Local Aboriginal Land
: (a) "the purpose of any putative use will, inevitably, assist
in identifying the physical activities which may be sufficient to
constitute use
or occupation"; (b) what is required is the "actual use" of land in fact,
in the sense of a more than merely notional,
present and not merely contemplated
or intended, use of the land; and (c) while what is required is such an
actual use of land, such
actual use need not involve physical acts on the land,
as some uses of land are for a purpose which requires no physical activity
Examples in the
authorities of passive uses of land not necessarily requiring any physical
activity but involving the present physical
deployment of the land for a purpose
include: bushland used as curtilage to a hospital, rifle range or powder
fallow land
and soil regeneration
reserves and foreshore
In contrast,
the mere holding of land for a future development opportunity has been held not
to be a use of land.
Court of Appeal's expressed understanding of the reasoning of Fullagar J
(in dissent in the result) in the
Royal Newcastle Hospital
exposes its erroneous view that the authorities say that a "use" of land
necessarily involves physical activity on the
Fullagar J's point was that it is a fallacy to conflate the deriving of an
advantage from land and the use of
According to the
Court of Appeal, Fullagar J's reasoning assumes "use" of land requires a
physical use.
Fullagar J, however, was saying only that the mere deriving of an advantage
from land (eg, rent, an outlook, a buffer) was not
necessarily
land. Nor does Fullagar J's agreement with the reasoning of Kitto J
carry any proposition that "use" needs to involve physical
activity on the
for example, accepted that it was "easy to imagine a case in which hospital
buildings may take up a small part only of a
large park-like area and yet the
proper conclusion of fact may be that the whole area is occupied or used for the
purposes of the
conflating, on the one hand, the possibility that land may be "used" passively
without any physical activity being carried out
on the land with, on the other
hand, land being "used" because of the mere existence of an estate or interest
in the land, the difference
between a mere constructive use of land and an
actual use of land in fact is lost.
Street, in its submissions in this appeal, makes the same error. It sought to
draw an equivalence between the concept of an
owner passively using land, such
as the curtilage to a hospital, and the concept of an owner passively using land
by parting with
exclusive possession of it by grant of a lease such as the lease
in this case. No such analogy is available.
Ryde Municipal Council v Macquarie
the arguments of Quarry Street. Gibbs A-CJ said in that case that, as a
general observation, a "person who owns land may
be said to use it for his own
purposes notwithstanding that he permits someone else to occupy it, even under a
The relevant
issue in that case, however, was whether the university was using land which it
had leased for university purposes.
There was no dispute about the fact that the
leased land was being used to provide facilities and services to staff and
of the university. In that context, the idea that the university itself
had to provide those facilities and services to use the land
for its purposes
and could not lease the land so that others could provide those facilities and
services on its behalf without losing
its rates exemption was understandably
Ryde Municipal Council v Macquarie
bear no similarity to the present case, in which Quarry Street, it may be
inferred, was driven to argue the novel point that the existence
of the lease
was a "use" of lot 5 by the Crown because CSKS, at the date of the claim,
being the person in exclusive possession of
lot 5 under the lease, was
neither carrying out any physical activity on lot 5 nor passively using
that land for any purpose.
Transfer of part of land effects a
statutory severance of the reversionary estate
Street submitted that the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
specifically
contemplates that only part of the land is claimable, "but has no mechanism for
dealing with a registered lease in this
circumstance". According to this
submission, it follows that land subject to a lease must be outside of the scope
of "claimable Crown
submission must be rejected.
is true that
may operate so that the whole or only a part of land
subject to a lease may be transferred to an Aboriginal Land Council. If the
whole of such land is transferred, the Aboriginal Land Council will own the land
subject to the lease and therefore be the lessor
under the lease. If only part
of such land is transferred, the Aboriginal Land Council will own the part of
the land subject to the
lease and the State will own the balance of the land
subject to the lease. Therefore, there will be two lessors under the lease.
cannot be assumed or inferred, however, that this indicates a legislative
intention against land subject to a lease being "claimable
Crown lands". To the
Real Property Act
specifically deals with
transfers of land to a person by operation of a statute. By
"Registrar-General may, of the Registrar-General's own motion, and shall, at the
written request (made in the approved form)
of a person in whom there has been
such a vesting ... register the person in whom any such land is vested
as the proprietor of such
estate therein as the Registrar-General deems to be
appropriate".
Sections 117
Conveyancing Act 1919
(NSW) also operate to ensure that
severance of a reversionary estate does not affect the annexure of lease
obligations of the lessee
and the lessor(s) to that reversionary estate. Most
importantly,
Conveyancing Act
"Notwithstanding the severance by conveyance, surrender, or otherwise of the
reversionary estate in any land comprised in a lease,
and notwithstanding the
avoidance or cesser in any other manner of the term granted by a lease as to
part only of the land comprised
therein, every condition or right of re-entry,
and every other condition contained in the lease, shall be apportioned and shall
annexed to the severed parts of the reversionary estate as severed, and
shall be in force with respect to the term whereon each severed
reversionary, or the term in any land which has not been surrendered or as to
which the term has not been avoided, or has
not otherwise ceased, in like manner
as if the land comprised in each severed part, or the land as to which the term
remains subsisting,
as the case may be, had alone originally been comprised in
the lease."
other words, no difficulty is caused by the fact that the provisions of the
Aboriginal Land Rights
enable transfer of part only of land
but do not specify the consequences of such a transfer for land subject to a
lease. The provisions
Real Property Act
Conveyancing
will operate according to their terms in the event of the transfer of
part of land subject to a lease. In any event, any concern
part only of land subject to a lease overlooks the capacity of a court of equity
to mould a remedy suitable
to resolve any dispute between the lessee and the
lessors after transfer of part of the land subject to the lease as "claimable
No statutory intention to prevent "loss" of land by
Street submitted that if the existence of a lease over land is not sufficient to
constitute a use of the land "the Crown's
fee simple would be liable to claim
whenever its tenant ceases to conduct 'activities on the land'". According to
Quarry Street,
and submissions of the Crown Lands Minister to the same effect,
it could not have been intended that the status of land as "claimable
lands" might depend on the actions or inactions (and thus "delinquency") of the
submission wrongly assumes a legislative intention of the
Aboriginal Land
that land on which no activities are being conducted (including
passive activities), but from which the State is deriving money,
should not be
"claimable Crown lands". This submission is underpinned by numerous unjustified
assumptions, such as that the interest
of the State is not to "lose" lands
vested in it to an Aboriginal Land Council and that the public purpose for which
the Crown Lands
Minister granted an estate or interest in the land would be
"defeat[ed]" by a transfer of the land to an Aboriginal Land Council.
submissions are irreconcilable with the text, context and remedial and
beneficial purpose of the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
, which the Minister
for Aboriginal Affairs described in the second reading speech for the Bill as
representing the New South Wales
Government's "clear, unequivocal decision that
land rights for Aborigines is the most fundamental initiative to be taken for
regeneration of Aboriginal culture and dignity, and at the same time laying
the basis for a self-reliant and more secure economic
future for our continent's
Aboriginal custodians", with the Bill providing "a substantial amount of
resources for the 40 000 Aborigines
in New South Wales to secure land",
including by "claims upon unused Crown
the face of the manifest remedial and beneficial purpose of the
Land Rights Act
, notions of the State's title to land being "imperilled" by
delinquent tenants, of the prospect of the State having to "monitor[]"
ensure its tenants continue to use it, and of the State having to "cajol[e]"
tenants into action to prevent a successful
land claim, and thereby an
Aboriginal Land Council "defeat[ing]" the State's title to the land, are
profoundly misconceived.
Conclusions on construing
the purposes of
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
difficult to improve on the observation of Windeyer J (Dixon CJ,
Fullagar and Kitto JJ agreeing) in
Randwick Corporation v Rutledge
in respect of land that is leased. His Honour
"'This provision', as
J, as he then was, said in a similar
matter, 'looks to the actual use ... of the land' ... The
only way in which the trustees use
the land is by leasing it to the club, to be
used by it as a racecourse in accordance with the grant and the
Jockey Club Act
. Indeed the land is not really used by the trustees at all,
for they have parted with the use and occupation of it for the term of
lease ... When the Act speaks of land used for a public reserve it is
referring to the actual use to which the land is put by
the persons who in law
control it for the time being."
analogy, the State in this case was not using lot 5 at all at the date of
the claim. The State had parted with exclusive possession
of lot 5 so that
only the person with exclusive possession, CSKS, could use lot 5. But at
the date of the claim CSKS was not using
lot 5. To the contrary, CSKS was
merely maintaining the lease to avoid forfeiting it while it worked out what, if
any, future use
could be made of lot 5, with a view to the future transfer
of the lease. The lease was insufficient to constitute the use of lot
these reasons, the appeal must be allowed, the first respondent is to pay the
appellants' costs of and incidental to the appeal
and the orders made by the
Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales on 10 May 2024 are
to be set aside and, in lieu
thereof, it is to be ordered that: (a) the
appeal to that Court be dismissed; and (b) Quarry Street pay the Land
Councils' costs
of and incidental to that appeal.
to the order for costs of the appeal to this Court extending to the second
respondent, the Crown Lands Minister, the Minister
submitted that the Minister
did not contend for any outcome in the appeal. Before this Court (in contrast to
the position adopted
below), however, the Crown Lands Minister did not submit
only that the mere grant of the lease was part of the "acts, facts, matters
circumstances"
inform whether the land was used in accordance with s 36(1)(b), but also
put a series of arguments against the appellants by
reason of asserted
consequences of acceptance of their construction. While none of those arguments
carried any ultimate weight (because
they wrongly assumed that it is a part of
the function of the management of Crown lands to ensure that land which might
be "claimable Crown lands" continues to be in fact used in accordance
with any estate or interest in the land granted by the Crown
Lands Minister so
as to avoid successful land claims), minds may differ as to whether the putting
of those arguments involved the
Minister adopting an adversarial position in the
appeal in substance if not in form. On balance, the Crown Lands Minister should
be given the benefit of doubt that the Minister was doing anything more than
merely assisting the Court to understand the practical
operation of the
statutory provisions on the competing constructions of s 36(1)(b).
Therefore, no order for costs should be made
against the Crown Lands Minister.
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
Section 3(a)
Section 3(c)
Section 36(2)
and (3) of the
Section 36(4)(a)
and (b) of the
Section 36(4)(c)
Section 36(1)
(definition of
"Crown Lands Minister") and (4)(c) of the
Section 36(5)(a)
Section 36(5)(b)
Section 36(5)(a)
Section 36(9A)
Section 36(13)
Interpretation Act
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
; (1999) 201 CLR 351 at 365-366
and 389 [86], quoting Hohfeld, "Some
Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning" (1913) 23
Yale Law Journal
16 at 21-22.
Jennings Construction Ltd v
Burgundy Royale Investments Pty Ltd [No 2]
[1987] HCA 10
; (1987) 162 CLR 153 at 162.
North Sydney Council v Ligon
302 Pty Ltd
[1996] HCA 20
; (1996) 185 CLR 470 at 481.
Risk v Northern
[2002] HCA 23
; (2002) 210 CLR 392 at 407
Northern Territory v Arnhem
Land Aboriginal Land Trust
(2008) 236 CLR 24 at 64 [52].
The Commonwealth v New South
[1923] HCA 34
; (1923) 33 CLR 1 at 33, 37. See also
Queensland v Congoo
[2015] HCA 17
256 CLR 239 at 253
; Edgeworth,
Butt's Land Law
, 7th ed (2017) at
Gray and Gray, "The Idea of
Property in Land", in Bright and Dewar (eds),
Land Law: Themes and
Perspectives
(1998) 15 at 27.
Gray and Gray,
Elements of
, 5th ed (2009) at 6 [1.1.10]. See also Whitman,
From Masters of
Slaves to Lords of Lands: The Transformation of Ownership in the Western World
(2025) at 254-255.
Schedule 4 (definition of
"land") to the
Interpretation Act
of 13 & 14 Vict c
21: "the Word 'Land' shall include Messuages, Tenements, and Hereditaments,
Houses and Buildings, of any Tenure,
unless where there are Words to exclude
Houses and Buildings, or to restrict the Meaning to Tenements of some particular
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
[2009] HCA 41
; (2009) 239 CLR 27 at 32
of 16 Vict No 1.
Section 21(e).
Section 2B.
See Dictionary (definition of
"land") to the
Legislation Act 2001
(definition of "land") of
Interpretation Act 1978
(NT); Sch 1 (definition of "land") to the
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Sections 3(3)
Interpretation Act
of 16 Vict No 1.
Schedule 4 (definition of
"estate") to the
Interpretation Act
The Commonwealth v New South
[1923] HCA 34
; (1923) 33 CLR 1 at 49-50.
Re Lehrer and the Real
Property Act 1900-1956
[1961] SR (NSW) 365 at 370.
Gray and Gray,
Elements of
, 5th ed (2009) at 13 [1.2.11], quoting Blackstone,
Commentaries
on the Laws of England
(1766), bk 2, ch 2 at 17.
Gray and Gray,
Elements of
, 5th ed (2009) at 13 [1.2.12], quoting Blackstone,
Commentaries
on the Laws of England
(1766), bk 2, ch 2 at 17. See also
Re Lehrer and
the Real Property Act 1900-1956
[1961] SR (NSW) 365 at 370-371.
Re Lehrer and the Real
Property Act 1900-1956
[1961] SR (NSW) 365 at 370;
Risk v Northern
[2002] HCA 23
; (2002) 210 CLR 392 at 418
Construction Ltd v Burgundy Royale Investments Pty Ltd [No 2]
[1987] HCA 10
; (1987) 162 CLR
153 at 163, querying whether a lease is a tenement.
Re Lehrer and the Real
Property Act 1900-1956
[1961] SR (NSW) 365 at 370, referencing
[1873] UKLawRpHL 8
; (1873) LR 6 HL 223 at 241-242 quoting Blackstone,
Commentaries on
the Laws of England
(1766), bk 2, ch 2 at 17.
Sections 40
Sections 42R(1)
Section 40(1)
(definition of
"deal with land") of the
Sections 52C(5)
Sections 5(1)
and (2) and
Interpretation Act
Section 5(1)
(definition of
"Crown Lands") of the
Section 3(1)
(definition of "Crown
Lands") of 25 Vict No 1.
(definition of "Crown
Lands") of 25 Vict No 2.
of 5 & 6 Vict c
of 9 & 10 Vict c
Wilson v Anderson
(2002) 213 CLR 401 at 436 [66]-[67];
South Wales Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands
(2016) 260 CLR 232 at 274-280 [104]-[120].
Williams v Attorney-General
for New South Wales
[1913] HCA 33
; (1913) 16 CLR 404 at 441.
Walsh v Minister for Lands
[1960] HCA 52
; (1960) 103 CLR 240 at 254.
Hawkins v Minister for Lands
[1949] HCA 21
; (1949) 78 CLR 479 at 492. See also
Jennings Construction Ltd v
Burgundy Royale Investments Pty Ltd [No 2]
[1987] HCA 10
; (1987) 162 CLR 153 at 161.
Coverdale v
[1878] UKLawRpKQB 80
; (1878) 4 QBD 104 at 120.
Wik Peoples v Queensland
(1996) 187 CLR 1 at 91-92;
Newcrest Mining (WA) Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 38
; (1997) 190 CLR 513 at 635.
Section 3(1)(a)
(definition of
"Land") of the
Real Property Act
Section 13(2)
Property Act
Section 13D
Property Act
Section 13J
Property Act
Section 42(1)
Property Act
Director-General of the National Archives of Australia
[2020] HCA 19
; (2020) 271 CLR 1 at
The Commonwealth v New South
[1923] HCA 34
; (1923) 33 CLR 1 at 42.
Fejo v Northern
[1998] HCA 58
; (1998) 195 CLR 96 at 126
Nullagine Investments
Pty Ltd v Western Australian Club Inc
[1993] HCA 45
; (1993) 177 CLR 635 at 656.
[2002] HCA 23
; (2002) 210 CLR 392 at 418
Section 184
Native Title
Section 186(1)(e)
Section 225
Native Title
Section 253
Native Title
Section 223(1)
Native Title
Mabo v Queensland [No 2]
[1992] HCA 23
; (1992) 175 CLR 1 at 58-59;
The Commonwealth v Yunupingu
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 621.
Section 3(1)
of the CLA.
Section 1.7(a)
Section 1.10(1)
and (2) of the
Section 1.12
Section 1.5(1)
(definition of
"land") of the
Section 132(1)(c) of the
Local Government Act 1919
[1959] HCA 63
; (1959) 102 CLR 54.
[1959] HCA 63
; (1959) 102 CLR 54 at 88.
(1993) 30 NSWLR 140.
(1993) 31 NSWLR 106.
[2012] NSWCA 359
; (2012) 193 LGERA 276.
(2008) 237 CLR 285.
(2016) 260 CLR 232.
(1993) 30 NSWLR 140 at 162-163.
[2012] NSWCA 359
; (2012) 193 LGERA 276 at 285-287
(1993) 30 NSWLR 140 at 164.
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493 at 506.
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 307
(2016) 260 CLR 232 at 269-270
[85]-[87], quoting
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493 at 507-508.
Council of the City of
Newcastle v Royal Newcastle Hospital
(1959) 100 CLR 1 at 3-4; [1959] AC 248
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the
Crown Land Management Act 2016
[2023] NSWLEC
This was part of a bulk land
claim lodged under
for all reserves within the
Crown Lands Act
(NSW) within
the boundary of the first appellant, the La Perouse Local Aboriginal
Land Council, save for three specified areas. The
boundary extends from northern
Wollongong to North Head and includes Paddington.
"Crown Lands Minister" is
to mean the Minister for the time being
administering any provisions of the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
(NSW) or the
Western Lands Act 1901
(NSW) under which lands are able to
be sold or leased. The reference to the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act
to be read as a reference to, from 1 May 1990 to 1 July 2018, the
by operation of Sch 7 and Sch 8, cl 21(1) of that Act. From
1 July 2018, it is to be read as a reference to the
Management Act 2016
(NSW) by operation of Sch 7, cl 39 and Sch 8 of
s 36(5)(a).
Subject to qualifications:
As at the date of the claim,
the reference to the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act
should be read as a
reference to the
Crown Lands Act
: see fn 90 above.
New South Wales Government
, No 200, 11 December 2009 at 6044-6045.
Crown Lands Act
New South Wales Aboriginal
Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
") (2016) 260 CLR 232 at 255-256 [32]-[33],
270‑271 [91]-[94], 288 [146], 297 [174].
Carr v Western Australia
[2007] HCA 47
; (2007) 232 CLR 138 at 143
Minister Administering
Crown Lands Act
v NSW Aboriginal Land Council
Wagga Wagga
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 306 [69].
Ryde Municipal Council v
Macquarie University
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633 at 637; see also 651. See also
Council of the City of Newcastle v Royal Newcastle Hospital
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR
493 at 515.
(1959) 100 CLR 1 at 4;
[1959] AC 248 at 255.
Royal Newcastle
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493 at 504.
Royal Newcastle
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493 at 515.
[1972] HCA 21
; (1972) 128 CLR 1 at 21. See
Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v NSW Aboriginal Land Council
Nowra Brickworks (No 1)
") (1993) 31 NSWLR 106 at 120.
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633 at 638.
Tourapark Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1982] HCA 18
; (1982) 149
CLR 176 at 181.
Macquarie University
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633 at 638.
Macquarie University
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633 at 638.
Macquarie University
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633 at 636-637, 640‑641, 651, 653.
Chief Commissioner of
State Revenue v Metricon Qld Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCA 11
; (2017) 224 LGERA 236 at 252
[49], 255 [61].
Commissioners of Taxation
v Trustees of St Mark's Glebe
[1902] AC 416 at 419‑421.
Randwick Corporation v
[1959] HCA 63
; (1959) 102 CLR 54 at 88.
[1923] HCA 34
; (1923) 33 CLR 1 at 33.
Berrima Gaol
260 CLR 232 at 250-251 [14].
Crown Lands
definition of "Crown land".
Crown Lands
Consolidation Act
, s 5 definition of "Crown Lands" ("lands
vested in His
and not permanently dedicated to any public purpose
or granted or
lawfully contracted to be granted in fee-simple
under the Crown Lands Acts")
(emphasis added);
Hawkins v Minister for Lands
[1949] HCA 21
; (1949) 78 CLR
479 at 492 (as to the meaning of "vested in His Majesty").
Minister Administering
Crown Lands Act
v La Perouse Local Aboriginal Land Council
[2012] NSWCA 359
; (2012) 193
LGERA 276 at 286-287
, relevantly citing
Attorney‑General v
(1847) 1 Legge 312
at 317. See also
Daruk Local Aboriginal Land
Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(1993) 30 NSWLR
140 at 162.
Leon Fink Holdings Pty
Ltd v Australian Film Commission
(1979) 141 CLR 672 at 679;
Australian Planning Commission v Southregal Pty Ltd
[2017] HCA 7
; (2017) 259 CLR 106
Nowra Brickworks (No
(1993) 31 NSWLR 106 at 118.
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408;
Project Blue Sky
Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
; (1998) 194 CLR 355 at 384
Certain Lloyd's Underwriters v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
; (2012) 248 CLR 378
389‑390 [25], 404-405 [68].
Shaw v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2003] HCA 72
; (2003) 218 CLR 28 at 43
Mondelez Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Manufacturing Workers Union
[2020] HCA 29
; (2020) 271 CLR 495 at 527
Bowen v Willoughby City
[2000] NSWLEC 69
; (2000) 108 LGERA 149 at 155
GNL Developments Pty Ltd
v Monash City Council
[2019] VCAT 1635
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at
305-306 [69].
Ex parte Professional
Engineers' Association
[1959] HCA 47
; (1959) 107 CLR 208 at 268. See also
[1965] HCA 66
; (1965) 114 CLR 226 at 272.
Wagga Wagga
237 CLR 285 at 307 [74].
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 307
Wagga Wagga
237 CLR 285 at 305 [69]. See also
Minister Administering
Crown Lands Act
Bathurst Local Aboriginal Land Council
(2009) 166 LGERA 379 at 429
[1972] HCA 21
; (1972) 128 CLR 1 at 21.
(1993) 30 NSWLR 140 at
(1993) 30 NSWLR
140 at 164-165.
(1993) 30 NSWLR
140 at 165.
[2012] NSWCA 359
; (2012) 193 LGERA 276 at 289
[2012] NSWCA 359
; (2012) 193
LGERA 276 at 284
Berrima Gaol
260 CLR 232 at 251-252 [17]-[18], citing
(1993) 30 NSWLR 140
at 160-162, 164.
Berrima Gaol
260 CLR 232 at 256 [34].
[2022] NSWLEC 142.
Nowra Brickworks
(1993) 31 NSWLR 106 at 120-121.
[2022] NSWLEC 142
New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Land Management Act 2016
[2024] NSWLEC 41
Local Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Land Management
(2024) 262 LGERA 244 at 257‑258 [57].
See [59]-[68] above.
[1959] HCA 63
; (1959) 102 CLR 54 at 88
(emphasis added; citations omitted).
Wagga Wagga
237 CLR 285 at 305 [69].
Crown Lands Act
s 34A(2)(c).
Crown Lands Act
Crown Lands Act
Crown Lands Act
Crown Lands Act
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship v
[2012] HCA 61
; (2013) 249 CLR 332 at 351-352
[67], 367-369 [77]-[85], 370‑371 [90], 378-380 [114]-[124];
for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
; (2018) 264 CLR 541 at 551
, 565 [54], 572 [78], 574 [84].
[2012] HCA 61
; (2013) 249 CLR 332
, 365-366 [72], 367 [76];
[2018] HCA 30
; (2018) 264 CLR 541 at 573
; see also 583 [131].
[2012] HCA 61
; (2013) 249 CLR 332
, 373 [98], 375 [105], quoting
Dunsmuir v New Brunswick
[2008] 1 SCR 190
at 220‑221 [47].
D 1.8.1, D 1.8.2;
G 2.1, G 2.12-14; Inst 2.1.pr, Inst 2.1.11.
Jurisprudence of Holland
, trans Lee (1926), vol 1, bk 1, ch 3 at 15 [1]. See
also Suárez, "De Legibus, Ac Deo Legislatore", in Williams, Brown and
Waldron (trans),
Selections from Three Works of Francisco Suárez
(1944), vol 2, bk 1, ch 2 at 30.
[1999] HCA 53
; (1999) 201 CLR 351.
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
201 CLR 351 at 365-366
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
201 CLR 351 at 366
, quoting Gray, "Property in Thin Air" (1991) 50
Cambridge Law Journal
252 at 299.
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
201 CLR 351 at 366
fn 74, citing Harrison (ed),
An Introduction to the
Principles of Morals and Legislation
(1948) at 337 fn 1.
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
201 CLR 351 at 389
, quoting Hohfeld, "Some Fundamental Legal Conceptions as
Applied in Judicial Reasoning" (1913) 23
Yale Law Journal
Chief Executive
Officer, Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority v Director of National Parks
[2024] HCA 16
; (2024) 98 ALJR 655 at 684-685
; 418 ALR 202 at 237-238.
New South Wales
Government Gazette
, No 84, 10 June 1983 at 2691.
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 548 [65].
Crown Lands Act 1989
s 34A(2)(c).
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 558 [124]-[129].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 557 [118].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 556-557 [111]-[120].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 557-558 [122]-[123].
Blackstone,
Commentaries
on the Laws of England
(1766), bk 2, ch 2 at 16.
Butt's Land
, 7th ed (2017) at 34 [1.280].
Blackstone,
Commentaries
on the Laws of England
(1766), bk 2, ch 2 at 18.
The Commonwealth v New
South Wales
[1923] HCA 34
; (1923) 33 CLR 1 at 37.
The Commonwealth v New
South Wales
[1923] HCA 34
; (1923) 33 CLR 1 at 33, quoting, in part,
Thomson v St
Catharine's College Cambridge
[1919] AC 468 at 480.
[1987] HCA 10
; (1987) 162 CLR 153 at
Risk v Northern Territory
[2002] HCA 23
; (2002) 210 CLR 392 at 407
Re Lehrer and the
Real Property
(1960) 61 SR (NSW) 365 at 370.
See, for instance,
Western Lands Act 1901
("Crown lands"), s 31A ("Crown land"),
("Crown lands" and
"Crown land");
Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
(NSW), s 5 ("Crown
lands"), ss 162, 214, 216, 220, 221, 225, 255, 268 ("Crown land"),
ss 25A, 124 ("Crown lands" and "Crown land").
See, for instance,
Western Lands Act 1901
, 35B ("lands"),
, 10, 13, 17A ("land"), ss 17, 17C,
("lands" and
See, for instance,
Lands Consolidation Act 1913
(NSW), s 5(1) ("lands vested"),
s 25A(3) ("land vested").
Interpretation
[1949] HCA 21
; (1949) 78 CLR 479.
Hawkins v Minister for
Lands (NSW)
[1949] HCA 21
; (1949) 78 CLR 479 at 492.
[1999] HCA 53
; (1999) 201 CLR 351 at
The Commonwealth v
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 602-603
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 701.
Crown Lands Act 1989
(NSW), Sch 7 (repealing the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
(NSW)), Sch 8,
, cl 21(1) (substituting a reference to
Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
in other legislation
with a reference to the
Crown Lands Act 1989
Crown Lands Act 1989
Crown Lands Act 1989
Minister Administering
Crown Lands Act
v NSW Aboriginal Land Council
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 307
Council of the City of
Newcastle v Royal Newcastle Hospital
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493 at 515. See also
Ryde Municipal Council v Macquarie University
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633 at 651,
Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v NSW Aboriginal Land
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 306 [69].
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633.
Local Government Act 1919
(NSW), s 132(1)(fii).
Ryde Municipal Council v
Macquarie University
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633 at 638, citing
Commissioner of
Income Tax v Hanover Agencies Ltd
[1967] 1 AC 681 at 689.
Ryde Municipal Council v
Macquarie University
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633 at 639.
[1930] HCA 46
; (1930) 45 CLR 122.
Land Tax Assessment Act
(Cth), s 13(g)(7).
Stephen v Federal
Commissioner of Land Tax
[1930] HCA 46
; (1930) 45 CLR 122 at 132.
Stephen v Federal
Commissioner of Land Tax
[1930] HCA 46
; (1930) 45 CLR 122 at 140.
[1959] HCA 63
; (1959) 102 CLR 54 at 88,
Stephen v Federal Commissioner of Land Tax
[1930] HCA 46
; (1930) 45 CLR 122 at
140. See also
Commissioners of Taxation v Trustees of St Mark's Glebe
[1902] AC 416 at 420-421, quoted by Aickin J in dissent in
Municipal Council v Macquarie University
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633 at 662.
Minister Administering
Crown Lands Act
v NSW Aboriginal Land Council
(1993) 31 NSWLR 106
Nowra Brickworks [No 1]
New South Wales Aboriginal Land
Council – Little Bay v Minister Administering the Crown Land Management
[2022] NSWLEC 142
Darkinjung Local Aboriginal
Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Land Management Act 2016
[2023] NSWLEC 134
[1793] EngR 1183
Keb 66 at 67
ER 814 at 815];
CSR Ltd v Eddy
[2005] HCA 64
; (2005) 226 CLR 1 at 11
Bell Lawyers Pty Ltd v Pentelow
[2019] HCA 29
; (2019) 269 CLR 333 at 346
also Cross and Harris,
Precedent in English Law
, 4th ed (1991) at
Western Australia v
[2002] HCA 28
; (2002) 213 CLR 1 at 165-166
The Commonwealth v
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 598-599
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 695-696,
referring to
Wik Peoples v Queensland
(1996) 187 CLR 1.
[2023] NSWLEC 134
[2022] NSWLEC 142
, [32], [36], [41].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 556 [112].
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at
300-301 [44]-[46].
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 24 March 1983 at
New South Wales
Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
260 CLR 232 at 255-256 [32], quoting
IW v City of Perth
[1997] HCA 30
; (1997) 191 CLR 1
at 12, 39 (in turn quoting
Coburn v Human Rights Commission
[1994] 3 NZLR
323 at 333) and
R v Kearney; Ex parte Jurlama
[1984] HCA 14
; (1984) 158 CLR 426 at 433.
Interpretation in Australia
, 10th ed (2024) at 364 [9.2].
Carr v Western Australia
[2007] HCA 47
; (2007) 232 CLR 138 at 143
Construction Forestry Mining
and Energy Union v Mammoet Australia Pty Ltd
(2013) 248 CLR 619 at 632-633
New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(2016) 260 CLR 232 at 270-271 [92]-[94].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 547 [60], 558 [131], [132].
Daruk Local Aboriginal
Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(1993) 30 NSWLR
140 at 162.
Council of the City of
Newcastle v Royal Newcastle Hospital
(1959) 100 CLR 1 at 4; [1959] AC 248 at
New South Wales
Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering the Crown Lands (Consolidation)
Act and the
Western Lands Act
(1988) 14 NSWLR 685 at 692;
Local Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering the Crown Land Management
[2022] NSWCA 275
; (2022) 110 NSWLR 535
, 540 [19].
(2016) 260 CLR 232 at
250-251 [14]. See also at 269-270 [87].
Knowles v Newcastle
Corporation
[1909] HCA 72
; (1909) 9 CLR 534 at 545;
Council of the City of Newcastle v
Royal Newcastle Hospital
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493 at 505, 507, 509;
Municipal Council v Macquarie University
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633 at 658.
Daruk Local Aboriginal
Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(1993) 30 NSWLR
140 at 164.
Real Property Act 1900
The Commonwealth v
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 589-590
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 683-684.
Possession,
Relative Title, and Ownership in English Law
(2021) at 55. See also Douglas,
"The Content of a Freehold: A 'Right to Use' Land?", in Hopkins (ed),
Studies in Property Law
(2013), vol 7, 359.
In re Bennet
[1903] UKLawRpCh 86
Ch 136 at 140.
Gray and Gray,
of Land Law
, 5th ed (2009) at 321 [4.1.33].
Dixon, Bignell and Hopkins,
Megarry & Wade: The Law of Real Property
, 10th ed (2024) at 87-88
[4-044]. See
In re Morgan
[1883] UKLawRpCh 175
; (1883) 24 Ch D 114 at 116.
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 537 [10]-[11].
Conveyancing Act 1919
The origin of this provision may have been the
Land Act 1882
(45 and 46 Vict c 38), s 2(10)(i). See also
Property Act 1925
(UK), s 205(1)(xix).
Uelese v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
(2015) 256 CLR 203 at 217 [45], 232
The Torrens
System in New South Wales
(1951) at 122.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 19 October 2016 at 61.
Crown Land Management Act
Crown Land Management Act
Crown Land Management Act
s 3.3(2)(b).
(1959) 100 CLR 1 at 4;
[1959] AC 248 at 255.
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633 at
Muswellbrook Shire
Council v Hunter Valley Energy Coal Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWCA 216
; (2019) 372 ALR 695 at 711
R v Australian
Broadcasting Tribunal; Ex parte Hardiman
[1980] HCA 13
; (1980) 144 CLR 13 at 35-36.
Aboriginal Land Rights
(NSW), Sch 4, cl 1 and
New South Wales Government
, No 84, 10 June 1983 at 2691.
The reference to the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
is to be read as a reference to: (a) the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act
from its commencement to 1 May 1990;
(b) from 1 May 1990 to 1 July 2018 "the
Crown Lands Act
[(NSW)]", by operation of Sch 7 and Sch 8, cl 21(1) of
that Act; and (c) from 1 July 2018 to date the
Management Act 2016
(NSW), by operation of Sch 8 and Sch 7,
cl 39 of that Act.
Aboriginal Land
Emphasis added.
See footnote 236.
See footnote 237.
However, provisions to the
same general effect were in the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act
Crown Land Management Act
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the
Crown Land Management Act 2016
[2023] NSWLEC 62
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the
Crown Land Management Act 2016
[2023] NSWLEC 62
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the
Crown Land Management Act 2016
[2023] NSWLEC 62
[1949] HCA 26
; (1949) 78 CLR 353.
[1949] HCA 26
; (1949) 78 CLR 353 at
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 556 [111].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 541 [24]. See also at 557 [116]-[117].
(2016) 260 CLR 232.
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 557 [116]-[119].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 557 [121]-[122].
[1980] HCA 16
; (1980) 144 CLR 1.
[1980] HCA 16
; (1980) 144 CLR 1 at 7.
[1980] HCA 16
; (1980) 144 CLR 1 at 7-8.
[1956] HCA 80
; (1955) 94 CLR 509 at
Collector of Customs v
Agfa-Gevaert Ltd
[1996] HCA 36
; (1996) 186 CLR 389 at 396.
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 537 [10]-[11].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 545 [43]. See also
Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
Aboriginal Land Council
(2008) 237 CLR 285 ("the
Wagga Wagga case
at 305-306 [69] and the
Berrima Gaol case
(2016) 260 CLR 232 at 256
Wagga Wagga case
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 307 [75].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 537 [3].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 537 [10].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 538-539 [18].
(2008) 237 CLR 285.
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 299
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 302
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at
302-303 [55]-[59].
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 307
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at
307-308 [76] (emphasis in original).
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493.
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493 at
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 307
(2008) 237 CLR 285.
(2008) 237 CLR 285.
Quarry Street Pty Ltd
v Minister Administering the
Crown Land Management Act 2016
[2023] NSWLEC 62
Wagga Wagga case
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 307 [75].
(2016) 260 CLR 232.
(2016) 260 CLR 232 at 276
[110], quoting
Attorney-General v Brown
(1847) 1 Legge 312
(2016) 260 CLR 232 at 277
[111], referring to
Mabo v Queensland [No 2]
[1992] HCA 23
; (1992) 175 CLR 1 at 54.
(2016) 260 CLR 232 at 280
[120]-[121].
[2017] NSWCA 11
; (2017) 224 LGERA 236.
[2017] NSWCA 11
; (2017) 224 LGERA 236 at 240
[2017] NSWCA 11
; (2017) 224 LGERA 236 at 242
[2017] NSWCA 11
; (2017) 224 LGERA 236 at 243
, [14]-[15].
[2017] NSWCA 11
; (2017) 224 LGERA 236 at 253
(footnotes omitted).
[1902] AC 416. See
Commissioner of State Revenue v Metricon Qld Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCA 11
; (2017) 224 LGERA 236 at
[1902] AC 416 at
[1923] HCA 34
; (1923) 33 CLR 1 at 33.
[2017] NSWCA 11
; (2017) 224 LGERA 236 at 254
[2017] NSWCA 11
; (2017) 224 LGERA 236.
Nullagine Investments Pty
Ltd v Western Australian Club Inc
[1993] HCA 45
; (1993) 177 CLR 635 at 656, referring to
Principles of the Law of Real Property
, 23rd ed (1920) at 6-7,
Megarry and Wade,
The Law of Real Property
, 5th ed (1984) at 13 and Gray,
Elements of Land Law
(1987) at 58.
The Commonwealth v New
South Wales
[1923] HCA 34
; (1923) 33 CLR 1 at 42, quoting Sweet,
Challis's Law of Real
, 3rd ed (1911) at 218. See also
Fejo v Northern Territory
[1998] HCA 58
; (1998) 195 CLR 96 at 126
, 146-147 [93].
Emphasis added.
Emphasis added.
Crown Lands Act
By analogy to
Hordern & Sons Ltd v Amalgamated Clothing and Allied Trades Union of
[1932] HCA 9
; (1932) 47 CLR 1 at 7.
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
; (1998) 194 CLR 355 at 381-382
(footnotes omitted).
Daruk Local Aboriginal
Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(1993) 30 NSWLR
Daruk Local Aboriginal
Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(1993) 30 NSWLR
140 at 160 (emphasis in original).
Daruk Local Aboriginal
Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(1993) 30 NSWLR
140 at 161.
Daruk Local Aboriginal
Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(1993) 30 NSWLR
140 at 160, quoting
Mabo v Queensland [No 2]
[1992] HCA 23
; (1992) 175 CLR 1 at 33.
Daruk Local Aboriginal
Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(1993) 30 NSWLR
140 at 162.
Daruk Local Aboriginal
Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(1993) 30 NSWLR
140 at 164.
Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v La Perouse Local Aboriginal Land Council
[2012] NSWCA 359
; (2012) 193 LGERA 276 at 279
, 287 [47]; the
Berrima Gaol case
260 CLR 232 at 251-253 [17]-[23], 258 [44]-[46], 268-270 [81]-[88], 298-299
[179]-[182], 300-301 [185].
NSW Aboriginal Land
Council v Minister Administering
Crown Lands Act
[2007] NSWCA 281
; (2007) 157 LGERA 18 at 25
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 545 [43].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 557 [118], applying the
Berrima Gaol case
(2016) 260 CLR 232 at
250-251 [14].
Wagga Wagga
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 288-289 [3]-[5], 290 [9], 293 [19], 296 [28], 300
[44], 301 [47]-[48]; the
Berrima Gaol case
(2016) 260 CLR 232 at 255-256
[30]-[34], 270-271 [91]-[94], 288 [146], 297 [174], 298 [178], 300-301
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 557 [119].
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 556 [111].
Minister Administering
Crown Lands Act
v NSW Aboriginal Land Council
(1993) 31 NSWLR 106 at
121, quoted in, eg,
NSW Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering
Crown Lands Act
[2007] NSWCA 281
; (2007) 157 LGERA 18 at 25-26
Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v La Perouse Local Aboriginal Land Council
[2012] NSWCA 359
; (2012) 193 LGERA 276 at 284-285
[2012] NSWCA 359
; (2012) 193 LGERA 276 at
, referring to the
Royal Newcastle Hospital case
[1957] HCA 15
96 CLR 493 at 515,
Randwick Corporation v Rutledge
[1959] HCA 63
; (1959) 102 CLR 54 at
Parramatta City Council v Brickworks Ltd
[1972] HCA 21
; (1972) 128 CLR 1 at 21,
Eaton & Sons Pty Ltd v Warringah Shire Council
[1972] HCA 33
; (1972) 129 CLR 270 at
287-288 and
Daruk Local Aboriginal Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(1993) 30 NSWLR 140 at 162.
Royal Newcastle
Hospital case
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493 at 514-515;
Council of the City of
Newcastle v Royal Newcastle Hospital
(1959) 100 CLR 1 at 4; [1959] AC 248 at
Rainn Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of State Revenue (Vic)
2016 ATC 20-597 at 19,247
Daruk Local Aboriginal
Land Council v Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
(1993) 30 NSWLR
140 at 143.
Chief Commissioner of
State Revenue v Metricon Qld Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCA 11
; (2017) 224 LGERA 236 at 257
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493.
Wagga Wagga
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 307 [75].
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493 at
Quarry Street Pty Ltd v
Minister Administering the Crown Land Management Act 2016
(2024) 114 NSWLR
534 at 555 [102].
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493 at
[1957] HCA 15
; (1957) 96 CLR 493 at
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633.
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633 at
[1978] HCA 58
; , (1978) 139 CLR 633
[1978] HCA 58
; (1978) 139 CLR 633.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 24 March 1983 at
[1959] HCA 63
; (1959) 102 CLR 54 at 88,
Stephen v Federal Commissioner of Land Tax
[1930] HCA 46
; (1930) 45 CLR 122 at
Wagga Wagga case
(2008) 237 CLR 285 at 307 [75].
RTF format (1.12 MB)
Signed PDF/A format