Rallen Australia Pty Lmited v Tamboran Resources Limited [2025] ATMO 212 (15 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Oppositions by Rallen
Australia Pty Limited to registration of trade mark application numbers 2305174
(4, 35, 37, 39, 40, 42)
TANUMBIRINI
and 2305175 (4, 35, 37, 39, 40, 42)
TANUMBIRINI
- in the name of Tamboran Resources
Louise Tuohy
REPRESENTATION:
Melissa Marcus of Counsel instructed by Gadens
Andrew Fox of Senior Counsel instructed by Davies
Collison Cave
2025 ATMO 212
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – oppositions under
sections 42(b)
considered – none
established – trade marks to proceed to registration
matter concerns oppositions by Rallen Australia Pty Limited
(‘Opponent’) under
Trade Marks Act 1995
to the registration of the
following trade mark applications (‘Applications’) in the name of
Tamboran Resources Limited
(‘Applicant’):
number: 2305174
Trade mark: TANUMBIRINI (‘174 Mark’)
Filing date: 5 October 2022
Specification:
(including) natural gas
(including) administration of oil and gas
(including) drilling of deep gas wells
(including) distribution and transportation of energy,
including gas
(including) gas production, processing and treatment
(including) engineering, design and related consulting
services in relation to the exploration, production, processing, treatment,
refining, supply and distribution of energy and gas
(‘Applicant’s Goods and/or Services’)
Trade mark number: 2305175
Trade mark: TANUMBIRINI STATION (‘175 Mark’)
Filing date: 5 October 2022
Specification: Applicant’s Goods and/or Services
Applications were examined as required by
and advertised for possible
registration on 13 February 2024.
9 April 2024 the Opponent filed its Notices of Intention to Oppose the
registrations, followed by its Statements of Grounds and
Particulars
(‘SGPs’) on 9 May 2024. The Applicant filed its Notices of Intention
to Defend the oppositions on 12 June
the parties filed evidence in accordance with the Regulations and filed
identical evidence in respect of both oppositions.
The Opponent filed the
following evidence in support:
Declaration of
Pierre Langenhoven, Director of the Opponent, made on 17 September 2024, with
Annexures PL-1 to PL-45 (‘Langenhoven’).
Confidential
Declaration of Paul McCormick, North Australian Livestock Manager of Customer
Solutions Teams at Elders, made on 19 July
2023, with Annexure PM-1
(‘McCormick’).
Confidential
Declaration of Will Evans, Chief Executive Officer of the Northern Territory
Cattlemen’s Association, made on 18
July 2023 (‘Evans’).
Applicant filed the following evidence in answer:
Declaration of
Joel Riddle, Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer of the Tamboran
Resources Group, made on 22 December 2024,
with Exhibits 1 to 23
(‘Riddle’).
Opponent filed the following evidence in reply:
Declaration of
Pierre Langenhoven, made on 20 February 2025, with Annexures PLA-1 to
the time for filing evidence had ended both parties were given an opportunity to
either request an oral hearing or a hearing
by way of written submissions. Both
parties requested to the heard by way of videoconference. As a delegate of the
Registrar of Trade
Marks I heard the matter by videoconference on 18 September
2025. Melissa Marcus of Counsel instructed by Erin Cassidy of Gadens
appeared on
behalf of the Opponent. Andrew Fox of Senior Counsel instructed by Stuart Green
and Lauren Eade of Davies Collison Cave
appeared on behalf of the Applicant. The
parties’ oral submissions were supported by written submissions filed
prior to the
Grounds of Opposition, Relevant Date and Onus
the SGPs the Opponent nominated grounds of opposition under ss 42(b), 43, 44,
58, 59, 60 and 62A. The Opponent did not press the
ground of opposition under s
44 and I consider it abandoned.
date at which the rights of the parties are to be determined is the filing date
of 5 October 2022 (‘Relevant Date’)
which is also the priority date
for the purposes of s 60.
Opponent bears the onus of establishing at least one of the grounds of
opposition.
The standard of proof
is the ordinary civil standard of the balance of
probabilities.
Preliminary issue
16 September 2025 the Opponent filed evidence out of time and requested that the
additional evidence being the declaration of Pierre
Longenhoven dated 16
September 2025 be taken into account pursuant to regs 5.15, 9.18 and 21.15(4).
Opponent submits that it was unable to file the evidence set out in the
declaration filed out of time because of the actions of
Santos QNT Pty Ltd and
events that had not occurred at the deadline for filing the Opponent’s
evidence in reply in the oppositions.
Applicant objects to the evidence as it does not add to the factual matrix and
post dates the Relevant Date.
my opinion, the evidence filed out of time is not material to my decision. The
evidence is in relation to the actions of a third
party and events that occurred
after the Relevant Date. Therefore, I have not had regard to the evidence filed
out of time.
The Opponent
Opponent is an Australian company with significant interests in pastoral leases
in Australia. In January 2020 the Opponent purchased
a cattle station property
and business named Tanumbirini Station along with the Forrest Hill Station from
Thames Pastoral Company
Pty Ltd. The purchase of Tanumbirini Station included an
interest in the Northern Territory Perpetual Pastoral Lease 01060 companying
N.T. Portion 701 named TANUMBIRINI which is 5,001 square kilometers in size. A
Perpetual Pastoral Lease provides the lessee with
the exclusive right to conduct
activity in perpetuity associated with pastoralism, including raising livestock
and developing infrastructure
necessary for pastoralism.
in 2009, the Applicant is a public natural gas company that was admitted to the
Australian Stock Exchange on 1 July 2021.
The Applicant re-domiciled from
Australia to the United States of America in December 2023. The Applicant and
its subsidiaries i.e.
Sweetpea Petroleum Pty Ltd and joint venture partners hold
mineral and gas exploration permits in the Beetaloo Sub-basin, which in
part of the Greater McArthur Basin.
Applicant was originally granted an exploration permit EP 161 in 2012. The
permit extends across the Opponent’s property
known as Tanumbirini
Station. The Applicant is now a party to a joint venture agreement with Santos
QNT Pty Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary
of Santos Ltd by which the parties are
the interest holder in exploration permit EP 161. Santos QNT Pty Ltd has engaged
in exploration
via wells named Tanumbirini 1, Tanumbirini 2H and Tanumbirini 3H
in the permit area EP 161 in Tanumbirini Station.
Opponent’s and Applicant’s disputes
parties are and have been involved in a number of disputes in Australia, both in
respect of trade mark oppositions and in relation
to the Applicant’s
business and the exercise by the Applicant and its subsidiary Sweetpea Petroleum
Pty Ltd of the mineral
and gas exploration rights.
58 provides:
58 Applicant not owner of trade
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the
applicant is
not the owner of the trade mark.
the SGPs the Opponent particularises the ground of opposition under s 58 as
The opposed TANUMBIRINI Trade Mark is identical to the
TANUMBIRINI trade mark, and substantially identical to the TANUMBIRINI STATION
trade mark (which is the subject of Trade Mark Application No. 2254660
TANUMBIRINI STATION in the name of Rallen Australia Pty Ltd)
that are both trade
marks owned by the Opponent.
[The opposed TANUMBIRINI STATION Trade Mark is substantially identical to the
TANUMBIRINI trade mark, and identical to the TANUMBIRINI
STATION trade mark
(which is the subject of Trade Mark Application No. 2254660 TANUMBIRINI STATION
in the name of Rallen Australia
Pty Ltd) that are both trade marks owned by the
The TANUMBIRINI and TANUMBIRINI STATION trade marks both owned by the
Opponent were first used by the Opponent’s predecessors
circa 1893 in
relation to a cattle station and the Opponent’s Goods and Services claimed
by Trade Mark Application No. 2254660
TANUMBIRINI STATION and the
Opponent’s Trade Marks have been continuously used since that time.
Accordingly, the Applicant
cannot claim to be the owner of the Trade Mark and
the Trade Mark should be refused registration under section 58.
establish this ground, the Opponent must show use in Australia, by some person
other than the Applicant, of a trade mark that is
identical or substantially
identical to the Trade Mark,
in relation to goods and/or
services that are the ‘same kind of thing’ as the Applicant’s
Goods and/or Services
The trade mark
relied on by the Opponent must have been used in the course of trade prior to
the filing date, or prior to the date
of first use of the Trade Mark, whichever
is earlier.
the SGP the Opponent relies on its earlier trade mark registration as
Trade mark number: 2254660
Trade mark: TANUMBIRINI STATION (‘TS Mark’)
Filing date: 9 March 2022
Specification: C
(including) live animals; agricultural,
horticultural and forestry products and grains
(including) quality assessment, certification,
verification and inspection of cattle to verify or certify breed type and
(including) provision of hotel accommodation
(including) livestock breeding services
(‘Opponent’s Goods and
Opponent also relies on its unregistered trade mark TANUMBIRINI (‘T
Mark’) in relation to the Opponent’s Goods
and Services and
operation of a cattle station.
test for whether trade marks are substantially identical was set out by Windeyer
The Shell Company Australia Ltd v Esso Standard Oil (Australia) Limited
as follows:
In considering whether marks are substantially
identical they should, I think, be compared side by side, their similarities and
differences
noted and the importance of these assessed having regard to the
essential features of the registered mark and the total impression
resemblance or dissimilarity that emerges from the comparison.
recently, the Full Federal Court considered the test for substantial identity
Accor Australia & New
Zealand Hospitality Pty Ltd v Liv Pty
Pham Global Pty Ltd v Insight Clinical
Imaging Pty
finding that the
test requires that the trade marks are considered side by side while having
regard to the essential features or
dominant cognitive cues of the marks.
the present matter I find that the Opponent’s T Mark is identical to the
174 Mark and the Opponent’s TS Mark is identical
to the 175 Mark.
do not find the Opponent’s T Mark is identical or substantially identical
to the 175 Mark or that the Opponent’s TS
Mark is identical or
substantially identical to the 174 Mark. While all the trade marks share the
word TANUMBIRINI, the Opponent’s
T Mark and 174 Mark are for the word
TANUMBIRINI solus. In comparison the presence of the word STATION in the
Opponent’s TS
Mark and the 175 Mark provides a significant different
visual impression. A total impression of resemblance does not emerge from
by side comparison.
to the question of whether the Opponent’s Goods and Services are the same
kind of thing as the Applicant’s Goods
and Services, Hearing Officer Worth
Sola Tube Australia Pty Ltd v Gabriel Andrews
“same kind of thing” in respect of the goods or services of the
parties does not equate to goods or services which
may be “of the same
description” (the latter being a term of art for goods or services which
are not the same but which
consumers are likely to believe come from the same
source). It is a narrower test that applies in the context of a claim to
the present case, and in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, I fail to
identify any of the Opponent’s Goods and
Services that are the same or the
same kind of thing as the Applicant’s Goods and Services. The
Opponent’s Goods and
Services are specific to the pastoral industry
including accommodation services, and these products and services are different
nature and purpose to the Applicant’s Goods and Services which are in
relation to the mining industry.
I find that the Opponent has not established the ground of opposition under s
60 provides:
60 Trade mark similar to trade mark that
has acquired a reputation in Australia
The registration of a trade mark in respect of particular goods
or services may be opposed on the ground that:
(a) another trade mark had, before the priority date for the
registration of the first‑mentioned trade mark in respect of
those goods
or services, acquired a reputation in Australia; and
(b) because of the reputation of that other trade mark, the use
of the first‑mentioned trade mark would be likely to deceive
the SGPs the Opponent particularises the ground of opposition under s 60 as
The Opponent’s predecessors in title commenced use of
the TANUMBIRINI STATION and TANUMBIRINI trade marks in Australia circa
relation to a cattle station and the Opponent’s Goods and Services covered
by Trade Mark Application No. 2254660 TANUMBIRINI
STATION in Classes 31, 42, 43,
44 (the Opponent’s Goods and Services), and the TANUMBIRINI STATION and
TANUMBIRINI trade marks
have been continuously used since that time. The
Opponent’s TANUMBIRINI trade mark is identical to the opposed trade mark
TANUMBIRINI
(Opposed Trade Mark) and the Opponent’s TANUMBIRINI STATION
trade mark is substantially identical with or deceptively similar
to the Opposed
Trade Mark.
The Opponent’s TANUMBIRINI and TANUMBIRINI STATION Trade Marks
(Opponent’s Trade Marks) had acquired a reputation in Australia
priority date of the Opposed Trade Mark.
The goods and services for which the Opponent’s TANUMBIRINI and
TANUMBIRINI STATION Trade Marks had acquired a reputation are
covered by the
Opponent’s Trade Mark Application No. 2254660 TANUMBIRINI STATION in
Classes 31, 42, 43, 44. The Opponent’s
Trade Marks have been continuously
used by the Opponent and the Opponent’s predecessors for an extremely long
period of time
since circa 1893 in relation to a cattle station and the
Opponent’s Goods and Services, and the Opponent’s Trade Marks
continue to be used by the Opponent for the Opponent’s Goods and Services
in Australia. As a result of the remarkably long
period of use of the
Opponent’s Trade Marks in relation to the Opponent’s Goods and
Services and the cattle station,
the Opponent’s Trade Marks are well-known
in the cattle industry in relation to the Opponent’s Goods and Services.
Due to the substantial and valuable reputation that the Opponent’s
Trade Marks acquired before the priority date of the Opposed
Trade Mark in
relation to the Opponent’s Goods and Services, and due to the Opposed
Trade Mark and the Opponent’s Trade
Marks being identical or substantially
identical, use of the Opposed Trade Mark[s] for the goods and services covered
by the Opposed
Trade Mark application[s] would be likely to deceive or cause
satisfy s 60 the Opponent must establish that the trade marks upon which it
relies had a reputation in Australia at the Relevant
Date. The Opponent must
then establish that because of that reputation, use of the 174 and 175 Marks
would be likely to deceive or
cause confusion.
McCormick & Co Inc v McCormick
, Kenny J asked what is intended by the
word ‘reputation’ in s 60. Her Honour consulted the
and on the basis of the definition provided concluded that it was
‘the recognition of the [trade mark] by the public
generally’.12F9F
Kenny also referred to the decision of
Hugo Boss AG v Jackson International
Trading Co Kurt D Bruhl Gesellschaft MbH & Co KG
, where Hearing Officer
Thompson stated:
[I]t is true that the assessment of the reputation
of a trade mark goes far beyond mere examination of sales or turnover of goods
sold under the trade mark and contemplation of the advertising and promotional
As regards a trade mark, its reputation derives both from the quantum of
sales under that mark and also its esteem, or image, projected
by that trade
mark. The quantum of sales, advertising and promotion contributes to the
‘recognition’ component of the
trade mark’s reputation. The
credit, image and values projected by a trade mark attaches to the
‘esteem’ component
of the reputation as do the public events and
other trader’s marks with which [the] owner of the trade marks in question
to associate the trade marks via sponsorships, cross-promotions,
‘contra deals’ and so forth.
It follows that a trade mark used in relation to goods with comparatively low
sales may have a high and strong reputation by virtue
of the high credit or
esteem in which it is held, or, conversely, that a trade mark which has very
high sales may have a strong reputation
notwithstanding the lack of esteem that
attaches to it. The particular popular images, or sets of values, that attach to
mark are also, therefore, important parts of the reputation of the
trade mark and may be as strong an associative force in the minds
of the public
as the association of the trade marks with the goods or services
themselves.14F11F
constitutes a significant or substantial number of persons in the relevant
market must be considered. Justice Heerey in
Le Cordon Bleu BV v Cordon Bleu
International Ltee
provided some guidance:
significant”
substantial”
will depend
on the nature of the goods or services in question. For some highly specialised
products, awareness among a few thousand
persons, or even less, might be
sufficient.F12F
Use of the TS Mark and T Mark
Langenhoven
states that the Opponent began use of the TS and T Marks in relation to the
Opponent’s Goods and Services following
its purchase of the Tanumbirini
Station property on 17 January 2020. Prior to this date, Langenhoven claims that
the TS and T Marks
had been used since circa 1893 by the Opponent’s
predecessors in relation to the cattle station and services including livestock
breeding and rearing services.
Langenhoven
annexes confidential sales figures for cattle sold under the TS Mark for the
years 2021 to 2024.
Langenhoven
attests that the Opponent uses the TS Mark on multiple signs around the cattle
station including at its main
I have reproduced an
undated image of the sign located at the main entrance to the property
Langenhoven
declares that TS and T Marks are used on uniforms worn by the Opponent’s
staff and in promotional materials. I have
reproduced images of these items
Langenhoven
states that the TS and T Marks are used on business documents as
Purchase Order
issued by the Opponent under the trade marks
and Tanumbirini Station
to Elders for the purchase of Chaff, Maxisoy and Mitavite, dated 20 June 2020.
Tax invoice
issued by Elders to the Opponent for delivery to Tanumbirini Station for
Mitavite (horse feed) dated 31 August 2020.
Tax invoice
issued by Neil Mansel Transport to Tanumbirini Station for delivery of equipment
dated 18 June 2023.
Quotation issued by Stocklick Trading to Tanumbirini (Thames Past) for custom
made livestock supplements.
Langenhoven
declares that the TS and T Marks are also used by the managers of the
Tanumbirini Station in their email addresses and
on their email signatures and
annexes a copy of an email sent on 9 June
Langenhoven
states that no other individual or entity can breed, raise or produce cattle at
Tanumbirini Station, and that the Northern
Territory Government has the
following specific requirements in regard to cattle branding, that is, all
cattle have a Property Identification
Code Number and must be branded with
either three letter brands or new distinctive brands for purposes of identifying
of the cattle and horses. On 1 June 2020 the Opponent registered the
three letter brand HTU for use on the Run: TAMUNBIRINI –
The Opponent also has
registrations for two distinctive (symbol) brands
and on 10 August 2020 the
Opponent also registered its new distinctive brand
Langenhoven
includes the confidential declarations of McCormick and Evans who attest to the
reputation of the TS Mark in relation
to high quality cattle, and for its
breeding and raising services.
my assessment of the evidence, I am satisfied the TS and T Marks have been used
in relation to the Opponent’s cattle station
and livestock services.
However, while the Opponent’s sales figures under the TS Mark are
substantial considering the short
period in which it has conducted its business
operations, there is no evidence provided which demonstrates these sales were
the TS Mark. Likewise the invoices annexed to Langenhoven are from third
parties that supply feed and equipment to the Opponent.
The Opponent has
provided details of its specific branding symbols which are for use on its
livestock, however this is not evidence
of use of the TS and T Marks. The
annexures to Langenhoven display staff uniforms and various marketing materials
that use the TS
and T Marks in various formats and with various taglines,
although the Opponent has not provided any evidence of the numbers of employees,
customers or advertising spend since the business was established in 2020.
Customer awareness of the TS Mark is acknowledged by members
of the established
cattle industry, however there is
evidence the TS and T Marks
had been used by the Opponent’s predecessors in title.
Considering
the dearth of evidence provided, I find that the Opponent has not established
that the TS and T Marks have a reputation
in relation to any of the
Opponent’s Goods and Services. Even if I were to find that the TS and T
Marks had acquired a limited
reputation in Australia before the Relevant Date,
the Opponent would have to show that in light of that reputation, use of the 174
and 175 Marks would be likely to deceive or cause confusion. The respective
trade marks are similar in that they all share the word
TANUMBIRINI, yet the
Opponent’s Goods and Services do not have the same natures, uses or trade
channels as the Applicant’s
Goods and Services. The respective goods and
services are so utterly dissimilar that I consider it improbable that a consumer
see one of the relevant trade marks in use by the Applicant in respect of
its goods and services and consider the Opponent, an operator
of a cattle
station, had somehow pivoted into the technically complex and capital intensive
field of oil and gas drilling. In the
circumstances, I am not satisfied that use
of the Trade Mark would be likely to deceive or cause confusion.
ground of opposition under s 60 has not been established.
Section 42(b)
42(b) provides:
42 Trade mark scandalous or its use
contrary to law
An application for the registration of a trade mark must be rejected if:
(b) its use would be contrary to law.
the SGPs the Opponent particularises the ground of opposition under s 42(b) as
The Opponent repeats the facts set out above in respect of
section 60. In summary, the Opponent and its predecessors have extensively
and promoted the Opponent’s Trade Marks TANUMBIRINI and TANUMBIRINI
STATION over a very long period of time in respect
of the Opponent’s Goods
and Services since circa 1893 and continuing up until and beyond the priority
date of the Opposed Trade
Mark application.
As a result of, among other things, these activities, the Opponent has built
up valuable goodwill and reputation associated with the
Opponent’s Trade
Marks in relation to the Opponent’s Goods and Services in Australia, now
and as at the priority date
of the Opposed Trade Mark.
As such, the Opponent’s Trade Marks TANUMBIRINI and TANUMBIRINI STATION
are exclusively and distinctively associated with the
Opponent and the
Opponent’s Goods and Services, such that use of the Opposed Trade Mark in
Australia in relation to the applied-for
goods and services would be likely to
mislead or deceive as, amongst other things, it would wrongly suggest a
connection in trade
between the Applicant and the Opponent, or that the
Applicant’s goods and services are provided by or with the sponsorship
approval of the Opponent when that is not the case.
Use of the TANUMBIRINI Trade Mark by the Applicant in relation to the
applied-for goods and services would be contrary to law as it
would constitute
misleading or deceptive conduct and the making of false statements contrary to
sections 18 and/or 29 of the Australian
Consumer Law, respectively, and passing
off at common law.
case law on s 42(b) requires the Opponent to show that use of the Trade Mark
would be, rather than could or might be, contrary
As observed by Rangiah J in
Primary Health Care Limited v Commonwealth of Australia
is not enough for a party opposing registration to show that s
Australian Consumer Law
Trade Practices Act
be contravened. The opponent must prove, on the
balance of probabilities, that the provision
contravened by use of the trade
Australian Consumer
concerned with misleading or deceptive conduct, while s 29 of the ACL is
concerned with false and misleading
representations. Case law has made it plain
that s 18 of the ACL imposes a more stringent test than that for deception or
under s 60.
found that the Opponent has failed to establish a ground of opposition under s
60. Consequently, I find that the Opponent
has also failed to establish that use
of the Trade Mark would be contrary to s 18 of the ACL.
relation to s 29 of the ACL it has been held that where a trade mark does not
offend s 18 of the ACL, neither will it offend s
and nor will it
Opponent has not established the ground of opposition under s
43 provides:
mark likely to deceive or cause confusion
An application for the registration of a trade mark in respect of particular
goods or services must be rejected
if, because of some connotation that the
trade mark or a sign contained in the trade mark has, the use of the trade mark
in relation
to those goods or services would be likely to deceive or cause
the SGPs the Opponent particularises the ground of opposition under s 43 as
The TANUMBIRINI trade mark has a connotation of the
Opponent’s well known trade marks TANUMBIRINI and TANUMBIRINI STATION,
have been owned and used by the Opponent and its predecessors for over one
hundred years for a cattle station and livestock services
Opponent’s Goods and Services. The Opposed Trade Mark TANUMBIRINI clearly
connotes that the goods and services for
which the Applicant seeks registration
are connected or associated with the Opponent and the Opponent’s Goods and
provided under the Opponent’s Trade Marks, or authorised by the
Opponent when this is not true. Due to connotation that the
TANUMBIRINI trade
mark has, there is a real and tangible danger that use of the Opposed Trade Mark
in relation to the goods and services
is likely to deceive or cause
establish a ground of opposition under s 43, there must be an inherent
connotation within the trade mark itself. Justice Gyles
Pfizer Products
Inc v Karam
‘Connotation’ is a secondary
meaning implied by the mark. The likelihood of deception or confusion must flow
secondary meaning inherent in the mark itself. It is apparent that the
underlying purpose of s 43 is a similar purpose to that lying
8677/section/1212">53 and
8677/section/258">55 of the
Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth)
to prevent the public being deceived or confused as to the nature of the goods
offered by reason of a secondary meaning connoted
by the mark in question
section requires the Opponent to demonstrate that there is a connotation in the
TS and T Marks and that because of the connotation,
use of the 174 and 175 Marks
would be likely to deceive or cause confusion.
Opponent submits that usage of the TS and T Marks for over 100 years by the
Opponent and its predecessors in title will lead to
a perception, among members
of the public, that any use of the TS and T Marks is associated with the
Applicant. Furthermore, upon
seeing the Applicant’s use of the 174 and 175
Marks, members of the intended market for the Applicant’s Goods and
are likely to believe that the Opponent has sponsored or is in some way
affiliated with the Applicant’s Goods and Services.
Applicant submits that the Opponent’s argument impermissibly seeks to rely
on the Opponent’s alleged reputation in
its TS and T Marks, which leads to
the same result as for the
(b) grounds.
agree with the Applicant, the TS and T Marks reputation have not been
established under
(b). While the Opponent’s TS and T Marks
have been used for a cattle station and livestock services, I consider these
circumstances
are extrinsic the TS and T Marks themselves. As such I do not
consider there is any implied or secondary meaning contained within,
inherent, to the TS and T Marks. Moreover, I do not consider the
Applicant’s use of the 174 and 175 Marks in relation to
mining goods and
services would be likely to result in deception or confusion or connote that the
Applicant’s Goods and Services
are dealt with under the aegis or sanction
of the Opponent.
Opponent has not established the ground of opposition under
- Applicant not intending to use trade
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the
applicant does not intend:
(a) to use, or authorise the use of, the trade mark in Australia, or
(b) to assign the trade mark to a body corporate for use by the body corporate
in Australia;
in relation to the goods and/or services specified in the application.
the SGPs the Opponent particularises the ground of opposition under
The Applicant has sought registration of the Opposed Trade
Mark[s] for a wide range of goods and services including goods and/or services
in relation to which it has no intention to use or authorise others to use the
Opposed Trade Mark[s] for.
nature of the intention in
was considered by Jacobson J in
Health World
Ltd v Shin-Sun Australia Pty Ltd
where he stated:
In my view,
the intention, or lack thereof, to which
is directed, is a ‘real and
definite intention’ of the applicant for registration, to use the mark
publicly as a trade
mark, although it is not necessary that the intention be
immediate or within a limited
is a presumption that where an application has been filed the applicant has the
requisite intention.
[T]here is authority for the proposition that where an
applicant for registration has been put on notice that its intention to use
mark was in issue, and has not responded to the opponent’s evidence, a
finding of lack of intention may be made.
The principle which underlies these authorities seems to me to be that the
evidentiary onus shifts to the applicant for registration
where an opponent
makes a prima facie case of lack of intention to use the
J also recognised the difficulty that an opponent has in establishing a ground
, stating in the same case:
The subjective nature of the
intention, the presumption of intention flowing from the application for
registration and the onus on
an opponent usually make it difficult for an
opposition or an application for rectification, to succeed on this
view of the authorities discussed above,
the onus of establishing the
ground of opposition pursuant to
remains with the Opponent until it has
established a
prima facie
case that on the Relevant Date the Applicant
lacked the requisite intention. If the Opponent establishes a
prima facie
case the onus then shifts to the Applicant for rebuttal. The relevant
intention requires that an applicant must have ‘a real
intention to use,
not a mere problematic intention, not an uncertain or indeterminate possibility,
but it means a resolve or settled
purpose which has been reached at the time
when the mark is to be
registered’.
There must be
‘a real and definite intention’ to use the mark publicly as a trade
mark in connection with the services
Opponent submits that the Applicant filed the 174 and 175 Marks for defensive
The Opponent argues
that Riddle gives extensive evidence about why the Applicant sought registration
of the 174 and 175 Marks by
stating that ‘Tamboran and its subsidiaries
and joint venture partners were using the TANUMBIRINI mark as part of the well
names ...and in other documents such as investor communications at the time the
Applications were filed, and intended to use and
authorise the use of the names
Tanumbirini and Tanumbirini Station for the goods and services of the
Applications...’. The
Opponent submits that it is not the Applicant but
Santos QNT Pty Ltd who named the wells and has been engaged in the exploration
activities via the fracking wells on Tanumbirini Station. Moreover, the Opponent
submits that the Applicant sought the registrations
to ‘describe their
wells in the usual manner, and by reference to their location’, and that
is not an intention to use
the 174 and 175 Marks in relation to the
Applicant’s Goods and Services.
Opponent argues that Riddle states that as a result of demands made by the
Opponent, the Applicant was concerned that the Opponent
would use its
registration for the TS Mark to prevent use by the Applicant or its subsidiaries
or joint venture partners of the word
TANUMBIRINI, including in investor
communications and in the naming of the wells. The Opponent submits, Riddle
states that the 174
and 175 Marks were filed ‘to defend its interests
including the established use of Tanumbirini well names’ and that this
does not evince an intention to use the 174 and 175 Marks as trade marks in
relation to the Applicant’s Goods and Services.
response the Applicant submits that at the time of applying for the 174 and 175
Marks it was using the 174 and 175 Marks in relation
to the Applicant’s
Goods and Services and had an intention to continue to use the 174 and 175
Marks, including through its
authorised users. Riddle’s evidence is that
the Applicant and its subsidiaries and joint venture partners were using the 174
and 175 Marks as part of the well names and in other documents such as investor
communications at the time the Applications were
filed, and intended to use and
authorise the use of the 174 and 175 Marks for the Applicant’s Goods and
Services, which are
all related to gas and mineral exploration. Riddle further
states ‘[t]o be clear, [the Applicant] filed the Applications to
its ongoing use of the names Tanumbirini and Tanumbirini Station for its own
goods and services and those of subsidiaries
and joint venture partners’.
Moreover, the Applicant is the owner of extensive exploration rights in the
Northern Territory.
The Applicant also submits there is no difficulty in using
the 174 and 175 Marks on well names and on or in relation to the property
locations where the Applicant’s Goods and Services are sourced, produced
or conducted, in the same way the Opponent relies
on its TS Mark.
the circumstances I am not persuaded by the Opponent’s submissions. The
Applicant has provided clear statements regarding
its intention to use or
authorise use of the trade marks, and evidence about itself, its subsidiaries
and joint venture partners.
The Opponent’s submissions that it is not the
Applicant but Santos QNT Pty Ltd who named the wells and has been engaged in
exploration activities does not change my view. Use of the 174 and 175 Marks is
not limited to goods and services from a particular
fracking well, rather it is
an intention to use the 174 and 175 Marks in Australia in relation to the
Applicant’s Goods and
Services. I add that it is not unusual for companies
to form joint ventures to pool capital, skills and operational know how and
this case the evidence shows that while Santos QNT Pty Ltd is the operator of
the EP 161 permit, Santos QNT Pty Ltd and the Applicant
are joint interest
holders in the permit.
Applicant is an established public natural gas company with extensive
exploration rights in the Northern
and is leveraging a
significant depth of experience from its subsidiaries and joint venture partners
such as Santos QNT Pty Ltd.
regard to the Opponent’s submissions in relation to the Applicant using
the 174 and 175 Marks to refer to the location of
wells, and not as trade marks,
I note that Tanumbirini is not a geographical location in the sense discussed by
Clark Equipment Co v Registrar of Trade
Rather, it is the
name of a privately owned cattle
and there is no reason
why the well name or well location, like any other sign, cannot serve as a badge
am not persuaded the Opponent has established a prima facie case that the
Applicant filed the 174 and 174 Marks for defensive purposes.
I am satisfied
that at the Relevant Date the Applicant did have the intention to offer all its
goods and services under the 174 and
175 Marks in Australia.
Section 62A
62A provides:
62A Application made in bad
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the
application was made in bad faith.
the SGPs the Opponent particularises the ground of opposition under s 62A as
The Applicant is a gas company that has previously been
granted exploration permits for petroleum resources by the Northern Territory
government on the Opponent’s property TANUMBIRINI STATION which is located
in the Beetaloo Sub-basin in the Northern Territory
of Australia. The Applicant
has a history of using the TANUMBIRINI and TANUMBIRINI STATION trade marks which
are owned by the Opponent,
without authorisation or licence from the Opponent,
in relation to the Applicant’s resource exploration wells which are
on the Opponent’s property. The Applicant and the Opponent have
been engaged in legal disputes over access and treatment of
the Opponent’s
The Applicant’s Trade Mark Applications No’s. 2305174[/2305175
have] been filed in bad faith to frustrate and waste the
Opponent’s time
and resources, particularly as the Applicant itself has opposed the registration
of the Opponent’s Trade
Mark Application No. 2254660 TANUMBIRINI STATION
which the Opponent is clearly entitled to register.
The Applicant’s grounds of opposition in its opposition against the
registration of the Opponent’s Trade Mark Application
No. 2254660
TANUMBIRINI STATION are contradictory to its application to register Trade Mark
Application No’s. 2305174[/2305175]
as they include:
because the Applicant submits that the TANUMBIRINI STATION
trade mark lacks the requisite inherent distinctiveness for registration;
section 42(b)
because the Applicant submits that the use of the trade
mark would be contrary to law because the trade mark is inherently misleading
and deceptive to consumers because the Trade Mark indicates that the claimed
services originate or emanate from a specific geographic
location when they
could in fact originate or emanate from a different location in Australia;
because the Applicant submits that the TANUMBIRINI STATION
Trade Mark connotes that the goods and/or services for which registration
sought possess a heritage and/or originate or emanate from a specific geographic
location in Australia, but the broad scope of
protection sought would permit use
of the Trade Mark on goods and/or services that do not in fact originate or
emanate from that
geographic location, and use of the Trade Mark is inherently
likely to deceive or cause confusion.
Despite the grounds of opposition raised by the Applicant against the
registration of the Opponent’s Trade Mark Application
No. 2254660
TANUMBIRINI STATION set out above, the Applicant has still filed its own Trade
Mark Application No’s. 2305174[/2305175]
plainly in bad faith.
As a result of the Applicant filing Trade Mark Application No’s.
2305174[/2305175] in bad faith, this application should be
registration.
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Trade Marks Amendment Bill 2006
provided some illustrations of applications made in bad faith:
persons who
monitor new property developments, register the name of new developments as
trade marks for a number of services and then
threaten the property developers
with trade mark infringement proceedings unless the developers licence or buy
the trade marks;
persons who have
a history of applying for trade marks that are deliberate misspellings of other
registered trade marks; and
persons who
identify trade marks used overseas but with no Australian use as yet who then
apply to register the trade marks in Australia
for the express purpose of
selling them to the overseas owners.
illustrations are not exhaustive. In
DC Comics v Cheqout Pty Ltd,
J observed that all of the circumstances surrounding the application to register
a trade mark are relevant.
Moreover, conduct after the priority date can be used to shed light on the
Applicant’s subjective intent at the filing
test for bad faith incorporates subjective and objective elements. That is, I
must consider what the Applicant actually knew at
the filing date, and then
consider whether, armed with that knowledge, its decision to apply to register
the Trade Mark would be
considered to be in bad faith by persons who adopt
proper standards of behaviour in business. In
Fry Consulting Pty Ltd v Sports
Warehouse Inc (No 2)
Dodds-Streeton J made the following comments, quoting from
Harrisons’s Trade Mark Application
Clearly the court,
when considering bad faith, cannot apply a purely subjective test, called by
Lord Hutton “the Robin Hood
test”. The dishonest person or one with
low standards cannot be permitted to obtain trade mark registrations in
circumstances
where a person abiding by a reasonable standard would not. The
registration of a trade mark is designed to enable bona fide proprietors
protect their proprietary rights without having to prove unfair trading.
Registration is not provided to help those with low moral
... The words “bad faith” suggest a mental state. Clearly when
considering the question of whether an application to register
is made in bad
faith all the circumstances will be relevant. However the court must decide
whether the knowledge of the applicant
was such that his decision to apply for
registration would be regarded as in bad faith by persons adopting proper
Honour continued later in the same decision:
The formulation in
United Kingdom authority of bad faith as falling short of the standards of
acceptable commercial behaviour observed
by reasonable and experienced persons
in a particular area is, in my view, an apt touchstone. An overly literal
application may,
however, tend to negate the relevance attributed to the
applicant’s mental state in the combined test preferred in
Further, in my view, mere negligence, incompetence or a lack of prudence to
reasonable and experienced standards would not, in themselves,
suffice, as the
concept of bad faith imports conduct which, irrespective of the form it takes,
is of an unscrupulous, underhand,
or unconscientious
onus is on the Opponent to establish that the act of filing the Application was
in bad faith. While the standard of proof remains
the same, given the serious
nature of the allegation cogent evidence is required in order to prove
Opponent submits that it is clear from the evidence that outside the confines of
this trade mark opposition, there is a real and
tangible dispute between the
parties. The Opponent submits that the Applicant’s witness Joal Riddle
gave evidence about proceedings
against the Applicant’s subsidiary
Sweetpea Petroleum Pty Ltd in Northern Territory Civil and Administrative
Tribunal regarding
access to the property and the subsequent Supreme Court
appeal by Applicant. Riddle also gave evidence about the Opponent’s
opposition to the Applicant’s use of photos of signage on the
Opponent’s property depicting the name TANUMBIRINI STATION
and associated
cattle branding.
In addition the
Opponent and a number of other third parties such as traditional owners, other
pastoralists, scientist and experts
have significant environmental and ethical
concerns in relation to fracking and drilling for gas on its property and in the
Opponent highlights Riddle’s evidence about the Applicant’s
motivations in filing the 174 and 175 Marks and his statement
its interests including the established use of the Tanumbirini well
names’. The Opponent argues that given
the vastly different activities
engaged in by the Applicant, it is difficult to see how the Applicant’s
actions would fall
foul of the Opponent’s trade mark registration for the
TS Mark. Moreover, the Applicant is a sophisticated multinational corporation
that is well advised. In such circumstances, the Opponent considers
Riddle’s comments defy belief.
Opponent submits Riddle’s comments make plain that the Applicant’s
desire to register the 174 and 175 Marks for defensive
purposes is repugnant to
the purposes for which the statutory regime exists. The Opponent argues that
there is much to be said for
Langenhoven’s evidence that the
Applicant’s motivation in filing the 174 and 175 Marks was, among other
things, to frustrate
and waste the Opponent’s time and resources. For the
Opponent this is particularly plain in light of the history of dealings
the parties.
response the Applicant submits that the evidence of Langenhoven demonstrates
that the Opponent is a passionate and active opponent
of the Applicant’s
gas-industry activities. The Opponent is a large and well-funded commercial
organisation seeking to profit
from its activities on a pastoral lease, and the
Applicant can understand why the Opponent may prefer if the Applicant was not
on the same land.
Applicant submits that it filed the Applications in response to its legitimate
use of those marks being challenged. It sought
to protect its use of the 174 and
175 Marks by seeking registration. The Applicant submits that this is not
conduct falling short
of the standards of acceptable commercial behaviour
observed by reasonable and experienced persons. These are the actions of a
commercially
astute Applicant. The Applicant’s conduct, in seeking to
register the 174 and 175 Marks with respect to its “vastly different
activities”, was entirely rational, and prudent, given the extent of
animosity directed at its business operations by the Opponent.
Properly and
fairly understood in context, the Applicant submits that its conduct was plainly
not fraudulent, dishonest or possessing
a quality which ‘makes it
repugnant to the purposes for which the statutory regime exists’. Given
the commercially significant
nature of the Applicant’s investments being
made in mining operations in Australia, the Applicant’s conduct in seeking
trade mark registrations for the 174 and 175 Marks would be viewed by other
traders and relevant consumers (which includes investors)
as necessary and
entirely proper.
am not persuaded by the Opponent’s submissions. The relationship between
the parties is sour due to factors related to the
Opponent’s pastoral
lease including access and environmental concerns. However, the evidence does
not establish that the Opponent
is engaged in mining activities or that the
filing of the Applications were made to frustrate and waste the Opponent’s
and resources. Any rights afforded to the Applicant upon registration are
only those provided for in the Act and the Applicant has
substantial investments
in mining activities in Australia. In the circumstances, I do not consider it
unreasonable that the Applicant
would proceed with the Applications despite
having knowledge of the Opponent and its trade marks.
the evidence before me does not establish that at the time of filing the
Applications the Applicant’s conduct fell
short of standards of acceptable
commercial behaviour observed by reasonable and experienced persons. In the
absence of such evidence,
I am not satisfied that the Applications were made in
Opponent has not established the ground of opposition under s 62A.
55 provides:
55 Decision
(1) Unless subsection (3) applies to the proceedings, the Registrar
must, at the end, decide:
(a) to refuse to register the trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations)
in respect of the goods and/or services
then specified in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
Opponent has not established a ground of opposition in relation to the
Applications. Accordingly, trade mark numbers 2305174 and
2305175 may proceed to
registration one month from the date of this decision. If the Registrar is
served with a notice of appeal,
I direct that the disposition of the
Applications should be in accordance with the Court’s order or direction.
parties sought an award of costs. It is usual for costs to follow the event, and
I see no reason to depart from that principle
here. I award costs in respect of
trade mark number 2305174 against the Opponent under s 221 in line with Schedule
8 of the Regulations.
In respect of trade mark number 2305175 I award reduced
costs against the Opponent in the same manner as indicated in
Hume Industries
(Malaysia) Berhad v James Hardie & Coy Pty
Louise Tuohy
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
Applicant’s Goods and/or Services
Natural gas; liquefied natural gas; petroleum gas; liquid
petroleum gas; liquefied gas; oil-gas; hydrocarbon gas for use as fuel;
compressed natural gas; coal bed gas; gas hydrates for use as fuel; shale gas;
coal seam gas; natural gas condensates for use as
fuel; liquefied natural gas;
liquefied coal seam gas; hydrocarbon products being butane or propane or any
other hydrocarbon gas or
hydrocarbon fuel, all being for use as fuel
Administration of oil and gas leases; business management
and administrative services related to the operation of gas field installations;
wholesaling and retailing of goods including those for fuel supply and energy
products; wholesaling and retailing of energy and fuel;
Wholesale and retail
services in relation to energy and fuel supply systems and infrastructure;
administrative and business management
services related to the processing of gas
to the distribution of gas; advertising services; promotion services; business
and business consultancy services; business project management
services; business management consultancy services in relation to
the provision
of energy products including the provision of gas; business administration and
business consulting services; office
functions; marketing of exploration and
field development services in the gas industry; information, support,
assistance, consultancy
and advisory services in relation to the aforementioned
Drilling; gas drilling; drilling of wells; rock drilling;
boring of wells; drilling of deep gas wells; hydraulic fracturing services;
fracking services; hydraulic fracturing services; gas well pumping; gas
extraction services; building, installation, construction,
maintenance, and
repair services; building, installation, construction, maintenance, repair,
supervision and bringing into operation
of gas wells and gas fields; building,
installation, construction, maintenance, and repair services relating to
drilling and servicing
of gas wells, gas infrastructure, machinery, plumbing,
roads and access tracks; building, installation, construction, maintenance,
repair services relating to the supply and distribution of gas; building,
installation, construction, maintenance, rental and
repair services in relation
to plant, apparatus, tools and equipment used in the production, generation,
distribution, transportation
and supply of gas; building, installation,
construction, maintenance, and repair services in relation to gas pipelines;
installation, construction, maintenance, and repair services in
relation to gas products, gas production, gas storage and gas supply
and systems; building, installation, construction, maintenance, and repair
services in relation to gas supply components;
civil engineering (construction)
services; mechanical engineering services (construction); civil construction
services; underground
civil construction and engineering (construction)
services; building construction services including building construction
supervision
and project management services; information, support, assistance,
consultancy and advisory services in relation to the aforementioned
Distribution and transportation of energy, including gas;
supply of energy, including gas; gas reticulation services; gas distribution
services; gas storage services; gas supplying; transportation, storage and
delivery of natural gas liquids, natural gas and liquefied
natural gas;
information, support, assistance, consultancy and advisory services in relation
to the aforementioned services
Gas production, processing and treatment services;
hydrocarbon production, processing and treatment services; natural gas
production,
processing and treatment services; natural gas liquid production,
processing and treatment services; liquid natural gas production,
processing and
treatment services; coal seam gas production, processing and treatment services;
petroleum gas production, processing
and treatment services; liquid petroleum
gas production, processing and treatment services; liquefied gas production,
and treatment services; oil-gas production, processing and treatment
services; hydrocarbon gas production, processing and treatment
compressed natural gas production, processing and treatment services; coal bed
gas production, processing and treatment
services; gas hydrates production,
processing and treatment services; shale gas production, processing and
treatment services; coal
seam gas production, processing and treatment services;
natural gas condensates production, processing and treatment services; liquefied
natural gas production, processing and treatment services; liquefied coal seam
gas production, processing and treatment services;
refining of gas; gas well
treatment services; production and generation of energy; production and
generation of gas; treatment of
materials; processing and conversion of fuels
and energy; technical advice in the fields of production and processing of gas;
advice related to the manufacture of gas production equipment, control
systems, and machinery; information, support, assistance,
consultancy and
advisory services in relation to the aforementioned services
Engineering, design and related consulting services in
relation to the exploration, production, processing, treatment, refining, supply
and distribution of energy and gas; gas exploration and prospecting services;
surveying and exploration services; analysis for gas
exploration services; gas
field surveys; gas well testing; gas well services, namely, monitoring hydraulic
fracture data in gas wells;
testing and analysis services for the safety of
energy products and energy systems; advice on the consumption and conservation
energy; analysis for exploitation of gas; analysis for gas-field
exploitation; gas prospecting, planning and design services related
to building
of gas wells, fields and infrastructure; hydrocarbon exploration; geophysical
exploration for gas; analysis services
in the field of geophysics, namely,
conducting feasibility studies to study fluid flow in gas reservoirs; analysis
services in the
field of geophysics, namely, analysis of gas fields; gas well
flow testing services; in-line testing of gas wells; drill stem testing;
of gas well and gas field surveys; geo-seismic survey services; well bore
surveying services; geological surveys and research;
geophysical exploration
services; geophysical exploration for gas; geological prospecting; geological
estimation and research; geological
exploration; recordal of seismic data;
gravimetric monitoring services; provision of scientific surveys; provision of
technical surveys;
scientific and technological services and research and design
services relating to the exploration, production, processing, treatment,
refining, supply and distribution of energy and gas; industrial analysis and
research services relating to the exploration, production,
processing,
treatment, refining, supply and distribution of energy and gas; information,
support, assistance, consultancy and advisory
services in relation to the
aforementioned services
Opponent’s TS Goods and/or Services
Live animals; beef cattle; livestock including cattle;
agricultural, horticultural and forestry products and grains; prepared
for livestock; foodstuffs for animals and livestock; stockfeed;
animal and livestock fattening preparations; straw forage; protein
consumption
Quality assessment, certification, verification and
inspection of cattle to verify or certify breed type and purity; scientific
services in the field of agriculture and horticulture; scientific
research relating to genetics; veterinary, agricultural and agribusiness
services in this class, namely progeny testing, sire proving, semen processing,
analysing, screening and profiling genetics, animal
selection and animal
Food and drink catering; hospitality services (food and
drink); preparation of food and drink; providing food and drink; restaurant
services; rental of rooms for social functions; hospitality services
(accommodation); arranging hotel accommodation; booking of hotel
accommodation;
provision of hotel accommodation; reservation of hotel accommodation; arranging
of temporary accommodation; providing
information, including online, about
services for providing food and drink, and temporary accommodation; providing
temporary accommodation;
hotel accommodation services; holiday camp services;
holiday lodgings
Livestock breeding services; livestock rearing and
producing services; breeding of animals; rearing and fattening cattle; animal
extraction; farming services; tracing services relating to the origin of
meat, poultry, beef; genetic testing for medical purposes;
veterinary,
agricultural and agribusiness services in this class, namely insemination
services, breeding and artificial breeding;
provision of information, advisory
and consultancy services in relation to the aforementioned services
Unless otherwise stated, each
reference to a section or regulation is a reference to a section of the
Marks Act 1995
(Cth) (‘Act’) or regulation of the
Trade Marks
Regulations 1995
(Cth) (‘Regulations’), respectively.
See Annexure 1 for the full
specification. The specification is the same for both Applications.
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd
v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and
Telstra Corporation Ltd v
Phone Directories Co Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot and
Edelman JJ).
Carnival Cruise Lines Inc. v Sitmar
Cruises Limited
[1994] FCA 68, [62] (Gummow J).
[1897] VicLawRp 118
(1897) 22 VLR 636
(Holroyd J).
Settef SpA v Riv-Oland Marble Co (Vic)
(1987) 10 IPR 402
See Annexure 2 for the full
specification.
[1963] HCA 66
(1963) 109 CLR 407
[2017] FCAFC 56
(Greenwood,
Besanko and Katzmann JJ).
[2017] FCAFC 83
(Greenwood,
Jagot, and Beach JJ).
[2014] ATMO 103
[2000] FCA 1335
[1999] ATMO 23
(1999) 47 IPR 423
[2000] FCA 1587
(albeit in relation to paragraph 28(a) of the now superseded
Trade Marks Act
(Cth)), (emphasis in original).
Langenhoven, Confidential
Annexure PL-25.
Langenhoven [47] to [49].
Langenhoven, Annexure
Langenhoven, Annexures
Langenhoven [58], Annexure
Langenhoven [54] to [56],
Annexure PL-20.
Langenhoven, [46] Annexure
Langenhoven, [46] Annexure
Advantage Rent a Car Inc
v Advantage Car Rental Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 683
, [28] (Madgwick J).
[2017] FCAFC 174
Competition and Consumer
(Cth), sch 2.
Parkdale Custom Built
Furniture Pty Ltd v Puxu Pty Ltd
[1982] HCA 44
(1982) 149 CLR 191
, 198. This case was
decided under the superseded s 52
Trade Practices Act 1974
(‘TPA’) the equivalent provision to the current
of the ACL.
Pacific Publications
Pty Ltd v IPC Media Pty Ltd
[2003] FCA 104
, Beaumont J considered - in
connection with the superseded TPA - that ‘the Court’s conclusion on
would necessarily carry with it a conclusion on
Sections 53(c)
-(d) of the TPA are the equivalent provisions to
-(h) of the ACL.
Re Equity Access Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking
Corporation
[1989] FCA 506
(Hill J), wherein
failure to succeed under
of the TPA ‘will invariably mean that
proceedings for passing off would likewise fail’.
[2006] FCA 1663
[2008] FCA 100
[2008] 75 IPR 478
Aston v Harlee
Manufacturing Co
[1960] HCA 47
(1960) 103 CLR 391
, 401 (Fullagar J).
Health World Ltd v
Shin-Sun Australia Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 100
, [162]-[163] (citations
Ibid [161] (citations
Re Ducker’s Trade
(1928) 45 RPC 397
Health World Ltd v
Shin-Sun Australia Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 100
, [160] (Jacobson J).
Suyen Corporation v
Americana International Limited
[2010] FCA 638
[212] (Dodds-Streeton J).
Riddle, Exhibit 15.
Riddle, Exhibit 17.
Riddle, Exhibit 14.
[1964] HCA 55
(1964) 111 CLR 511
Tamboran Resources Limited v Rallen
Australia Pty Ltd
[2024] ATMO 193
[27] (Hearing Officer Wilson).
[2013] FCA 478
Ibid, [71].
[2012] FCA 81.
Harrison’s Trade
Mark Application
[2004] EWCA Civ 1028
, [24]-[26].
[165]-[166].
Hard Coffee Pty Ltd v
Hard Coffee Main Beach Pty Ltd
[2009] ATMO 26
, [12] (Hearing Officer
Nancarrow).
See paragraph 37 for image
of the signage.
Langenhoven [87], Annexure
[2001] ATMO 78
(Hearing Officer
RTF format (8.68 MB)
Signed PDF/A format