Rothbury Wines Pty Ltd v Murray Tyrrell, Tyrrell's Vineyards Pty Ltd and Trevor Drayton [2008] ATMOGI 1 (13 June 2008)
AUSTRALIAN WINE AND BRANDY CORPORATION ACT 1980
Objection to
determination of geographical indication
DECISION OF A DEPUTY REGISTRAR OF
TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Objection
by Rothbury Wines Pty Ltd to determination of geographical indication filed in
the names of Murray Tyrrell, Tyrrell’s
Vineyards Pty Ltd and Trevor
Michael Arblaster
REPRESENTATION:
Stephen Burley of Counsel, instructed by Frances Drummond
of Freehills, Patent & Trade Mark Attorneys.
David Catterns QC and Stephen Stern, solicitor, instructed
by Luke Merrick of Corrs.
2008 ATMO GI 1
evidence shows quite limited use of the word ‘Rothbury’ as a place
name to designate an ill-defined area in the Lower
Hunter Valley.
people and businesses within the area covered by the proposed geographical
indication (GI) appear to identify their geographical
location by use of the
word ‘Pokolbin’.
administrative Parish of Rothbury, and its boundaries, are unknown to many of
its residents and the term appears to be used only
in relation to identifying
real property in the transfer of land title.
word ‘Rothbury’ thus has very little force as a geographical
evidence also shows that the word ‘Rothbury’ has developed a
secondary meaning as a trade mark denoting the wines
of the Objector, distinct
from whatever geographical origins it might have had.
a GI can be used in a trade-mark-like manner to promote the term as denoting the
source of origin of the wine, the use of
‘Rothbury’ as a GI would be
confusing with the registered trade mark “The Rothbury Estate”.
word ‘Rothbury’ has acquired a secondary meaning to denote the
Objector and it wines. The Objector therefore has trade
marks rights in the word
“Rothbury” (in relation to wine). The use of ‘Rothbury’
as a GI would be confusing
with the term ‘Rothbury’ which is
contained in the registered mark “The Rothbury Estate” and which
of the Objector’s pending mark Rothbury.
a GI is territorially based, and its use is open to all that live within it, but
the Objector’s trade marks are not,
the use of the word Rothbury as a GI
would, because of the reputation of the trade marks, be confusing.
likelihood of confusion is not ameliorated by any force that the word
‘Rothbury’ has otherwise developed.
Objector has made out its grounds of objection.
are no circumstances satisfying me that it would be reasonable to exercise my
discretion to recommend determination of the GI.
give notice that, subject only to the outcome of an appeal against this
decision, the GI Committee of the AWBC (the Committee) may
not determine the GI
without the consent of the Objector.
Introduction
US Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act 2004
enacted amendments to the
Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation Act 1980
(‘the Act’)
to provide measures:
“ ... to provide specific procedures for
the owner of a trademark to object to the determination of a geographical
(GI) on the basis of pre-existing trademark rights
procedures are contained within Division 4 of the Act. Section 40RA provides
that, following an application for determination
of a GI, the Australian Wine
and Brandy Corporation (‘the Corporation’) must give notice inviting
persons to object to
the determination of the GI on the basis of prior trade
mark rights. The objection is to be made to the Registrar of Trade Marks
grounds set out in Section
amendments to the Act also reflect Australia’s international obligations
under Section 2,
(relating to trade marks)
and Section 3 (relating
to GIs) of the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
TRIPS Agreement
’). Section 40A indicates that the
of the Act, dealing with the protection of certain names and
expressions, is to enable Australia to fulfill its obligations under
wine trading Agreements. The only such agreement is that in force between
Australia and the European Economic Community
(the EC Agreement), as stipulated
in Section 4 of the Act.
This matter
Murray Tyrrell, Tyrrell’s Vineyards Pty Ltd and Mr Trevor Drayton of the
Hunter Valley (‘the Applicant’) applied
(by documents dated 15 July
2002, 25 August 2002, and 21 March 2002 respectively) to the Geographical
Indications Committee (‘the
Committee’) for determination of a GI
named ROTHBURY. The proposed GI is based on the Parish of Rothbury in the
Hunter Valley
with some minor additions, apparently, from the Parish of
response to a notice published on 23 February 2005 in
The (Cessnock)
by the Presiding Member of the Committee, Rothbury Wines Pty Ltd
(‘the Objector’) made written objections on 18 March
2005 to the
determination of the GI.
grounds notified by the Objector are that at the time of application for the
determination of the GI, the Objector was the registered
owner of five
registered trade marks, three “pending” trade marks and two common
law marks, each of which would conflict
(be a source of confusion) with the
proposed GI if it were determined.
The Objector has also nominated a number of other ‘grounds’ as the
basis for its objection. They evoke the criteria
for determination of a GI by
the committee, and are not properly a matter for consideration by the Registrar.
Nevertheless, the evidence
that relates to these latter ‘grounds’
may be relevant to a consideration of how the word ‘Rothbury’
and as such are pertinent to my assessment of any likelihood of
confusion and thus my recommendation to the Committee.
considering the objections enlisted above, the provisions of the Act, and the
evidence filed by the parties, it is open for
me to find:
the Objector has made out its grounds; and if so,
circumstances exist in which it is reasonable nonetheless to recommend that the
GI be determined; and to
the Committee of my finding.
8. The parties have, in accordance with Part 6, Division 1 of the
Wine and Brandy Corporation Regulations 1981
regulations’), filed evidence in support of their respective positions and
evidence in answer. As Deputy Registrar
, assisted by Hearing Officer
Iain Thompson, I heard the arguments of the parties at a hearing in Sydney on
Wednesday, 20 September
2006. David Catterns QC and Stephen Stern, solicitor,
instructed by Corrs, represented the Objector. Stephen Burley of Counsel,
instructed by Freehills, Patent & Trade Mark Attorneys, represented the
Applicants Tyrrell Vineyards Pty Ltd and Mr Murray Tyrrell.
Mr Trevor Drayton
was not represented at the hearing, neither did he appear or file written
submissions.
parties served and filed the evidence in support simultaneously – the
process amounts to an exchange of copies of the evidence
and filing of the
originals at the Trade Marks Office. The evidence in chief comprises statutory
declarations by:
(a) Mr Murray Tyrrell dated
13 October 2005;
(b) Mr Christopher Barnes dated 12 October 2005;
(c) Mr Gregory Drayton (undated);
(d) Mr Maxwell Drayton of 11 October 2005;
(e) Mr John Tulloch dated 13 October 2005; and,
(f) Mr Ian Tinkler dated 13 October 2005.
(a) Mr Mike Degaris of 10 October 2005;
(b) Mr Stephen Marcus Stern of 3 October 2005;
(c) Mr Rod Masters of 11 October 2005; and,
(d) Dr Richard Smart of 12 October 2005.
evidence in answer was also served and filed simultaneously and comprises
statutory declarations by:
(a) Ms Frances Drummond; and,
(b) Ms Catherine Jouguelet, both dated 6 March 2006
(a) Professor Robert Lusby of 28 February 2006
(b) Mr Kenneth Sloan of 28 February 2006,
(c) Mr Neil McGuigan of 1 March 2006);
(d) Mr Glen R Thomson of 1 March 2006;
(e) Mr George Tsiros of 1 March 2006;
(f) Mr Paul A Stuart of 1 March 2006;
(g) Mr John Parkinson of 1 March 2006;
(h) Mr Stephen Marcus Stern of 3 March 2006;
(i) Mr David Lowe of 3 March 2006;
(j) Mr Ross MacDonald of 7 March 2006.
(k) Mr Christopher Hancock dated 17 March 2006
Applicant, by letter dated 12 September 2006, sought leave to file additional
evidence in the form of material publicly available
on the register of trade
marks. The declaration of Catherine Jouguelet of 15 September 2006, was served
electronically on that day
and admitted without
The Applicant’s Evidence in Chief
Murray Tyrrell is the Managing Director of Tyrrell's Vineyards Pty Ltd
(‘TVPL’). Mr Tyrrell’s family settled
in the Hunter Valley in
1858 and has been growing grapes and making wine there since that time. Mr
Tyrrell gives his address as
Broke Road, Pokolbin. Mr Tyrrell avers,
“Viticulture and wine making played a major role in the early development
of Rothbury
in the 19th century. During the 1960's new wineries started up in
the area. They were rapidly joined by other bigger wineries.
The name Rothbury
has been used as a GI since that
to Mr Tyrrell’s declaration are both his and TVPL’s applications to
the committee for determination of the GI
ROTHBURY. I note that both of these
are unsworn documents but the content is within the ambit of Mr Tyrrell’s
statement in
the foregoing paragraph.
TVPL application states that Rothbury is recognised as a subregion by the wine
industry and is accepted as such in our international
markets. It indicates that
Rothbury is on the Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation’s (AWBC's) list
of protected names
and has been
seen locally as a distinct region. The application attests that the parish
boundaries of Pokolbin, Belford and Rothbury
“have always been distinct
and continue to be recognised by local residents as important”. It argues
further that the
parish boundaries “reflect historical usage of the
proposed names as well as activities associated with viticulture and winemaking.
The parish boundaries also align with the natural landforms and historical
features in the area”.
TVPL application argues that the geology, soil, landscape and climate are
homogenous within the region and distinct from those
of the surrounding
The geology of Rothbury is generally uniform throughout the
proposed subregion. Rothbury is dominated by rocks from the Dalwood Group
early Permian period, and rocks from the Maitland Group of the mid-to-late
Permian. The geological landscape of Rothbury also
comprises minor extracts of
the later Singleton Coal Measure. The proposed subregion of Rothbury is
geologically divided by three
fault lines. The Dalwood Group lies to the west of
these fault lines, while the Maitland Group lies to the east of these fault
These fault lines are unique to Rothbury. They create a distinct
distribution of the geological units, with the Dalwood Group to
the west and
Maitland Group to the east.
The soil landscape of Rothbury is another grape growing attribute which is
homogenous throughout. The soil landscape is comprised
of intermingling between
the Rothbury soil and the Branxton soil which is uniform throughout the proposed
subregion. It is this interaction
between the Red Podzolic soils (Rothbury soil)
and the Yellow Podzolic soils (Branxton soils) which makes the proposed
of Rothbury unique. This composition of soils does not appear to the
same degree in any of the surrounding subregions.
With respect to climate, the proposed subregion of Rothbury is substantially
homogeneous. Climatic factors such as temperature and
rainfall have a
substantial effect on the proposed subregion of Rothbury. In summary, Rothbury
appears to have higher rainfall and
lower temperatures than Belford, and lower
rainfall and higher temperatures than Pokolbin. Rothbury is generally lower in
than Pokolbin, yet higher in elevation than Belford. The terrain of
rolling hills in Rothbury differs to the undulating hills of
Pokolbin and the
alluvial flats of Belford. For these reasons, we submit that the proposed
subregion of Rothbury is discrete from
Pokolbin and Belford to a degree that is
substantial.
note that the distinction between the ‘rolling hills’ in Rothbury
and ‘undulating hills’ of Pokolbin is
a fine one and is lost on the
writer of the geological report on which Mr Tyrrell relies in his application at
Annex B to his declaration:
ROTHBURY SOIL LANDSCAPE
This soil landscape covers undulating and rolling low hills south and
south-east of Singleton. Red Podzolic Soils (Dr3.21, Dr5.21)
occur on upper
slopes with Yellow Podzolic Soils (Dy2.41) on midslopes. Yellow Solodic Soils
(Dy3.42) and brown Soloths (Db3.40)
occur on lower slopes. There are Prairie
Soils (Gn4.22) in the drainage lines.
TVPL application also argues that, historically, the natural landforms have
resulted in different land usage in those areas:
Land use and
employment within the Parish of Pokolbin was originally directly related to
agriculture in the form of vineyards, small
cropping, orchards, diary farms,
cattle grazing and timber cutting. In contrast, there has been virtually no
agricultural development
in the Parish of Rothbury. This is due to the poorer
soil quality and lower rainfall levels.
Apart from wine grape growing and wine production, the other major industry
in the Hunter region is the coal industry. Over the years,
there has been a
large degree of coal mining carried out in the Parish of Rothbury. In contrast,
there has been no coal mining in
the heartland of Pokolbin.
TVPL application outlines the history of the Rothbury area from the earliest
large land grants and the creation of the Parish
of Rothbury to the more recent
soldier settlement blocks. It highlights the development of roads and of
community facilities.
Settlement within the Parish of Rothbury was
significantly different to that of Pokolbin, Prior to the 1860s, large land
grants were
made along Black Creek and throughout the district. A number of
smaller grants appear to have been made to a person by the name of
The large area of land shown as 10,000 acres on the old parish map included
in Annexure 3 was an additional grant made to Richard
Jones in 1839. It remained
scrub land until the 1960s when it was later subdivided in the land rush era.
This area of land is now
known as Hermitage Road. In those days it was known as
Belford Lane, as no road then existed. This road has been upgraded by the
Singleton Council as a result of the subdivision. Prior to this, it was merely a
The area of land shown as Rothbury Estate on the old parish map included in
Annexure 3 operated as a sheep station before it was resumed
by government for
subdivision for World War I soldier settlement blocks. A more recent parish map
indicates that the land was later
sold to the Travena family and Matthews
family. An area of land to the west of the Rothbury Estate was granted to the
Gear family.
The Tyrrell family selected an area of land in Rothbury in 1858. A number of
other selections were made in the Parish of Rothbury
by Hungerford, Kime, Love,
Wills, Peacock, Hall, and Drayton. These consisted of smaller farms using
winemaking, grape growing and
general cropping as their source of income.
The large Phillips selection was very similar to the Tyrrells' selection. The
Phillips family operated up until the 1940s or World
War II when grape growing
and winemaking ceased and general grazing occurred. The property was eventually
sold during the wine boom
in the 1960s. Their property actually joined the
Tyrrells' property and was on land selected by Mitchell.
Mr Deasy selected an area of land in Rothbury in the early 1900s. The land
was used to operate a sheep station continuously up until
the 1950s when the
wool market collapsed.
The land in Rothbury generally has poorer soil quality than Pokolbin and is
noted on early maps as pasture land.
The early portions of land granted in Rothbury were generally larger than in
Pokolbin. Subdivision of the Coulson and Bryce selection
along Black Creek
occurred in the late 1800s. However, the McDonald selection remained as one
holding. The holding still has not
been subdivided.
The large additional land grant on the north western boundary of Rothbury was
subdivided during the early 1900s into a large portion
(somewhere between 500
and 1,000 acres) but remained undeveloped until the land wine boom in the 1960s
and early 1970s.
Hermitage Road was established with this subdivision and it was only then
that access from Broke Road was upgraded from a track to
a road. Hermitage Road
is now divided into mainly 25 and 50 acre lots all with access to Hermitage Road
as shown on recent parish
maps (see Annexure 43). This type of subdivision also
occurred on land along Deasy Road, Palmers Lane and Gillards Road where poorer
soil existed. Prior to the subdivision, this land was not used for agricultural
or viticultural purposes.
care must be taken in reading the application for determination. While the terms
‘Rothbury’ and ‘the Parish
of Rothbury’ are both used in
the applications, the distinctions between them are not apparent. Furthermore,
it is unclear
to what extent the businesses, community facilities, or vineyards
referred to have ever identified themselves as being within either
Rothbury or
the Parish of Rothbury For example, the application states:
first new boutique wineries started in Rothbury in the early 1960's. These
Lakes Folly
and Jim Roberts Belbourie. These were
followed by
The Rothbury Estate
in 1967, and
also in the late 1960's. Both of these new wineries were geared
around tourism. Rothbury Estate is renowned for its extensive mailing
famous ribbon dinners.
Hungerford Hill
is well-known in the wine
industry for its cellar door, motel, restaurant and wine village. Another
popular attraction in Rothbury
is a guesthouse called
It opened in October 1984 and was the first high class accommodation built in
Other major tourist developments in Rothbury include the
, the Vintage Country Club Resort (which is due to open later
this year), the Hunter Valley Country Club Golf Course, the Hunter Valley
Resort, and Casurina.
note that Peppers guesthouse gives its address as Pokolbin, as does Lakes Folly,
the Objector, Harrigans, and Hungerford Hill.
also note that, of the 20 people who are listed as supporting the application
for determination, one has an address at North Rothbury;
the remainder have
addresses at Polkolbin. Similarly, of the vintners or grape growers who are
nominated as having vineyards within
the proposed GI, one has an address at
North Rothbury – the balance have addresses at Pokolbin. This is despite,
application records, Rothbury having its own postcode (North
Rothbury also has its own postcode).
his declaration, Mr Tyrrell states that the term Rothbury has been used in
relation to wine by third parties. Annexed to his declaration
"Annexure I" are internet extracts in relation to Rothbury Ridge Wines Limited
located at Rothbury. Also annexed and
marked "Annexure J" is an extract from
ASIC's database in relation to the company Rothbury Ridge Wines Limited.
Greg Drayton avers that he has:
... lived and worked in the Hunter
Valley Wine Industry all my life.
I am aware that Rothbury Wines Pty Ltd has objected to the determination of
the geographical indication Rothbury.
The name Rothbury has always referred to by the local community as the region
north of the Broke Road of the Lower Hunter wine growing
area. The Rothbury
Estate Winery was established in the 1970's and as the name "estate" implies was
named after the region in which
it was located. The name Rothbury is commonly
use as place of address name for example the newly developed Vintage Resort
heavily promoted as McDonaids Road, Rothbury which will contain over
600 residences.
John Younie Tulloch, Maxwell Keith Drayton, Christopher Barnes, and Geoffrey
Tinkler provide what may be termed ‘supporting
declarations’. These
people are (or have been) involved in the wine industry and/or live in or near
to Pokolbin in the Lower
Hunter Valley – none of these declarants has an
address in Rothbury. All in their various terms attest to the region in question
being known and referred to as ‘Rothbury’; that
‘Rothbury’ has been used in connection with agriculture,
tourism; and that it is commonly used as an address. Mr Barnes also submits that
Rothbury “has been accepted as
a wine region”. While he indicates
that he can produce historic records, books, maps and newspaper articles
supporting this
statement, none of these were provided as exhibits to his
declaration.
The Objector’s Evidence in Chief
Mike Degaris is General Manager and Chief Winemaker of Rothbury Wines Pty Ltd.
He declares that Rothbury Estate was established
in 1968 by a syndicate headed
by the wine personality Len Evans.
Degaris describes the establishment of the vineyard and winery over the
successive years. He attests to the fact that The Rothbury
award-wining winery building was dubbed the “Pokolbin Opera House”.
He also declares that many books
relating to the Lower Hunter Wine Region refer
to the winery and quotes an excerpt from John Beeston’s book A Concise
of Australian Wine (1994), in which Beeston attenuates Rothbury Estate
to simply ‘Rothbury’.
Degaris goes on to describe in some detail the establishment of the Rothbury
Wine Society; a wine buying, tasting and educational
club. He declares that the
Society has some 50,000 members (of whom 15,000 are described as active) each of
whom receives a regular
newsletter. Members of the Society account for some 40%
of The Rothbury Estate’s sales.
relation to the use of the Objector’s trade marks, Mr Degaris refers to
several ranges of wines “sold under and by
reference to the trade marks
ROTHBURY and ROTHBURY ESTATE by the Objector”. He cites a number of
publications reproducing
the ‘Rothbury marks’ and highlights that
the most recent labels in evidence show the word ‘Rothbury’
prominently
within the trade mark and used in larger font than the words
“the estate”.
Degaris provides a number of front and back of bottle labels to show use of the
Objector’s trade mark. These show the use
of the word ROTHBURY in greater
or lesser degrees of prominence. Representative front and back bottle labels
appear in reduced sizes,
total number of bottles sold under the trade mark for the financial years
leading up to 2004 is provided by Mr Degaris. Confidentiality
is claimed for
these figures so I will observe that the total number of bottles sold in the six
years to 2004 is in the many millions
and that the Objector was selling several
million bottles a year at the date of the application. At the end of the first
of production, as much as one third of the Objector’s production
was in export trade. Mr Degaris avows that the use of the
trade marks is not
restricted to wines from the Parish of Rothbury, nor to wines from the Hunter
Valley, but includes wines from
a wide variety of regions. Mr Degaris cites
Mudgee and Cowra as areas from which grapes are commonly sourced. He avows that
of this consumers associate the trade marks ‘ROTHBURY
ESTATE’ and ‘ROTHBURY’ with the “Rothbury Estate
wines, rather than a specific (if any) geographical area”. He states
The trade mark ROTHBURY signifies (both in Australia and
internationally) Rothbury Estate, the Objector and its wines. In my opinion,
does not signify the old Parish of Rothbury.
Degaris attests to the registered trade marks of the Objector. The first three
in relation to wines in class 33, the fourth in
relation to alcoholic beverages
in class 33 and the fifth in relation to a range of wine, entertainment and
tourism related services
in class 41:
THE ROTHBURY ESTATE
THE ROTHBURY PAN
Degaris also brings into evidence the Objector’s pending applications to
register trade
Class 35. Wholesale and retail services relating to the sale, distribution
and marketing of alcoholic beverages; direct marketing
and direct selling
services in relation to the supply of alcoholic beverages including by mail
order and by electronic means; promotion
services including arranging
exhibitions and tasting events in respect of wines.
This application claims divisional status based on the earlier application,
itself a divisional.
THE ROTHBURY WINE SOCIETY
Class: 33 Wines including sparkling wines
This application claims divisional status based on the earlier application,
itself a divisional.
A wide range of goods and services in class 18, 25, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35,
39, 40, 43 and 44.
This application claims divisional status based on the earlier application
itself a divisional.
Richard Smart is a viticulturist and the Principal of Smart Viticulture Pty Ltd.
He describes himself as an expert viticulturalist
and provides an outline of his
career culminating, over the last 15 years, as a specialist consultant including
in relation to vineyard
appraisal, site selection and design. Dr Smart concludes
that there are no major differences between the proposed Rothbury and Pokolbin
GIs to the extent that either can be considered discrete or homogenous. He
declares that the proposed boundaries have no basis in
climate, soil or
topography and that the Parish boundary is an administrative device with no
respect for such grape growing attributes.
Marcus Stern in his first declaration declares that he is a solicitor of Corrs
Chambers Westgarth. His declaration outlines
the conduct of what he describes as
“a very extensive review of wine producers in, and of historical records
relating to, the
Lower Hunter Valley”. The declaration states that the
review also examined “marketing materials and labels of wine producers
both current and, to the extent possible, historical records located in and
around the old Parish of Rothbury (the Reviewed Producers)”.
Stern gives the results of his team’s research and review in tabular form
with accompanying exhibits. He states that the
results invite the following
conclusion:
The clear picture that emerged among the reviewed
producers is that a vast number of wine producers located in the old Parish of
describe the location of their vineyard or winery as POKOLBIN.
Stern lists the forty-six vineyards or wineries within the Parish of Rothbury;
these give their addresses by reference to Pokolbin
– the one exception,
de Iullis, gives its own address as Broke Road, Lovedale, but its address is
given by the Hunter Valley
Wine Guide as being at Lovedale Road in
latter part of Mr Stern’s declaration addresses the technical merits of
the application for determination to the Committee.
This decision, however, is
not concerned with the technical merits of that application, per se, although
the materials help shed
light on what the word ‘Rothbury’ denotes,
or connotes, in relation to wines and wineries.
P. Masters is the Managing Director and Principal of GSS Environmental. He has
held this position since 2003. GSSE is an environmental
consultancy that
specialises in soil and land capability assessment and all aspects of land
repair and reclamation. GSSE is the environmental
consultancy arm of the Global
Soil Systems Group of Companies and specialises in resource assessment, soil and
water conservation
and mine rehabilitation.
Masters provides a detailed critique and comparison of soil types within the
areas covered by the proposed Pokolbin and Rothbury
GIs. Much of this
declaration is highly technical and of significance to my decision only to the
extent that it bears on connotations
associated with the word
‘Rothbury’. Mr Masters attests:
Whilst the soil
properties (relevant to grape growing) are homogenous throughout the wider
Hunter Valley catchment area they are,
in my opinion, certainly not discrete
with respect to the proposed sub-regions of "Rothbury" and "Pokolbin".
Applicant’s Evidence in Answer
Drummond is a partner in Freehills Patents & Trade Mark Attorneys, the
attorneys for Tyrrell's Vineyards Pty Ltd and Mr
Murray Tyrrell, two of the
Applicants for the determination of the Rothbury GI. Ms Drummond makes the
proposition that, “Rothbury
is a geographical location with a reputation
in relation to wine and wine growing,” and attaches several exhibits to
her declaration
in support of the hypothesis.
first, "Annexure FMD-1" is a copy of extracts from a book "A History of Greater
Cessnock, Mines, Wines and People" by W.S.Parkes,
Jim Comerford and Dr Max Lake
published by the Council of the City of Greater Cessnock in 1979. It records
The development of vineyards in the lower Hunter Valley began
first on the Hunter River itself at Kirkton with the Busby and Kelman
and then spread to the north side of the river on the foothills of the Great
Dividing Range, in the valleys of the Paterson
and Williams Rivers, east to Port
Stephens. The vineyards there served as a fountainhead of expertise and indeed a
source of vines,
for the development of vineyards in the Cessnock area which
followed the Robertson Act land grants forty years later. One suspects
early success of these north bank vineyards occurred during an unusually
favourable (for the vine) climatic decade or so,
as all of these enterprises had
terminated later in the century. Now, with a fifty-inch or more annual, mainly
summer rainfall, the
prospects of severe disease are too great to consider any
planting there, and have been so, in living memory. Things must have been
more favourable a hundred years ago, emphasising the climatic cycles that so
typify viticulture in the Hunter. Good wine can
always be made, with difficulty,
in wet years; but it is a series of great wines, from fine grapes, that make a
district's fame and
fortune. This depends on continuing reasonable to
outstanding seasons, evident this century, on the south side of the Hunter
between it, and the Mount View Range over Pokolbin and
westward to Fordwich, and embracing the slopes and plains from Sawyers' Gully
northward. [Stress added]
FMD-2" is a copy of extracts from a book "A Concise History of Australian Wine",
by John Beeston, second edition 1995. I
note that while both this annexure and
FMD-1 make reference to Rothbury as an early location neither contains express
reference to
its promotion as a wine producing region:
John McDonald
came to Pokolbin in 1870, building a house and winery and planting every vine on
his 'Ben Ean' property with his own
hands. Though his winery stands today as
Lindeman's Hunter Valley headquarters and the brand 'Ben Ean' sells many bottles
of Lindeman's,
the region's only memory of McDonald, who sold his winery to
Lindeman's in 1912, is the name of the road leading from Pokolbin to
. [Stress added]
FMD-3" consists of extracts from a publication compiled by Ivan Howard titled
"Pokolbin Community Halls, Their History and
Development". This publication
records an undated but apparently historical comment from the letters column of
a newspaper correcting
confusion about the boundaries of the parishes of
Rothbury and Pokolbin:
There is a good deal of misconception with
regard to the Parish of Pokolbin. It may often be noticed throughout the columns
paper that persons who do not reside in this parish are represented as
residing in it. I notice in one of your last issues the appointment
of Mr Edward
Tyrrell of Ashwonda, Pokolbin, to the Commission of the Peace. Mr. Tyrrell does
not reside in the Parish of Pokolbin,
Parish of Rothbury
[Stress added]
extract, from the Maitland Daily Mercury of 7 March 1906, records a
correspondent’s experiences hunting dingoes at ‘Rothbury
On my return from Keepit Station I went out to
Rothbury Station
, and asked permission to shoot kangaroos. The boss, Mr.
T. B. Watson (a Sydney solicitor) said that he would not allow anyone to
on the station. It is his own men [he would allow] as I might shoot some of his
sheep. I asked him if he was aware that there
were about 14,000 kangaroos,
50,000 wallabies and hundreds of dingoes, on his station. He replied that he
knew that he was nearly
eaten out with roos and wallabies, but said that be
could not allow strangers on his ground. [Stress and other parenthetical
FMD-4" is a copy of extracts from a book "Hunter Winemakers" by Max Lake,
published by The Jacaranda Press, in 1970. The
book records two references to
Rothbury as a location. “Annexure FMD-5” provides copies of a real
estate agent’s
advertising of two properties for sale in
‘Rothbury’. "Annexure FMD-6" contains photographs of a sign
advertising land
for sale at the Vintage Resort, at McDonald’s Road,
Rothbury. This, presumably, is the land development referred to by Mr
Drayton in his declaration, in paragraph 23 above.
Jouguelet’s declaration in answer brings into evidence a letter from a Mr
Ray Shipton. This letter is unsworn and
will be weighted accordingly but gives
very much the same sort of information as in the declarations by Messrs Tulloch,
Barnes, Tinkler
and the declarations of Gregory and Maxwell Drayton. Mr Shipton
distinguishes between ‘Rothbury’ and Rothbury Estate
following terms:
Rothbury is a small
between Cessnock and
Branxton. A part of the northern end of the Valley falls into the Parish of
The Rothbury Estate, to me, is a Company started in the early 1970's by Len
Evans and Murray Tyrrell, among others.
Objector’s Evidence in Answer
Stern’s second declaration relates to the Objector’s dealings with
the company Rothbury Ridge Wines Limited referred
to in Mr Tyrrell’s
declaration. While Mr Tyrrell averred that the term Rothbury had been used in
relation to wine by third
parties, Mr Stern declares that that usage was the
subject of an infringement action filed by the Objector in the Federal Court.
Stern’s exhibits to his declaration make it clear that, as a result of
consent orders from the Court, the third party no
longer uses a trade mark,
company name, business names or domain name which includes the words ROTHBURY
RIDGE. The declaration by
Luke Merrick also addresses these dealings.
Graeme Sloan is the owner of Mistletoe Wines, which is located near Pokolbin.
After outlining his experience in the industry,
Mr Sloan claims a detailed
knowledge of the production and marketing aspects of wine. He states that the
term “Rothbury”
signifies The Rothbury Estate:
term visitor and (more recently) a resident of the Lower Hunter Valley, to me,
the name 'Rothbury' principally refers to
Rothbury Estate.
To me, first and foremost the name Rothbury brings to my mind the name of the
very well-known Rothbury Estate. Rothbury means to me,
after all of my
experience in the Lower Hunter Valley, that well-known vineyard and winery. I
also know, of course, of the North
Rothbury village but if the name Rothbury is
used alone, I never associate it with the village.
further attests that to the best of his recollection “I have never seen,
or heard of, grapes or wines or any other products
being sold or marketed as
originating from Rothbury”. He indicates that when in the course of this
dispute it was brought to
his attention that some producers were using Rothbury
as part of their address it came “as a complete surprise”. This
Prior to the issues in this dispute being brought to my
attention, I had never heard the name Rothbury used to describe either a place
name or a geographical point of reference in respect of wine.
Robert Lusby in his declaration attests that he is the owner and manager of
Tintilla Estate, a wine producer located in
the Lower Hunter Valley. He claims
extensive knowledge of the production and marketing of wine (especially from the
Lower Hunter).
He states that:
To me, the name 'Rothbury' means
Rothbury Estate. In this regard, I have been a member since the early 1970s of
The Rothbury Estate
Society, a wine club operated by Rothbury Estate (which is
now known as the Rothbury Wine Society). The name also brings to mind
small township of North Rothbury, which is near Braxton. I am also now aware
that Rothbury is the name of an old parish.
In all the time that I have been visiting and living in the Lower Hunter
Valley, I had never heard anyone mention the parish of Rothbury
approximately 1998 when, in the context of this dispute, I was informed that
there has historically been a local parish named
Rothbury. Prior to this date, I
had never heard anyone use the name Rothbury to describe either a place name or
a geographical point
of reference in respect of wine or in respect of any
agricultural or other products. I had only ever heard the name Rothbury as a
reference to (most commonly) Rothbury Estate and (less commonly) the township of
North Rothbury.
I have never seen, or heard of, grapes or wine or other products being sold
or marketed as originating from Rothbury. Further, I have
never seen, or heard
of, wine labelled under the name Rothbury (with the exception of Rothbury
Estate's wines). The vast majority
of wine that I have seen in the Lower Hunter
Valley has been labelled "Hunter Valley", which is a well known and recognised
I have occasionally seen wines labelled "Pokolbin", but I have observed
this less frequently.
I have sometimes seen people use the name Rothbury as a part of their street
address. Such usages are, in my experience, infrequent.
When I purchased Tintilla Estate in 1993, it was advertised for sale as being
located in the Hunter Valley. The property was not promoted
or marketed or
represented to me by anyone as having any connection with the parish of (or any
area named) Rothbury.
Tsiros and Glen Thomson make declarations in similar vein. George Tsiros is the
owner and manager of Peacock Hill Vineyard,
Pokolbin in the Lower Hunter Valley.
Glen Thomson gives his evidence against a background in tourism promoting the
region and its
wines inter alia for the Cessnock Tourism Board.
both Messers Tsiros and Thomson the name ‘Rothbury’ is synonymous
with ‘Rothbury Estate’ or its wines.
Both attest that they have no
knowledge of grapes or wines being sold or marketed as originating from the
region or area of Rothbury.
Both attest that the only wine they have seen
labelled as “Rothbury” are the wines of Rothbury Estate wines (and
Tsiros case the temporary usage by Rothbury Ridge vineyard). Both suggest
that the area is known as either “Pokolbin”
or more frequently
“The Lower Hunter”.
other declarants for the Objector, Mr Thomson indicates, with the use of
exhibits, that the use of the parish name is rarely
used, being linked, in his
experience, to the sale of property:
This came to my attention when
I purchased the Grandvin vineyard as the property details listed the parish in
which the vineyard is
located as Rothbury. On the other hand, the Contract for
Sale of Land, the correspondence from my lawyers and the advertisement for
land in question all refer to that land as being located in Pokolbin. Copies of
those documents are attached hereto as Annexure
C. Prior to that time, I had
never heard of the parish of Rothbury, let alone any suggestion that the word
Rothbury is, or was used
as, the name of a wine region. In my significant
experience in the tourism and wine industries in the Lower Hunter Valley, when
use the word Rothbury it is almost always a shorthand version of the name
Rothbury Estate.
Parkinson of Pearl Beach attests that he is the Head of Wine Brand Strategy and
Trading for Cellarmaster Wines. His declaration
covers much of the same ground
as those before it and supports the position that ‘Rothbury’, in
relation to wine, signifies
The Rothbury Estate and its wines. He emphasises the
role of The Rothbury Estate in the development of the region and its
reputation.
The first and clearly the most prominent thing which is
called to mind by the name Rothbury is Rothbury Estate. Having visited the
Hunter Valley on countless occasions over the course of more than three decades,
I have witnessed first hand the establishment and
growth of Rothbury Estate and
its fame as a wine producer. Rothbury Estate is one of the most famous producers
of wine in the Hunter
Valley and it has played a significant role in increasing
the commercial profile of the Hunter Valley as a wine producing region.
Conversely,
Mr Parkinson emphasises that he is not aware of ‘Rothbury’ as a
geographic place or region being marketed
as a source of wines:
can't remember the name Rothbury being used to describe a wine region or a
geographical point of reference in respect of wine. When
I have seen or heard
the name Rothbury in connection with wine, it has been in connection with
Rothbury Estate.
In the entire time I have been involved in the wine industry, I have never
seen, or heard of, grapes or wine being sold or marketed
as originating from
I have also never seen or heard of any wine labelled Rothbury, with the
exception of The Rothbury Estate wines.
Anthony McGuigan of Nulkaba is the General Manager of Production and Wine Supply
for McGuigan Simeon Wines Limited. After outlining
his experience in the region
and industry he states:
As a winemaker it is important to know the
origin of the fruit used in the production of wine in order to ensure that the
which you market wine complies with the Label Integrity Program (LIP).
The LIP is a recording system which provides an audit trail
from grape purchase
to finished product, to substantiate label claims in respect of vintage, variety
and geographical indication.
I have never purchased, or heard of anyone purchasing, grapes from a grower
that are stated to originate from "Rothbury". I have,
however, regularly
purchased grapes from growers that are stated to originate from the "Hunter
Valley", the "Lower Hunter Valley",
"Lovedale/Allandale", "Mount View" and,
occasionally, "Pokolbin". In particular, I note that I have purchased grapes
from numerous
different growers located in the Lower Hunter Valley.
I have never seen or heard of any wines called or labelled Rothbury (with the
exception of The Rothbury Estate wines, the matter referred
to in paragraph 18
producer for one vintage
in the 1980s). Similarly, I have never seen or heard of any grapes or indeed any
other products being marketed
or sold under the name Rothbury.
In my experience, there is no connection between the name Rothbury and the
production or sale of wine other than in respect of Rothbury
Estate and its
Anthony Stuart, of Pokolbin, is the Sales and Marketing Manager at Bimbadgen
Estate, a vineyard and winery located in Pokolbin,
in the Lower Hunter Valley.
Mr David Lowe of Mudgee states that his is one of the owners and the manager of
the Lowe Family Wine
Company, a wine producer located in Mudgee. He avers that
he lived in the Lower Hunter Valley from 1979 to 1991 and has been making
marketing wine in the area since 1978. Both make declarations in similar terms
that ‘Rothbury’ signifies The Rothbury
Estate and its wines and that
they are not aware of ‘Rothbury’ being used by others to promote the
geographic origin
Ross McDonald, who alone of the declarants in the matter gives his address as
being at Rothbury, says that he is the owner of Macquariedale
Estate, a vineyard
located in the Pokolbin vine region in the Lower Hunter Valley. He goes on to
aver that he has:
Even though the address of Macquariedale Estate is
170 Sweetwater Road, Rothbury, we have never used the name Rothbury on our wine
as a wine region or to indicate the source of the wine. The wine produced by
Macquariedale Estate is labelled, sold and marketed
under the name Hunter
In the entire time I have been involved in the wine industry, I have never
heard of grapes or wine being sold or marketed as originating
from Rothbury.
In my view, insofar as the name Rothbury has a reputation in the Lower Hunter
Valley or in respect of wine, it is because of The Rothbury
Estate. In my view,
any association or connection between wine and the name Rothbury comes solely
from the reputation of the wines
of The Rothbury Estate.
Christopher Hancock of Manly outlines a stellar and varied career in the wine
industry. Mr Hancock goes on to aver that:
When I hear the name
'Rothbury', it first and foremost brings to mind Rothbury Estate. The name
Rothbury also brings to mind (albeit
in a much more secondary manner) part of
the name of the small village of North Rothbury, located near Branxton in the
Lower Hunter
In the context of this dispute, it has also come to my attention that there
is an old parish named Rothbury, which is near North Rothbury.
I had never heard
of this parish prior to this dispute. However, in the entire time that I have
been involved in the wine industry,
I have never heard anyone use the name
Rothbury to describe a wine region or geographical point of reference in respect
To the best of my knowledge, I have never heard of grapes or wine being sold
or marketed as originating from Rothbury.
I have never seen, or heard of, wine labelled under the name Rothbury other
than the wines of Rothbury Estate. The vast majority of
wines that I have seen
from the Lower Hunter Valley have been labelled "Hunter Valley'.
Statutory Background - Definitions
to this matter are the following provisions:
(a) Section
4 of the Act defines ‘geographical indication’
(b) Sections
5C and 5D of the Act define the meaning of
“description and
presentation”
(with which wine is sold) and the meaning of (where
“originates”
respectively.
relation to trade marks, the Act makes the following
provisions:
has the meaning given in the
Marks Act 1995
Register of Trade Marks
means the register kept under
section 207
Trade Marks Act 1995
registered owner,
in relation to a trade mark, means the person in
whose name the trade mark is registered under the
Trade Marks Act
registered trade mark
means a trade mark whose particulars are entered
in the Register of Trade Marks under the
Trade Marks Act 1995
in relation to an application for the registration of a trade
mark under the
Trade Marks Act 1995
, has the meaning given in that
relevant provisions of the
Trade Marks Act 1995
(‘the TMA’)
(a) Section 17,
which specifies “
(b) Section 7,
which defines the use of a sign as a trade mark.
(c) Section 228
which provides for the use of a trade mark for export
Statutory Background – the provisions of the Act
40RB of the Act specifies the grounds of objection. Loosely, the provisions
require me to consider the nature of the trade
mark rights claimed by the owner
(whether Registered, Pending or common law) and to decide whether the GI in
question is “likely
to cause confusion” with any of the terms in
which rights subsist. The structure of the section deals in turn with registered
rights, rights in pending applications and common law rights. The second and
third subsections therefore mirror the first with only
minor differences. I will
replicate the provisions dealing with registered rights below, and will comment
on the differences when
these arise.
respect of registered rights Section 40RB
objection to the determination of a geographical indication
Registered owner of a registered trade mark
(1) The registered
owner of a registered trade mark may object to the determination of a proposed
GI on one of the following grounds:
(a) that the trade mark consists of a word or expression that is identical
to the proposed GI;
(i) the trade mark consists of a word or expression; and
(ii) the proposed GI is likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression;
(i) the trade mark contains a word or expression; and
(ii) the proposed GI is likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression; and
(iii) the owner has trade mark rights in that word or
expression.
(2) The owner may object on the ground specified in
paragraph (1)(c) even if there are conditions or limitations entered on the
of Trade Marks suggesting that the owner does not have trade mark
rights to that word or expression.
will be helpful at this point to comment on some aspects of these
provisions.
standing was not an issue before me I note simply that for an Objector to have
standing it is enough for them to be the Registered
owner of a trademark, to
have an application pending for registration, or to claim that they have rights
in an unregistered mark.
structure of these provisions invites a conclusion that the onus lies with the
Objector to establish the ground relied on, on
the balance of probabilities:
Rejfek v McElroy
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 CLR 517
at 521. Moreover, submissions from
the Applicant asserted this conclusion, and the Objector did not contest the
The question of comparison of terms
Subsections
40RB (1) (3) & (4), set out the grounds on which a person may object to the
determination of a GI. Relating to registered,
pending and unregistered rights
respectively, each has the same basic structure, being broken into three parts.
In each case a “word
or expression”, forming part, or all of, a
trade mark is to be compared with the proposed GI, with a view to determining
the proposed GI is likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression.
each subsection, I must first decide whether the trade mark “consists
of” or “contains” a relevant “word
or expression”
(the relevant term) with which to compare the GI. The distinction here I think
is clear. “Consists of”
implies that the trade mark is made up
entirely of the word or expression, whereas “contains” allows for
the possibility
that the mark includes the relevant word or expression along
with a range of other material of greater or lesser significance.
a registered trade mark consists of a word or expression and that word or
expression is identical to the GI, then the ground under
(1)(a) is established.
No further comparison leading to a conclusion of the likelihood of confusion is
required. The implication
of this is clear. If the proposed GI is already
registered as a trade mark, then the registered owner is presumed to have rights
in it and there is a presumption of a risk of confusion. I note that this is
consistent with Australia’s obligations under
Section 2 of TRIPS.
40RB refers to a word or expression which is identical to the GI. In making a
comparison of trade marks, Sections 44 and 60
of the TMA refer to trade marks
that are “substantially identical”. If two trade marks are
“substantially identical”,
then one can say that they share the same
identity with only minor variations or additions. An interpretation of
“identical”
which incorporates the concept of “substantially
identical” would lead to a presumption in the provisions that a GI would
cause confusion with a registered mark with which it shared the same identity.
Because the intent of this provision is to protect
prior trade mark rights, it
may have been appropriate to use this test. The statute however, refers to
terms which are “identical”.
The Applicant submitted that in this
context, the comparison dictated by “identical” is narrower than
that dictated
by Sections 44 and 60 of the TMA and cited by analogy
Bayerischer Ausfuhrhrauereien Engetrgener Verein V Bavaria NV
[2006] ATMO 53
(30 June 2006) at [10]. I agree with the Applicant’s submission. The
plain meaning of Section 40RB requires not a shared
identity, but that the two
words or expressions be identical.
a trade mark that is the basis for an objection does not consist of a word or
expression that is identical to the GI, then two
further options are open to the
GI so resembles the trade mark, as a whole, that the GI is likely to cause
confusion with the trade mark;
the GI is likely to cause confusion with a word or expression (a relevant term)
that is contained within the trade mark and in
which the owner can establish
trade mark rights.
respect of this last point, the Applicant submits that it is necessary for the
GI to be compared with the trade mark in its entirety
“without shearing a
part of the mark from the whole”. In support of this, the Applicant cites
Crazy Ron’s Communications Pty Ltd and others v Mobileworld
Communications Pty Ltd
[2004] FCAFC 196
(2004) 61 IPR 212 (FFC).
I agree with the submission
only to the extent that we are considering those trade marks that
“consist” of the word or
expression that is being used for
comparison with the GI. Section
on its face clearly
anticipates the possibility that only part of the trade mark (a word or
expression contained in the trade mark)
would be used for
comparison.
Identifying trade mark rights in the relevant
provisions of Section 40RB of the Act envisage that an Objector may claim rights
relating to one or more registered, pending or
unregistered trade marks. In each
case, it is possible that the word or expression with which the GI is to be
compared is either
the trade mark itself or a subset of it. If the GI is to be
compared with the trade mark itself then it is assumed that the registered
has rights in that word or expression. This is because ownership of a
registration for a trade mark which is identical to the
GI term is sufficient to
establish the ground of objection. This is consistent with the structure of the
TMA, which in Section 20
indicates that registration conveys rights on the
registered owner to use and exclude others from using the sign. It also
(Section 84) that rights in a trade mark need to be confirmed through
use and that terms which are not used as trade marks are subject
cancellation.
follows, that in considering any of the situations set out in subsection (1) of
Section 40RB of the Act the starting point can
be that the owner has rights in
the trade mark as a whole. If the relevant term is so similar to the whole trade
mark that its identity
is the same then the owner will have rights in the
relevant term. This will often be the case where the additional material or
alterations
are purely descriptive and do not alter the idea of the trade mark.
If however, differences exist between the trade mark as a whole
and the relevant
term, then there will need to be evidence of use of the relevant term by the
registered owner. The use will need
to establish that there is an association
between the relevant term and the owner of the trade mark as the origin of the
goods or services. If this association is established, the owner of the
trade mark is then considered to have trade mark rights in
the relevant term and
the proposed GI would be likely to cause confusion.
the case of a pending trade mark the situation is similar. If the relevant term
for comparison is the trade mark itself, the owner
must first establish that
they have trade mark rights in the pending trade mark by satisfying the
Registrar that it meets the requirements
for registration. If however, the
relevant term for comparison is a subset of the trade mark, the owner must first
show that the
trade mark as a whole (as applied for) satisfies the requirements
for registration, and then that they have rights in the subset
being used for
comparison. In this case, the considerations set out in paragraph 76 above will
if the Objector is relying on an unregistered trade mark, they must establish
that trade mark rights have been acquired through
use in the relevant term for
comparison. This requires an assessment of the extent of use and what, if any,
connotation there is
associated with the trade mark. It is also necessary that
those rights were acquired through use in good faith.
40RB requires that a pending application has been made in good faith and that
any rights acquired through use in an unregistered
mark have been acquired in
good faith. The TMA has a rebuttable presumption that an application is made in
good faith. It can be
tested. One of the grounds of Opposition to registration
is that the Application was made in bad faith and “that there was
intention in good faith to use the mark” is a prescribed ground for both
Removal by the Registrar and Cancellation provisions.
That construct is not
directly transferable here because the Act requires a decision maker to be
satisfied that a pending application
was made in good faith and that rights in a
common law trade mark were acquired through good-faith-use. The construct of the
is however relevant in a consideration of this question. There is an
implicit expectation in the TMA that traders will seek to promote
their brands,
that they will seek registration for trade marks and seek to enforce these
rights. This is normal and fair use.
question in the context of the Act will be whether the trade mark owner has
behaved in a normal and fair way, one that could have
been expected in all the
circumstances, of a person acting in good faith. In particular, the question
will revolve around what use
has been made of the trade mark, what link this has
with the owner’s business and business strategy, and to what extent that
behaviour has been influenced by or is directed purely at the application for
determination of the GI. Considerations here will include:
nature of the business activity and strategy of the Objector. For example, if
the business is a long standing one and the term
has no direct link to the
business name or owner of the mark one might wonder why the term as been chosen
at this point in time.
Alternatively, if the trade mark has some direct link
with a long-standing business name or the Objector can provide evidence of
well developed business strategy then this would contribute to a finding of good
date of first use of the trade mark and its timing in relation to the
application for determination of the GI. If the trade mark
was first used, and
rights acquired, a long time before the application for the GI then this would
support a finding of good faith.
Conversely, if first use of the trade mark and
the application for registration were both made immediately before the
application
for determination of the
this would make good faith
harder to establish.
actions before the Registrar, or actions in the marketplace to enforce rights,
are those within the bounds of what is expected
of an owner of a trade mark
seeking to establish and prosecute their rights.
further issue in identifying the rights of an Objector revolves around whether
those rights must have been acquired through the
use of the relevant term
itself, or whether they can have been acquired through use of the relevant term
with minor additions or
alterations.
the words within the statutory definition of a trade mark as being, “a
sign used, or intended to be used, as a trade
mark...,” brings into
operation the other provisions of the TMA which concern the use of a trade mark.
These provisions include
Section 228 concerning use of the trade mark in export
trade. Also relevant to these reasons is Section 7 of the TMA which provides
“If the Registrar or a prescribed court, having regard
to the circumstances of a particular case, thinks fit, the Registrar
court may decide that a person has used a trade mark if it is established that
the person has used the trade mark with additions
or alterations that do not
substantially affect the identity of the trade mark.”
In other words, if the words ‘THE” and “ESTATE” do
not substantially affect the identity of the word ROTHBURY
within the trade mark
THE ROTHBURY ESTATE, it is open to me to find that the Objector has used the
trade mark ROTHBURY.
Ultimately,
the comparison in this kind of question goes to such cases as
PB Foods Ltd v
Malanda Dairy Foods Ltd
[1999] FCA 1602
Microcom Pty Ltd v Microcom
Systems Inc
[1998] ATMO 2
(1998) 41 IPR 163
Bayer Pharma Pty Limited v
Farbenfabriken Bayer Aktiengesellschaft
[1965] HCA 71
(1965) 120 CLR 285 (Bayer
Blount v Registrar of Trade Marks
[1998] FCA 440
(1998) 83 FCR 50 (Blount).
that this reasoning is also open to the Registrar and her delegates in relation
to the provisions of the Act. And it is
a course which is, in view of the
intention and objectives of the Act, the explanatory memorandum to the FTA
Implementation Act,
the provisions of the TMA, and Australia’s compliance
TRIPS Agreement
, within the scope of this decision.
includes the goods ‘wines,’ there are 521 records of registrations
or applications on the register of trade marks
which include the word
‘estate’. It is a word that is common to the trade. The word
‘estate’ is used to
signify the wine of one particular estate or
vineyard. As such, it lacks any capacity to distinguish the goods of one
from those of another. It is a word that contributes very little to
the identities of the Objector’s trade marks; the part
of the trade marks
by which they gain the main weight of their identities is the word
‘Rothbury.’
essence, when the question is posed as to whether the Objector has used the
trade mark ROTHBURY with alterations or additions which
do not affect its
identity, the element ESTATE ought to be disregarded, and the answer is
‘yes’, with particular force
in relation to the trade marks in which
the word ROTHBURY is prominent.
I am wrong in this conclusion, it alternatively follows that each of the
Objector’s registered, pending and unregistered
trade marks not identical
to the proposed GI certainly contain a word which is identical to the proposed
GI. The Objector has demonstrated,
for the reasons stated above, that the word
has developed a secondary significance as denoting its goods and not their
geographical
origin. Therefore, the Objector has trade mark rights in the term
proposed to be determined as a GI.
Likelihood of
leads me to a discussion of “the likelihood of confusion’. The issue
is by no means straightforward. The first consideration
“confusion” is to be understood and whether what I might call
“the normal trade mark tests” should
apply. In this context, it is
worth recalling that the purpose of these provisions, as articulated in the
title of the amending Act
implement the provisions of the Free Trade Agreement between Australia and the
United States of America (the FTA). That purpose
is to protect the rights of
trade mark owners in the face of a proposal to determine a GI that will cause
confusion with those trade
mark rights. In order to protect trade mark rights
against confusion it is the trade mark tests for confusion that are relevant.
Moreover, the Act provides for the Registrar of Trade Marks to determine whether
the confusion is likely. Presumably, this is because
Parliament considered that
the Registrar not only had the competence but also the expertise to make
findings on the matter in question.
The Registrar’s expertise encompasses
both issues of general registrability and questions of comparison between
competing rights.
I am therefore satisfied that the considerations that would
normally pertain when assessing potential confusion between two trade
should also be used when applying the provisions of Section 40RC of the
the GI is likely to cause confusion will therefore be subject to a number of
standard tests:
consideration of “all the surrounding circumstances as to what is proper,
normal and fair use” of the respective
terms (both GI and trade mark);
Re Application by the Pianotist Co Ltd
(1906) 1A IPR 379
at 380. More
recently, French J in
Registrar of Trade Marks v Woolworths
(‘Woolworths Metro’)
[1999] FCA 1020
(1999) 45 IPR 411
at 428 said that “All
circumstances are to be taken into account. These include the circumstances in
which the marks will be
used, the circumstances in which the goods or services
will be bought or sold and the character of the probable acquirers of the
by reference to the manner in which the Applicant for registration has used its
mark (in this case GI) in the past, but
by reference to the use to which it can
properly put the mark if it becomes registered”.
Berlie v Hestia
Industries Ltd
[1973] HCA 43
(1973) 129 CLR 353
use of the GI [as a GI] mean “that a number of persons are caused to
wonder whether it might not be the case that the two
products or closely related
products and services come from the same source. It is enough if the ordinary
person retains a reasonable
doubt.” (‘Woolworths Metro at
question is not limited to whether a particular use will give rise to deception
or confusion. It must be based upon what the Applicant
can do if registration is
obtained. See
Southern Cross Refrigerating Co. v. Toowoomba Foundry Pty.
[1953] HCA 73
; (1954) 91 CLR 592 at pages 594-5 per Kitto J.
Coca-Cola Co v All-Fect Distributors
(1998) 43 IPR 47
at [41] the Full
Court said that a consideration of the likelihood of confusion would include an
assessment “of what would
be the visual impression on customers or
potential customers which would be produced as a result of the notional normal
use” of the signs. Moreover, “customers are not to be
credited with any high perception or habitual caution. On the other
exceptional carelessness or stupidity may be disregarded.”
will observe now that the words involved in decisions such as this one may
function either as geographical place names; or, may
allude to a geographical
place; or be fancy words; or may have become dedicated to public use as being
descriptive or generic; or,
be geographical indications; or, indeed, trade
marks. Differences between these categories may blur or a word might, through
mutate or migrate from one class to another. Each class of words has
different legal consequences that might flow from its use or
misuse, and each
may have different classes of users who can make appropriate use of them. The
distinctions between these classes
of words are fundamental to the reasoning in
this decision.
Use as a GI
4 of the Act defines a
geographical indication
geographical indication
), in relation to
wine, means:
(a) a word or expression used in the description or presentation of the wine
to indicate the country, region or locality in which
the wine originated;
(b) a word or expression used in the description and presentation of the wine
to suggest that a particular quality, reputation or
characteristic of the wine
is attributable to the wine having originated in the country, region or locality
indicated by the word
or expression.’
Section 40ZA
provides for the establishment of a ‘Register of Protected Names’
(the “Register”). When determining
whether a GI should be entered
onto the Register the Committee must consider both the appropriateness of the
word or words proposed
for the name and the
While neither is the
subject for consideration in these proceedings, it is relevant to note that a
term is not determined as a GI
simply by virtue of being a geographic term that
is somehow related to the production of wine. It must meet criteria that include
a consideration of the extent to which, if any, there is a history of use or
reputation associated with the
. Moreover, the restrictions
against use of a term, once determined, and the penalties associated with
, go well beyond what
might appropriately apply to the simple name of a geographic place.
Applicant has submitted that a GI is a purely descriptive term (and that such
use was not likely to cause confusion). It points
to the definitions contained
in Section 5C of the Act that expressly allows that use of a word or expression
in an address may constitute
use of the GI. However, those provisions serve both
to define the term and to set out the scope of the context for possible misuse
(the description and presentation with which wine is sold, exported and
a GI is registered, the Act prohibits the false or misleading use of that term
in the description and presentation of wine, including
This use of a term, as
part of an address, will constitute use of the registered GI. However, it is
not at all clear that use of
a term, as an address, can constitute use of the GI
before the term is registered. Nor does use of a term in the description and
presentation of wine necessarily make that term a GI. Indeed, the criteria for
determining a GI includes consideration of “the
extent it is known to wine
retailers beyond the boundaries”. Predictably, use of a locality as part
of an address, in small
font on the back label of a bottle of wine will do
little by itself to build this reputation.
the other hand, typically a GI will be used to promote the reputation of an area
and protect the investment associated with building
that reputation. It is not
fanciful to suggest that this is why parties apply for the determination of a
particular area as a GI.
They hope that it will serve this purpose. They will
seek to use it in a manner to distinguish wines from that area from wines from
other areas. It matters not, whether the producers in a GI pursue this objective
vigorously and successfully or not. The GI
be used in this way. It
can be used for example, to promote the reputation of a particular area or
region for consistent production
of high quality grapes that leads to premium
wine production. It can be used to distinguish that wine from the wine of other
The wine can be labelled or marketed as for example a “Coonawarra
this suggests that use of a term “as a GI” in pursuit of its
purpose, (rather than simply use of the GI whether in
an address or otherwise)
is use that works to build a secondary meaning in the term, a connotation or
significance beyond the simple
indication of geographic location. Use as a GI
would include use of the term on labels, marketing, promotion, advertising and
activities of this ilk that lead to the creation of a reputation
associating the name designated with the production of wine.
once determined, Part VIB of the Act provides that any producers in the region
may use the term to build that reputation.
It simultaneously works to prevent
any other producers from using the term in the description and presentation of
wine, where the
grapes do not originate from the region denoted by the term.
This includes inter-alia use of a trade mark that contains the GI. Thus,
determination of a term as a GI serves at once to build the reputation,
signification or connotation associated with the term as
a GI, and to undermine
the connotation or signification associated with rights subsisting in
confusingly similar prior trade marks
light of this discussion, the question of confusion essentially boils down to
“What is the likelihood that a person would
be confused about the trade
source or the true place of origin of the goods upon seeing
“Rothbury” used “
”, (or used in any way in
which a GI could reasonably and fairly be used)?”.
effect of a condition or limitation
40RB (2) provides:
(2) The owner may object on the ground
specified in paragraph (1)(c) even if there are conditions or limitations
entered on the Register
of Trade Marks suggesting that the owner does not have
trade mark rights to that word or expression.
note that subsection 2 applies only to paragraph (1)(c) and not to the
previous paragraphs. As indicated earlier there is a presumption
1(a)&(b), that if the term the GI is being compared with is the trade mark,
then rights do not need to be established,
they are assumed. Thus the effect,
and therefore existence of, a condition or limitation is irrelevant to the
consideration of 1(a)&(b).
however the relevant term is a subset only of the trade mark then
paragraph (1)(c) applies and subsection 2 must be considered.
In this case
as Mr Catterns, for the Objector, observed, first and foremost the section
answers the initial concern about any endorsements
on a registration.
consequence of the inclusion of this provision in the Act is expressly that I am
to look at the effect of the registrations in
all of the circumstances. In this
context, the endorsement itself provides no barrier to a finding that the owner
has trade mark
rights in a term. That said, a condition or limitation reflects
the status of the sign at the time of consideration, and therefore
suggests that
it may be more difficult for an owner to establish that they have rights in the
sign. However, my task is to consider
what the evidence before me now shows.
The import of an entry in the EC Agreement
TVPL application cites the fact that the list of names annexed to the EC
Agreement includes ‘Rothbury’ as evidence
that the term is already
recognised as a GI. Indeed, the Applicant puts some weight on this argument. Mr
Catterns for the Objector
argues on the other hand, that that list was nothing
more than a “wish list” a “reservation statement”
so that if it were subsequently shown that the subregion were a GI it
could receive protection. The Objector supports this statement
with a long
excerpt from the list of possible subregions “many of which would never
have appeared on a wine label or been used
to promote a wine or its place of
origin.” The Objector also submitted that the removal of
‘Rothbury’ from the
draft list for the renegotiated treaty, which is
to replace the EC Agreement, underscores this point. While I agree with this
submission,
the entry of Rothbury onto the list suggests, at the very least,
that someone in the wine industry, or Government, entertained the
possibility
that Australia might want to protect the term Rothbury in the future. Its
removal from the list suggests that no more
weight than this should be placed
upon it. Whether it is entered onto the AWBC’s Register of Protected Names
will depend on
the outcome of the present application.
The value of technical evidence
general, Mr Burley submitted, for the Applicant, that many of the documents
relied upon by the Objector were technical in nature
and related to the
appropriateness of the application before the Committee. As such, he submitted
that they were not material to
the grounds before me. To the extent that this is
true, the principle also logically applies to similar material submitted by the
Applicant, including significant proportions of technical material in the TVPL
application and material submitted by Mr Tyrrell.
it is not my role to consider the relevance of geology or landforms for the
purposes of determining a boundary nor to consider
any of this material in
relation to the appropriateness of a particular name. However, much of that
material might be relevant to
the question of how the term
‘Rothbury’ is perceived and understood within the trade and by the
general public, and this
issue is central both to the question of the scope of
trade mark rights and to the possibility of confusion.
Hunter Valley, for example, has more or less accepted boundaries that follow
landforms, and has an internal geology and microclimate,
which enable it to be
seen and accepted as a discrete area from a viewpoint divorced from its
suitability as a GI. The Hunter Valley
is thus appreciated as an area in its
own right and when the words THE HUNTER VALLEY are used and understood, they are
accepted as
denoting the ‘gestalt’ of a specific area. THE HUNTER
VALLEY carries a meaning and ‘baggage’ beyond mere
words on a page
and has a force to which the local population, industry, agriculture, landforms,
climate, vegetation, geology, history,
etc have all contributed. This factor
has some potency in the assessment of any likelihood of confusion – the
specific force
or baggage carried by the word proposed for the GI may contribute
to, or militate against, the likelihood of confusion. For convenience,
refer to this phenomenon as the gestalt of the word ‘Rothbury’.
other ‘driver’ in this approach to my analysis is, of course,
whether the evidence reveals that vineyards and wineries
are associated with the
gestalt of the word ‘Rothbury’ to the extent that the word has been
in fact used as a GI –
this is a factor that may contribute to the
exercise of my discretion.
these factors will feed into my reasoning, it is appropriate at this time to
consider what the word ‘Rothbury’ imports
either as a word of some
potential geographical significance, as a gestalt, or as a trade mark.
turn now to what the evidence shows.
The significance or meaning of the term ‘Rothbury’
take on a geographical significance under the TMA in relation to goods if those
goods are made in that place and the place name
is also honestly needed by other
traders in the normal course of trade to use to describe the origin of their
goods or services:
Clark Equipment Co v Registrar of Trade Marks
[1964] HCA 55
111 CLR 511
(the trade mark MICHIGAN); another example is
University Press v Registrar of Trade Marks
[1990] FCA 175
mark OXFORD). If no goods are (or can be) made in an area with reference to the
name of that area, the word may be arbitrary
or fanciful when used as a trade
mark, as in the example given by Kitto J in
, above, of the word
NORTH POLE when used in relation to bananas. One could add the example of
SAHARA for ocean cruises. If the
words NORTH POLE and MICHIGAN are opposite
ends of a geographical continuum, many words with actual or potential
geographical significance
will fall at either end or somewhere in between:
Application by Cedarapids Inc
(CEDARAPIDS
Jonsered Motor
Aktiebolag, Re
[1993] ATMO 23
[1993] ATMO 23
1993); 27 IPR 267
(1973) RPC 453
). It has long been a
principle that, considered
prima facie
as a potentially registrable trade
mark, a place name is not geographical only because it is the name of a place on
Magnolia Metal Co. v. Atlas Metal Co
. (1897) 14 RPC 389
is, in the Applicant’s evidence, much mention of the word
‘Rothbury’ as the name of an area in the Hunter
Valley. For
example, Mr Tyrrell says that the word ‘Rothbury’ has been used
extensively as a GI for wine. He gives no
examples. Mr Tinkler says that the
general community area of Rothbury has always been well known and recognised as
a local community
in regard to
, Community School of
activities –
however, the lack of a school, church, School of Arts, or bushfire brigade at
Rothbury and the past presence of
these facilities at North Rothbury (which is a
hamlet or small village) suggest that Mr Tinkler has conflated the names of
areas. Mr Barnes refers to Rothbury as being accepted as a wine region in
the Lower Hunter, and has many historic records as a wine
area in books and
newspaper articles referring to it as such – but these observations are
unsupported by exhibit evidence.
Mr Max Drayton says the name Rothbury is now
and has historically been a well-defined geographical area within the Hunter
He says the name Rothbury is well known for its community, its mining
history, agricultural and current day tourism activities.
Mr Paul Drayton says
that Rothbury has always been referred to by the local community as the region
north of the Broke Road of the
Lower Hunter wine growing area. The Rothbury
Estate Winery was, he says, established in the 1970's and, as the name "estate"
was named after the region in which it was located. Mr Drayton
declares that the name Rothbury is commonly use as part of an address
example, the newly developed Vintage Resort which is heavily promoted as being
located on McDonalds Road, Rothbury. Finally,
Mr Tulloch refers to Rothbury as
being known and used as a place name for well in excess of 100 years in
connection with agriculture,
coal mining and, in more recent years,
of these statements provides any objective support, by way of exhibit evidence,
for the propositions that Rothbury is a distinct
area which has had an
uninterrupted history of viticulture, or has wineries presently within the area
that regard and describe themselves
as being within Rothbury. The vineyards in
the Parish of Rothbury, with one exception, give their address as being
Pokolbin. There
is some suggestion that viticulture might have taken place in
the general area historically but it is unclear to what extent, if
businesses regarded or described themselves as being within Rothbury. The
statements in support of the application for
determination, viewed against the
totality of the evidence, seem rather to suggest that the name has had some
usage amongst local
residents as referring to the land where the homestead, and
focal area, of the original 30,000-acre Rothbury property was historically
located. Mr Shipton, in his letter, says that the name Rothbury had a nice ring
to it so Len Evans decided this would be a suitable
name for the
Objector’s property.
this evidence, the word ‘Rothbury’ begins to look as if it is much
closer to the term NORTH POLE on the geographical
continuum than it is to the
geographical term MICHIGAN.
Drummond’s evidence establishes that there was a 30,000-acre Rothbury
property over-run with dingoes and kangaroos. The
passage in “
History of Greater Cessnock, Mines, Wines and People
” establishes that
there were vineyards close to the Rothbury area but not that there were
vineyards at Rothbury: mention of
the Hunter River and the Mount View Range in
the same sentence suggests that Rothbury was not being nominated as a
viticultural centre.
The other related exhibits to Ms Drummond’s
declaration are of the same general type.
evidence concerning the Parish of Rothbury exhibited to Ms Drummonds’s
declaration might show that the words ‘Parish
of Rothbury’ (which
are, of course, not the proposed GI) denote an area with a widely recognised
boundary as part of the gestalt
of the word Rothbury. As Mr Catterns observed,
however, parishes in Australia are now so obscure that their only real facility
on title deeds to identify real property when transferring land. The
declarants in support of the Objector who live in the area
largely state that
they were unaware of ‘the Parish of Rothbury’ until it arose in the
context of this dispute and I
consider that most Australians who live within an
administrative parish would be unaware of where its boundaries run. Even
historically,
when the term ‘Parish of Rothbury’ was apparently in
greater use, the evidence shows that a pedant wrote to a local newspaper
attempting to correct confusion between the parishes of Rothbury and Pokolbin.
The administrative term, ‘Parish of Rothbury’
does not appear to
have contributed to the word Rothbury’s gestalt or have much meaning or
Additionally,
Mr Tyrrell’s evidence shows that while part of the boundary of the
proposed GI, based on the Parish of Rothbury,
may be defined by landforms, much
of the boundary is defined by the boundaries of other Parishes. To this extent,
the parish boundary
being a little used and recognised artificial construct, the
proposed GI is itself artificial and refers to an area whose boundaries
generally recognised or appreciated, even by those who live there.
Objector’s evidence, which tends to be better supported, also suggests
that the word Rothbury has very little force as a
geographical word. With one
, it is not used within
the addresses of the forty-six wineries and vineyards that are situated within
the proposed GI.
evidence thus suggests to me that the word ‘Rothbury’ was and is
used to refer to a general area, community of people,
and its facilities, rather
than as a well defined and cohesive agricultural district and consequently used
to denote an area of production.
The word ‘Rothbury’ is
occasionally used as a short-form of the words ‘North Rothbury’
which is the name
of a hamlet or small village.
are no materials in the Applicant’s evidence that definitively show the
word ‘Rothbury’ as the widely accepted
name of a defined
agricultural district or extant agricultural community. The community
facilities such as the School of Arts, school,
churches, and bushfire brigade
have either burnt down, closed down, or moved. Additionally, the evidence put in
by the Objector shows
that the word ‘Rothbury’ has hardly ever been
used in any way that meets even the broadest construction of the definition
‘description and presentation’ in the Act. Nor is there any evidence
that it been used in any similar sense in relation
to produce or industry that
might contribute to its gestalt. Almost universally, businesses, and the people
who live within the
proposed GI, appear to refer to themselves as living within
apart from saying that Rothbury has “been used as a GI” the
Applicant has neither claimed nor provided any exhibit
evidence to show that
‘Rothbury’ has been used to promote the origin of wine as coming
from the Rothbury region. It seems
that almost all of the relevant wine is
described and promoted as coming from either ‘The Hunter Valley’ or
from ‘Pokolbin’.
The one winery using a sole address of
‘Rothbury’ promotes its wine as coming from the Lovedale district of
Hunter Valley. In fact, the maps tendered in evidence show that the
physical location of this winery is Allendale.
the word ‘Rothbury’ barely seems to be a geographical word or to
have any force as a gestalt. The only person who
uses the word in relation to
wines – or indeed, anything much at all, is the Objector who uses it as a
trade mark – the
Objector’s address, by contrast, on its wine labels
in evidence is given as Pokolbin (as is the address on the labels and brochures
of other wine producers in the area).
am left with the suspicion that a significant part of whatever force exists
today in the word ‘Rothbury’ as referring
to an area, has been
created by the public recognition of the word as part of the Objector’s
trade marks and that if the word
has a gestalt, it may be as a trade
The Trade Marks of the Objector
registered and pending trade marks of the Objector are listed
Each of these has a
common-law ‘ghost’ that might grow more corporeal and substantial
through the use of the trade mark.
Burley, for the Applicant, submitted that the acceptances of the
Objector’s registered trade marks were subject to the “insertion
an endorsement” and that “none of the trade marks was accepted by
the office without the presentation of evidence
of prior use in conformity with
s41(5) of the Act.” While I accept that this is the state of the register,
for reasons outlined
at paragraphs 97 - 100 above, it is clear that the
endorsement per se is not a barrier to the objection. Ultimately, the question
will be “What is the significance or connotation associated with the
Objector’s marks (or in a relevant word or expression)
and what does the
evidence show about the nature and scope of their rights in such
any event, the effect of the endorsements is ambiguous. While the endorsements
on the first two of the registered trade marks (727340
and 727340) might seem to
imply at least a geographical tinge in the word ROTHBURY, they also clearly
entertain the idea that wine
could be badged “The Rothbury Estate”
even though it did not come from the locale called Rothbury. This impression is
reinforced because there is no such endorsement on registration 910882 on which
the endorsement confines itself to concerns about
the GI ‘Hunter
application of the endorsement to the registrations is seemingly inconsistent
with the acceptance of the trade marks under the
terms of Section 41(5) of the
TMA. If the trade marks had developed (or were obviously capable of developing)
a secondary meaning
distinct from the geographical origins of the trade marks,
and were being accepted because of that, how could this secondary meaning
confusing if it denotes the goods of the Objector and not the geographical
origin? The latter registration with its reference
only to the Hunter Valley
underscores this point.
Burley also submitted that with regard to the acceptance of 727340(33) THE
ROTHBURY ESTATE, the Objector had submitted argument
to the examiner that it was
“not seeking to deprive other traders of the right to describe their own
goods as emanating from
an estate in Rothbury”. I do not however consider
this to be persuasive. In essence, the expression is one similar to many
made in submissions to trade mark examiners, any interpretation of which lies in
the eyes of the beholder.
consider that the point to be drawn from the terms of acceptance of the
Objector’s THE ROTHBURY ESTATE registrations is that
each relied on the
provision of evidence of the extensive use of the trade marks. The Objector had
established that the trade marks
were either distinctive or capable of becoming
distinctive of its wines.
system underlying the TMA is, in broad brush, a formalization of rights that
should exist at common-law. It was put this way
by Carr J in
PB Foods Ltd v
Malanda Dairy Foods Ltd
[1999] FCA 1602
, at paragraph 78:
scheme of the Act is not proprietorship by registration but rather registration
of proprietorship, although such registration
confers various benefits including
some protection from infringement proceedings.
prima facie
entitlement to acceptance for possible registration arises
if: the trade mark is capable of distinguishing the designated goods or
from the similar goods or services of other
and the application
does not attract the other provisions of Division 2 of the
(as well as some possible
administrative considerations that may arise in Division 3 of the TMA).
in the instance of a trade mark which is not
prima facie
distinguishing the designated goods or services from the goods or services of
other persons, the provisions of subsections
41(4), (5), and (6) of the TMA come
into play according to the scheme and tests outlined by Branson J in
. Acceptance for possible registration becomes dependant on the
Applicant satisfying the examiner that its common-law rights in the
are such (or have the capacity to become such) that the trade mark has come to
denote their goods.
grounds for rejection under section 41 are perceived to be under either
subsection 41(5) or (6) of the TMA is dependant on
the examiner’s
assessment of the relative
prima facie
‘weakness’ of the
trade mark and strength of the ground. A footnote to subsection 41(6) of the
TMA records that:
Note 1: Trade marks that are not inherently
adapted to distinguish goods or services are mostly trade marks that consist
a sign that is ordinarily used to indicate:
(a) the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value, geographical
origin, or some other characteristic, of goods or services;
(b) the time of production of goods or of the rendering of services.
the presence of the word ‘wholly’ in the footnote, it is the
practice of the Registrar and Courts to view minor
descriptive elements or
graphics within a trade mark as not contributing to its identity and hence
capacity to distinguish: In
Blount supra
, Branson J
Bayer Pharma
Kitto J was required to consider
"a mark consisting of the word BAYER printed in roman capital letters
horizontally and again vertically,
so that the printings intersect and the
letter "Y" is common to both, the whole being enclosed within a circle." His
Honour said
of this cross device that it:
"...merely provides a fancy method of presenting the name `Bayer', and it has
no greater aptitude than has the name itself for distinguishing
the proprietor's
goods from those of other people who happen to be known as `Bayer'. It seems to
me beyond doubt that the name is
the feature which makes the device what it is -
the feature which stands out as the operative thing in it, and to which
else is merely assistant - the feature which ... `would strike the
eye and fix in the recollection.'"
On appeal to the Full Court of the High Court, Taylor and Owen JJ expressly
agreed with the above approach of Kitto J to the Bayer
cross device. No member
of the Court criticised his Honour's approach.
By analogy, it seems to me that I must conclude that the particular manner in
which the Applicant's trade mark presents the word "Oregon"
does not give it
inherent adaptability to distinguish the designated goods, the word "Oregon"
alone lacking such inherent adaptability.
I do not think that the use of
upper-case letters, and the oval device surrounding the word "Oregon" are
sufficient to take the Applicant's
trade mark outside of the ambit of the
observation set out above of Kitto J in the
Bayer Pharma
These aspects of the trade mark, whether viewed singly or together, are
not, in my view, sufficiently distinctive to give the trade
mark a significance
other than its ordinary geographic significance
or its significance in
respect of a particular kind of timber. [Stress added]
the ground for rejection is under subsection 41(5) or (6) of the TMA, the test
which is applied to the evidence provided by
the Applicant is similar to the
initial test for ‘adaptation to distinguish’ enunciated by Kitto J
Clark supra
"[T]he question whether a mark is
adapted to distinguish [is to] be tested by reference to the likelihood that
other persons, trading
in goods of the relevant kind and being actuated only by
proper motives - in the exercise, that is to say, of the common right of
public to make honest use of words forming part of the common heritage, for the
sake of the signification which they ordinarily
possess - will think of the word
and want to use it in connexion with similar goods in any manner which would
infringe a registered
trade mark granted in respect of it."
the evidence of the owner’s use of the trade mark shows that the trade
mark has been used to the extent that it has developed
a secondary significance,
such that it is unlikely that another person could think of the word for the
sake of its ordinary signification,
being actuated only by proper motives, and
want to use it in connexion with similar goods, etc, then that trade mark is
functioning
as one which in fact distinguishes the goods or services of its
owner. The trade mark has, in effect, developed a secondary significance
denoting the goods or services of its owner; this secondary significance is
distinct from whatever its geographical origins might
the acceptance for possible registration of such an application, opposition to
registration by another person is possible.
Opposition may be founded on any of
the grounds set out in Division 2, excepting that the trade mark cannot be
represented graphically,
but includes a geographical ground under section 41,
and additional grounds under
sections 58
Trade Marks Act 1995
These sections include grounds that the Applicant is not the owner of the trade
mark and that the trade mark contains or consists
of a false geographical
indication.
of the Objector’s THE ROTHBURY ESTATE registrations has been subject to
the above tests as to its registrability. None
of these applications was
that the first two of the registered trade marks include the word ROTHBURY and
each was accepted under the provisions of
Section 41(5)
of the TMA, it is
possible that the words other than ROTHBURY appearing in the trade marks were
not viewed as contributing to the
identity of either, and the geographic
weakness of the word ROTHBURY merited objection. Alternatively, it is possible
that the contribution
of the words THE ... & ... ESTATE to the trade
marks’ inherent capacity to distinguish were such that it moved the ground
in relation to the word ROTHBURY from
subsection 41(6)
subsection 41(5).
in either case, an assessment was made in terms similar to that outlined above,
that the trade marks are developing, are
capable of developing, or have
developed, a secondary meaning and should be accepted for possible registration
and, importantly,
no other person has opposed those registrations.
alternative way of looking at the Objector’s registered, pending, and
unregistered trade marks is via the ‘reputation’
that they might
McCormick & Company Inc v McCormick
[2000] FCA 1335
said at paragraphs 81-82:
What is intended by the word "reputation"
The word is defined in
The Macquarie Dictionary
as follows:
... 1. the estimation in which a person or thing is held,
esp. by the community or the public generally; repute ... 2. favourable
good name ... 3. A favourable and publicly recognised name or standing for
merit, achievement, etc. ... 4. The estimation
or name of being, having done,
etc, something specified.
The Oxford English Dictionary
, the word is, I think, apt
to refer to "the recognition of the McCormick & Co marks by the public
generally".
Does the evidence establish that in Australia before 9 March 1992 the
McCormick & Co marks were recognised by the public generally
and, because of
that, the use by Mary McCormick of her marks would be likely to cause the public
confusion, as for example, by the
public's mistakenly attributing a business
connection between the two or attributing her product to the company?
evidence shows that usually, but not invariably, the Objector uses the word
ROTHBURY prominently on the labels on its bottles
within the trade mark THE
ROTHBURY ESTATE. The word ROTHBURY is in noticeably bigger typeface or font and
the word ‘THE’
is not always used. The instances of the word
‘Rothbury’ not being stressed in the trade marks in use appear to be
– from the 1970s and 80s. The words THE ... & ... ESTATE
are, in relation to ‘wines,’ exceptionally weak trade
mark material
that lacks inherent capacity to distinguish the goods such that they do not
detract significantly from any geographical
significance that the word
‘Rothbury’ might have.
Hamilton And Another (T/A Ewell's
Vineyards) v Hamilton
- (1996) 37 IPR at 645.
The word ‘Rothbury’ also appears frequently on its own in the
Objector’s advertising and promotional literature
in contexts where it is
not clear whether it is used as a trade mark or refers to the business.
Importantly, it never appears to
refer to any geographical significance in the
advertising.
Objector’s use of the trade mark is also shown by the evidence to be
extensive – it sells many millions of bottles
of wine under the trade mark
and expends commensurate sums on advertising and promoting its trade mark.
high proportion – about one third – of these sales are, or were,
overseas: these are sales to which the provisions of
Section 228
apply and should be looked to as contributing to the distinctiveness in fact, or
reputation, of the trade mark. There
is no evidence of other traders using
Rothbury in relation to the sale or promotion of wines for export.
Objector thus uses, or has used, a number of different registered trade marks in
which the word ROTHBURY is the common and uniting
theme. By way of contrast, I
note that while the words Lower Hunter Valley occur on the Register in class 33
some 53 times, and
POKOLBIN appears in the trade marks of four different
traders, the word ROTHBURY only occurs in the registered trade marks of the
only evidence of use in this way by another trader relates to the use of
“Rothbury Ridge”. The Applicant drew my
attention to the trade mark
application which was never registered and has now lapsed. The Objector’s
evidence shows that as
a result of action before the Federal Court this usage
has now ceased.
evidence shows that, in relation to wines, the Objector has used the word
ROTHBURY prominently within its trade marks to the extent
that there is a very
low likelihood that another person could, without improper motive, think of the
word for the significance it
ordinarily possesses and want to use it on their
wines. The evidence also shows that where another trader has used the word
within its trade mark, the Objector has taken steps to enforce its
rights against that other trader and that the other trader was
not within the
boundaries of the proposed GI.
Rothbury wine society is in fact the society of the Objector. The society has
50,000 members, 15,000 of which it describes as
“active” and a
significant proportion of its considerable sales are distributed in this way.
Moreover, the Objector tendered
evidence that shows that, at least in relation
to wine and the wine industry, the word Rothbury is sometimes used as shorthand
The Rothbury Estate and its wines.
the current and historical significance of the geographical word Rothbury, in
relation to wines, I find that it has come
to develop a secondary meaning as a
trade mark denoting the wines of the Objector, and only the wines of the
Objector. As it happens,
the evidence shows that geographical significance of
the word ‘Rothbury’ is not high.
Objector’s wines are made from grapes grown all around South Eastern
Australia without any apparent confusion happening.
This suggests that the
secondary meaning of the word ‘Rothbury’ as a trade mark has grown
to an extent that it can only
denote the wines of the Objector and not the place
that they were grown.
the alternative, the trade mark THE ROTHBURY ESTATE has developed a reputation
in respect of the Objector’s goods in which
the element ROTHBURY plays a
dominant role.
light of the above discussion, my assessment of the Objector’s pending
applications for registration is that they do satisfy
the requirements for
acceptance under the TMA. In particular, if the ground for rejection of the
application for ROTHBURY in classes
33 and 35, were to be framed in terms of
subsection 41(6)
of the TMA (which I do not think that the evidence in terms of
the geographical significance of the word supports), the application
ought to be
accepted for possible registration as being distinctive in fact of the
Objector’s wines and related services.
assessment of the Objector’s common-law rights in these unregistered trade
marks which consist of or include the word ROTHBURY
as a trade mark used in
relation to wines, is the same for the reasons stated above.
meaning of the term ‘confusion’ is often conflated with that of the
term ‘deception’ within the expression
‘deception and
confusion’ which occurs, for example, in
sections 43
is, however, a distinct concept. Confusion is an uncertainty or doubt in the
mind of the consumer. In the words of Richardson
J (as he then was) in
Pioneer Hi-Bred Corn Company v Hy-Line Chicks Pty Ltd
[1978] 2 NZLR 50
62 (CA) (Pioneer Corn):
'Deceived' implies the creation of an
incorrect belief or mental impression and causing 'confusion' may go no further
than perplexing
or mixing up the minds of the purchasing public. Where the
deception or confusion alleged is as to the source of the goods, deceived
equivalent to being misled in not thinking that the goods, bearing the name of
the Applicant's mark come from some other source
and confused to being caused to
wonder whether that might not be the case.
is another potential contributor that will, in the long term, lead to, or add
to, uncertainty or doubt in the minds of the purchasing
public which may be
within the ambit of the expression ‘confusion’. In Woolworths Metro
French J observed at paragraph
The trade mark law concept of
confusion in the sense of mere wonderment as to common origin or connection has
little part to play
in the consumer protection statutes. That, no doubt, is
because "confusion" used in that sense, does not of itself lead into error
affect choices at the point of sale. It is perhaps best described in trade mark
law as effecting a prophylactic support for commercial
distinctiveness.
Full Bench of the High Court used a similar expression in
Campomar Sociedad,
Limitada v Nike International Limited
[2000] HCA 12
at paragraphs 94 and 95
when referring to the operation of Section 28 of the
Trade Marks Act
Section 28(a) barred the registration of a mark the use
of which would have been likely to deceive or cause confusion. The issue was
be determined at the date of the application for registration and with respect
to all of the goods for which registration was
desired, not only those for which
there was proposed an immediate use. A state of confusion falling short of an
actual probability
of deception leading to a passing-off would not negative the
operation of s 28 and would not lift the bar to registration.
By this prophylactic operation of s 28, an Applicant might be denied
registration for certain goods even though the subsequent use
of the mark on
those goods would not mislead or deceive or be likely to have that result, and
would not found an action against the
Applicant for contravention of s 52 or
passing-off. Thus, there could be a field of activity in which, whilst the
Applicant was denied
registration of the mark and the rights against other
traders which this would have given, use of the mark by the Applicant could
be enjoined by those traders.
‘confusion’, used in this sense, offers a prophylactic support for
commercial distinctiveness, then factors which would,
in the long term, lead to
a loss of commercial distinctiveness are confusing.
marks such as those of the Objector have through extensive use developed a
secondary meaning as denoting the goods or services
of their owner. The
evidence shows that the goods sold under the Objector’s trade marks, if
they were ever tied to a physical
place by the geographical tinge in the trade
marks, have shed that bond: the Objector’s goods are now made from grapes
may be grown well away from the location of the winery without any
apparent deception or confusion occurring.
a GI is tied, by definition and inextricably, to a specific area.
trade marks which contain, or consist of, a word or expression state, in effect,
‘These are the goods of one person of a
particular quality, made anywhere
from grapes selected by the person.’ However, a GI proclaims that the
goods are of any quality
made in a particular place by any one of a number of
people who are qualified to use it by having vineyards within the proposed
Alternatively,
a further point of potential confusion relates to whether those seeking to
purchase the wines of the Objector might
be given “cause to wonder”
in terms of
Pioneer Corn
through or with the use of the GI once determined.
Applicant submits that they would not, because:
in the GI ‘Rothbury’ is likely to be taken to have trade mark
significance”;
Rothbury Estate’ has specific connotations as to the producer of the
familiar with ‘The Rothbury Estate’ are not likely to consider that
‘Rothbury’ when applied as a GI
was the same as the Estate;
of the word ‘Rothbury’ as a GI is use of it as a descriptive term,
and finding confusion in this context would be
to confer a monopoly for which
the TMA would require evidence of use of the trade mark as a
can agree with this analysis to the extent that the use of the GI is purely
descriptive use, as for example as part of an address,
in small font, at the
bottom of a back label.
as discussed above, I must consider the possibility of confusion arising from
any fair and reasonable use that might be
made of the GI once determined.
discussed above use of a term
to promote the qualities,
reputation or other characteristic of the wine and to market the causative link
between geographical origin
and those characteristics, is not purely descriptive
use. Used in this way,
the term is being used as a sign to
designate origin, to create secondary meaning and to connote some characteristic
of the wine.
That such use would be normal, reasonable and fair can be seen from
the fact that this is the purpose of the GI. That use in this
way could in
principle give cause to wonder (be confusing) can be seen from the successful
passing-off actions in relation to Champagne
in New Zealand and the
juxtaposition of both the trade marks which consist of or contain the word
ROTHBURY and the GI ROTHBURY in the marketplace therefore
could not do other
than mix up or perplex the minds of the purchasing public.
if confusion is a prophylactic for commercial distinctiveness, the use of the GI
ROTHBURY in the marketplace could not do other
than lead in the long term to a
loss of commercial distinctiveness of the Objector’s trade marks which
consist of, or include,
the term ROTHBURY.
to have the word ROTHBURY appearing prominently on bottles of wine both as a
trade mark and as a GI cannot do other than confuse:
the one states, in effect,
that the wine is from anywhere, made by one person and of a particular quality;
the other states that
the goods are from a specific area and of any quality but
made by one of a number of different people who have vineyards in the proposed
likelihood of confusion is not counterweighed, or ameliorated, to any extent by
a particular gestalt or force of meaning of the
word ‘Rothbury’
since, in relation to the goods, and in relation to whatever geographic weight
the word might have once
carried, it has come to denote the wines of the
Objector. Further, the weight of the word ‘Rothbury’ as denoting a
agricultural area, defined by landforms, soil and vegetation types,
is not such, or widely known and recognized as such, that it
could detract in
any way from the confusion which is likely to arise.
The resolution of this matter
Objector is the owner of the registered mark 727340 “THE ROTHBURY
ESTATE” and has claims pending and common law rights
“ROTHBURY” solus.
evidence shows that there is very little geographical significance in the term
‘Rothbury’ and even less in its use
in association with wine. It
shows that what reputation there now is in ‘Rothbury’ as it relates
to the production of
wine arises from the Objector’s use of its trade
marks. Those marks have been used extensively, both domestically and for export,
with prominence given to the word ‘Rothbury’.
common in the wine industry for labels to prominently display a GI. It is also
common to use labels which display a particular
range of wines. My finding in
paragraph 120 above is that there is very little geographical significance or
reputation associated
with ‘Rothbury’ for wines, other than for the
Objector. The evidence shows, both in declaration and exhibit that “The
Rothbury Estate” is commonly truncated to ‘Rothbury’ and that
this term has acquired the meaning of the Objector
considering the possibility of confusion I must consider all fair and normal use
I therefore find
for the reasons outlined in this paragraph and those set out in paragraphs
[151 - 166] that if determined, the GI
Rothbury would be likely to
cause confusion with both the word Rothbury and the expression “THE
ROTHBURY ESTATE”.
Accordingly,
the Objector is the owner of the registered trade mark 727340, which consists of
the expression “THE ROTHBURY ESTATE”
and contains the word
“ROTHBURY”. Determination of the GI is likely to cause confusion
with both the word and the expression.
The ground of objection is therefore
established pursuant to Subsection 40RB(1) of the Act.
similar reasons, the Objector has established its grounds in relation to the
registered mark 780828 “THE ROTHBURY ESTATE”
in fanciful style.
relation to the pending marks ‘Rothbury’, ‘The Rothbury Wine
Society’, and Rothbury
there are two matters still to be resolved.
the application was made in good
Objector has made extensive use of its trade mark The Rothbury Estate of which
Rothbury is the dominant element. This use predates
the application to determine
a GI, and indeed the amendments to the Act, by many decades. The Objector has
significant use of the
trade mark both domestically and in export trade. There
is no exhibit evidence and little claim that any other trader, with the one
exception, has used the term Rothbury in relation to the sale or promotion of
wine. Rothbury has little or no geographical significance
in relation to wine
other than by virtue of the promotion of the Objector’s trade mark.
The Applicant submits that the Objector’s decision not to respond to
the examiner, to allow these pending applications to lapse,
and to lodge a
divisional application, pending outcome of this present matter raises doubts
has acted in a manner entirely
consistent with the purpose and spirit of the TMA. Here, the Objector has
apparently been content
to keep its powder dry as far as filing evidence in
support of its applications for registration. It has been diligent in filing
divisional applications in order to keep these applications on foot before the
Registrar (although in terms of the Act it is not
obvious that this is strictly
necessary). The inference is, I think, that the Objector wishes to address the
examiner’s stated
grounds for rejection once this decision is issued. In
the circumstances present before me, I do not consider that this amounts
lack of good faith. There is no evidence of other dealings between the parties
from which a lack of good faith could be inferred.
the pending applications satisfy the requirements for acceptance under the
I simply notice that in light of my finding at paragraphs
[149-150] this requirement is satisfied in relation to the first two trade
marks. In relation to the third mark 1011558 ‘Rothbury’ it is
established in relation to wine and related services. Evidence
was not tendered
in relation to the other goods and services in this application. I do note
however, that the geographical significance
of the word Rothbury is very
reasons similar to those outlined above, the grounds under Subsection 40RB(4)
are also made out in relation to the Objector’s
unregistered marks
Rothbury and Rothbury
therefore conclude that the Objector has made out its grounds for
ground being made out, it remains only for me to consider the discretion given
to me under Subsection 40RC (3) of the Act. That
section provides relevantly
that I may recommend to the Committee that the GI be determined despite the
ground being made out.
this is a broad discretion it is constrained by:
(3)(b) which stipulates that I may do this if I am satisfied in all the
circumstances that it is reasonable to do so;
Note 1, which
draws my attention to a view that it may be reasonable to make such a
recommendation if the GI was in use before the
trade mark rights arose; and
Subsection (4)
which requires that I take account of Australia’s international
obligations.
Section 2 requires that Member States provide protection for trade marks
including in the face of later determined GIs. The
FTA imposes a similar
requirement, and enshrines the principle of first in time first in right. The
present provisions are designed
to give effect to these requirements. Thus,
Australia’s international treaty obligations, so far as they are relevant
present matter, tend to suggest against protection for the GI. The
question then seems to be “Are there any circumstances
present, in the
face of an international obligation to protect prior trade mark rights, and in
the face of an established property
right in Australia, in which it would be
reasonable to recommend that the GI be determined?”
first and most obvious such circumstance is reflected in Note 1 which draws my
attention to the principle of “first in time,
first in right”;
“Was the GI in use before the trade mark rights arose?” In
considering any use of the proposed
term I should take account of:
The extent of
such use, in volume and duration;
Its nature;
whether it was use as a purely descriptive sense or
use as a GI
If there has
been use, whether any actual instances of confusion have been
extablished.
as discussed above, there has been very little use of the word Rothbury in
relation to the sale and marketing of wine (other
than by the Objector). What
little there has been could hardly be said to be use of the term as a GI such
that it could be said
that “the GI was in use” before the trade mark
rights arose. The evidence shows that there is very little use of the
Rothbury as reference to a geographic locale. The vast majority of those
wineries within the proposed boundary even use another
locale for their address.
There was no evidence provided of producers referring to their wine as coming
from Rothbury. There is thus
no evidence that ‘Rothbury’ has or has
had an established reputation in relation to wine prior to the acquisition of
rights by the trade mark owner. There is no evidence that the word Rothbury is
or has ever been used “as a GI”.
circumstances to consider will include the relative inconvenience to the parties
by allowing the GI to be determined or not.
inconvenience to the Applicant will be greater to the extent that there has been
use of the term as a GI. It will be less where
there are other obvious or
reasonable alternatives for the Applicant to use. In this matter, no evidence
was presented of use of
the proposed term as a GI, or even more loosely in the
promotion or marketing of Rothbury as the origin of a particular wine. The
evidence also shows that wineries in the region predominantly use the GI
“Hunter Valley”, “Lower Hunter Valley”
or the term
“Pokolbin” to promote their wines. There are therefore other terms
available than the one applied for, and
these are already being used. What
little commercial use there has been of the term Rothbury (other than by the
Objector), in relation
to wine, relates to its use in an address. I note that
Section 122 of the TMA indicates that a trade mark is not infringed if a
uses the sign to indicate the geographical origin of the goods or services.
Thus, the protection of the term Rothbury as a
GI is not necessary to allow what
little use there has been to continue.
inconvenience for the Objector however, would seem to be considerable if the
term Rothbury were allowed to be determined as a
GI. Issues to be considered
here will include:
Dilution of the
reputation built over many years in both domestic and export markets;
The possible
diversion of trade as a result of confusion in the marketplace;
Confusion in the
marketplace may lead to the possibility that the Objector would need to re-brand
their product; and
The effect of
determination of a term as a GI is to prohibit false and misleading use of the
the evidence provided, all four factors are a consideration in this case. While
the extent of each of the first three factors is
subjective, the evidence does
show that they are material. For instance, I found earlier that any reputation
associated with the
word Rothbury in relation to wine seems to be the product of
the promotion of the Objector’s trade marks. In relation to the
factor, the Objector provided evidence that a significant proportion of its wine
was sourced from outside Rothbury, from other
parts of the Hunter Valley, from
Mudgee, and from elsewhere. Determination of the term as a GI would, through the
false and misleading
provisions of the
, prevent continued use of
the trade mark in relation to these wines.
relative inconvenience to the parties thus weighs heavily with the Objector.
would in these circumstances be unreasonable to recommend that the trade mark be
constrained by the determination of the GI.
light of this discussion I am not satisfied that it would be reasonable to
exercise the discretion given to me under S40RC(3) and
I refuse to do so.
evidence shows some minor use of the word ‘Rothbury’ in relation to
an ill-defined area in the Lower Hunter Valley.
Most people appear to place
this area within the Pokolbin wine growing region and Pokolbin is the place of
manufacture almost invariably
nominated on the wine labels in evidence and in
the addresses of people and businesses in the area. On the evidence before me,
word ‘Rothbury’ has no gestalt or force either in relation to
viticulture, other produce, or industry, in the area but
has some force as
denoting social and cultural activities or structures within an ill-defined
area. This is unconnected with any
potential that it might have as either a
geographical word in terms of the TMA or as a GI.
people and businesses within the area covered by the proposed GI appear to
identify their geographical location by use of the
‘Pokolbin’.
administrative Parish of Rothbury, and its boundaries, is unknown to many of its
residents and the term appears to be used only
in relation to identifying real
property in the transfer of land title.
word ‘Rothbury’ thus has very little force as a geographical
evidence also shows that the word ‘Rothbury’ has developed a
secondary meaning as denoting the wines of the Objector,
distinct from whatever
geographical origins it might have had.
a GI can be used in a trade-mark-like manner to promote the term as denoting the
source of origin of the wine, the use of
‘Rothbury’ as a GI would be
confusing with the registered trade mark “The Rothbury Estate”.
word ‘Rothbury’ has acquired a secondary meaning to denote the
Objector and it wines. The Objector therefore has trade
marks rights in the word
“Rothbury” (in relation to wine). The use of ‘Rothbury’
as a GI would be confusing
with the term ‘Rothbury’ which is
contained in the registered mark “The Rothbury Estate” and which
of the Objector’s pending mark Rothbury.
a GI is territorially based, and its use is open to all that live within it, but
the Objector’s trade marks are not,
the use of the word Rothbury as a GI
would, because of the reputation of the trade marks, be confusing.
likelihood of confusion is not ameliorated by any widespread appreciation of any
force in the word ‘Rothbury’ other
than as a trade mark and a place
name of minor significance.
Objector has made out its grounds of objection.
are no circumstances satisfying me that it would be reasonable to exercise my
discretion to recommend determination of the
An appeal to this decision
may be made to the Federal Court under Section 40RF of the Act.
I give notice that, the grounds being made out, and subject only to the
outcome of an appeal against this decision, the GI Committee
of the AWBC (the
Committee) may not determine the GI without the consent of the
Deputy Registrar of Trade
Statutory Background
Relevant to this matter, Section 4 of the Act defines ‘geographical
indication’ as:
geographical indication
, in relation to wine, means:
(a) a word or expression used in the description and
presentation
to indicate the country,
region or locality in which the wine
(b) a word or expression used in the description and presentation of the wine
to suggest that a particular quality, reputation or
characteristic of the wine
is attributable to the wine having originated in the country, region or locality
indicated by the word
or expression.
Sections 5C and 5D of the Act, footnoted
in the above, provide:
description and
presentation
In this Act, a reference to the description and presentation with which wine
is sold, exported or imported is a reference to all names
(including business
names) or other descriptions, references (including addresses), signs, designs
and trade marks used to distinguish
the wine and appearing:
(a) on the container (including on the device used to seal the container or
on a label affixed to the container), on any tag attached
to the container or,
if the container is a bottle, on the sheathing covering the neck of the bottle;
(b) on protective wrappings (such as papers and straw envelopes of all
kinds), cartons and cases used in the packaging of the wine
or the transport of
the wine; or
(c) in documents relating to the transport of the wine or in other commercial
documents (for example, invoices or delivery notes)
relating to the sale or
transport of the wine; or
(d) in advertisements relating to the wine.
For the purposes of this Act:
(a) a wine is taken to have originated in a foreign country or Australia only
if the wine is made from grapes grown within the territory
of that country or of
Australia, as the case may be; and
(b) a wine is taken to have originated in a particular region or locality of
a foreign country or of Australia only if the wine is
made from grapes grown in
that region or locality.
In relation to trade marks, the Act makes the following provisions:
has the meaning given in the
Trade Marks Act
Register of Trade Marks
means the register kept under
section 207
Trade Marks Act 1995
registered owner
, in relation to a trade mark, means the person in
whose name the trade mark is registered under the
Trade Marks Act
registered trade mark
means a trade mark whose particulars are entered
in the Register of Trade Marks under the
Trade Marks Act 1995
, in relation to an application for the registration of a trade
mark under the
Trade Marks Act 1995
, has the meaning given in that Act.
Grounds of Objection
The Act provides the following grounds of objection
to the determination of a GI:
40RB Grounds of objection to the determination of a geographical
Registered owner of a registered trade mark
(1) The registered owner of a registered trade mark may object to the
determination of a proposed GI on one of the following grounds:
(a) that the trade mark consists of a word or expression that is identical to
the proposed GI;
(i) the trade mark consists of a word or expression; and
(ii) the proposed GI is
likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression;
(i) the trade mark contains a word or expression; and
(ii) the proposed GI is likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression; and
(iii) the owner has trade mark rights in that word or expression.
(2) The owner may object on the ground specified in paragraph (1)(c)
even if there are conditions or limitations entered on the Register
Marks suggesting that the owner does not have trade mark rights to that word or
expression.
Trade mark pending
(3) If a person has an application pending for the registration of a trade
mark under the
Trade Marks Act 1995
, the person may object to the determination
of a proposed GI on one of the following grounds:
(i) the application was made in good faith; and
(ii) the trade mark consists of a word or expression that is identical to the
proposed GI; and
(iii) prima facie, the requirements under the
Trade Marks Act 1995
accepting an application for registration of a trade mark would be satisfied in
respect of the trade mark applied for;
(i) the application was made in good faith; and
(ii) the trade mark consists of a word or expression; and
(iii) the proposed GI is likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression; and
(iv) prima facie, the requirements under the
Trade Marks Act 1995
accepting an application for registration of a trade mark would be satisfied in
respect of the trade mark applied for;
(i) the application was made in good faith; and
(ii) the trade mark contains a word or expression; and
(iii) the proposed GI is likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression; and
(iv) prima facie, the requirements under the
Trade Marks Act 1995
accepting an application for registration of a trade mark would be satisfied in
respect of the trade mark applied for; and
(v) after registration, the applicant would have trade mark rights in the
word or expression.
Trade mark not registered
(4) If a person claims to have trade mark rights in a trade mark that is not
registered, the person may object to the determination
of a proposed GI on one
of the following grounds:
(i) the trade mark consists of a word or expression that is identical to the
proposed GI; and
(ii) the person has trade mark rights in that word or expression; and
(iii) the rights were acquired through use in good faith;
(i) the trade mark consists of or contains a word or expression; and
(ii) the proposed GI is likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression; and
(iii) the person has trade mark rights in that word or expression; and
(iv) the rights were acquired through use in good faith.
Provisions of the Trade Marks ACT 1995 (the TMA)
Turning to section 17 of the TMA; it defines
‘trade mark’ as being:
is a sign used, or intended to be used, to
distinguish goods or services dealt with or provided in the course of trade by a
from goods or services so dealt with or provided by any other person.
see section 6.
of a sign as a trade mark, within section 17, above, is
defined within section 7 of the TMA:
7 Use of trade mark
(1) If the Registrar or a prescribed court, having regard to the
circumstances of a particular case, thinks fit, the Registrar or
the court may
decide that a person has used a trade mark if it is established that the person
has used the trade mark with additions
or alterations that do not substantially
affect the identity of the trade mark.
prescribed court
see section 190.
(2) To avoid any doubt, it is stated that, if a trade mark consists of the
following, or any combination of the following, namely,
any letter, word, name
or numeral, any aural representation of the trade mark is, for the purposes of
this Act, a use of the trade
(3) An authorised use of a trade mark by a person (see section 8) is taken,
for the purposes of this Act, to be a use of the trade
mark by the owner of the
trade mark.
(4) In this Act:
use of a trade mark in relation to goods means use of the trade mark upon, or
in physical or other relation to, the goods (including
second hand goods).
(5) In this Act:
use of a trade mark in relation to services means use of the trade mark in
physical or other relation to the services.
Further, concerning the use of a trade mark, section 228 of the TMA
228 Use of trade mark for export trade
(a) a trade mark is applied in Australia:
(i) to, or in relation to goods that are to be exported from Australia
(export goods); or
(ii) in relation to services that are to be exported from Australia (export
services); or
(b) any other act is done in Australia to export goods or export services
which, if done in relation to goods or services to be dealt
with or provided in
the course of trade in Australia, would constitute a use of the trade mark in
the application of the trade mark or the other act is taken, for the purposes
of this Act, to constitute use of the trade mark in
relation to the export goods
or export services.
in relation to goods
applied in relation to services
see section 9.
(2) Subsection (1) applies to an act done before 1 January 1996 as it applies
to an act done on or after that day, but it does not
(a) a decision of a court made before that day; or
(b) the determination of an appeal from such a decision.
Grounds notified by the Objector.
The grounds notified by the objector are that:
Objector is the owner of five registered trade marks (details of which are set
out in Schedule A) (the Registered Trade Marks).
(a) The Registered
Trade Marks each consist of a word or expression that is identical to the
Proposed GI.
(b) The Registered Trade Marks:
(i) each consist of a word or expression; and
(ii) the Proposed GI is likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression.
(c) The Registered Trade Marks:
(i) each contain a word or expression; and
(ii) the Proposed GI is likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression; and
(iii) the Objector has trade mark rights in that word or expression.
Objector’s use and proprietorship of each of the Registered Trade Marks
(whether by itself or through its predecessors in
business) substantially
predates the application to register the Proposed GI as a GI.
Objector has applied for registration of three trade marks under the TM Act
(details of which are set out in Schedule B) (the
Pending Trade Marks).
(a) The Pending Trade Marks:
(i) were each applied for in good faith; and
(ii) each consist or a word or expression that it is identical to the
Proposed GI; and
(iii) prima facie, the requirements under the TM Act for accepting an
application for registration of each of the Pending Trade Marks
satisfied in respect of each of the Pending Trade Marks.
(b) The Pending Trade Marks:
(i) were each applied for in good faith; and
(ii) each consist of a word or expression; and
(iii) the Proposed GI is likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression; and
(iv) prima facie, the requirements under the TM Act for accepting an
application for registration of each of the Pending Trade Marks
satisfied in respect of each of the Pending Trade Marks.
(c) The Pending Trade Marks:
(i) were each applied for in good faith; and
(ii) each contain a word or expression; and
(iii) the Proposed Gf is likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression; and
(iv) prima facie, the requirements under the TM Act for accepting an
application for registration of each of the Pending Trade Marks
satisfied in respect of each of the Pending Trade Marks; and
(v) after registration, the Objector would have rights in that word or
expression.
Objector's use and proprietorship of the trade mark the subject of each of the
Pending Trade Marks (whether by itself or through
its predecessors in business)
substantially predates the application to register the Proposed GI as a Gl.
Objector is the owner of the unregistered, common law trade marks ROTHBURY and
ROTHBURY ESTATE (the Common Law Trade Marks).
(a) The Common Law
Trade Marks:
(i) consist of a word or expression that is identical to the Proposed GI;
(ii) the Objector has trade mark rights in that word or expression; and
(iii) those rights were acquired by the Objector through use in good faith of
the Common Law Trade Marks.
(b) The Common Law Trade Marks:
(i) consist of or contain a word or expression; and
(ii) the Proposed GI is likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression; and
(iii) the Objector has trade mark rights in that word or expression; and
(iv) those rights were acquired by the Objector through use in good faith of
the Common Law Trade Marks.
Objector's use and proprietorship of each of the Common Law Trade Marks (whether
by itself or through its predecessors in business)
substantially predates the
application to register the Proposed GI as a Gl.
Proposed GI does not constitute a proper subregion for the purposes of the AWBC
Act and the Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation
Regulations 1981 (Cth).
is not a proper name for any GI, including, without limitation, the Proposed
Proposed GI is not, and has never been used as, a GI.
is not the consensus of grape growers and winemakers in the Lower Hunter Valley
that the Proposed GI be registered as a subregion.
reason of the matters set out above, and otherwise in the circumstances of the
case, the Registrar should:
(a) determine that the grounds of
objection specified above have been made out; and
(b) notify the Applicant for the Proposed GI, the Objector and the
Geographical Indications Committee that the grounds of objection
specified above
have been made out.
US Free Trade Agreement
Implementation Bill 2004
, Explanatory
S40 RB (the grounds
of objection) is set out in full in Attachment
The notice of objection,
including the grounds claimed, is set out in full in Attachment
The marks, which form the
basis of these claims, are set out in paragraphs 26 and 27 below.
Section 205
Trade Marks Act 1995
205 Deputy Registrar of Trade Marks
(2) Subject to any direction by the Registrar, a Deputy Registrar has all
the powers and functions of the Registrar, except the powers
of delegation under
section 206.
(3) A power or function of the Registrar, when exercised by a Deputy
Registrar, is taken to have been exercised by the Registrar.
In fact, I was presented with
no evidence to support this statement or to show that the term
“Rothbury” had ever been
used as a GI
(see paragraph 108
Rothbury was originally on a draft list provided by the Australian Government to
the European Commission, and as such on
Annex II of the Agreement, the term has
never been entered on the AWBC’s Register of Protected Names. Its entry
such lists and on the Register of protected names depends on the
outcome of the present
application.
These applications
are filed claiming divisional application status from the Objector’s
registrations –
Trade Marks Act 1995
divisional application. Divisionals of these divisional applications have also
been filed by the Objector.
Here Mr Shipton apparently refers to the hamlet North Rothbury. There is no
village of Rothbury.
Paragraph 18 of the declaration refers to Rothbury Ridge
Section 40RB (1)
See also 40RC (3)(c)
and 40RC (4)(b).
It is important to
distinguish the consideration in paragraph 71 from that here. In paragraph 71, I
deal with the interpretation
of “identical” in a comparison of the
relevant terms under 40RB(1)(a) and related clauses. Here, it has been decided
that the terms are not identical under that provision. However in deciding
whether the owner has trade mark rights in a term it is
necessary to examine the
term in the context of its use as a trade mark and its identity under the
Of The International
(Nice) Classification of Goods and
US Free Trade
Agreement Implementation Act 2004
See also paragraph 1 of this
Section 40T and
Regulations 24 & 25 set out the relevant
Both are set out in
Division 2 of
Section 5C of the Act
defines the meaning of “description and
presentation”.
‘Cedarapids’ a geographical word, despite the elision thus not
prima facie
registrable.
‘Jonsered’ the name of a place where the goods are made but it is a
company town belonging to the Applicant thus
prima facie
registrable.
‘Tijuana’ the well-known name of a place but goods not made there
thus registrable in Part B of the Register under the
Trade Marks Act
‘Magnolia’ the name of a place but obscure with a more obvious other
meaning and thus
registrable.
Anglican Church closed in 1963 – Annexure A to Tyrrell
declaration.
Rothbury Public
school closed in 1963 – Annexure A to Tyrrell
declaration.
Rothbury School
of Arts burnt down in 1960 – Annexure A to Tyrrell
declaration.
The Rothbury
bushfire brigade has relocated to Cessnock Airport – Annexure A to Tyrrell
declaration.
See paragraph
In paragraph 31
Section 41 of the
Sections 39, 40, 42, 43,
and 44 of the TMA
worth noting that Section 122 of the TMA expressly provides that such use of a
term in a descriptive manner constitutes a defence
against infringement of a
trade mark.
Interprofessionnel du Vin de Champagne v Wineworths Group Limited
Taittinger and others v Allbev Ltd and others
[1994] All ER
One of the Rothbury marks is
in relation to wholesale and retail services for wine while the other is for a
broad range of goods
Subsection 40RB(4)
requires that rights acquired through use in unregistered marks must have been
acquired in good faith. For reasons
outlined above in relation to the pending
marks and because use predates the establishment of the GI system in Australia I
this requirement is also satisfied.
Sections 40D and
presentation
relation to wine, has a meaning affected by section
alcoholic beverage produced by the complete or partial fermentation of fresh
grapes or products derived solely from fresh
grapes, or both, and includes a
grape product declared by the regulations to be wine for the purposes of this
relation to wine, has the meaning given by section 5D.
RTF format (2.53 MB)
Signed PDF/A format