John Dagger v Oscar Wylee Pty Ltd [2025] FWCFB 237 (22 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 237
The attached document replaces the document previously issued with the above
code on 22 October 2025.
An incorrect header code was used.
Associate to Vice President Asbury
Dated 23 October 2025
[2025] FWCFB 237
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Appeal of decision
John Dagger
Wylee Pty Ltd
(C2025/3104)
VICE PRESIDENT ASBURY
DEPUTY PRESIDENT MASSON
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
MELBOURNE, 22 OCTOBER 2025
Appeal against decision
[2025] FWC 873
of Commissioner Simpson at Brisbane on 28 March 2025 in matter number
Introduction and outcome
Mr John Dagger has lodged an appeal under
Work Act 2009
(the Act), for which permission is required, against a
Commissioner Simpson issued on 28 March 2025 (Decision). The Decision
concerned an application made by Mr Dagger for the Commission
to deal with a
general protections dispute involving dismissal by his former employer Oscar
Wylee Pty Ltd (Oscar Wylee). Oscar Wylee
had raised a jurisdictional objection
to the application on the basis that it had been lodged outside of the 21-day
statutory time
frame. The date that the dismissal took effect was not in
dispute, it being 3 December 2024.
Having been dismissed in early December 2024, Mr Dagger filed
with the Commission a Form F2 – Application for an unfair dismissal
at 9.20PM on 23 December 2024, and subsequently a Form F8 – General
protections application involving dismissal (the
first general protections
application) at 9.28PM, on 23 December 2024.
On 29 January 2025, an email was sent from the Chambers of Deputy
President Easton confirming receipt of the two applications (email
29 January). In respect of Mr Dagger’s unfair dismissal application
(U2024/15609) which was lodged first, Chambers informed
the parties that it
appeared that Mr Dagger had not completed the minimum employment period of
six months. Chambers further acknowledged
receipt of Mr Dagger’s first
general protections application (C2024/9339) and observed that
the Act prohibits an applicant from making multiple applications in relation to
the same dismissal. The email conveyed the Deputy
President’s provisional
view that the first general protections application could not proceed by
operation of
of the Act. The email also outlined
passages from the Full Bench decision in
Northern Belting Services Pty
at [30]–[31]:
“[30] It follows from
of the Act that the applicant is
statutorily barred from making a general protections application unless the
unfair dismissal application
is withdrawn (or otherwise fails for jurisdiction
reasons). [...]
The appropriate course for the applicant in the present matter to
take if he seeks to pursue an application under
of the Act in relation to
his dismissal in lieu of the unfair dismissal application, is to withdraw the
application and to file a
application. In such circumstances, the
appropriate procedural and other requirements under the Act for the making of
application will need to be met and an extension of time sought in
accordance with
of the Act.”
Thereafter, Mr Dagger was informed:
“If Mr Dagger wants to pursue a general protections claim
instead of an unfair dismissal claim he should consider following
referred to by the Full Bench above, discontinue both applications and file a
general protections claim.
Alternatively, Mr Dagger might choose to continue with the first unfair
dismissal application filed (matter
U2024/15609
) and discontinue the
general protections claim
Mr Dagger has the opportunity to make any submissions about the above matters
before the Deputy President makes his decision about
dismissing the second
application.
Could Mr Dagger please provide any response to the above matters by no later
4:00pm on 5 February 2025
? If Mr Dagger wants to discontinue one or
both applications he can do so by sending a reply email indicating which
matter(s) he would
discontinue.
Mr Dagger wrote to Deputy President Easton’s Chambers later
that day to confirm that his intention was to discontinue both applications
to file an application under
of the Act, which he did. The
application was filed six days later, on 5 February 2025
(second general protections application). The second general protections
application was therefore lodged 42 days outside of the statutory period
provided by
s. 366(1)(a)
of the Act.
The Commissioner refused the extension application on the basis that
he was not satisfied that there were exceptional circumstances
justifying an
extension of time. Mr Dagger appeals the decision on several grounds which are
later traversed, including that the
Commissioner made an error of law by failing
to determine the jurisdictional validity of the unfair dismissal application
relying on it to bar his first general protections application.
The appeal was listed for hearing before us on 20 June 2025 in
relation to permission to appeal and the merits of the appeal. Mr Dagger
was self-represented, and Oscar Wylee was represented by Mr T Moffat.
We granted permission for Oscar Wylee to be legally represented
satisfied that the appeal on merits and permission raised complex issues around
the correctness of the application of
legal principles. We were also satisfied
that legal representation would enable the appeal to be dealt with more
efficiently having
regard to its complexity.
For the following reasons we have found that Mr Dagger’s
appeal does not raise any issue which attracts the public interest.
application before the Commissioner was decided on its particular facts and
raised no issue of principle or general importance.
Accordingly, we have decided
to refuse permission to appeal. Our detailed reasons follow.
The decision at first instance
Section 366(2)
of the Act sets out the circumstances in which the
Commission may grant an extension of time as follows:
“(2) The FWC may allow a further period if the FWC is
satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances, taking into account:
(a) the reason for the delay; and
(b) any action taken by the person to dispute the dismissal; and
(c) prejudice to the employer (including prejudice caused by the delay); and
(d) the merits of the application; and
(e) fairness as between the person and other persons in a like
Central to Mr Dagger’s argument before the Commissioner was
his assertion that his withdrawal of applications U2024/15609 and
C2024/9339 was
initially based on the assumption that application U2024/15609 was properly made
under the Act. At paragraph [23]
of the Decision, the Commissioner noted that on
the day of hearing, Mr Dagger introduced a new argument that application
U2024/15609
was not a valid application under the Act and therefore should not
have been treated as the ‘first’ application (for
the purpose of
of the Act). The Commissioner observed that Mr Dagger’s
new argument extended to an assertion that the Deputy President had
‘erred’ in ‘determining’ that the general protections
application C2024/9339 could not proceed on 29 January
2025. It was
Mr Dagger’s view that C2024/9339 should have been allowed to continue
as it was properly made under the Act. This
contrasted to U2024/15609, which,
according to Mr Dagger, was not properly made because the application fee
was unpaid and it was
not served by the Commission on Oscar Wylee.
Regarding Mr Dagger’s new argument that Deputy President
Easton had ‘erred’ in ‘determining’ that general
protection application C2024/9339 could not proceed, and that C2024/9339 should
have been allowed to continue because U2024/15609
was not properly made, the
Commissioner traversed the parties’ arguments and the authorities relied
upon, at paragraphs [25]
to [42] of the Decision.
At paragraph [43] of the Decision, the Commissioner rejected Mr
Dagger’s submission that the application in U2024/15609 was
that term was understood by reference to the decision of
application C2024/9339 could have proceeded and did not need to be withdrawn.
The Commissioner expressed the view that it
had been open to Mr Dagger to make
an application that matter U2024/15609 be dismissed on the basis the application
fee had not been
paid, but he did not do so.
At paragraph [44] of the Decision, the Commissioner clarified that
the Deputy President had merely invited Mr Dagger to consider his
course of action having regard to
, and as was pointed out in the
email of 29 January, there was information on the Commission website and on the
application forms
themselves in relation to multiple applications.
At paragraph [45] of the Decision, the Commissioner explained that
he was not satisfied that Mr Dagger had provided an adequate explanation
delay between 13 January 2025 and 29 January 2025, noting that Mr Dagger
had been put on notice by Oscar Wylee on 13 January
2025 that it was raising a
In relation to the period of delay between 29 January 2025 and 5
February 2025, the Commissioner was not satisfied Mr Dagger had provided
satisfactory explanation for the reason for this delay. The Commissioner
observed that Deputy President Easton had put Mr Dagger
on clear notice about
his difficulty on 29 January 2025, and whilst he withdrew U2024/15609 and
C2024/9339 that same day, he did
not file his second general protections
application for another six days. The Commissioner concluded that the reason for
did not favour extending time.
As to the other considerations in
, the Commissioner
concluded that the merits of the second general protections application,
fairness as between Mr Dagger and other
persons in a like position, and
prejudice to Oscar Wylee, were all neutral factors. In respect of whether
Mr Dagger took any action
to dispute his dismissal, the Commissioner
acknowledged that Mr Dagger had filed his unfair dismissal application and
his first general
protections application within time and found that this
favoured extending time.
Having weighed each of the matters he was required to consider in
of the Act, the Commissioner determined that while Mr Dagger did
make multiple applications within time, he withdrew them and then
delayed making
his second general protections application for further period of 6 days, despite
having been made aware of this issue
as early as 13 January 2025. The
Commissioner formed the view that the circumstances overall were not exceptional
and did not justify
an extension of time of 42 days. On that basis, the second
general protections application was dismissed.
Grounds of appeal and submissions
The Appellant
Mr Dagger advanced several grounds of appeal contending that
the Commissioner made various errors of law and fact. The grounds of
set out in the Notice of Appeal and his submissions in relation to those grounds
of appeal, can be summarised as follows.
, Mr Dagger asserts that the Commission made an
error of law by failing to determine the jurisdictional validity of the unfair
application before relying on it to bar his first general protections
application. In this respect, Mr Dagger considers that his
unfair dismissal
application (U2024/15609) was clearly defective and jurisdictionally invalid
because he had not met the minimum
employment period, there was no evidence that
the application fee had been paid, and the application was never served on Oscar
Mr Dagger considers that the Commission consequently misapplied
of the Act.
, Mr Dagger further submits that the
Commission fell into jurisdictional error when it failed to make a preliminary
finding about
whether it had jurisdiction to deal with the unfair dismissal
application (by reference to
of the Act). Mr Dagger holds the view
that had the Commission done so, it would have concluded that the unfair
dismissal application
was invalid and could not bar a subsequent general
protections application.
, it is contended that the Commission failed to
consider that, as a self-represented litigant, Mr Dagger was entitled to rely on
guidance from a tribunal officer, namely the Deputy President, and that the
withdrawal of his first general protections application
was directly caused by
the Commission’s communication. Mr Dagger submitted that he acted promptly
and in good faith on the
Commission’s advice and the Commission dismissed
his second general protections application for being out of time, without
acknowledging the role its own guidance played in causing the delay. Mr Dagger
contends that the provisional view of the Deputy President
was misleading and
resulted in prejudice.
, Mr Dagger asserts that the Commission failed to
properly assess the circumstances that led to the late filing of the second
protections application, noting that the delay of six days was minimal
and, again, was caused by reliance on the Commission’s
correspondence.
[23] Ground 4
outlines that the Commission failed to consider that
Mr Dagger was the purported victim of a common assault in the workplace and
rather than investigating the matter appropriately, Oscar Wylee failed in
its duty of care to protect him and then proceeded to take
adverse action.
According to Mr Dagger this was a critical matter in his case.
, Mr Dagger asserts that he was prevented
from obtaining evidence that could have supported his account of the
abovementioned workplace
incident when his application for an order to produce
documents relevant to the workplace assault and associated investigation was
denied. Mr Dagger submits that as a result of this he was unable to test
the adequacy of Oscar Wylee’s investigation or properly
defend himself
against subsequent adverse action.
[25] Ground 6
focuses on a denial of procedural fairness and a failure to
consider relevant evidence arising from an omission by the Commission
Wylee to conduct a meaningful enquiry into whether:
Wylee’s investigation met the standards of procedural fairness;
(b) Mr Dagger
was retaliated against for exercising his workplace right to make a formal
(c) the assault
incident should have informed the assessment of whether his dismissal was
In relation to Mr Dagger’s assertion that ‘the denial of
access to relevant documentation impacted my ability to present
we consider that Mr Dagger is referring to the Commissioner’s refusal to
grant orders under
s. 590(2)(c)
of the Act for the production of certain
documents in the first proceedings.
Furthermore, it is apparent from Mr Dagger’s materials that
some citations and quotes relied upon by Mr Dagger were either non-existent
or appeared to have been an amalgam of different sources. For example,
Mr Dagger noted as follows:
“The Full Bench has repeatedly held that payment of the
prescribed fee is a jurisdictional precondition to validity:
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCA 1059
Whilst there is the judgment of the Federal Court of Australia in
Benissa v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCA 76
), that judgment concerns circumstances where Mr Benissa
failed to pay the fee for lodging his application with Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (Tribunal). As a consequence, the Tribunal determined it did not have
delegate who had
refused Mr Benissa’s application for a specific visa. Mr Benissa
sought judicial review of the Tribunal’s
decision and the Federal Circuit
Court determined that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction, which was upheld by
Edleman J in
Paragraph [31] of
states as follows:
“The decision of Bennett J was relied upon by Flick J
Cheng v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2011] FCA 1290
(2011) 198 FCR 559
. In that case the applicant
had failed to file an application for review within the required time and there
was no power vested in
the Tribunal to extend the time within which an
application for review could be made. His Honour held that the “utility of
extending any opportunity to be heard” was “elusive” and may
well have been (using the phrase of Bennett J) “a
opportunity”. There would have been no practical injustice arising from a
denial of a hearing concerning jurisdiction
(567 [29]).”
Mr Dagger sought to rely upon a proposition in
is particular to the operation of legislation other than the Act, and the case
he referred to is unable to be identified by
reference to the citation that Mr
Dagger provided. Furthermore, whilst
speaks to circumstances
where an application is to be accompanied by the prescribed fee and the
implications arising when it is not,
as we will detail shortly, the validity of
the unfair dismissal application was not a matter that necessitated
determination.
Similarly, at paragraphs 15 and 22 of the Applicant’s
submissions, he refers to the Commission’s decision in
Transport for NSW
[2021] FWC 6181.
However, the citation ‘
’ is the citation for the decision in
Monteiro v Hope Community
Services Ltd
[2021] FWC 6181
, which is not on point.
Mr Dagger goes on to submit that in ‘
Ioannou v Northern
Belting Services Pty Ltd
[2023] FWCFB 1001
indicate that it is again a citation that again does not exist) the Full Bench
stated at paragraph [30] that ‘[O]nly
an application that has been
dismissed or dealt with can trigger
”. We observe that in
(for which the correct citation is,
[2014] FWCFB 660)
, is not authority for
the proposition referred to by Mr Dagger.
There are other anomalies within the Applicant’s submissions
with respect to misconceived propositions derived from decisions
with incorrect
citations or otherwise fictitious case names or citations, which we can only
assume are the result of ‘technological
hallucinations’. However,
for the purpose of our consideration we have predominantly placed reliance on Mr
Dagger’s appeal
grounds as articulated by him in the Notice of Appeal.
Whilst we consider that several of the grounds are misconceived, they are
otherwise afflicted by ‘technological hallucination’.
Oscar Wylee
It is to be appreciated that in its attempt to respond to the
Applicant’s grounds of appeal and submissions, Oscar Wylee sought
synthesise the grounds of appeal to four. However, for ease of reading, we have
aligned Oscar Wylee’s submissions with Mr
Dagger’s grounds of appeal
as ordered and expressed in this decision.
Regarding ground 1, Oscar Wylee submits that Mr Dagger appears to
take issue with the email of 29 January. However, if this were to
be in error
(which is not conceded) it considers it would constitute an error made prior to
the Decision. In that respect, Oscar
Wylee presses that the action of the Deputy
President was not an issue that can be appealed. The question, says Oscar Wylee,
there was an error made by the Commissioner in the Decision, and
whether the Deputy President fell into error in respect of the email
January, is not an appealable issue.
Regarding that same email, Oscar Wylee observes that Mr Dagger was
invited to consider his position and what course of action he should
including making submissions, which he did not do. Oscar Wylee submits that Mr
Dagger elected to withdraw the unfair dismissal
application and the first
general protections application and did so in circumstances where he had been
provided with the reference
. That reference detailed that an
extension of time would be necessary if he wished to file the second general
protections application.
Oscar Wylee noted that it is not the Commission’s
role to give legal advice to parties and, having received several notices
the Commission and from Oscar Wylee identifying the problems his case faced, Mr
Dagger could have sought legal advice and did
As to the operation of
of the Act and its subsequent
sections, Oscar Wylee submits that the first general protections application
could have only continued
if the unfair dismissal application had been withdrawn
or failed for want of jurisdiction or failed because the Commission was not
satisfied that the dismissal was a case of genuine redundancy. Oscar Wylee notes
that none of those actions occurred. According to
Oscar Wylee, once the unfair
dismissal application and the first general protections application were
withdrawn, those proceedings
were finished and could not be revived.
In response to ground 6, Oscar Wylee expressed that the matters
referred to by Mr Dagger could only go to the merits of Mr Dagger’s
case. Oscar Wylee submits that it was not the role of the Commissioner to make a
final determination about all matters of complaint
relating to Mr Dagger’s
employment.
Appeals against decisions under
and permission to
An appeal under
of the Act is an appeal by way of
rehearing and the Commission’s powers on appeal are only exercisable if
there is error on
the part of the primary decision
There is no
right to appeal, and an appeal may only be made with the permission of the
Commission. By virtue of
, without limiting when the Commission may
grant permission, the Commission must grant permission if satisfied that it is
in the public
interest to do so.
It will rarely be appropriate to grant permission to appeal unless
an arguable case of appealable error is demonstrated. This is so
appeal cannot succeed in the absence of appealable
However, the
fact that the Member at first instance made an error is not necessarily a
sufficient basis for the grant of permission
Some of the
grounds justifying the grant of permission to appeal include that the decision
is attended with sufficient doubt to warrant
its reconsideration; and that
substantial injustice may result if leave is refused.
The task of assessing whether the public interest test is met is a
discretionary one involving a broad value
Bench of the Commission, in
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Makin
identified some of the considerations that may attract the public interest:
“... the public interest might be attracted where a matter
raises issues of importance and general application, or where there
diversity of decisions at first instance so that guidance from an appellate
court is required, or where the decision at first
instance manifests an
injustice, or the result is counter intuitive, or that the legal principles
applied appear disharmonious when
compared with other recent decisions dealing
with similar
In relation to extensions of time to lodge applications under
of the Act, the test of ‘exceptional circumstances’
establishes a ‘high hurdle’ for an applicant. However,
a decision as
to whether to extend time under
involves the exercise of a broad
discretion.
therefore be necessary in an application for permission to appeal against a
decision made under
, to demonstrate that there is an arguable
case that there was appealable error in the exercise of the discretion. This
will require
the identification of error of the type described in
House v The
is, that the decision-maker has acted on a wrong principle, has mistaken the
facts, has taken into account an irrelevant
consideration or failed to take into
account a relevant consideration, or has made a decision which is unreasonable
or manifestly
Consideration
The approach to dealing with applications for an extension of time
The power to extend time pursuant to
can only be
exercised if the Commission is satisfied that there are ‘exceptional
circumstances’. The Commission may be
satisfied that circumstances are
exceptional if they are out of the ordinary course, unusual, special or
deciding whether there are exceptional circumstances the Commission must take
into account each of the matters specified in
s. 366(2)(a)
–(e), insofar as
those matters arise in a particular
matter into account means that the matter is a ‘relevant
consideration’ which the decision maker is bound to
matter into account requires that it is evaluated and given due weight having
regard to all other relevant factors. A matter
is not taken into account by
being noticed and erroneously discarded as
irrelevant.
taking into account the matters in
s. 366(2)(a)
–(e) it is not necessary to
find that the circumstances pertaining to any of the identified criteria are
exceptional, rather
the test posited by
is whether taking into
account all of the relevant specified criteria, there are ‘exceptional
circumstances’.
Appeal grounds 1, 2 and 3
Plainly, the Commissioner’s obligation, pursuant to
, was limited to considering whether he was satisfied there were
exceptional circumstances warranting the provision of an extension
of time for
Mr Dagger to make his unfair dismissal application, and if there were,
whether it was fair and equitable to grant an
Turning to appeal ground 1, Mr Dagger essentially asserts that the
made an error of law by: (a) failing to make a preliminary
finding about whether it had jurisdiction to deal with the unfair dismissal
application; and (b) failing to determine the jurisdictional validity of the
unfair dismissal application before relying upon it
to bar his first general
protections application.
Our first observation is that ground 1 does not appear to take issue
with the decision of the Commissioner but rather calls into question
approach adopted by Deputy President Easton when addressing
Mr Dagger’s two dismissal related applications in light of
of the Act. In our view appeal ground 2 is interrelated to the first
appeal ground. Briefly stated, appeal ground 2 traverses Mr
contention that he was entitled to rely upon the Deputy President’s
guidance and that the withdrawal of his
first general protections application
was directly caused by the Deputy President’s communication.
It is first necessary to address the email of 29 January. The email
set out in plain terms the apparent issue that Mr Dagger faced
unfair dismissal application and the minimum employment period. In addition, it
addressed that
of the Act prohibits an applicant from making
multiple applications in relation to the same dismissal – the observation
been made that Mr Dagger had lodged an unfair dismissal application and
the first general protections application.
The email expressed a
provisional
view. The provisional view
of the Deputy President was simply that the first general protections
application could not proceed by
operation of
of the Act. In support
of that proposition, the Deputy President outlined for the parties the relevant
passages from
that addressed the issue. That the Deputy
President’s view was provisional is reinforced by his use of the word
‘provisional’
and that he afforded to Mr Dagger the opportunity
to make any submissions about the first general protections application and the
unfair dismissal application before the Deputy President would move to consider
dismissing the first general protections application.
The provisional view
expressed by the Deputy President was both appropriate and legally correct. It
did not give rise to prejudice
and was not, as Mr Dagger contends, misleading.
In this respect, we consider that the observation of the Commissioner at
[44] of his Decision regarding the email of 29 January,
constituted an accurate characterisation.
Mr Dagger was not provided with a conclusionary view regarding the
operation of
of the Act and his two applications. He was not
directed as to the course of action to take. He was merely asked to provide a
to the email within a reasonable timeframe – a timeframe in which
he could arguably have made further enquiries, sought legal
advice or guidance,
or undertaken self-directed research on the issues raised.
Instead, Mr Dagger decided to discontinue his unfair dismissal
application and the first general protections application. This was
notwithstanding having been provided time to make responsive submissions to the
issues raised regarding the two applications. Once
filed, a notice of
discontinuance (or the communication of the same to Chambers) is self-executing
and it brings the application
Therefore, as
of 29 January 2025, Mr Dagger’s unfair dismissal application and his first
general protections application were
concluded. There was no opportunity for the
Deputy President to misapply
of the Act because before he turned to
the determinative consideration of that section and Mr Dagger’s two
dismissal related
applications, Mr Dagger had, by his own hand, brought those
two proceedings to an end.
Insofar as it is relevant, it had always been open to Mr Dagger
to address his concerns about the validity of his unfair dismissal
application
prior to his discontinuance of the same. The Deputy President had proffered him
the very opportunity to make submissions
regarding the two applications. That Mr
Dagger decided not to do so as of 29 January 2025, is not now something that can
be addressed
by way of filing an appeal against the decision of Commissioner
The task before the Commissioner was limited to considering whether
he was satisfied there were exceptional circumstances warranting
an extension of
time and if there were, whether it was fair and equitable to grant an extension.
The task did not, and could not,
extend to determining the jurisdictional
validity of the unfair dismissal application because that application had been
discontinued.
To the extent that the Commissioner turned his mind to the
validity of the unfair dismissal application at paragraph [43] of his
we consider little turns on this point. Ultimately, it had no bearing on the
reasons for delay and the Commissioner’s
conclusion in respect of
s. 366(2)(a)
of the Act.
Regarding the reasons for delay, in appeal ground 2, Mr Dagger
pressed that the Commission dismissed his second general protections
application
for being out of time, without acknowledging the role its own guidance played in
causing the delay.
We are not persuaded that the content of the email of
29 January was a causative factor regarding the delay. However, the timing
that email requires due consideration as do the circumstances leading up to
its issuance.
Mr Dagger made his unfair dismissal application and first general
protections application on 23 December 2024. On 13 January 2025,
Wylee filed its Form F8A Response to the first general protections application,
having served the Form on Mr Dagger at that
The Form F8A
Response detailed at
that Mr Dagger had made another application
dealing with the dismissal (such as an unfair dismissal application). Expanding
this answer in the Form F8A Response, Oscar Wylee noted it had received
correspondence from the Commission that Mr Dagger had commenced
dismissal claim with matter number U2024/15609. Further, it noted that the
application had not, at that time, been served
on Oscar Wylee.
At paragraph [22] of the Decision, the Commissioner records Oscar
Wylee’s submission that the Applicant had been placed on notice
was not able to proceed with multiple applications when it filed its Form F8A
response to the first general protections application.
At paragraph [42] of the
Decision the Commissioner further records Oscar Wylee’s submission that,
once alerted to the multiple
application issue, Mr Dagger should have
immediately taken steps to withdraw the unfair dismissal application and the
first general
protections application, and file his new general protections
claim. The Commissioner appears to have accepted these submissions.
At paragraph
[45], the Commissioner expresses he was not satisfied that Mr Dagger had
provided adequate explanation for the delay
period between 13 January 2025
and 29 January 2025, referring specifically to Mr Dagger having been
placed on notice by Oscar Wylee
of its jurisdictional objection regarding the
multiple applications.
We are of the view that it was open to the Commissioner to have
reached that conclusion. After the lodgement of the Form F8A Response,
evident that the Commissioner considered it should have been reasonably apparent
to Mr Dagger that there was an appreciable
issue arising from having made
two dismissal related applications at once. Oscar Wylee had, after all,
submitted a jurisdictional
objection on the point. At the hearing before us, Mr
Dagger agitated that he was not aware of any problems with the two applications
up until 29 January
However, as
of 13 January 2025, Mr Dagger had possession of a necessary document
which should have alerted him to seek legal advice
or other guidance about
whether he could proceed with the two applications within the Commission’s
is not apparent from the evidence that Mr Dagger took
any active step from 13 January to 29 January 2025 to seek advice after
become aware that there was a potential jurisdictional impediment. We
accept that an unrepresented applicant may view with suspicion
information set
out in a response to the application provided by a former employer identifying
However, we are also of the view
that in cases of this kind, the steps that an applicant took to seek advice or
obtain further guidance
after becoming aware of a potential jurisdictional issue
with an application may be relevant to the exercise of the broad discretion
grant a further period for an application to be made. We do not consider that
the Commissioner erred in treating this as a relevant
By appeal ground 3, Mr Dagger asserted that there was a failure to
properly assess the circumstances that led to the late filing of
general protections application, noting that the delay of six days was minimal
and, again, was caused by reliance on the
Commission’s correspondence.
Having addressed the email of 29 January, our attention turns to the
six-day delay period between
29 January 2025 and 5 February 2025.
The Commissioner concluded that Mr Dagger had not provided a
satisfactory explanation for that period of the delay. At paragraph [21]
Decision, the Commissioner detailed that Mr Dagger had submitted that he took
prompt action in response to the email of 29
January and that the delay of six
days in filing the second general protections application was
‘minimal’ and due to
his desire to obtain legal advice prior to the
second lodgement. At the hearing before us, Mr Dagger explained that in relation
the delay period of six days, two of those days were on a weekend, and that
he had a solicitor that he wanted to contact but the
solicitor, who was Mr
Dagger’s friend, was not available, and it took the solicitor three days
to contact Mr
Mr Dagger further explained that he wanted to go to the library to conduct
some further
he was awaiting the refund of $89.00 (presumedly from one of the first
applications) so he could pay that money for the
second general protections
application.
The evidence before the Commissioner was, in our view, confined to
Mr Dagger explaining that the delay of six days arose from his
seek legal advice and that the period was ‘minimal’. Mr Dagger had
not advised the Commissioner that he was
awaiting receipt of a
not apparent that Mr Dagger had explained to the Commissioner that he had wanted
to use the library and its resources prior
to filing the second general
protections
application.
Commissioner was only able make a decision based on the evidence before him. It
follows that the Commissioner’s consideration
of the criterion in
s. 366(2)(a)
of the Act was, on the basis of the material seen by the Full
Bench, consistent with the material and evidence before him.
Insofar as it is relevant, Mr Dagger was able to articulate further
reasons for the six day delay period when presenting his case
including undertaking research at a library and awaiting the refund of the fee
paid for his first general protections
application. Regarding the admission of
new evidence, the principles governing the discretion to admit new evidence or
to consider
further material are well established and are traversed in
v National Australia Bank
Whilst it is recognised that the Commission may, in some circumstances, depart
from the principles set out in
and that the principles may not be
strictly applied, it is nevertheless the case that it will be rare for fresh
evidence to be admitted
on appeal where the conditions in
consider it was open to Mr Dagger to have provided to the Commissioner the
additional reasons for delay, with little diligence
required, we are not
satisfied the new evidence should be admitted in the appeal.
However, for completeness, we observe that Mr Dagger’s reason
of the use of library resources in circumstances where he had
already made the
first general protections application and was therefore cognisant of its
requirements, does not, in our view, constitute
an acceptable reason for the
delay. We also note that other than changing the date upon which the dismissal
was said to have taken
effect and inserting two sentences to explain the delay
in lodging the application, the two general protections applications are
identical. In respect of awaiting a refund, we have no reason to doubt that
having been unemployed for an extended period Mr Dagger
faced financial
difficulty. Nonetheless, it was always open to Mr Dagger to seek a waiver
of the application fee for the second general
protections application or place
the Commission on notice that he faced difficulty paying the fee and was
awaiting the refund. He
did not do so. Had this additional reason been put to
the Commissioner, again we are unpersuaded that it would have formed an
reason for the delay. As to Mr Dagger’s assertion that the
delay period was minimal, even if the delay period had been only
one day, that
would not take the matter further. Whether the delay period is one day or one
year, there must be an acceptable explanation
The ultimate conclusion as to the existence of exceptional
circumstances will turn on a consideration of all the relevant matters
assignment of appropriate weight to each. Further, it may be observed that the
approach to this particular consideration
by Members of the Commission varies
depending on the circumstances before them. In this matter, we are not persuaded
the Commissioner’s
findings in relation to
s. 366(2)(a)
ultimate conclusion unreasonable or manifestly unjust. The Commissioner’s
analysis and findings are both unremarkable
as well as consistent with the
analysis that would be expected in proceedings of this type when considering the
reasons for delay.
Regarding appeal grounds 1, 2 and 3, we find no error of
principle or law arises and that there is no significant error of fact.
In respect to appeal ground 4, Mr Dagger takes issue with the
Commissioner’s purported failure to consider that he was an alleged
of a common assault in the workplace, and that Oscar Wylee did not investigate
the matter appropriately, failed in its duty
of care to protect him, and then
proceeded to take adverse action against him. Mr Dagger considered that this was
a critical matter
in his case.
As is apparent from paragraphs [53] and [54] of the Decision, the
Commissioner was confronted with the not uncommon scenario of disparate
accounts in respect of the merits. At paragraph [53] the Commissioner condensed
Mr Dagger’s argument on the merits
and similarly at paragraph [54] he
outlined the Respondent’s contentions in summary form. It is well accepted
that in matters
of this type, the substantial merits of the application are not
able to be fully examined or agitated at the time an application
extension of time is under
consideration.
This was an opinion that had already been shared with Mr Dagger when he
sought an order for production of documents pertaining to
the merits of his
general protections application from the Full
satisfied the Commissioner took into account the merits of the application and
approached the assessment of the merits in
an orthodox manner. We do not
consider that anything raised by Mr Dagger in his appeal notice gives rise to
any arguable case that
the Commissioner erred in his consideration under
s. 366(2)(d)
of the Act.
Grounds 5 and 6
Mr Dagger has referred to ‘the denial of access to relevant
documentation impacted [his] ability to present [his] case’.
From this we
have surmised that Mr Dagger is referring to the Commissioner’s refusal to
grant orders under
s 590(2)(c)
of the Act for the production of certain
documents in the first proceedings.
In the lead up to the hearing before the Commissioner,
Mr Dagger had filed a Form F52 seeking production of documents related to
Wylee’s internal investigation. We have already noted that
Mr Dagger had sought a similar order from the Full Bench in the
the appeal hearing, which we
categories of documents included in the Form F52, as submitted to
Commissioner Simpson, included documents, records, and information
the investigation conducted by Oscar Wylee’s HR department concerning his
‘protected rights
That the Commissioner refused the application for production was the
appropriate course and it therefore follows that no error was
made. The hearing
before the Commissioner was not the opportunity for Mr Dagger to test the
adequacy of Oscar Wylee’s investigation
or properly defend himself against
alleged adverse action. As we stated in our Decision in
Mr John Dagger v
Oscar Wylee Pty
It is well established that the Commission
should not embark upon a detailed consideration of the merits of a substantive
determining whether to grant an extension of time. This is particularly
so where the matter involves disputed facts. Full Benches
of the Commission have
emphasised that while the Act requires the Commission to take into account the
merits of an application in
deciding whether to grant an extension of time to
file an application, the substantial merits are not able to be fully examined or
agitated at this stage of the proceeding.
It has also been observed that it would be undesirable to expose
the parties to a requirement to present their evidentiary cases twice,
would occur if the Commission embarked on a detailed consideration of the
substantive case in relation to an extension of time
application and the matter
proceeded to a full hearing on merits. In
Kyvelos v Champion Socks
a Full Bench of the Commission said a Member of the Commission making a
finding about the merits of a case would serve as an encouragement
applicants for late acceptance to put their entire evidentiary case and seek to
cross-examine the respondent’s witnesses
to reduce the possibility of an
adverse finding on the merits, leading to an unjustifiable delay and
Ground 6 of the appeal grounds is comparable to ground 5 to the
extent that it focuses on a perceived denial of procedural fairness
failure to consider relevant evidence, which Mr Dagger contends arises from
the Commissioner’s omission, and that of
Oscar Wylee, to conduct a
meaningful enquiry into whether:
Wylee’s investigation met the standards of procedural fairness;
(b) Mr Dagger
was retaliated against for exercising his workplace right by making a formal
complaint; and
(c) the assault
incident should have informed the assessment of whether his dismissal was
The gravamen of ground 6 again concerns the merits of the second
general protections application albeit framed in the context of procedural
fairness. The Commissioner was not required to, and appropriately did not,
conduct a meaningful enquiry or otherwise reach a final
conclusion concerning
the merits of the matter. Grounds 6 is essentially no more than generalised
assertions concerning the merits
of Mr Dagger’s case which do not
disclose any contention of appealable error on the part of the Commissioner.
An appeal to the Full Bench exists for the correction of error. It
is not a hearing de novo. We are not persuaded that any of the
matters raised by
Mr Dagger as justifying the grant of permission to appeal enliven the
public interest. In this regard and as we
have noted, we are not satisfied that
the appeal raises any issue of importance or general application, nor does it
identify any
relevant diversity of decisions at first instance. We do not
consider that it is arguable that the decision of the Commissioner manifests
injustice, or that the result is counterintuitive or unjust. The legal
principles applied are not disharmonious with other authorities
dealing with
similar matters. Finally, the decision of the Commissioner discloses no
appealable error.
As we are not satisfied that the grant of permission to appeal would
be in the public interest, permission to appeal must be refused.
VICE PRESIDENT
Appearances
, Applicant
for the Respondent
Hearing details:
Melbourne (by video using Microsoft Teams):
(Decision).
Appeal Book, 41.
because on appeal the Commission has power to receive further evidence, pursuant
Fair Work Act 2009
Coal and Allied
Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
, 204 [17] per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron and Hayne JJ.
Trustee for Perrott Trust T/A Perrott Engineering Pty Ltd
Wan v Australian Industrial
Relations Commission
[2001] FCA 1803
(2001) 116 FCR 481
, 489 [30].
5) [28] citing
Lawrence v Coal & Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd
FWAFB 10089
, [28], affirmed on judicial review in
Coal & Allied
Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler
(2011) 192 FCR 78, and
New South Wales
Bar Association v McAuliffe
5) [29] citing
O’Sullivan v Farrer
[1989] HCA 61
(1989) 168 CLR 210
per Mason CJ,
Brennan, Dawson and Gaudron JJ, applied in Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 85 ALJR 398
[69] per Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ, and
Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler
(2011) 192 FCR 78, 90
, [24]–[27], cited in
(n 5) [29].
5) [30] citing
Lombardo v Commonwealth
(1936) 55 CLR
, 505, cited in
(n 5) [30].
Blue Star Group Pty Ltd
for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Australia Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1987) 16 FCR 167
Stogiannidis v Victorian Frozen Foods Distributors Pty Ltd
MW Engineers Pty Ltd
Appeal Book,
Transcript of
Proceedings,
Dagger v Oscar Wylee Pty Ltd
(Fair Work Commission,
C2025/3104, Asbury VP, Masson DP and Beaumont DP, 20 June 2025),
[PN217]–[PN218].
Ibid [PN149].
Ibid [PN133],
Ibid [PN234].
Ibid [PN236].
[PN157]–[PN162].
JJ Richards
& Sons Pty Ltd v Transport Workers’ Union of Australia
Mermaid Marine Vessel Operations Pty Ltd v Maritime
Union of Australia
, [147]–[18];
Ozsoy v Monstamac Industries Pty Ltd
, [21]–[25] (
Perry v Rio Tinto Shipping
Vincent v Roof Safe Pty Ltd
Ozsory v Monstamac Industries Pty Ltd
Peters v Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd
Broadbent v
Goulburn Flight Training Academy Pty Ltd
Donohoe v QuickComms Australia Pty Ltd
Long v Keolis Downer
, [71]–[73];
Kyvelos v Champion Socks Pty Ltd
(Australian Industrial Relations Commission, Giudice J, Acton SDP and
Commissioner Gay, 10 November 2000, M Print T2421), [14].
Oscar Wylee Pty Ltd
Appeal Book,
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (759 KB)
Signed PDF/A format