URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1965/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pacific Motor Auctions Pty Ltd v Motor Credits (Hire Finance) Ltd [1965] UKPCHCA 1; (1965) 112 CLR 192 (3 March 1965)
PRIVY COUNCIL
PACIFIC MOTOR AUCTIONS PTY. LTD. v. MOTOR CREDITS (HIRE FINANCE) LTD.
[1965] UKPCHCA 1
112 CLR 192
Sale of Goods
Privy Council
Lord Reid(1), Lord Hodson(1), Lord Pearce(1), Lord Upjohn(1) and
Lord Wilberforce(1).
Sale of Goods - Seller retaining possession - Subsequent sale to second
purchaser - Purchase in good faith and without notice -
Title of second
purchaser to goods - "Continues in possession" - Continuity of physical
possession regardless of alteration of legal
title - Sale of Goods Act,
1923-1953 (N.S.W.), s. 28 (1)*.
1965, January 19-21; March 3. 3:3:1965
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
LORD PEARCE delivered the judgment of their Lordships as follows:-
The present case is concerned with the title to certain motor cars which
2. In 1960 one Webb was carrying on a large, vigorous, and apparently
thriving business as a dealer in motor-cars under the style
of Motordom. The
business was turned into a limited company in June 1960; but this has no
relevance to the issues and at all times
the dominant personality was Webb.
The respondent carries on the business of a hire purchase finance house. In
February 1960 the
respondent and Motordom made a written agreement called a
"display agreement" (and referred to in evidence as a "floor plan"). The
purpose of Motordom in making the agreement was to obtain cash to finance some
of the stock which it had to buy from time to time;
and the purpose of the
finance house was to obtain hire purchase contracts with Motordom's customers.
The subsequent course of dealing
changed the operation of the written
agreement in important respects and superseded it. Under the original
agreement in writing Motordom,
described as the agent, was inter alia to buy
such used vehicles as the respondent might authorize in writing, but it might
in its own name without disclosing its agency; and the respondent was to
pay to Motordom ninety per cent of the purchase price of
such cars. Cars so
bought were to be on hire to Motordom who was to be in possession of them as
bailee only, and must keep them in
good condition. Motordom was however to be
at liberty to sell them on behalf of the respondent and must in that case
account to the
respondent immediately, retaining for itself as commission any
surplus obtained on the sale over and above certain sums. During the
which it held the goods before selling them it had to pay a certain rental.
The respondent was entitled without notice
to take possession of any cars so
bought. (at p194)
3. The agreement in practice as found by the learned trial judge was as
follows. Motordom without any prior written authority from
the respondent
bought used cars in its own name and on its own account, so that the title in
the cars passed to Motordom. It then
got in touch with the respondent (as a
rule by telephone) and asked that the cars so purchased should be "put on
display plan". If
they were accepted, a cheque for ninety per cent of the
price which Motordom had paid for them was sent to it by the respondent with
list of the cars accepted. This procedure constituted an offer by Motordom to
sell the cars to the respondent and on acceptance
the respondent acquired the
title to the cars. Motordom then had the right to retain the cars in its
possession and had a general
authority to resell them in its own name and at
such a price as it should decide; it also had a right to receive the purchase
and retain it subject only to its obligation to account to the
respondent. (at p195)
4. The general effect of this course of dealing was that Motordom would
receive in cash ninety per cent of the price of stock purchased;
disposal of the stock would repay the cash. If Motordom's customer bought the
car on hire purchase from the respondent,
the money would be repaid without
interest, but otherwise certain interest was payable. (at p195)
5. Motordom of its own volition decided what cars it would place "on floor
plan" with the respondent and only a proportion of its
stock was so placed. On
2nd November 1960, the date of the transaction with which this appeal is
concerned, about twenty cars were
"on floor plan" out of a total stock of
6. The appellant is an auctioneer and dealer in used motor-cars. During 1960
it had various dealings with Motordom both in selling
to it and buying from it
used cars. In that year up to October 31st it sold to Motordom two hundred and
sixty-four cars in all at
a total price of 143,854 Pounds and bought from
Motordom one hundred and seventy-three cars at a total price of 58,910 Pounds.
7. Early in November 1960 Motordom was in financial difficulties. In the
afternoon of November 2nd the respondent told it that Motordom's
authority to
handle the respondent's cars (that is to say any of Motordom's stock which was
"on floor plan") was withdrawn. No notification
of this withdrawal was given
to the appellant or any other person with whom Motordom had dealings. (at
8. The appellant also was having trouble with Motordom. A few days before 2nd
November Motordom's cheques drawn in favour of the
appellant for 6,965 Pounds,
2,535 Pounds and 3,790 Pounds in respect of cars which it had bought from the
appellant had been dishonoured.
Motordom assured the appellant that this
difficulty was temporary and could be surmounted. On the evening of 2nd
November after ordinary
working hours the appellant's manager went to
Motordom's premises and bought twenty-nine cars at specific prices which made
of 16,510 Pounds. In respect of each car Webb on behalf of Motordom
signed a declaration that the car was the seller's sole property,
any other interest and that the seller had good right and title to sell it. It
was arranged that the appellant would sell
them back to Motordom if within
seven days Motordom had paid off the dishonoured cheques. The appellant made
out a cheque to Motordom
for 16,510 Pounds which Motordom endorsed on the back
in favour of the appellant. The appellant kept the cheque and took away the
cars. Of the twenty-nine cars thus sold, nineteen had been purchased from the
appellant shortly before, and only two had been paid
for. Out of twenty-nine
there were sixteen which had been "put on floor plan" and paid for by the
respondent, and which were thus
the property of the respondent. These sixteen
cars are the subject matter of the present dispute. (at p196)
9. Motordom did not surmount its financial difficulties. The respondent
demanded the return of its cars. On refusal it started these
proceedings
claiming return of the cars and damages for detention. (at p196)
10. At the trial there was much controversy over the details of the
complicated events which led up to the situation in which one
or other of the
parties, by reason of Motordom's misbehaviour, must lose its money. It was
clear that, unless the appellant could
establish that it bought the cars on
2nd November bona fide in the belief that the cars belonged to Motordom, it
had no case. For
bona fide and ignorance of the former sale to the respondent
were essential to any defence which it could raise against the respondent
was the true owner at the time of the transaction. The appellant's general
manager maintained that Webb had told him nothing
that he believed that Motordom owned the cars. This was not challenged
directly but he was naturally
cross-examined on his knowledge of "floor plans"
in order to show that he must have had some knowledge or suspicion that the
did not belong to Motordom. The learned judge who heard his evidence did
not accept it on all points. For instance he disbelieved
his denial of a visit
paid to the appellant's premises by an agent of the respondent who was
checking Motordom's statement that it
had sold seven cars to the appellant
shortly before and who accepted without any query the appellant's assurance
that it had purchased
them,- a visit which would show the appellant that some
of Motordom's cars were "on floor plan". But the learned judge did not deduce
that the appellant knew that the particular cars in dispute were "on floor
plan": and he held that since the appellant's previous
dealings with Motordom
had been in the belief and on the basis that Motordom had the right to dispose
of the cars in its own name
(which up to that time was in truth the position)
the agent's visit "would serve to confirm the belief" if the appellant
"entertained
any doubts about it". The trial judge accepted that the
transaction on the appellant's part was done in good faith. He also held
in spite of the unusual features of the transaction it must be regarded as one
of the sale and purchase of the cars in question.
11. Further the trial judge considered that it was not material if the
transaction was not one "in the ordinary course of business",
since "that is a
limitation applicable where the only basis of the apparent authority is the
possession of the goods and where the
Factors Act is applicable". Had that
question been relevant, their Lordships deduce that he would have held (and
rightly held) that
the transaction was not in the ordinary course of business.
Sale of Goods Act, 1923
(N.S.W.) provides as follows: - "26 (1)
Subject to the provisions of this Act, where goods are sold by a person who is
not the owner
thereof and who does not sell them under the authority or with
the consent of the owner, the buyer acquires no better title to the
the seller had, unless the owner of the goods is by his conduct precluded from
denying the seller's authority to sell."
and "28.(1) Where a person having
sold goods continues or is in possession of the goods or of the documents of
title to the goods,
the delivery or transfer by that person or by a mercantile
agent acting for him of the goods or documents of title under any sale
or other disposition thereof to any person receiving the same in good faith
and without notice of the previous sale shall
have the same effect as if the
person making the delivery or transfer were expressly authorised by the owner
of the goods to make
the same." The appellant relied on each of these
sections. His Honour having considered
(1) and the question of estopel
and the case of Eastern Distributors Ltd. v. Goldring (Murphy, Third Party)
1957) 2 QB 600
to the conclusion that the respondent was, by its
conduct in clothing Motordom with apparent ownership or apparent authority
precluded from denying Motordom's authority to sell. It was therefore
not necessary for him to deal with the contention
appellant had
acquired a good title under
(1). He accordingly dismissed the
respondent's claim. (at p197)
13. On appeal to the High Court of Australia the respondent succeeded by a
[1963] HCA 27
(1963) 109 CLR 87.
J. agreed with
the learned trial judge.
Taylor J. however distinguished the facts from Eastern Distributors Ltd. v.
Third Party)
(1957) 2 QB 600
on the ground that the
transaction here was not in the ordinary course of the dealer's business and
that the present
case was not
one of ostensible ownership since the appellant
was aware of the fact that Motordom was receiving "floor
plan" finance
the respondent.
In his Honour's view Motordom's authority, even had it not
been revoked, would not have covered
the present
transation. On the point
Sale of Goods Act
he took the view that Motordom did
not continue in
possession since
the character of its possession had changed
from that of a seller
to that of a bailee (following Staffs Motor Guarantee
Ltd. v. British
Waggon Co. Ltd.
(1934) 2 KB 305
and Eastern Distributors Ltd.
v. Goldring
(1957) 2 QB 600)
14. Owen J. took the view that "there can be no doubt that had Motordom sold
the cars in the ordinary course of its business the
defendant would have got a
good title to them notwithstanding the fact that the plaintiff had revoked
Motordom's authority to sell"
(1963) 109 CLR, at p 102, since the Factors Act
would have applied. He also considered that the respondent held Motordom out
authority to sell in the ordinary course of business but that it had
not held out Motordom as having authority to sell otherwise.
For that reason
he held that the respondent was not precluded from denying Motordom's
authority to sell the cars under the circumstances
in question. As to s. 28
(1) he held the same view as Taylor J. (at p198)
15. The appellant contended before their Lordships both that the respondent
was estopped or precluded from denying Motordom's authority
as the learned
trial judge had found, and also that the appellant obtained a good title under
Sale of Goods Act, 1923
(N.S.W.). Owing to the view taken by
their Lordships on the effect of
, it became unnecessary to consider
the difficult question of estoppel. (at p198)
16. The point under
turns on the construction of the words "where a
person having sold goods continues or is in possession of the goods". Are
those words
to be construed in their full sense so that whenever a person is
found to be in possession of goods which he has previously sold
whatever be the capacity in which he has possession, pass a good title? Or is
some, and if so what, limitation to be placed
on them by considering the
quality and title of the seller's possession at the time when he sells them
again to an innocent purchaser?
Section 28(1)
does not limit its effect to a sale "made in the ordinary
course of business" as does
Factors (Mercantile Agents) Act,
and the corresponding English provision. But Mr. Newton for the respondent
urged their Lordships to limit the application of
in a like manner,
since Motordom was in fact a mercantile agent and therefore it was not right
to attribute to it a wider
than was provided by the section
particularly directed to its activity. Their Lordships are unable to accept
Section 28(1)
is not limited to any particular class of seller; it
applies to a purchase from any kind of seller made in good faith
and without
notice of the previous sale. (at p199)
18. The English statutory provision which was the origin of s. 28(1) was
introduced in 1877 with the object of mitigating the asperity
of the common
law towards an innocent party purchasing goods from a person who has all the
trappings of ownership but in truth has
no proper title to the goods. Nemo dat
quod non habet. The purchaser had no defence at common law against the true
owner, subject
to certain exceptions which are set out by Willes J. in Fuentes
(1868) LR 3 CP 268
, at pp 276, 277 (at p199)
In Johnson v. Credit Lyonnais(1877)
an innocent purchaser
attempted to establish that the true owner had "so conducted
himself as to
have lost the right to follow his
own goods into the hands of the purchaser or
pledgee". The true owner had in that
case left in the hands of the seller the
of title to the goods which he had bought and had failed to have an
in the books of the dock company which had custody
of the goods,
thus facilitating the fraudulent second sale. Denman J. held that
there was no
estoppel. As a direct consequence statutory
protection was given to purchasers
by s. 3 of the Factors Act, 1877 (40
& 41 Vict. c. 39). (at p199)
When Johnson's Case(1877)
was dismissed on appeal(1877)
Cockburn CJ said: "And I am strongly fortified in this
view by the fact that,
as soon as the decisions here appealed from had been
made public, the
legislature by statute (40 & 41
c. 39) at once proceeded to settle the
question in that view in the future
by applying the protection given by the
persons acquiring title from agents, to innocent parties
purchasing or making
advances in such cases as the present. Whether
and independently of such legislation, the law as it stood would have afforded
protection is a different matter" (1877)
at p 36 (at p199)
21. There is thus no doubt about the general intention of the original
provision and the general mischief at which it was aimed.
It was intended as a
protection to innocent purchasers in cases where estoppel gave insufficient
protection. (at p199)
22. Section 3 of the Factors Act, 1877 dealt only with sellers who continue
in possession of documents of title, but later s. 8
of the Factors Act, 1889,
which took its place, dealt with the seller's continued possession both of
goods and of documents of title.
The wording of this latter section was
included in identical terms in the Sale of Goods Act, 1893 (s. 25(1)). In the
Sale of Goods
New South Wales adopted the same form of words as that
contained in the two English sections. (at p200)
23. The first reported question that arose about the construction of those
same words is to be found in Mitchell v. Jones
24 NZLR 932
under the New Zealand
Sale of Goods Act, 1895
. There the owner of a horse sold
it to a buyer and some days later
obtained it back from him on lease. Then,
having possession of
the horse in the capacity of lessee, he sold it a second
innocent purchaser. The Full Court held that the innocent purchaser
was not protected. Stout C.J. said: "The point turns on how the
words 'or is
in possession of the goods' . . . are to be construed
. . . . The meaning is -
first, that if a person sells goods and
continues in possession, even though
he has made a valid contract
of sale, provided that he has not delivered them,
he may to a bona
fide buyer make a good title; and, secondly, the putting-in
the words 'or is in possession of the goods' was meant to apply to
of this character: if a vendor had not the goods when he
sold them, but they
came into his possession afterwards, then he
would have possession of the
goods, and if he sold them to a bona
fide purchaser he could make a good title
to them. He would be
in the same position as if he had continued in possession
of the goods
when he made his first sale. In such a case as that he could
a good title to a bona fide purchaser. That is not this case. In
this case the
person who sold the goods gave up possession
of them, and gave delivery of
them to the buyer. The relationship, therefore,
of buyer and seller between
them was at an end. It
is true that the seller got possession of the goods
again, but not as a seller.
He got the goods the second time as the bailee of
the buyer, and as the bailee he had no warrant, in my opinion, to sell the
again, nor could he make a good title to them to
even a bona fide
purchaser" (1905) 24 NZLR, at p 935 . And Williams J. said that
the section
"does not apply where a sale has been
absolutely final by delivery and
possession has been obtained by the vendee." (1905)
24 NZLR, at p 936 . It has
not been doubted
in argument nor do their Lordships doubt that that case was
rightly decided. (at p200)
24. In 1934, however, MacKinnon J., founding on that case, put a further
gloss on the statutory provision in Staffs Motor Guarantee
Ltd. v. British
Waggon Co. Ltd.
(1934) 2 KB 305
In April one Heap agreed with a finance
company to sell his lorry to it and then
to hire it from the company on hire
purchase terms.
He filled up a proposal form which was accepted, and a hire
purchase agreement
dated May 2nd was signed. During the term of the hiring
sold it to an innocent purchaser. It seems that there was an interval
the agreement to sell and the hire purchase agreement,
but it does not appear
from the report that there was any physical
delivery or interruption of Heap's
physical possession. MacKinnon
J. held that "Heap's possession of the lorry"
(at the time of the
second sale) "was not the possession of a seller who had
delivered the article sold to the buyer, but was the possession
bailee under the hire purchase agreement" (1934) 2 KB, at p
314. Although the
sale had not been completed by physical delivery
nor had there been
interruption of the seller's physical possession,
he held that the case was
covered by the principle in Mitchell
(1905) 24 NZLR 932.
25. In Union Transport Finance Ltd. v. Ballardie
(1937) 1 KB 510
du Parcq J.
while not doubting the correctness of the decision
of MacKinnon J. came to a
contrary conclusion in slightly different
circumstances. One Clark sold his
car to a finance house with
a view to its being let on hire purchase to his
employee. The employee
signed the agreement but the whole transaction was
and Clark at all times was intended to keep possession of the car.
The learned judge held that at different stages the finance house
employee had a right to the possession of the car but neither
had exercised
the right at the date of delivery of the car
to the innocent purchaser. Clark
had never attorned to the employee so
as to make his possession a bailment
under the hire purchase.
The section therefore applied. This conclusion is in
their Lordships'
opinion correct. (at p201)
26. In Olds Discount Co. v. Krett
(1940) 2 KB 117
Stable J. accepted the
decision of MacKinnon J. There a finance house agreed with
Goldstein that it
would buy his goods whenever
he could negotiate a contract with somebody who
would hire the goods on hire purchase
from the finance house. He did so. The
house bought the goods from Goldstein and the hirer took possession of
them. He defaulted,
however, and Goldstein as agent for the
finance house took
possession and then dishonestly sold them to an innocent purchaser. Stable
rightly held that it was a mere
accident that the agent to whom the finance
house subsequently gave their mandate to hold the
goods was the person who had
to the finance house. That decision in their Lordships' opinion is
clearly maintainable on
the principle of Mitchell v. Jones
(1905) 24 NZLR 932
27. Finally a judgment of the Court of Appeal delivered by Devlin J. in
Eastern Distributors Ltd. v. Goldring (Murphy, Third Party)
(1957) 2 QB 600
one point in a complicated case accepted and followed the decision in Staffs
Motor Guarantee Ltd. v. British Waggon
(1934) 2 KB 305
discussing it or questioning its validity. (at p202)
28. There is thus no case which holds that the section does not apply where
after the sale the seller simply attorns to the buyer
and holds the goods as
his bailee. (at p202)
29. It is plainly right to read the section as inapplicable to cases where
there has been a break in the continuity of the physical
possession. On this
point their Lordships accept the observations of the learned judges in
Mitchell v. Jones (1) as to the words
"or is" which are the sole grounds for
any doubt on this point. But what is the justification for saying that a
person does not continue
in possession where his physical possession does
continue although the title under or by virtue of which he is in possession
changed? The fact that a person having sold goods is described as
continuing in possession would seem to indicate that the section
contemplating as relevant a change in the legal title under which he
possesses. For the legal title by which he is in possession
cannot continue.
Before the sale he is in possession as an owner, whereas after the sale he is
in possession as a bailee holding
goods for the new owner. The possession
continues unchanged but the title under which he possesses has changed. One
may perhaps say
in loose terms that a person having sold goods continues in
possession as long as he is holding because of and only because of the
but what justification is there for imposing such an elaborate and artificial
construction on the natural meaning of the words?
The object of the section is
to protect an innocent purchaser who is deceived by the vendor's physical
possession of goods or documents
and who is inevitably unaware of legal rights
which fetter the apparent power to dispose. Where a vendor retains
uninterrupted physical
possession of the goods why should an unknown
arrangement, which substitutes a bailment for ownership, disentitle the
innocent purchaser
to protection from a danger which is just as great as that
from which the section is admittedly intended to protect him? (at p202)
30. Since the original provision under the Factors Act, 1877 (s. 3) dealt
only with the continuing in possession of documents of
title to goods, it
seems clear that it was intending merely to deal with the physical possession
of the documents and it did not
intend that a consideration of the legal
quality of the possession of the documents should have any relevance. When the
Factors Act,
1889 (s. 8) added continuance in possession of the goods
themselves to continuance in possession of the documents, it can hardly
suggested that the word "possession" was intended to have any more esoteric
meaning in relation to goods than it had in relation
to documents of title.
Moreover such a construction would be in direct conflict with the definition
(s. 1(2) of the Factors Act,
1889) whereby "a person shall be deemed to be in
possession of goods or of the documents of title to goods where the goods or
are in his actual custody or are held by any other person subject to
his control or for him or his benefit". When s. 8 of the Factors
came to be enacted again as s. 25(1) of the Sale of Goods Act, 1893, the
identical words cannot have been intended to bear
a different meaning from
that which by definition they bore under the 1889 Act. (at p203)
31. Further sub-s. (1) of s. 25 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1893 was
accompanied by sub-s. (2) which was in identical terms with s.
Factors Act, 1889 (originally s. 4 of the Factors Act, 1877), and dealt with a
person who having bought or agreed to buy
goods obtains possession of the
goods. Possession under sub-s. (1) must surely mean the same as possession
under sub-s. (2), which
has been held to mean actual custody. In sub-s. (2)
there is a reference to "mercantile agent" which by sub-s. (3) "has the same
meaning as in the Factors Acts". (at p203)
In Hugill v. Masker
(1889) 22 QBD 364
, Lord Esher M.R. said of sub-s. (2):
"It is to be observed that the section is not dealing
with the rights of the
parties to that
contract as against each other, but with the rights of third
persons who enter into another
transaction on the faith of the possession
which the vendee under that contract has obtained of the documents of title"
QBD, at p 370 (at p203)
33. Again in Cahn v. Pockett's Bristol Channel Steam Packet Co.
(1899) 1 QB
Collins L.J. with reference to sub-s. (2) said:
"'Possession' by the
Factors Act, 1889, s. 1(2), means actual custody. The Factors
Act, 1889 which
is thus referred to, and as to
part of it in terms again enacted, in the Sale
of Goods Act, is the last of a series
of statutes whereby the Legislature has
enlarged the powers of persons in the actual possession of goods or
documents of
title but without property therein, to pass the
property in the
goods to bona fide purchasers. Possession of, not property in, the
disposed of is the cardinal fact. From the
point of view of the bona fide
purchaser the ostensible authority based on the fact
of possession is the same
whether there is property
in the thing or authority to deal with it in the
person in possession at the
time of the disposition or not."(1899) 1 QB, at p
34. The climate of legislative opinion was at the time of the passing of the
1877 and 1889 Factors Acts favourable to legislation
which would prevent the
buyers or others from being misled by an apparent possession of goods which
was belied by legal transactions
which were unknown to the world at large. In
1878 the Bills of Sale Act destroyed the validity of assignments and the like
delivery unless registered and in 1883 the Bills of Sale (Amendment)
Act made similar provisions in respect of agreements to secure
money on goods
remaining in the apparent possession of the borrower. (at p204)
35. The heredity of the section which their Lordships are now considering can
therefore be summed up as follows. Its words are identical
with those of s. 8
of the Factors Act, 1889 where they first appeared in this exact form. In that
Act it was expressly deemed that
"actual custody" should constitute
possession. In the Sale of Goods Act, 1893, s. 25, the same form of words was
again enacted. Part
of that section (namely s. 25(2)) contains an implicit
reference and part of it (namely s. 25(3)) an explicit reference to the
Acts. There was strong authority for saying that in part of the
section (namely s. 25(2)) "actual custody" constitutes possession.
never been suggested by 1923, when the same form of words was first enacted in
New South Wales, that there could be written
into another part of s. 25
(namely s. 25(1)) an implied proviso that actual custody should not constitute
possession if the possession
though continuous became attributable to a
bailment - thus giving to possession a meaning different from that which it
the rest of the section and different from that which it had under a
previous and co-existing section in identical terms (Factors
Act, 1889, s.8).
36. There is therefore the strongest reason for supposing that the words
"continues in possession" were intended to refer to the
continuity of physical
possession regardless of any private transactions between the seller and
purchaser which might alter the legal
title under which the possession was
held. (at p204)
37. Their Lordships do not think that such a view of the law which they
believe Parliament to have intended could in practice create
any adverse
effect. It would mean that when a person sells a car to a finance house in
order to take it back on hire purchase the
finance house must take physical
delivery if it is to avoid the risk of an innocent purchaser acquiring title
to it. But in any event
such arrangements where there is no delivery are not
without some jeopardy owing to the Bills of Sale Acts. (at p205)
38. It seems to their Lordships that Staffs Motor Guarantee Ltd. v. British
Waggon Co. Ltd.
(1934) 2 KB 305
(and Eastern Distributors
Ltd v Goldring
(Murphy, Third Party)
(1957) 2 QB 600
in so far as it followed it), was
wrongly decided. Even if it were rightly decided,
it would not cover the facts
of this case. For
even assuming that a separate agreement of bailment,
following a sale, without any
break in the seller's physical possession, were
sufficient to break its continuity for the purposes of the section, here there
no such separate bailment. Motordom's continued
physical possession was
solely attributable to the arrangement which constituted
the sale. It was a
term of the sale by Motordom
to the respondent that Motordom should be
entitled to retain possession of the cars
for the purpose of selling them to
Motordom only received ninety per cent of the price on the sale to
the respondent,
and it cannot be argued that the sale ended at
that stage. It
would be absurd to suppose that either party intended Motordom to sell
stock for ninety per cent of its value
without getting a right to any further
benefit. The transaction by which Motordom sold
the cars to the respondent was
inextricably
mixed with Motordom's right to keep the cars for display at its
premises. In their Lordships'
opinion Motordom, having sold the goods
ownership is disputed, continued in possession of them. (at p205)
39. In spite of Mr. Newton's arguments their Lordships cannot question the
learned trial Judge's conclusions as to the bona fides
of the appellant and
its lack of notice of the previous sale. No doubt those arguments were put to
him at the trial, but having heard
and seen the witnesses he did not accept
the arguments. (at p205)
40. Their Lordships will therefore humbly advise Her Majesty that the appeal
should be allowed, the order of the High Court dated
28th August 1963 set
aside with costs and the order of the Supreme Court of New South Wales dated
25th July 1962 restored. The respondent
must pay the costs of this appeal. (at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter