Boyson v Chief of Army [2019] ADFDAT 2 (2 May 2019)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Boyson v Chief of Army
[2019] ADFDAT
Appeal from:
General Court Martial
File number:
DFDAT 1 of 2019
LOGAN J ( PRESIDENT), BRERETON JA (DEPUTY
PRESIDENT) AND PERRY J (MEMBER)
Date of decision:
2 May 2019 (reasons for decision, published 30
Catchwords:
DEFENCE AND WAR
– application for an
extension of time to appeal from a General Court Martial (“GCM”)
– where the applicant
was found guilty of one count of sexual intercourse
without consent – whether the GCM’s verdict was unreasonable and
could not be supported by the evidence – whether the GCM’s verdict
was unsafe or unsatisfactory – where the complainant
alleged the applicant
had inserted a bottle into his rectum – where the complainant was sitting
up at the time of the alleged
insertion – where complainant gave evidence
of feeling a sharp pain in his rectum – where prosecution case relied on
purported admissions by the applicant – where there were several witnesses
who saw the complainant sitting on the ground but
none who gave evidence of
seeing the alleged insertion – whether alleged insertion could be
considered physically impossible
– extension of time granted – leave
to appeal granted – appeal allowed – conviction quashed.
Legislation:
Constitution
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Crimes Act 1900
Evidence Act 2011
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Criminal Appeal Act 1907
Cases cited:
[2014] NSWCCA 210
Angre v Chief of Navy (No 3)
[2017] ADFDAT 2
Betts v Chief of Army
[2018] ADFDAT 2
Coulter v The Queen
(1988) 164 CLR 350
Dickson v R
[2017] NSWCCA 78
(2017) 94 NSWLR 476
Haskins v The Commonwealth
(2011) 244 CLR 22
Hodge v Chief of Navy
[2015] ADFDAT 4
Lane v Morrison
[2009] HCA 29
(2009) 239 CLR 230
Lane v The Queen
[2018] HCA 28
(2018) 92 ALJR 689
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
(2007) 230 CLR 559
Low v Chief of Navy
[2011] ADFDAT 3
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
McKell v The Queen
[2019] HCA 5
(2019) 93 ALJR 309
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
Perara-Cathcart v The Queen
[2017] HCA 9
(2017) 260 CLR 595
Rasic v The Queen
[2009] NSWCCA 202
Re Tyler; Ex parte Foley
[1994] HCA 25
(1991) 181 CLR 18
RWB v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 147
(2010) 202 A Crim R 209
SKA v The Queen
[2011] HCA 13
(2011) 243 CLR 400
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
White v Director of Military Prosecutions
[2007] HCA 29
(2007) 231 CLR 570
Yewsang v Chief of Army
[2013] ADFDAT 1
Date of hearing:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr E Muston SC with Ms M Barnes
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Wyatts Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr J Lawton with Ms J Woodward
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Director of Military Prosecutions
Table of Corrections
In paragraph 27, “pleased” has been replaced with
DFDAT 1 of 2019
RHILEY BOYSON
CHIEF OF ARMY
LOGAN J ( PRESIDENT), BRERETON JA (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
AND PERRY J (MEMBER)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
applicant be granted an extension of time for the lodging of a notice of appeal,
insofar as the same may be necessary, to the
date of filing of his
application.
to appeal be granted.
appeal be allowed.
applicant’s conviction be quashed.
application for costs the applicant intends to make, accompanied by written
submissions of not more than five pages, be filed
and served within seven days
from the date of these orders.
response to an application for costs, accompanied by written submissions of not
more than five pages, be filed and served within
seven days of the service of a
costs application.
Note: Entry of orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR
2 May 2019, at the conclusion of the hearing of the application, it was
announced that, by majority, the Tribunal had determined
that the applicant
should be granted the requisite extension of time and leave to appeal, that his
appeal should be allowed and that
his conviction should be set aside. It was
further announced that reasons for the making of these orders would be published
later date.
following are my reasons for respectfully dissenting from the majority of the
Tribunal in relation to the allowance of the appeal
and the quashing of the
applicant’s conviction.
the evening of 5 April 2017, upon the completion of an All Corps Captains Course
at the Land Warfare Centre, Kokoda Barracks, Canungra,
Queensland, an end of
course function was held at the Officers’ Mess at the barracks. The
function was an informal one with
a Hawaiian theme. Present at the function were
those who had attended the course. They were encouraged to, and most did, dress
accordance with the evening’s theme.
function commenced around 18:30. Beer, wine and spirits were available in
plentiful supply. The beer was available from eskies
located on the rear
verandah of the Mess. The beer available included Corona beer in small,
long-necked bottles. The majority but
by no means all attendees at the function
consumed a considerable amount of alcohol.
applicant, then Lieutenant subsequently promoted to Captain (
Boyson, was one attendee at the function. Another was the complainant, a fellow
junior officer and course attendee.
and rear verandah. He was dressed in a Hawaiian
style shirt and shorts. In the
toilets he stood at the urinal trough so as to relieve himself. While standing
there with his shorts
and underpants lowered to around his ankles, he was
tackled to the tiled floor of the toilet area by at least one, unidentified,
male defence member. The complainant’s evidence was that, while wriggling
on the toilet floor attempting to pull up his shorts
and underpants, he felt a
penetration of his anus of about five seconds’ duration and related pain.
complainant’s further evidence (Transcript, p 56) was that, having managed
to stand up and while still attempting to pull
up his shorts and
... I saw Rhiley [CAPT Boyson] coming back from the
sink. In one hand he had a Corona bottle, so a beer bottle, and then he said
me that – to the effect of, “I just stuck this in you” and was
pointing, I believe approximating how far it
went in. And then he said –
you know – words to the effect of, “It was disgusting”.
You said that he pointed to the bottle. What sort of bottle was it? --- It was
a Corona beer bottle.
What part of the Corona bottle was he pointing to when he said that he said that
he stuck it in you?---He was pointing to the neck
of the bottle, I would say a
number of centimetres down from the actual opening.
a sequel to this alleged incident, the applicant came to be charged before a
General Court Martial (
) with the service offence of engaging in
conduct outside the Jervis Bay Territory that is a Territory offence, being the
of sexual intercourse without consent, contrary to
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
), in its application
Crimes Act 1900
formulated as follows:
Being a defence member at Kokoda Barracks Canungra in
the State of Queensland, on 5 April 2017 engaged in sexual intercourse with
complainant], by inserting a bottle into his anus, without his consent, and
being reckless as to whether he was consenting.
alternative charge of engaging in an act of indecency, contrary to
of the DFDA in its application of
proffered against the applicant but, it was not proceeded with in light of the
verdict in respect of the primary charge.
these charges, the applicant pleaded, “Not guilty”. On 3 December
2018, following a trial, the GCM returned a verdict
of guilty in respect of the
primary charge. On 5 December 2018, the GCM imposed the following sentence on
the applicant in respect
of the offence of which it had convicted him:
Imprisonment for
Dismissal from
the Defence Force;
Reduction to the
rank of Lieutenant with seniority in that rank to date from 5 December
the automatic review mandated by
of the DFDA and the subsequent
dismissal of a review petition lodged by him, the applicant applied to the
Tribunal for leave to appeal
against his conviction. The application was lodged
outside the period specified in
Defence Force Discipline
Appeals Act 1955
Appeals Act
). The delay in the lodging of
the application is readily explained by the applicant’s wholly
understandable and reasonable
desire to await the fate of his review petition.
Quite properly, the respondent Chief of Army did not oppose the granting of an
extension of time. I therefore agreed that he should be granted an extension of
time for the lodging of his application up to the
date on which it was
of the sentence imposed on the applicant was stayed by a reviewing authority,
pursuant to s 176 of the DFDA, pending the
hearing and determination of the
present application.
interlocutory direction, argument on the application for leave to appeal was
directed to be treated as argument on any consequential
applicant sought leave to appeal on the basis that his conviction was
unreasonable or could not be supported having regard to
the evidence, pursuant
to s 23(1)(a) of the Appeals Act and, further or alternatively, that, in
all the circumstances of the case,
the conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory
pursuant to s 23(1)(d) of Appeals Act. The factors upon which he relied to
these grounds were as follows:
evidence of the Appellant was supported by the evidence of CAPT Machatsch;
evidence of the complainant in relation to the conduct constituting the offence
was uncorroborated and there were serious doubts
reliability;
were at least six witnesses (CAPT Bagwill, CAPT Botham, CAPT Cassar, CAPT
Machatsch, CAPT Melia and Mr Vincent,) who were present
at the time of the
alleged conduct who did not corroborate the complainant’s evidence, and
gave evidence that that they did
not see the conduct alleged occur;
video taken in the bathroom that night tells strongly against any sexual assault
against the complainant, is inconsistent with
the complainant’s version
and on its own ought to have given rise to a reasonable doubt;
was inherently unlikely that the Appellant would behave in the manner alleged
given his good character, his shoulder injury, the
fact that there were so many
eyewitnesses present in the bathroom, the friendship between the Appellant and
the Complainant and the
evidence that the atmosphere in the bathroom was jovial
throughout.
relation to the proceedings before the GCM, publication of the name and other
identifying particulars was prohibited by the application
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
(ACT), as applied by
s 146 of the DFDA. So as not to subvert the operation of that provision as
a result of later proceedings in
the Tribunal, an order was made by the Tribunal
during the hearing, pursuant to s 18(2)(b) of the Appeals Act, that no
any part of the proceedings which related to the identity of the
complainant be published.
Betts v Chief of Army
[2018] ADFDAT2, at [73] – [74]
) and by reference to statements made in High Court cases
concerning the meaning and effect of cognate provisions in respect of appeals
the civilian criminal justice system,
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
M v The Queen
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
SKA v The Queen
[2011] HCA 13
(2011) 243 CLR 400
, the Tribunal observed of
s 23(1)(a) and s 23(1)(d) of the Appeals Act:
While these are separate grounds, under ss 23(1)(a) and 23(1)(d)
respectively of the DFDA Act, they are the same in legal substance:
the phrases
“cannot be supported, having regard to the evidence” and
“unsafe and unsatisfactory” are different
ways of stating the same
legal concept:
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
at 492 (Mason CJ, Deane,
Dawson and Toohey JJ);
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
at 623-624;
[2002] HCA 53
- [59] (McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ);
Yewsang v Chief of
[2013] ADFDAT 1
(Tracey J (President), White JA (Deputy
President) and Logan J (Member)).
scope of these grounds is now well-established and was explained by this
Tribunal in
at [56]-[59], with reference to
M v The Queen
MFA v The Queen
SKA v The Queen
(2011) 243 CLR 400
The central principles are:
First, the question for the
Tribunal is whether it considers that, upon the whole of the evidence, it was
open to the DFM to be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was
guilty: see
M v The Queen
Secondly, to address that question, the Tribunal must make an independent
assessment of the sufficiency and quality of the evidence:
[14] (French CJ, Gummow and Kiefel JJ);
at [57]-[59].
Thirdly, the conviction must be set aside if the Tribunal decides that the DFM
should have had a reasonable doubt about the appellant’s
guilt, even if
there is sufficient evidence in law to support it: M at 493-495;
Low v Chief
[2011] ADFDAT 3
(Tracey J (President), White JA (Deputy
President) and Mildren J (Member)).
Fourthly, a doubt experienced by the Tribunal will be a doubt which the DFM
ought also to have experienced, except where the DFM’s
advantage in seeing
and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by the
M v The Queen
observations are just as applicable to an invocation of s 23(1)(a) and
s 23(1)(d) of the Appeals Act so as to challenge a conviction
by a GCM or,
for that matter, a restricted court martial (
) as they are to a
challenge to a conviction by a Defence Force Magistrate (
distinguishing feature as between the trial of a service offence by a DFM and a
trial by court martial is that a court martial
panel is not obliged to, and does
not, give reasons for its verdict. The sentencing role undertaken by a court
martial pursuant
to the DFDA has no counterpart in the role of a jury in the
civilian criminal justice system. However, in its role as a tribunal
which does not give reasons for its verdict, the role undertaken by a court
martial panel in the military justice system
is directly analogous that
undertaken by a jury. Thus, given the bases of challenge advanced by the
applicant, it is especially
necessary, in addition to the summary of principle
from the High Court cases mentioned, also to take heed
of what was stated in
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
) in relation to the role of a jury:
is fundamental to our system of criminal justice in relation to allegations of
serious crimes tried by jury that the jury is “the
constitutional tribunal
for deciding issues of fact”. Given the central place of the jury trial in
the administration of criminal
justice over the centuries, and the abiding
importance of the role of the jury as representative of the community in that
the setting aside of a jury’s verdict on the ground that it is
“unreasonable” within the meaning of s 668E(1) of
Criminal Code
is a serious step, not to be taken without particular
regard to the advantage enjoyed by the jury over a court of appeal which has
seen or heard the witnesses called at trial ... .
those considerations in mind, a court of criminal appeal is not to substitute
trial by an appeal court for trial by jury. Where
there is an appeal against
conviction on the ground that the verdict was unreasonable, the ultimate
question for the appeal court
“must always be whether the [appeal] court
thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be
beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was
[Footnote references omitted]
more recent authority in the High Court has underscored, by reference to
, the basal role of the jury as a tribunal of fact in the
civilian criminal justice system and the imperative need for courts of criminal
appeal “not to substitute trial by an appeal court for trial by
Perara-Cathcart v The Queen
[2017] HCA 9
(2017) 260 CLR 595
Lane v The Queen
[2018] HCA 28
(2018) 92 ALJR 689
, at [44] and [50];
McKell v The
[2019] HCA 5
(2019) 93 ALJR 309
in contrast with the position ordained by
Constitution
in respect of the trial by jury of civilian criminal offences against the laws
of the Commonwealth prosecuted on indictment, it cannot
be said that the trial
by court martial of service offences is constitutionally ordained, such a means
of trial is instead constitutionally
permissible:
White v Director of
Military Prosecutions
[2007] HCA 29
(2007) 231 CLR 570.
In relation to serious service
offences and either as a result of the election by the defence member concerned
or a request by the
Director of Military Prosecutions, trial by court martial is
the means ordained by Parliament of determining whether an accused defence
member has committed a service offence.
means of trial is neither unique to our times nor to Australia. The trial by a
panel of officers known as a court martial of
service offences, as an adjunct to
service discipline, may be traced back at least to Articles of War issued by
Prince Rupert, in
his capacity as Commander in Chief, in 1672 at the outbreak of
the Anglo-Dutch War, on the authority of a commission issued to him
Majesty King Charles II: War
Manual of Military Law
1907) 10. In turn, that means of trial was an evolution of earlier provision
for the adjudication of service offences by a
Court or Council of War comprised
of officers and established as required by ordinances made by a Commander in
Chief in accordance
with authority granted in his commission from the Crown: War
Manual of Military Law
(UK, 1907) 9.
contemporary Australian provision in the DFDA for courts martial is a reflection
of this English heritage. As with juries in
the civilian criminal justice
system, courts martial have played a central role in military justice systems of
such heritage in the
determination of whether a charge has been proved for
centuries. Latterly, in the United Kingdom, Canada and New Zealand, under
influence of norms that have no counterpart in Australian Federal domestic law,
longstanding, ad hoc, court martial based military
justice systems have been
replaced by the introduction of serving judicial officers into the trial
process. In
Re Tyler; Ex parte Foley
[1994] HCA 25
(1994) 181 CLR 18
, a majority of
the High Court was of the opinion that, if there were to be found in the
Constitution
a requirement of sufficiency of independence on the part of
service tribunals exercising disciplinary powers, a GCM constituted under
DFDA met those requirements. For a brief period last decade, courts martial
(and DFM) were replaced by the so-called Australian
Military Court. The members
of that body were members of the Australian Defence Force who were, by
legislation, given a considerable
degree of independence in the discharge of
their duties but not tenure of the kind mandated by
Constitution
in respect of those exercising the judicial power of the
Commonwealth. The model was found to be constitutionally invalid:
[2009] HCA 29
(2009) 239 CLR 230.
Trial by courts martial or DFM was promptly
reintroduced.
by court martial does not just buttress the discipline of the Australian Defence
Force. It also indicates Parliament’s
presently subsisting value
judgement that, in peace and in war, the making of factual assessments as to
whether, on the evidence,
a charge of a service offence has been proved beyond
reasonable doubt should be undertaken not just by those with ordinary experience
of life as with a civilian jury but also, to adopt an eloquent description
offered by Heydon J in
Haskins v The Commonwealth
(2011) 244 CLR 22
at [103] (in no way diminished in accuracy by its appearance in a dissenting
judgement), by “officers, sworn to defeat the
Queen’s enemies, who
are appropriately experienced in the servitude and grandeur of arms and the
splendours and miseries of
military life”.
these reasons, no less than with a court of criminal appeal and juries in
relation to the civilian criminal justice system, there
is a need for this
Tribunal not to substitute trial by the Tribunal for trial by court martial. It
is a serious thing to overturn,
under either
or s 23(1)(d)
of the Appeals Act, the verdict of a court martial panel. The question is
whether the Tribunal thinks that upon the
whole of the evidence it was open to
the court martial panel to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
applicant was guilty
of the service offence charged?
role of the Tribunal under s 23(1)(a) and s 23(1)(d) of the Appeals
Act being as described above, it follows that that role is
much wider than
scrutinising the reasons of the officer who determines a review or a petition to
the end of deciding whether the
conclusion reached by that officer was
reasonably open. The Tribunal must conduct its own, independent, assessment of
of the evidence before, in this case, the court martial, in order to
answer the question posited in the preceding paragraph. Accepting
that this is
the role and having conducted my own review of the evidence, I find that the
summary of the evidence offered by his
Honour Judge P E Smith, in the discharge
of his additional commission as a Colonel in the Australian Army appointed under
to review the conviction to be both comprehensive and accurate. I
therefore gratefully adopt that summary without further attribution.
keeping with the non-publication order, I have deleted from the summary which
follows the name of the complainant. I have also
omitted footnoted references
to the transcript. The reference to “the accused” is a reference to
“the applicant”.
The complainant
[The complainant] arrived at the function at about 1900 hours and started
drinking, consuming about six beers over the evening.
He knows the accused
having first met him at RMC in February or March 2013. They were friends. He
had nothing to do with the accused
after finishing at RMC. He had a good
relationship with the accused over the course.
recollects that he went to the toilets about two or three times throughout the
course of the evening. By 10 or 11pm he had had
six beers and went to the
toilets to urinate. When he went to the urinals there were four to six people
there including CAPT Botham
and the accused. He pulled his shorts down to
urinate, having them below his knees as a bit of low brow humour and he started
He was then tackled to the ground from behind, he landed on the
ground, on his bum and hips. He was trying to pull his pants up
and then he
felt a really sharp pain. The pain was in his anus. There was someone to the
right of him crouched over him. The pain
lasted for about 5 seconds. He then
tried to push the person away or kick them. He yelled “what the fuck,
what the fuck are
you doing”. At the time he did not know what caused the
pain but felt like he had been penetrated with something. It penetrated
five centimetres or so. He was shocked and continued to pull up his
he got up from the floor he saw the accused coming back from the sink basins
with a Corona bottle. The accused said “I
stuck it in you and it was
fucking disgusting”. The accused was pointing to the neck of the bottle a
number of centimetres
down from the actual opening. He mimicked throwing up.
He estimated it was about 60 seconds from being tackled to the ground to
saw the accused. The only other person he recalled in the bathroom was CAPT
Botham. After the accused made the comment the
accused left the toilets. The
complainant was still in pain and he put his hand into his underwear and there
was a small amount
of blood on his hand. He used toilet paper to soak up the
blood. He did not consent to the penetration with the bottle.
he walked out CAPT Annie Tanner asked him if he was ok and the complainant at
that stage tried to laugh it off. He heard comments
complainant] got penetrated” and he laughed it off denying it. He told
CAPT Courtney Cleggett what happened
in the toilets about 24 hours later. He
also on the evening saw CAPT Tanner talking to the accused for about a minute
sometime between
10:30pm and llpm. The complainant stayed in the mess until
this he went back to his accommodation. He also believes he had contact with
his wife. The following day a group went to the
beach on the Gold Coast and
then he flew from Brisbane to Adelaide and got home between 2030 and 2130 hours.
He then told his wife
that he had been penetrated with a beer bottle.
18 was a photograph taken of a group that evening and exhibit 19 was a course
photograph.
cross-examination he confirmed he had six or seven beers on the night of the
function. He agreed that he would have been intoxicated
when he went into the
bathroom but he was not stumbling or slurring his words. He did not recall
making any comments to the accused
that he pulled his shorts and underwear down below his knees as part of a
humorous atmosphere.
He saw the accused and CAPT Botham in the urinals at the
time. He had no recollection of anyone trying to grab at his shorts at
urinal. He did not know who tackled him to the ground and did not recall anyone
holding him on the ground. He was not sure
how many people were involved in
the tackle. He agreed that the tackling was also part of the humour. The
aggrieved did not see
what caused the sharp pain in his anus and did not see who
did it. At the time there were potentially up to six people in the bathroom.
agreed that he was not in a position which easily enabled anything to put into
his anus. He could not recall that he was laughing
and joking about what had
occurred. He recalled CAPT Botham watching the accused retch into the sink. He
was confident there was
blood on his fingers. He agreed he didn't seek any
medical treatment that night. He could not say whether the accused was
intoxicated.
It was possible that the accused placed a beer bottle between his
thighs about six inches below his bottom at the urinal. He disagreed
proposition he had difficulty recalling because he was drunk. He did not recall
telling CAPT Tanner or CAPT Cleggett that
he thought it would be funny to pull
his shorts down around his ankles and pee like a little boy and “they
tried to stick a
bottle in my arse”. He later agreed that he said
“they tried to stick a bottle in my arse”. He said the bottle
actually go into his arse.
USB containing video footage was tendered as exhibit 20 and still photographs
from the video were tendered as exhibit 21. In the
video from the night in
question it appeared the complainant’s shorts were below his knees and he
was reaching to pull them
up. He did not have a recollection of CAPT Vincent
holding a plastic sign over him. He agreed he was smiling with his shorts down
in the bathroom. The video was after the tackle but before the penetration. It
was put to the complainant that he was mistaken
as to how he ended up on the
ground and was mistaken as to something penetrating his anus but he denied this.
He denied that he was
mistaken about any sexual assault happening in the
bathroom that night. It was put to him that the conversation with the accused
CAPT Andrew Cassar
Cassar gave evidence that he attended the course at Canungra. He also attended
the end of course function on 5 April 2017.
He had a number of alcoholic drinks
and was intoxicated. At one stage he went to the toilet, to the urinal. The
complainant was to
his left and he recalled someone pulling the
complainant’s pants down but the witness focussed on finishing what he was
and then he recalled the complainant being on the ground. He heard some
laughter. The complainant’s pants had been pulled
down all the way to his
ankles but he did not see who pulled the pants down. He then saw the
complainant on the floor trying to
cup his genitals. He recalled hearing
laughter at that point. CAPT Machatsch or CAPT Bagwill were present as were
CAPT Tofa and
CAPT Wetherill. He did not recall how long the complainant was on
the ground for and did not see the complainant stand up. He washed
and went back to the function. When he left the complainant was still in the
cross-examination the witness said he did not have any recollection of the
accused being in the bathroom. He did not recall anyone
being near the
complainant when the complainant’s pants were down around his ankles. He
did not recall anyone on top of the
complainant in the bathroom. He agreed the
mood in the bathroom was jovial. He did not see a beer bottle inserted into the
complainant's
CAPT Christopher
Wetherill gave evidence he was at the function. He knew both the accused and
the complainant. He had about two or three beers
prior to arriving at the
function and was intoxicated later but he was still functional. At one stage he
went to the toilets and
someone had vomited. At one stage he saw the accused in
the toilet in a group talking.
cross-examination he agreed he saw the accused in the toilet about half way
through the night. He did not speak to the complainant
that night and did not
see him in the bathroom.
Mr Curtis Tofa
Curtis Tofa was also on the course and at the function. He consumed Coronas
that evening. He knew both the accused and the complainant.
He visited the male
toilets that night and recalled that it stunk of vomit.
cross-examination he said he did not recall seeing the accused in the toilet or
the complainant in the toilet that evening. With
respect to the complainant and
the accused he did not form any particular views as to their state of
intoxication. When the accused
was affected by alcohol he was a very happy,
outgoing person and not aggressive. The accused was dedicated to his training.
accused also had an injured shoulder and didn’t participate in one of
the mess games because of this. Based on his knowledge
of the accused the
allegation was out of character. The witness had never seen the accused behave
in the manner alleged.
CAPT Justin Ryan
Ryan gave evidence that he attended the function. During the course of the
evening he had between six and ten Coronas then he
revised this to perhaps 10-12
Coronas. Immediately after dinner he was the most intoxicated but by 12
midnight he stopped drinking
completely and was not as intoxicated at about 2am.
During the evening he used the male toilets but did not see the accused or the
complainant there.
cross-examination he agreed the nominated fine sheriff for the course was CAPT
Bagwill. The complainant was a very active member
of the charge session group
which occurred maybe twice or three times a week.
CAPT Annie Tanner
Tanner gave evidence that she went to the function. She had about three or four
drinks and was not intoxicated. She was in
a group of people looking at a video
on a mobile phone. She saw a still of the complainant on the ground in the
bathroom with his
pants down. He appeared to be grabbing at his pants and a wet
floor sign had been placed over his legs. As a result of that photo
she spoke to
the complainant. She asked him if he was ok and he said “no I don't think
I am, no I’m not”. He
said that he had been at the urinal, he had
his pants down and he had been grabbed and a bottle was stuck up his arse. His
expression was saddened. He was sheepish and withdrawn and shocked.
CAPT Tanner asked him if he would like to report the incident
and he said he
didn’t want to do it as he didn’t want to get anyone in trouble or
make a big deal out of it. He said
he did not want the accused, Rhiley, in
trouble. After this the witness had a conversation with the accused. She asked
the accused
if he’d stuck a bottle in [complainant’s given
name’s] arse and he said “yes but I made myself physically
it, I went and vomited in the sick afterwards”. He was disgusted in
himself. CAPT Tanner said to the accused “that’s
fucked”. The
accused at another point spoke to the complainant saying “are we cool, are
we good”. The complainant
responded “yeah mate we’re
fine” but sounded quite grim.
cross-examination she did not recall the complainant drinking alcohol that
evening but formed the view that she did not think he
was intoxicated. She
could not say what the accused’s level of intoxication was. She denied
that the complainant said that
it would be funny to pull his shorts down around
his ankles and pee like a little boy but he did describe that he pulled his
down around his ankles. She could not recall the exact wording but he
said that he had stood at the urinal with his pants pulled
down and peed at the
urinal. He said that he was grabbed from the urinal by a group of men and then
someone stuck a bottle in his
arse. She persisted in her evidence that the
accused had admitted that he stuck a bottle in the complainant’s arse.
persisted in her evidence that he told her that he had gone and vomited
in the sink. She agreed she was a good friend of the complainant’s.
disagreed that she was simply trying to give evidence to support him as a
friend. She thought she was impartial.
agreed that she did not report the incident to the chain of command. She
disagreed that the complainant had said that someone
stick a bottle up his arse. She denied giving evidence to help the complainant
as a friend and said she was
probably a better friend with the
CAPT Jillie-May Reading
Reading gave evidence that she was at the function. She had about six to eight
alcoholic drinks and was mildly intoxicated.
Later in the evening she overheard
a conversation in a group about something which occurred in the toilets. There
were about five
to six members in that group, namely CAPT Luke Staples, the
accused and CAPT Justin Ryan. She could not recall who said the words.
heard someone say that the complainant had slipped over in the men’s
bathroom and urinated on himself. Her impression was
the complainant seemed to
be enjoying the night. Both the complainant and the accused were no more
intoxicated than herself. The
complainant was part of the conversation. As to
the accused he was a quiet member but he was open, positive and
approachable.
CAPT Courtney Cleggett
Cleggett was also at the function. ·She did not consume alcohol that
evening as she was pregnant. The complainant told her
that he was in the toilets
trying to be funny and peed like a little boy with pants around his ankles and
he said words to the effect
of “they tried to stick a bottle in my
arse”. He was laughing when he said this. The accused then showed her a
on his mobile phone which had the complainant lying on the ground with
his pants down but with a safety sign so you couldn't see
his private area. She
was shocked and told the accused to delete it and he said no. Later she spoke
again to the complainant and
asked him whether he was alright and he said
“no I’m not fucking alright”. She said that the complainant
was intoxicated
and the accused was similar. She left the function with the
complainant. At that time he was no longer drinking alcohol, he was very
staring a lot and looking sad.
cross-examination she agreed that she had told - ADFIS investigators that the
complainant and the accused had consumed a significant
amount of alcohol. She
also agreed that she told ADFIS investigators that the accused seemed more
composed than the complainant.
She agreed that CAPT Tanner was drinking alcohol
but she did not recall her being intoxicated. It was her impression that the
was taken on the accused’s phone. With respect to the laughing
by the complainant she thought it was an embarrassed laugh.
CAPT Leon Botham
Botham gave evidence that he knew both the accused and the complainant. He was
at the function. He was unsure what he consumed
that night but by the end of
the night would have been drunk. Towards the end of the evening he went to the
toilet and was in there
with the complainant. He used the urinal and was
washing his hands and the guys were mucking around wresting and being rowdy
A number of people were wrestling standing up and then wrestling on the
ground. He knew that the complainant was wrestling but
was not sure who the
other guys were, but it was more than one. He then saw the complainant on the
floor. He was not sure if the
complainant was still on the floor when he left
the toilets. He did not recall seeing the accused in the toilets.
cross-examination he agreed that mess games were common at the functions. He did
not specifically recall the accused being at the
end of course function. He did
recall that the accused was recovering from a shoulder injury, which affected
his ability to participate
in course activities such as PT. He never heard the
complainant yelling “what the fuck” or “what the fuck are
doing”. He did not recall anyone vomiting into the sink. With respect to
the accused he had never seem him act in the
manner alleged. He had the
impression the accused was very dedicated to flying and training.
CAPT Vincent Machatsch
Machatsch gave evidence that he knew both the accused and the complainant. He
was also at the function. He was drinking Coronas
and he believed he had about
20 to 25. Later in the evening he went to the toilet at about 2130 to 2200
hours and there was a mass
of people there. He saw CAPT Cassar, CAPT Ryan;
potentially CAPT Melia and the complainant. The majority were having a chat or
washing their hands but the complainant was at the urinal with his pants around
his ankles. By this stage the witness had consumed
was affected by alcohol but had complete motor control over what he was doing.
He then saw the accused
come into the toilet, walk past the complainant and then
place a beer bottle between the upper thighs of the complainant who clenched
thighs to hold the bottle in place. The accused then went to the right side of
the urinal to go to the toilet. It seemed like
a joke between the two of them.
He then saw someone grabbing at the pants of the complainant who was moving away
from the urinal
but still had his pants around his ankles. He thought this was
CAPT Ryan. The bottle was placed about 15 to 20 centimetres from
complainant’s buttock crease. It was angled at about a 45-degree angle.
He recalled the complainant as attempting to
pull his pants up but did not see
the complainant on the ground at any stage.
witness was shown exhibit 21 which jogged his memory. The video happened after
the placing of the bottle between the complainant’s
legs. He can’t
recall the complainant being on the floor. After he went outside he was standing
with CAPT Tanner, CAPT Cleggett
and the accused and the accused said “I
put a bottle in [the complainant’s] arse”. He was smiling when he
this and was drunk.
cross-examination the witness thought the accused was referring to the act the
witness had seen. He did not see a beer bottle being
put into the
complainant’s anus. From hat he observed the complainant seemed to laugh.
He thought it was a form of practical
joke. He didn't see anyone vomiting in the
bathroom, nor did hear anyone yell “what the fuck are you
CAPT Clarke Melia
Melia gave evidence that he was at the function. He had about five to ten beers
that evening. He went to the toilets on one
occasion and the complainant walked
in to use them and he recalled the complainant pulling his pants down and
standing at the urinal
mimicking a kindergarten-aged boy. He thought this was
in the latter part of the evening. At that stage someone grabbed the complainant
from behind, there was a wrestle. He believed that person was the accused but
couldn’t be 100 per cent sure. They both ended
up on the floor and they
were trying to wrestle the pants off the complainant. The wrestling went on for
less than one minute, the
witness washed his hands and walked out. His
recollection is the complainant put his pants back on as he was leaving. He was
the video, exhibit 20, but it did not jog his memory as to who else was in
the bathroom. He could not say if the complainant was
still in the toilet when
cross-examination he said that the wrestle was not depicted in the images. The
images occurred after the wrestle. He said that
after the complainant was
mimicking going to the toilet like a kindergarten boy there was laughter. His
recollection of the order
of events was the complainant pulled his pants down
and stood there; the accused initiated a wrestle and tried to remove the
complainant's
pants completely; they ended up on the floor and then the accused
handed the complainant the pants back. The video showed the complainant
end putting his pants back on. He certainly heard laughter in the room. He did
not see a beer bottle being inserted into the
complainant's anus whilst in the
bathroom. When he left the bathroom the complainant was on the floor as depicted
in the pictures.
CAPT James Vincent
Vincent attended the course and was at the function. He had about five to seven
drinks. He was reasonably drunk but could still
function. At one stage he
recalled being in the toilets with CAPT Bagwill and he saw the complainant come
in and was standing at
the urinal with his pants around his ankles talking about
how liberating it was for a young child to urinate with their pants down.
next thing he recalled was seeing the complainant on the ground. He
didn’t know how he got there. His pants were still
around his ankles. He
then went back out to the deck. He was shown the video, exhibit 20, and agreed
that he was the one placing
the “slippery when wet” sign on but he
did not have any independent recollection of doing that.
cross-examination he agreed that the complainant seemed jovial and happy when he
was in the bathroom. He was also laughing. In
a statement to ADFIS he said that
when the complainant was on the ground he was laughing and he did not recall if
there were other
people in the room but the complainant was laying on his back.
The witness then washed his hands and left about 10 to 15 seconds
later. Also he
told ADFIS there were three trainees still in the bathroom when he
CAPT Jack Bagwill
Bagwill was at the function. He consumed about 12 beers, three or four Jack
Daniels and coke and a few nips of port. Although
he was inebriated he was
still in control. On one visit to the toilet he saw the complainant at the
urinal, noting his buttocks
were bare and exposed. The witness proceeded to the
urinal. The complainant ended up on the bathroom floor. He saw the complainant
laying on the ground as if he'd fallen straight back from the urinal. His pants
were still between his buttocks and his knees.
When the witness left the
bathroom he could not recall if the complainant was still on the floor. There
were three or four others
in the bathroom but he did not know who they were.
The video, exhibit 20, did not jog his memory. The video showed CAPT Vincent
placing a wet floor sign on the complainant.
cross-examination he agreed that he had purchased Five Seed cider and Corona
beer for the function. When he saw the complainant
at the urinal he was bare
foot. He regarded it as a type of joke. He did not know as to how the
complainant came to be on the floor.
When he was urinating he heard a commotion
and some laughing. He didn't hear the complainant saying “what the
It was a jovial atmosphere in the bathroom. He described the
accused as reserved and kept to himself and did not recall seeing him
toilets. At no stage did he see anyone stick a beer bottle into the
complainant’s anus.
Record of interview with the accused dated 11
December 2017
record of interview with the accused was then played to the court. He said that
he went to the bathroom and he saw the complainant
had pulled his pants down. He
then put a stubbie between the complainant’s thighs as a joke. He then
threw the bottle way
and then went to the toilet next to the complainant. He
denied tackling the complainant to the ground. The bottle went nowhere near
complainant’s bum or cheeks. The bottle was six inches away from the anus.
He threw the bottle away as it was empty. He
denied inserting the bottle into
the anus. At no stage did he grab the complainant. The complainant was
tackled while the accused
was at the urinal. He admitted talking to CAPT Tanner
who said it wasn't funny. He did not otherwise recall what she said.
W02 Andrew Crawford
Crawford gave evidence that he was the ADFIS commander in South Australia. He
commenced his inquiries into the case on 1 December
2017 and conducted the
record of interview with the accused on 11 December 2017. The record of
interview was tendered as exhibit
cross-examination he agreed that he was concerned to speak as swiftly as
possible to the accused. Exhibit 24, the accused's service
record was tendered.
The Warrant Officer confirmed the accused did not have any criminal history or
discipline history. The Warrant
Officer also gave evidence that he spoke to CAPT
Tanner after taking the statement from the complainant.
The complainant’s
complainant’s wife] gave evidence that she spoke to the complainant on the
telephone and he sounded detached and different.
On Friday evening he arrived
a group of guys came
and tackled him, pulled him to the ground, pulled down his
shorts, held him there and one of them stuck a beer bottle in his arse.
fairly emotionless when he was explaining this.
Accused’s Medical Records
54. Exhibit 26 were accused's medical records relative to the arm injury.
Defence case
accused did not give evidence but character evidence was called.
this summary, “ADFIS” is, as I understand it, an acronym for the
Australian Defence Force Investigation Service”
and “PT” is an
acronym for “Physical Training”.
applicant’s contentions were fairly summarised in the particulars pleaded
in his notice of appeal, as set out above. These
contentions, as the respondent
Chief of Army correctly submitted, took up the essence of the points made on
behalf of the applicant
in his defending officer’s closing address to the
court martial panel.
present case is, in my respectful view, a paradigm example of one where
everything turned on the assessment by the court martial
panel of the
credibility of witnesses which they saw and heard. That is an advantage which
the panel had and which we on the Tribunal
do not. Neither individually nor
collectively did the contentions made on behalf of the applicant to the court
martial panel, and
repeated to the Tribunal, dictate that a reasonable doubt be
above summary discloses that there were inconsistencies in the evidence before
the panel as to the events on the evening of 5
April 2017. These were for the
panel to consider in deciding whether it was satisfied that the charge was
proved beyond reasonable
doubt. There could be no doubt that the complainant
was, at some stage late in the evening, on the floor in the toilet area of the
mess with his pants and underwear around his ankles, i.e. with his naked
buttocks exposed. That his anus was penetrated by the neck
of a Corona beer
bottle wielded by the applicant was not wholly dependent on acceptance of the
complainant’s evidence as to
what he felt in his anus and, in the
immediate aftermath of that feeling, saw of the applicant and heard from the
applicant by way
of confession.
it is that, if the panel accepted that part of CAPT Machatsch’s evidence,
it corroborated the applicant’s version,
as related in his record of
interview, that he had placed the beer bottle between the complainant’s
thighs, some six inches
from his anus. But they were not obliged to do this.
CAPT Machatsch’s evidence also included his hearing a confession by the
applicant immediately afterwards in the mess anteroom to placement of a beer
bottle in the complainant’s anus. He thought
it was said as a joke but,
on his account, it was said. CAPT Tanner’s evidence, if accepted, was not
just of a confession
by the applicant of the placement of a beer bottle in the
complainant’s anus but of the subdued mood of the complainant in
anteroom immediately after the alleged event. In that same immediate aftermath,
CAPT Cleggett related hearing the complainant
say, “no I’m not
fucking alright” and being “very quiet, staring a lot and looking
sad”. Taken in
conjunction with the complainant’s evidence, it was,
in my view, reasonably open for the panel to conclude that the act charged
been admitted to others by the applicant in its immediate aftermath, entirely
consistent with observations made as to his mood
in the immediate aftermath of
the event he claimed had occurred and proved to the requisite standard.
so-called inconsistencies amongst those who went to the mess toilet area when
the complainant was there could be no more than
the recollection many months
later of a brief visit which occurred and concluded either before or after the
alleged incident.
possibility raised in the course of argument, prompted by looking at the video,
was that the appellant may have injured his anus
via some projection on the
floor, given the evidence of his vigorously writhing on the floor. But there
was no evidence of any such
projection and that possibility was not put to the
panel. To find in such a possibility a doubt such that the appeal should be
would be to embark on the type of usurpation of the tribunal of fact
deprecated by the High Court in
applicant put that, as with
M v The Queen
, this was a case where there
was an inherent improbability that the charged events could have occurred. In
this case, so the submission
went, the event charged, if it occurred as related
by the complainant, occurred in an area where a number of other officers were
present and others were coming and going. The particular passage in
where the inherent improbability in the circumstances of that case was
described was the following (at 500):
But more important than any individual matter was the
improbability of the appellant acting as he was alleged to have done in the
circumstances prevailing on that night, namely, on a squeaky bed in an unlocked
bedroom which was only a short distance from, and
within hearing distance of,
another bedroom occupied by the appellant’s wife, in a·fully
occupied, small house.
prevailing circumstances in the Officers’ Mess late in the evening of 5
April 2017 were, on any view of the evidence, very
different. The event
concerned was planned to be a light-hearted one at the conclusion of a lengthy
course. So, on the evidence,
it proved to be. Much alcohol was consumed by
many. The video taken of the complainant in the toilet area was played in the
of the hearing before the Tribunal. There was never any suggestion that
it depicted the whole of events there. The complainant
is revealed to be in a
jovial, even frivolous, mood. So, too, is whoever placed the sign over him while
he was on the floor. And
it was open to the panel to conclude that so, too, was
the applicant. It was for the panel members, in weighing up the evidence,
bringing to bear their experience of military life, to decide whether there was
an improbability that the applicant acted as he was
alleged to have done and
thereby to entertain a doubt. It was, on the whole of the evidence, reasonably
open, in my view, for the
panel to conclude that there was nothing inherently
improbable about the event occurring as alleged, however much they might lament
that a candidate for promotion to senior subaltern, as opposed perhaps to an
adolescent officer cadet or recently appointed, immature
Second Lieutenant or
Lieutenant, might behave in such a fashion.
course the evidence as to the events of that evening was not all one way. But
the Court marital panel enjoyed the singular advantage
over the Tribunal of
seeing and hearing the witnesses and making informed value judgements as to
their credibility accordingly.
Conceding to the panel that advantage, as I
must, I regard their verdict as reasonably open on the evidence.
to the granting of leave to appeal, in
Coulter v The Queen
(1988) 164 CLR
, at 356, the Mason CJ, Wilson and Brennan JJ stated:
The jurisdiction which the court exercises in
determining an application for leave is not a proceeding in the ordinary course
of litigation
... It is a preliminary procedure recognised by the legislature as
a means of enabling the court to control in some measure the volume
of appellate
work requiring its attention.
same, in my view, is true of the leave condition found in s 20(1) of the
Appeals Act in relation to grounds of appeal which do
not entail a question of
law. That is applicable to the grounds relied upon by the applicant. The
Appeals Act does not specify
the criteria which must be satisfied for leave to
appeal to be granted. However, the requirement for a grant of leave to appeal
against conviction on a ground which does not raise a question of law may be
traced to the
Criminal Appeal Act 1907
Criminal Appeal Act
The granting of leave is certainly not a formality. In the civilian criminal
justice system and in relation to Australian analogues
of the Criminal Appeal
Act, the approach has been that the requirement for a grant of leave entails an
assessment of the arguability
of the ground(s) concerned. If the ground is
reasonably arguable, leave is granted:
Rasic v The Queen
[2009] NSWCCA
, at [2], [12];
RWB v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 147
(2010) 202 A Crim R 209
, at [128]. In
my view, a like approach should inform the Tribunal in deciding whether to grant
leave to appeal.
accept that the grounds specified in the notice of appeal are reasonably
arguable. However, for the reasons given, it was (and
remains) my view that the
appeal should be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding thirty-eight (38)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision herein of the
Justice Logan
(President)
Dated: 30 May 2019
BRERETON JA:
3 December 2018 the appellant (then) Captain Rhiley Boyson was convicted by a
General Court Martial of an offence of sexual intercourse
without consent
contrary to
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(“DFDA”) and
Crimes Act 1900
particulars of which were:
Engaging in conduct outside the Jervis Bay Territory
that is a Territory offence, being the offence of sexual intercourse without
Being a defence member at Kokoda Barracks Canungra in the State of Queensland,
on 5 April 2017 engaged in sexual intercourse with
[the complainant], by
inserting a bottle into his anus, without his consent, and being reckless as to
whether he was consenting.
alternative charge of engaging in an act of gross indecency, contrary to
of the DFDA and
, was not proceeded
with in light of the verdict in respect of the primary charge.
5 December 2018 the appellant was sentenced to imprisonment for three months,
dismissal from the Defence Force, and reduction to
the rank of Lieutenant with
seniority in that rank to date from 5 December 2018. For the purpose of the
automatic review provided
for by DFDA
, the Reviewing Authority
obtained a report under DFDA,
s 154(1)(a)
, from Colonel (now Brigadier) His
Honour Judge Smith, who advised the Reviewing Authority that he could detect no
error of law in
the conduct of the trial, such that the conviction may be
confirmed on review, and that there was no error in the punishments imposed
were they excessive, and that they also may be confirmed on review, although it
was entirely within the discretion of the Reviewing
Authority to mitigate the
punishments if he or she thought fit. By Minute dated 20 January 2019, the
Reviewing Authority Major General
Bilton, Commander Forces Command, confirmed
the conviction and approved the punishments. Meanwhile, however, on
24 December 2018,
the appellant had lodged with the Reviewing Authority a
petition for review, under DFDA
, in respect of which the Reviewing
Authority obtained a further report from Captain Renwick CSC, RANR, SC, a
s 154(1)(a)
legal officer, who on 1 March 2019 advised that the
petition should be dismissed.
notice of appeal filed on 19 March 2019 and amended on 27 March 2019, the
appellant applies for leave to appeal to this tribunal.
The only grounds of
appeal are that the conviction is unreasonable and cannot be supported having
regard to the evidence (under
Defence Force Discipline
Appeals Act 1955
(Cth) (“the Appeals Act”)), and/or that in all
the circumstances of the case, the conviction is unsafe and unsatisfactory
(under s 23(1)(d) of the Appeals Act). At the conclusion of the hearing of
the appeal on 2 May 2019, the Tribunal extended time
for lodging an appeal to
the date on which it was lodged, granted leave to appeal, and (by majority:
Brereton JA and Perry J; Logan
J dissenting) allowed the appeal and set aside
the conviction, with reasons to be published subsequently. These are my reasons
concluding that those orders should be made.
Extension of time
21 of the Appeals Act requires that an appeal, or an application for leave to
appeal, to the Tribunal be lodged “within
the appropriate period”,
or within such further period as the Tribunal allows, and defines the
“appropriate period”
as the period of 30 days commencing immediately
after the earlier of the day on which the results of the s 152 review are
to the appellant, or the last day of the period of 30 days after the
conviction. The results of the s 152 review were notified to
the appellant
on or about 21 January 2019, and the period of 30 days from 22 January
expired on 21 February 2019. The period of
30 days after the conviction expired
on 2 January 2019, and the period of 30 days commencing on 3 January
expired on 2 February 2019
which, being the earlier of the two relevant periods,
was the time by which an appeal was required to be lodged.
appellant therefore requires an extension of time within which to appeal, which
was not opposed – a position very properly
adopted, given that the
appellant was not notified of the outcome of his s 153 petition of review
until sometime after 1 March 2019
(being the date of Captain Renwick’s
report), and the notice of appeal was filed very promptly thereafter. It is at
usually reasonable for a convicted person in the position of the appellant
to exhaust their rights of review before resorting to
an appeal to the Tribunal.
In those circumstances, it was appropriate to extend the period for lodging an
appeal to the date on which
it was lodged, being 19 March 2019.
Leave to appeal
to appeal to the Tribunal is required, except on a question of law [Appeals Act,
s 20(1)]. As the “unsafe and unsatisfactory”
grounds can
succeed on the basis that the Court Martial should have entertained a reasonable
doubt, even if there was sufficient
evidence in law to support the conviction
[see, for example,
Dickson v R
(2017) 94 NSWLR 476
[2017] NSWCCA 78
], it follows that these grounds do not raise a question of law. Leave to
appeal is therefore required.
Angre v Chief of Navy (No 3)
[2017] ADFDAT 2
the Tribunal (Tracey, Logan and
Brereton JJ) considered the test for leave to appeal in the context of the
Tribunal and said:
purpose of a requirement for leave to appeal is generally to serve as a filter
on unmeritorious or trifling appeals, so as to
restrict the appeal procedure to
appropriate matters and thereby promote the efficiency of the Tribunal’s
appeal procedures:
Coulter v The Queen
(1988) 164 CLR 350
at 359. Most
principles concerning leave to appeal have been developed in the context of
interlocutory appeals in civil matters,
and considerable caution is required in
their application in the present context of appeals from final convictions in
quasi-criminal
matters, where, as Deane and Gaudron JJ observed in
“In a case such as the
present where the application for leave to appeal was from a criminal conviction
or information to a
first court of appeal exercising general supervisory
appellate jurisdiction, the requirement of leave effectively represents no more
than a means of efficiently disposing of prospective appeals which would
obviously fail since it is difficult to envisage circumstances
where a competent
application for leave to appeal to such a court could properly be refused in a
case where the conviction should
be set aside if leave were to be granted and
the appeal were to proceed to a full
other words, leave would not be refused in a criminal appeal if it appeared to
the tribunal that there had been a miscarriage of
justice warranting the
quashing of a conviction. An equivalent approach should apply in this
is, self-evidently, not an appeal which would obviously fail; a grant of leave
to appeal is therefore appropriate.
Unsafe and unsatisfactory
the grounds that the conviction is unreasonable, or cannot be supported, having
regard to the evidence; and that in all the
circumstances of the case, the
conviction is unsafe or unsatisfactory, are separate grounds, under
ss 23(1)(a) and 23(1)(d) of the
Appeals Act respectively, they are legally
indistinguishable: the terms “unreasonable”, “cannot be
supported, having
regard to the evidence” and “unsafe and
unsatisfactory” are different ways of stating the same legal concept [
v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
at 492 (Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and
Toohey JJ);
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
[2002] HCA 53
(McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ);
Yewsang v Chief of Army
[2013] ADFDAT
principles which inform those grounds have recently been restated by the New
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal in
Dickson v R
(2017) 94 NSWLR 476
[2017] NSWCCA 78
, by Bathurst CJ (with whom Johnson J and Fullerton J
concurred), as follows (emphasis added):
principles on which a court will set aside a verdict as unreasonable are well
established. In
SKA v The Queen
(2011) 243 CLR 400
[2011] HCA 13
, the Court stated the approach to be adopted was that laid down in
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
at 492-494;
[1994] HCA 63
, namely that
the Court is required to make its own “independent assessment of the
evidence”. If after taking into account
the primary responsibility of the
jury in determining the question of guilt or innocence and the benefit of the
jury having seen
or heard the evidence, the Court is left in doubt as to the
reasonableness of the verdict, the verdict should be set aside. In
Court also stated (at 494) that “[i]n most cases a doubt experienced by an
appellate court will be a doubt which a jury
ought also to have
experienced” and “[i]t is only where a jury’s advantage in
seeing and hearing the evidence is
capable of resolving a doubt ... that the
court may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred”: see also
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
[2002] HCA 53
was pointed out by Hayne J in
Libke v The Queen
(2007) 230 CLR 559
[2007] HCA 30
(Gleeson CJ and Heydon J agreeing), for a verdict to be
unreasonable it is not enough that a review of the evidence shows only that
was possible for a jury to reach a different conclusion. However,
for a Court
to conclude there was no miscarriage, it is not sufficient that there was
evidence on which a jury could convict
. If after giving full weight to the
primacy of the jury, the Court is left in reasonable doubt as to the verdict, it
is only where
the jury’s advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is
capable of resolving the doubt that the Court can conclude that
there was no
miscarriage of justice.
considering the issue in a case such as the present where the Crown relies on
circumstantial evidence, it is important to bear
in mind that the task of the
appellate court is to consider and weigh all the circumstances in considering
and deciding whether there
is an inference consistent with innocence reasonably
open on the evidence. The evidence is not to be looked at in a piecemeal
R v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
[2016] HCA 35
respondent rightly points out that, in considering these grounds, an appellate
court “must not disregard or discount either
the consideration that the
jury is the body entrusted with the primary responsibility of determining guilt
or innocence, or the consideration
that the jury has had the benefit of having
seen and heard the witnesses” [
M v The Queen
[13] (French CJ, Gummow and Kiefel JJ)], and that the assessment of the
reliability and credibility of witnesses is quintessentially
a matter for the
[2014] NSWCCA 210
]. These considerations are
reinforced by the following observations of the High Court in
The Queen v
(2016) 258 CLR 308
[2016] HCA 35
[66] (footnotes
is fundamental to our system of criminal justice in relation to allegations of
serious crimes tried by jury that the jury is “the
constitutional tribunal
for deciding issues of fact.” Given the central place of the jury trial in
the administration of criminal
justice over the centuries, and the abiding
importance of the role of the jury as representative of the community in that
the setting aside of a jury’s verdict on the ground that it is
“unreasonable” within the meaning of s 668E(1) of
the Criminal Code
is a serious step, not to be taken without particular regard to the advantage
enjoyed by the jury over a court
of appeal which has not seen or heard the
witnesses called at trial. Further, the boundaries of reasonableness within
which the jury’s
function is to be performed should not be narrowed in a
hard and fast way by the considerations expressed in the passages from the
reasons of the Court of Appeal explaining its disposition of the appeal.
those considerations in mind, a court of criminal appeal is not to substitute
trial by an appeal court for trial by jury. Where
there is an appeal against
conviction on the ground that the verdict was unreasonable, the ultimate
question for the appeal court
“must always be whether the [appeal] court
thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be
beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was
Nonetheless,
the concluding words of that passage, and the authority cited for it (namely
M v The Queen,
at 494-5), show that the ultimate question remains whether
the appellate court thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open
the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty.
does not affect the propositions that:
(1) the appellate court must make its own independent
assessment of the evidence, and if after taking into account the primary
responsibility
of the jury in determining the question of guilt or innocence and
the benefit of the jury having seen and heard the evidence, the
Court is left in
doubt as to the reasonableness of the verdict, the verdict should be set
(2) in most cases a doubt experienced by an appellate court will be a doubt
which a jury ought also to have experienced, and only
where a jury’s
advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt may
the court conclude that no
miscarriage of justice occurred;
(3) while it is not sufficient, to render a verdict unreasonable, that a review
of the evidence shows only that it was possible for
a jury to reach a different
conclusion, it is also not sufficient, for a Court to conclude there was no
miscarriage, that there was
evidence on which a jury could convict: if after
giving full weight to the primacy of the jury, the Court is left in reasonable
as to the verdict, it is only where the jury’s advantage in seeing
and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving the doubt
that the Court can
conclude that there was no miscarriage of justice.
principles have been stated in this Tribunal, with reference to
Yewsang v Chief of Army
Hodge v Chief of Navy
[2015] ADFDAT 4
Betts v Chief of
[2018] ADFDAT 2
. Drawing on those authorities,
and having regard also to
they may for
present purposes, in the context of an appeal to this Tribunal from a conviction
by Court Martial, be stated as follows:
(1) First, the question for
the Tribunal is whether it thinks that, upon the whole of the evidence, it was
open to the Court Martial
to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
appellant was guilty [
M v The Queen
(2) Secondly, to address that question, the Tribunal must make its own
independent assessment of the sufficiency and quality of the
at [14] (French CJ, Gummow and Kiefel JJ);
Yewsang v Chief of Army
at [57]-[59]].
(3) Thirdly, although it will not suffice to set aside the conviction if it
appears only that it was
on the evidence for the Court Martial
to reach a different conclusion, the conviction must be set aside if the
Tribunal decides that
the Court Martial should have had a reasonable doubt about
the appellant’s guilt (in the sense that it
, as distinct from
, have entertained such a doubt), even if there was sufficient
evidence in law to support it [
M v The Queen
Low v Chief of Navy
[2011] ADFDAT 3
(4) Fourthly, a doubt experienced by the Tribunal will generally be a doubt
which the Court Martial ought also to have experienced,
and if after giving full
weight to the primacy of the Court Martial the Tribunal is left in reasonable
doubt, it is only where the
Court Martial’s advantage in seeing and
hearing the evidence is capable of resolving the doubt that the Tribunal can
that there was no miscarriage of justice [
M v The Queen
issue before the Tribunal was therefore whether it was open (in the sense
described in
) on the whole of the
evidence for the Court Martial to be satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that
the appellant had, at the time
and place alleged, inserted a bottle into the
complainant’s anus. For the reasons that follow, in my opinion it was
incident which gave rise to the proceedings occurred in the male bathroom in the
Officer’s Mess at Canungra on 5 April 2017,
during an end-of-course
function for the All Corps Captains’ Course, on which the complainant (an
Army Captain of the same
cohort as the appellant) and the appellant were both
students. The theme was Hawaiian, and there was a band, dancing, slide show,
and various mess games, including drinking games. Alcohol was consumed, in
considerable quantities, by most of those present, including
the complainant,
the appellant, and all the relevant prosecution witnesses other than Captain
The appellant’s account
the outset, it is important to appreciate that the appellant, while disputing
that he had inserted a beer bottle into the complainant’s
anus, did not
dispute that, in the course of the evening, in the male bathroom, he had placed
a beer bottle between the complainant’s
appellant was first apprised of the allegation on 11 December 2017 when ADFIS
investigators arrived at his unit. In the ensuing
recorded interview (which was
recorded audio-visually, and transcribed, and the audio-visual record as well as
the transcript was
available to the Tribunal), the senior investigator recorded
what had transpired at their initial contact, which the appellant agreed
accurate (emphasis added):
Q33. Just before I go on and speak to you about the
allegation I just want to go through with you a record that I’ve made of
what has transpired this [sic] far from when I first met you, which I have
recorded in my service police notebook. So basically
I arrived at Headquarters
6 Aviation this morning just after 11 and I did have a chat with the CO to make
some arrangements to see
you and a couple of other people. So I have recorded
at 1148 hours at the briefing room at Headquarters 6 Aviation I met LT Boyson
and I introduced myself and CPL Bettes. At 1149 I cautioned LT Boyson. You
replied that you understood the caution. At 1150 I informed
LT Boyson of the
purpose of my visit and the nature of the allegation against him and then
offered him the opportunity to take part
in an interview after caution. LT
Boyson said yes and
then you made a comment words to the effect of,
“That's not how it happened”
and I said, “Well, we can
talk about that in an interview”, or something along those lines, or
similar words.
the commencement of the recorded interview, the senior investigator
Q1. ... Sir, I am making inquiries into an allegation
that on 5 April 2017 in the male toilet of the Canungra officers’ mess
Kokoda Barracks in Canungra you did assault captain, now [the complainant] of
[unit] in the male toilets by inserting a beer bottle
into his rectum, a serious
allegation - I intend to ask you some questions in relation to the allegation,
but before I do I am going
to remind you of the caution which is that you do not
have to say or do anything, but anything you do say or do may be used in
the opportunity to consult a lawyer, the appellant said that he would like
A14. Take a break to have a think about it because I
just [or obviously] want to clear up what I’ve done,
because that
wasn’t what I did
, but it’s obviously a big allegation at the
from the moment he was confronted with the allegation, the appellant’s
response was to the effect that he had done something,
but not what was alleged.
Having consulted a legal officer, he was asked for his version of
Q35. ... Okay, sir. Sir, I mentioned to you briefly at
the headquarters what we were making inquiries into, obviously a very serious
allegation that in fact at the course, the function at the end of the course at
the officers’ mess an incident occurred in
the male toilets. [The
complainant] alleges that he was urinating at the trough and that he was tackled
to the ground and that someone
then shoved a beer bottle or similar into his
anus and he alleges that that was you that did that. So that’s obviously
serious allegation. A lot of time has elapsed since that allegedly
occurred and now, and he says that he has been trying to reconcile
with that and
struggling a little bit about what happened, but he has come forward. Last week
he made a statement to us and he asked
for this matter to be investigated by
Q36. Do you want to provide any account, any version or
do you want to say anything in relation to that
allegation?
I want to give my version of what happened there.
Q37. Yes, please carry on,
was the course function there and so I’m kind of shocked as well because I
was good mates with [the complainant]. Yes,
went to the bathroom.
the urinal going to the bathroom but he'd pulled his pants down like a -
everyone was mucking around at the course function.
So he was urinating like a
child, they pull their pants down and they go to the toilet. And then I walked
in with my stubby and he'd
gone and just put it between his legs, so thighs, as
a - a not funny joke at the time. So I was holding the bottle, as you would
a bottle, and then with the tip, the end down and it went in between his thighs
as he was at the trough going to the toilet.
And then I threw that bottle away
and then went to the toilet next to him
. So I never tackled him to the
ground and put a bottle in him or had any intent to do that with what I did do
with putting it by
his thighs.
Q38. Okay. Is there anything else,
were other people in there but I’m not sure who was in the bathroom. There
probably would have been at least five, five
people I suppose in the
the course of the recorded interview, the appellant also said that the bottle
went nowhere near the complainant’s anus or
his “bum or
cheeks”, but between his thighs, some six inches away from his anus. He
also said that immediately after
placing the bottle between the
complainant’s thighs as he stood at the urinal, he threw the bottle away
and then went to the
urinal next to the complainant, and was urinating when
someone else pushed the complainant to the ground.
The complainant’s evidence
only direct evidence of the alleged incident was that of the complainant, who
said that it occurred in the male bathroom between
2200 and 2300 hours. He
entered the bathroom, wearing a Hawaiian shirt and shorts; there were then four
to six other men in the
bathroom, including the appellant and Captain Botham.
He went to the urinal and, in an attempt at juvenile humour, dropped his shorts
and his underwear down below his knees as he stood at the urinal to urinate.
While standing at the urinal, he was “tackled”
to the ground; this
amounted to him being pushed down from the shoulder by one or more others, whom
the evidence did not identify.
He fell over backwards; his bottom hit the
ground first:
When you fell, what part of your body hit the ground
first?---I believe it was sort of around my bum and
was on the ground, trying to pull up his pants, when he felt a sharp pain:
So while you were on the ground what happened next?---So
I was on the ground, I was trying to pull my shorts up and – yeah,
of felt a really sharp pain.
was sitting on his buttocks, with his legs straight out in front of him,
wriggling in an attempt to pull his shorts up:
Now, you said you were trying to pull your shorts up;
how were you trying to do that?---So, I was on the ground sort of trying to
up and pull my shorts up at the same time. From memory, I just grabbed on to my
shorts. I was trying to pull those up but my
underwear was sort of still around
my knees and impeding that.
How were you positioned on the floor at that stage?---So, do you mean like
orientation wise or how my body was positioned?
How were you pulling your shorts up, where your body was positioned, where your
feet were?---Okay. So, I was on – at the point
where I marked on the map
sort of where I initially fell. I was sort of I suppose half sitting up but my
feet were out in front,
almost like a – I suppose like a sit up but with
my feet extended, and yes, my bum was on the ground.
How bent were your legs?---From memory, they were relatively straight.
As you were on the ground, how were you moving your body in order to pull your
shorts up?---Yes, so I was sort of just wiggling my
body trying to get my shorts
up, I think. Yes, just trying to pull your shorts up while you’re sitting
on the ground is quite
difficult and I think I was just trying to get them up as
quickly as I could.
sharp pain he felt was in the vicinity of – he variously used the words
“on” and “in” – his
You told us that you felt a sharp pain; where did you
feel that?---In – like on my anus.
CHIEF JUDGE ADVOCATE: What was that, sorry?
PROSECUTOR: Where did you feel that sharp pain?---I felt it in my anus.
lasted for about five seconds:
How long did that pain last for?---It was quite quick.
I would say between say five and - probably five seconds.
did not know what was causing the pain, but said that he felt as if he had been
“penetrated” with something:
At that stage when you felt that sharp pain, did you
know what was causing that sharp pain?---At the time, no.
Whilst you were feeling that really sharp pain, are you able to describe to us
what you felt was happening with your anus?---I felt
like it was – like
I’d been penetrated with something.
Do you know how far you felt that you’d been penetrated?---I think
probably a few centimetres, probably five centimetres or
so, I could definitely
feel something.
that time, his buttocks were still on the
When you felt that pain and that penetration, are you
able to describe to us what your body position was, how you were on the
ground?---Okay.
So, I was still in the – sort of the stage of trying to
pull my shorts up, so my upper body was up from the ground. My bum
were in contact with the floor. But yes, from
memory, I think like the –
sort of like my right – my right side was higher up which exposed my anus.
Do you know how high up it was, your right side?---I can’t recall
specifically, no.
Do you recall how far your buttocks or your back was off the ground?---No, I
can’t really recall that.
noticed somebody “crouching down over” him to his right:
PROSECUTOR: While you felt that pain, what did you
see?---So, I had somebody to the right of me, sort of crouching down over me,
but I was still trying to I suppose pull my shorts up. So, the view was off the
wall, however, there was somebody was like next
to me, crouching next to me.
said he was yelling “what the fuck” or “what the fuck are you
doing”, stood up and pulled his shorts up:
What, if anything, were you saying at this stage?---I
think I was yelling, like “What the fuck?” or “What the fuck
are you doing?”.
When that sharp pain stopped, what did you see? I withdraw that. When that
sharp pain stopped, what did you do?---I have difficulty
to recall. I think I
was just shocked. I continued to pull my shorts up so I stood up and pulled my
How long did it take you to pull your shorts up?---Probably about 10 seconds.
cross-examination, he confirmed that he did not know who had tackled him, did
not see what was used to cause the pain he experienced,
and did not see who it
was who did it:
You don’t know who it was who you described as
tackled, but you don’t know who it was who tackled you, pulled you to the
ground?---No.
You didn’t see what was used to cause this sharp pain in your anus, did
That is as it was occurring?---No.
You didn’t see who did it?---No, I can’t
he stood up, he saw the appellant, who said that he had stuck a beer bottle in
As you were pulling your shorts up, where were you doing
that?---I believe it was in the vicinity of where I was fallen on the ground,
but potentially I was a bit closer to the – to the wall when I stood up.
I’m not too sure if I kind of stood up and
walked around a couple of steps
When you had stood up, how far up were your pants by that stage?---When I stood
up, I believe I had my pants up around my waist where
When you stood up with your pants around your waist, what did you see
next?---Okay. So, I saw Rhiley coming back from the sink basins.
As CAPT Boyson was coming back from the sink basins, what did he do?---He had a
Corona bottle in one hand. I can’t recall
what that hand was in, and -
you know – he said, “I just” – I believe it was like
“I stuck it in you”,
and then pointed how far it was and he said,
“It was fucking disgusting”.
CHIEF JUDGE ADVOCATE: Just get him to repeat that. I couldn’t
understand.
PROSECUTOR: [The complainant], what I’ll get you to do is just repeat
what you said CAPT Boyson did, but I’ll also get
you to use words to the
effect of?---Okay.
What you heard the words that came out of his mouth were to the best of your
ability to remember?---Okay. So, I saw Rhiley coming
back from the sink. In
one hand he had a Corona bottle, so a beer bottle, and then he said to me that
– to the effect of,
“I just stuck this in you” and was
pointing, I believe approximating how far it went in. And then he said –
know – words to the effect of, “It was disgusting”.
You said that he pointed to the bottle. What sort of bottle was it?---It was a
Corona beer bottle.
What part of the Corona bottle was he pointing to when he said that he said that
he stuck it in you?---He was pointing to the neck
of the bottle, I would say a
number of centimetres down from the actual opening.
As he said that, what facial expression did he have?---I can’t recall his
expression when he said and pointed to the bottle,
but when he said it, it was
– you know – words to the effect of, “It was
disgusting”. He was mimicking throwing
Do you recall seeing him throw up?---No.
Did you hear him throw up?---From memory, no.
From the point that you were tackled to the ground to that point where you stood
up and saw CAPT Boyson, what period of time had
elapsed?---I would estimate no
more than 60 seconds.
Smith’s report, which is replicated in the
President’s reasons,
states that in cross-examination the complainant “recalled CAPT Botham
watching the accused
retch into the sink”. That
is not quite accurate; the relevant evidence was:
DEFENDING OFFICER: It’s all right, I’ll do
it another way. To your observation did CAPT Botham say anything to you or
Boyson at that point in time in the toilets?---Yes. Yes, he did.
What was that?---He said that as he was washing his hands that CAPT Boyson was
retching in the sink.
CHIEF JUDGE ADVOCATE: Would you just get him to repeat that, I didn’t
understand that?---Okay, so – sorry, one moment.
I think the question is did CAPT Botham say anything to you or – did you
put also CAPT - - -
DEFENDING OFFICER: Or CAPT Boyson.
CHIEF JUDGE ADVOCATE: Yes?---Okay, so I recall Leon – I’m not sure
if he was talking to me or to Rhiley, we were close
together, said that he was
watching Rhiley retch into the sink.
other words, what the complainant recalled was not Captain Botham watching the
appellant retch into the sink, but Captain Botham’s
hearsay report that
the appellant “retched in the sink”. Captain Botham’s
evidence was that although he recalled
the complainant in the bathroom,
wrestling with others, including on the floor, he saw nothing more than
“guys having fun”,
did not see anyone insert a bottle into his anus,
did not recall seeing the appellant in the bathroom, and did not recall seeing
someone vomit or retch into the sink – though as to that he added that it
was not something he would pay much attention to
so as to remember it nine
months later.
complainant said that he put his hand into his underwear and when he pulled his
hand out there was a small amount of blood, on
the tips of three of his fingers.
He went into one of the cubicles and used toilet paper to soak the blood, and
then left the bathroom.
According to Captain Tanner and Captain Cleggett
(though the appellant did not recall this), he subsequently in the course of the
evening told each of them aspects of what he said had happened in the bathroom.
The video clip
of the incident was captured by someone present in a video clip on a mobile
phone, which appears to have been distributed almost
immediately to a number of
the course members present. The video (which covers less than five seconds)
(1) the complainant sitting on his bottom on the floor
in the men's bathroom, with his legs extended in front of him, knees slightly
bent, and his shorts below his knees, and no shoes on;
(2) Mr Vincent having placed a pink plastic cleaning sign over the complainant's
crotch, as if to preserve his modesty;
(3) the complainant apparently laughing, and Captain Melia looking at the
complainant from the urinal and smiling;
(4) the complainant wriggling his buttocks and legs in an endeavour to pull up
his shorts, with them well above his knees by the
end of the clip, but their
crotch held back by his underpants, which were still below his knees;
(5) as he wriggled to pull up his shorts, the complainant raising his left
buttock from the ground very slightly – five centimetres
at the most;
(6) by the end of the video, there is no one in the complainant’s
immediate vicinity, let alone crouching beside or over him,
and there is no sign
of the appellant, though there are other men – including Captain
Machatsch, Mr Vincent, Captain Melia,
and the photographer (whoever he was)
– in the room.
evidence does not reveal who recorded the video clip, and it was not suggested
that it was the appellant. While the appellant
had some images from the night
on his phone, and showed one to Captain Cleggett, the statement in Colonel
Smith’s summary,
that “It was her impression that the photograph was
taken on the accused's phone”, is neither entirely accurate nor complete.
Captain Cleggett’s relevant evidence was that it was
impression that the appellant had taken the photograph, but that the phone on
which she was shown it was his:
The phone that was being handed around with the photo on
it, did anyone tell you who took the photo?---I had an impression at the
who took the photo, but I don’t know how I knew that, I just – yes,
But your impression wasn’t that it was CAPT Boyson who had taken the
photo?---That was not my impression, no.
The phone that was being handed around, you don’t know whose phone that
was do you?---It was my impression that it was CAPT
Boyson’s phone. To my
knowledge it didn’t get handed around, he held it and showed me. I never
touched the phone.
That being your impression, you didn’t know?---No, I did not
that rose no higher than an impression, and even if the impression were correct
it would not mean that the photo was taken on
the appellant’s phone: there
was evidence that the video clip (and Captain Cleggett’s description of
the photo she was
shown corresponds with the opening frame of the video clip)
was electronically distributed to several course members very shortly
complainant said that the events depicted in the video occurred before he felt
the pain in (or on) his anus. Although he did
not recall the placement of the
pink cleaning sign, the video is consistent with his evidence that:
(1) he was on the ground, trying to sit up and pull up
his shorts, but his underwear was still around my knees and impeding that;
(2) he was “half sitting up” with his legs extended relatively
straight and his “bum was on the ground”;
(3) he was wriggling his body trying to get his shorts
the trial, and before us, the complainant’s reliability was the subject of
attack, including on the basis that he was intoxicated;
that he said he was
wearing shoes, when the video clearly showed that he was barefooted; that he had
no recollection of the pink
cleaning sign being placed over him, as shown in the
video; that (contrary to the evidence of Captain Tanner and Captain Cleggett)
had no recollection of that night telling either of them anything about the
incident, nor of any conversation in which the appellant
apologised to him; that
his account was inconsistent with Captain Cleggett’s evidence that he told
her that someone “
to put a bottle up his arse”
following which he was then tackled to the ground; that (contrary to his
wife’s evidence)
he had no recollection of telephoning her that night; and
that his evidence was inconsistent with the version he told his wife 48
after the incident.
Court Martial must have accepted that despite these criticisms, the complainant
was an apparently truthful and reliable witness
as to the essential facts
– being that he experienced pain in the vicinity of his anus and saw a
little blood on his fingers,
and the “admission” he attributed to
the appellant. In deference to the Court Martial’s position of advantage
in having seen and heard the complainant give his evidence, including his
cross-examination, so should the Tribunal. But it does
not follow that this
proves, beyond reasonable doubt, that the appellant performed the act charged.
As has been observed, the complainant
did not see what caused the pain in the
vicinity of his anus, nor who it was who caused it. His actual knowledge was
only of unexplained
pain in the vicinity of his anus, unexplained blood, and
what the appellant told him. How he was able to assess that he had been
penetrated “five centimetres or so” is not apparent, though the
answer may well lie in his belief that when the appellant
showed him the bottle
that he said he had stuck in him, he was indicating how far. It is entirely
natural that once told by the
appellant that he had stuck a bottle in him, he
would have associated the pain with what he was told. However, he described
on his bottom when he was “tackled”. With his shorts around
his lower legs at the urinal, he was effectively hobbled,
and would have had no
capacity to protect himself as he fell; he probably landed quite hard, on a hard
tiled floor. The mechanism
of his fall, and his subsequent struggle to
reposition his shorts, could account for his experiencing trauma, injury and
the foot of his spine, or in his buttocks, near his anus. This
possibility is not necessary to my conclusion, below, that as a matter
physical possibility, in the circumstances, the insertion of a beer bottle into
his anus is improbable in the extreme. But it
does illustrate that insertion of
something – and in particular a bottle – into his anus is not the
only rational explanation
for the pain and a small quantity of blood. And when
coupled with what he understood the appellant to have told him in the bathroom,
it provides an explanation as to how the complainant could honestly and credibly
have been mistaken as to the cause. It also demonstrates
the centrality of the
“admissions” to proof of the appellant’s guilt.
Physical impossibility
that background, provided by the complainant’s evidence and the video
clip, the appellant submitted that it was physically
impossible for a bottle (or
any item) to have been inserted into the complainant’s anus, positioned as
he was sitting on his
bottom with his legs extended in front of him.
complainant’s evidence in chief, set out above, was that when he felt the
pain/penetration, his “bum was in contact
with the floor and ... the heel
of my shoes were in contact with the floor”, though “from memory, I
think like the –
sort of like my right – my right side was higher up
which exposed my anus”. In cross-examination, he agreed that he
sitting on his bottom throughout, and that he was not in a position that would
easily have permitted anything to be put in his
You, throughout this time, you were sitting on your
bottom, weren’t you?---Yes.
You weren’t in a position that would have easily enabled anything to be
put into your anus were you?---I – I would say,
yes I’d agree with
was subsequently revisited:
Just a moment please, sir. You said already that you
were sitting on the bathroom floor with your pants down, and we can see that
the still images, how do you say something was penetrated into your
anus?---I’m sorry, it’s a question about how I
believe someone
physically could do that in that position?
Yes?---I’m honestly not too sure how it could occur, I could suggest that
somebody could push a leg over to the side, say my
right leg over to the side,
or push my body back further onto the ground.
But you don’t know and you didn’t
see?---No, in the time that it occurred, I’m not sure exactly what –
of any of those occurred.
You don’t recall having your leg pushed over or your body pushed back do
you?---I can’t recall exactly what occurred,
suggestion that his body could have been pushed back further onto the ground is
entirely implausible: he did not remember it occurring,
and if it had, access to
his anus would have been from in front of him, with him lying on his back, in
which circumstances the shorts
he had almost completely pulled up would have
presented an obstacle, and more significantly he could not have failed to have
the perpetrator. Nor is it at all apparent how his right leg could have
been pushed “over to the side”. The video confirms
complainant’s evidence that his buttocks were on the ground, and (at the
end) shows him raising his left buttock (not his
right) slightly, and not to an
extent that would expose his anus, let alone provide access to enable a beer
bottle to be manoeuvred
under him and into his anus.
my view, no plausible explanation has been advanced, either at the trial or
before us, for how a Corona beer bottle, with a long
neck, could have been
manoeuvred underneath, and its neck inserted several centimetres into the anus
of, a man sitting on the floor
on his buttocks with his legs extended to his
front. When asked, counsel for the respondent before us said:
Well, the bottle need not be held vertically to the
ground or to the complainant’s anus. If he’s on an angle, the
could be held at an angle.
even on an angle, there would have had to be sufficient room beneath the
complainant to manoeuvre a beer bottle into position,
and to find the anus.
Given the complainant’s position sitting with his buttocks on the floor,
struggling to pull his shorts
up (which while down effectively hobbled his
legs), the notion that his leg could somehow be moved so as to enable this to be
in seconds and without observation or sensation on the part of the
complainant, is highly improbable.
my view, as a matter of physical possibility, in the circumstances revealed by
the complainant’s evidence and the video,
the insertion of a beer bottle
into the complainant’s anus is improbable in the extreme.
Absence of corroboration where corroboration is to be
the respondent rightly submitted, there is no requirement that the
complainant’s evidence be corroborated [
Evidence Act 2011
That, however, is not the point in this case; here the
significance of the absence of corroboration is that, given the nature of
alleged incident and the presence of others in the relatively confined space in
which it and the events which immediately followed
it (including the complainant
yelling out, the appellant retching and then showing the complainant the bottle)
allegedly took place,
absence of corroboration amounts to evidence that the
incident did not take place as alleged.
has been indicated, the video clip shows
Machatsch, Captain Melia and Mr Vincent – as well as the unknown
photographer – as being present at what must
have been moments before the
alleged assault. Other evidence suggests that Captain Bagwill, Captain Botham
and Captain Cassar were
also present for at least some of the relevant period.
None of these six witnesses, each of whom gave evidence in the prosecution
observed anything like what the complainant described. Captain Melia recalled a
playful wrestle between the appellant and
the complainant, on the floor, as best
he could tell before the events depicted in the video, but he did not see a
bottle being inserted
into the complainant’s anus, and firmly denied that
he had seen a sexual assault. It may be that not all six were present
same time, but given that at least four were present at the time of the video,
and Captain Melia was still using the urinal
at the end of the video clip, it is
improbable that not one of them remained when the alleged assault took place
moments later, and
it is improbable that the alleged assault could have taken
place without at least one of them observing it or its immediate sequelae.
is perhaps theoretically possible that after the incident at the urinal, and
after the video was exposed, everyone but the appellant
and the complainant left
the bathroom, but that does not accord with the evidence of the complainant, and
the probabilities are otherwise.
It is perhaps also theoretically possible that
the act was performed without coming to the notice of whoever else was present
the bathroom, but that too seems highly improbable. Those are the type of
theoretical possibilities that might, in a defence case,
raise a “rational
hypothesis”; but when a prosecution case depends on such theoretical
possibilities, it is not proved
beyond reasonable doubt.
Captain Machatsch’s evidence
contrast to the absence of corroboration for the complainant’s version,
and although the appellant did not himself give evidence
at the trial, there was
direct evidence which corroborated his account of events as given in his
recorded interview. The appellant’s
version was substantially
corroborated by Captain Machatsch, who gave the following evidence:
And when you came out of that stall and saw [the
complainant] at the urinals what did you then see?---So as mentioned, I saw [the
complainant] standing there, presumably urinating, with his underwear and shorts
around his ankles, so completely dropped. And I
then saw CAPT Boyson come into
the toilet stall - or the toilet, sorry, and then essentially one motion, walked
past me, walked past
[the complainant], and in one - one motion just placed a
beer bottle between the upper thighs of [the complainant], who then, from
saw, clenched his thighs to presumably hold the bottle in place. CAPT Boyson
then went to the right-hand side of the urinal
to obviously go to the toilet and
from there I believe – I definitely witnessed that and I saw then –
I can’t quite
recall what happened to the bottle after that because I just
remember seeing that and seeing the two having a joke, what I presume
a joke, I then turned, I believe I was speaking to someone, and then from the
periphery of my vision I recall someone grabbing
at the pants of [the
complainant] who was then moving away from the urinal but still had his pants
around his ankles.
Do you remember who that person was who grabbed at his pants?---I can’t
say with absolute certainty but from my recollection
I think it is possibly to
have been CAPT Ryan, it was someone of – the reason I say CAPT Ryan is
because I think I can remember
him being in the toilet at the time and I can
recall it was someone of larger stature doing that.
When you told us that you saw CAPT Boyson walk past you and walk up to [the
complainant] at the urinal where in his upper thighs
did he place the
bottle?---It would have been approximately 15 to 20 centimetres from [the
complainant]’s buttock crease, below,
like in the upper thigh region.
Did you see what angle it was pointed in?---It was about from the horizontal it
may have been up to a 45 degree angle from the horizontal.
CHIEF JUDGE ADVOCATE: When you say buttock crease are you talking about the top
or the bottom of the buttock crease?---The bottom,
the horizontal buttock
crease, sorry.
PROSECUTOR: You said that [the complainant] clenched his thighs, how long did
he clench his thighs for?---I can’t say. I
saw him definitely clench his
thighs in what I presume was an effort to keep the bottle in place, but then as
I turned away once
I’d witnessed that, to chat, I can’t recall how
long he would have done that for.
How long were you talking to that other person for?---I can’t say in
absolute terms, however it was for maybe a minute or two
minutes and it would
have been after [the complainant] left the toilet but I stopped talking and then
I essentially walked out soon
after that.
an application by the prosecutor for leave to cross-examine Captain Machatsch as
adverse was at one stage foreshadowed, it
was not pursued.
is true that Captain Machatsch’s evidence did not necessarily exclude the
possibility that there was a second bottle incident,
after the complainant had
been pushed to the ground, which he did not witness. However, it provided
substantial corroboration for
the appellant’s version of events.
The admissions
of the appellant’s “admission” to the complainant in the
bathroom – and the other alleged “admissions”
to which I shall
come – there was no evidence to establish what had caused the pain
experienced by the complainant, let alone
who (if anyone) was responsible for
it. Proof that it was the appellant, using a beer bottle, as alleged, depended
on the admissions
attributed to the appellant. There was evidence of
(1) to the complainant who, as recorded above, said that
the appellant told him “I stuck this in you” and words to the
of “it was disgusting”;
(2) to Captain Tanner, who says she asked the appellant if he had “stuck a
bottle in [the complainant’s] arse”,
to which he responded
“Yes, but I made myself physically ill from it. I went and vomited in the
sink afterwards”; and
(3) to Captain Machatsch, who said that the appellant said to him “I put a
bottle in [the complainant’s] arse”.
content of these “admissions” must be considered in the context of
the events. That context includes, relevantly,
that the appellant had
admittedly (as Captain Machatsch confirmed) as a prank placed a beer bottle
between the complainant’s
thighs as he stood at the urinal; that it was an
evening of exuberance and hijinks; and that the perceptions of all the relevant
witnesses were clouded by substantial quantities of alcohol.
words attributed to the appellant by the complainant were: “I just stuck
this in you” pointing how far it went in
and “It was
disgusting”, mimicking vomiting. But the complainant did not hear or see
him vomit. At that point spirits
– at least the appellant’s –
were still high (he had not yet been spoken to by Captain Tanner about his
inappropriateness),
and the words attributed to him by the complainant are
explicable as a continuation of the “prank” practised at the urinal.
relevant evidence of Captain Tanner was that after the complainant had told her
that “a bottle had been stuck up his arse”,
she had a conversation
with the appellant:
When CAPT Boyson came over to the both of you, what did
he say?---I don’t remember the words that he said to come in, but I
started a conversation with Rhiley, with CAPT Boyson.
Okay. So, you started a conversation with CAPT Boyson, are you able to give us
words to the effect of what you said and then, if
he responded, any of those
words?---Sure. I asked Rhiley if he’d stuck a bottle in James’s
arse, essentially, words
to the effect, and his response to me was, “Yes,
but I made myself physically ill from it. I went and vomited in the sink
afterwards”.
CHIEF JUDGE ADVOCATE: Just pause there. You asked Rhiley if he stuck a bottle
in James’s arse. He replied yes, and then
what did he say?---“I
made myself physically ill and went and vomited in the sink from it”.
PROSECUTOR: When he said those words, what was the tone of his voice?---I
sensed that he was quite disgusted in himself.
What facial expression did he have when he said that?---I believe it was kind of
jovial, sort of a bit of disgust but a little bit
When CAPT Boyson spoke those words to you, did you respond?---Yes, I did.
What did you say to CAPT Boyson?---I pretty much said, “That’s
PROSECUTOR: Now, you said that there were other occasions that CAPT Boyson came
over to you with [the complainant] beside you.
What, if anything, did he say on
either of those interactions?---So, CAPT Boyson came over approximately three or
four times when
I was just sitting with [the complainant], and during that time,
I do remember one instance with words to the effect of a conversation
overheard. It wasn’t directly said to me, but it was - - -
I’ll stop you there. It’s only if he spoke to you?---Okay, sure.
Did CAPT Boyson say anything when he came over to you and [the complainant]
while you were standing there?---The conversation went
on a lot more. I just
can’t remember the exact wording, I apologise.
While you were standing beside [the complainant] did you hear CAPT Boyson say
anything to [the complainant]?---I did hear him say
words to the effect of,
“Are we cool?” or “Are we good”.
How many times did you hear him, or how many of those interactions did you hear
him say that?---There was probably a couple of those
times that it happened.
words to which the appellant allegedly assented were to the effect that he
“stuck a bottle in [the complainant’s]
arse”. That is
consistent with what he admittedly did. It is not unambiguously an admission to
inserting the bottle into
the anus. At the outset of that conversation –
before Captain Tanner pointed out the inappropriateness of the conduct –
the appellant appeared to her “kind of jovial”; it is at least
plausible that, in his mind, the “prank” was
still on. After she
had pointed out, in blunt terms, its inappropriateness, he apologised.
relevant evidence of Captain Machatsch was as follows:
When CAPT Boyson joined the group, what, if anything,
did he say?---He said words to the effect of, “I put a bottle in [the
complainant’s] behind”.
Were they the exact words that he used or words to the effect?---Words to the
CHIEF JUDGE ADVOCATE: So, just, “I put a bottle in [the
complainant’s] behind”?---Well, it was more vulgar and
Just using - - -?---The exact wording was, “I put a bottle in [the
complainant’s] arse”.
PROSECUTOR: When he said that what was his facial expression?---I believe he
was in an upbeat move [
No, no, just answer the question, what was his facial expression when he said
that?---Sorry. Smiling in a happy way.
Importantly,
in cross-examination, Captain Machatsch gave this evidence:
DEFENDING OFFICER: Captain, I represent CAPT Boyson.
When you observed CAPT Boyson saying those words that you’ve just given
evidence about did he say those words in a way which suggested to you that that
is what he had literally done?---No.
What did you think he was referring to?---I thought he was referring to the act
that I’d seen of him putting the bottle between
[the complainant]’s
legs and that’s why I ascribed nothing further to that.
At any time when you were in the bathroom during this occasion that you have
been describing did you see someone stick a beer bottle
complainant]’s anus?---No.
the words which the appellant allegedly used were to the effect that he
“put a bottle in [the complainant’s] arse”.
Again, that is
consistent with what he admittedly did, and is not unambiguously an admission to
inserting the bottle into the anus.
Captain Machatsch did not take it to be so,
but to be a reference to what he had seen at the urinal. This is entirely
with the appellant’s “admission” being part of the
that the appellant inserted a beer bottle into the complainant’s anus, as
alleged, depended on the admissions attributed
to the appellant. It must be
allowed that the Court Martial accepted the evidence of the complainant, of
Captain Tanner and of Captain
Machatsch as to the “admissions”, and
in deference to its position of advantage in hearing and seeing the witnesses,
so should the Tribunal. However, the prank at the urinal – which the
appellant admitted and Captain Machatsch confirmed –
provides an innocent
explanation for those “admissions”, in the terms in which they were
said to have been made. Significantly,
Captain Machatsch, who saw and heard the
appellant make the “admission” and had seen the event at the urinal,
interpreted
it as a reference to the prank he had seen. At the very least, it
cannot be excluded that the appellant’s “admissions”
referable to an event of the type he described, rather than to the conduct
charged. But even if the evidence of those “admissions”
reconciled in that way, it must be viewed in the context of the high degree of
improbability that the alleged act could
physically have been performed in the
circumstances, the improbability that it could have been performed without a
single other person
in the bathroom witnessing it or its sequelae, and the
presence of corroboration for the account given by the appellant when
interviewed.
my view, once one has regard to:
(1) the high degree of improbability that the alleged
act could physically have been performed in the circumstances, no plausible
explanation having been advanced, either at the trial or before the Tribunal,
for how a beer bottle could have been manoeuvred underneath
and its neck
inserted several centimetres into the anus of a man sitting on the floor on his
(2) the possibility that the pain and bleeding experienced by the complainant
was associated with trauma and injury from his fall
onto his bottom, and not
with penetration;
(3) the improbability that the act charged could have been performed without a
single other person witnessing it or its immediate
sequelae, despite the
presence in the bathroom of half a dozen other officers, including one who
exposed video of the complainant
on the floor moments before the appellant is
alleged to have penetrated him with a bottle;
(4) in contrast, the existence of corroboration for the account given by the
appellant when interviewed, involving the relatively
innocuous placement of a
beer bottle between the complainant’s thighs as he stood at the urinal,
and not the insertion of a
bottle into his anus as he sat on the floor; and
(5) the availability, based on that account, of an innocent explanation for the
“admissions” as being referable to what
the appellant said (in his
recorded interview) he did, as part of the
the appellant’s guilt was not proved, even on the balance of
probabilities. And even if one were to disregard the possible
alternative
explanation for the pain and bleeding experienced by the complainant, and to
consider that the evidence of the admissions
could not be reconciled with the
appellant’s account, the other matters still leave a more than reasonable
doubt as to the
appellant’s guilt. The objective improbability from the
physical perspective, the absence of corroboration when it would be
and the corroboration of the appellant’s account, are much more reliable
foundations than the recollection of conversations
through a haze of alcohol.
the Court Martial had the advantage of seeing and hearing the evidence does not
explain, in the slightest, how it could have
been satisfied that it was
physically possible for the act charged to be performed in the circumstances
revealed by the evidence.
Nor does that position of advantage explain how the
Court Martial could have been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the
appellant’s
guilt when not one of the six other officers present in the
bathroom during parts of the relevant period – all of them prosecution
witnesses – witnessed the act charged, while one did attest to just what
the appellant described. The Court Martial should
therefore at least have
entertained a doubt, and it was not open to it, in the relevant sense, to be
satisfied, beyond reasonable
doubt, of the appellant’s guilt.
Disposition
was for those reasons that I was, and remain, of the view that the Tribunal
should make orders granting the appellant the requisite
extension of time,
granting leave to appeal, allowing the appeal and setting aside the conviction.
As on all the evidence there
ought to have been doubt as to the
appellant’s guilt, and as the same considerations would apply to the
alternative charge
of act of indecency, there was no occasion to order a new
I certify that the preceding sixty-six (66) numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision herein of the Honourable
Justice Brereton
(Deputy President).
Dated: 30 May 2019
have read the reasons of Brereton JA with which I respectfully
I certify that the preceding one (1) numbered paragraph is a true copy of
the Reasons for Decision herein of the Honourable Justice
Perry (Member).
Dated: 30 May 2019
RTF format (550 KB)
Signed PDF/A format