URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1970/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McClelland v Federal Commissioner of Taxation [1970] UKPCHCA 1; (1970) 120 CLR 487 (2 November 1970)
PRIVY COUNCIL
McCLELLAND v. FEDERAL COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
(1970) 120 CLR 487
Income Tax (Cth)
Privy Council
Lord Donovan(1), Lord MacDermott(2), Viscount Dilhorne(1), Lord
Wilberforce(1)
and Lord Pearson(2).
Income Tax (Cth) - Income - Assessable income - Purpose of profit-making by
sale - Profit-making undertaking or scheme - Acquisition
of joint interest in
land in order to prevent its sale to others - Realization of assets - Income
Tax and Social Services Contribution
Assessment Act 1936-1963 (Cth), s. 26
1970, July 13, 16; November 2. 2:11:1970
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
November 2.
The judgment of LORD DONOVAN, VISCOUNT DILHORNE and LORD WILBERFORCE was
delivered by LORD DONOVAN:-
The appellant, jointly with her brother, became entitled under the will of
her uncle and pursuant to the assent of his executors
to land in Western
Australia. She wished to retain the land unsold. Her brother did not. She
managed to purchase his interest, but
only by selling off part of the land.
She still retains the rest. The respondent estimated that on the part she sold
the appellant
made a profit of 56,951 pounds, and assessed her to income tax
in this sum. The appellant objected, on the ground that the whole
of the sale
price she received was capital and that no part of it constituted assessable
income. At the hearing of this objection
before a single Judge of the High
Court of Australia (Windeyer J.) she won her case. The assessment was set
aside and the respondent
ordered to pay costs. Upon his appealing to the Full
Court (Barwick C.J., Kitto, Menzies and Owen JJ.) the appellant lost (Barwick
C.J. dissenting) and was herself ordered to pay the respondent's costs
[1969] HCA 72
118 CLR 353
. Subsequently special
leave was granted
to the appellant to
appeal to the Board. (at p489)
2. The detailed narrative begins with the will and codicil thereto of Henry
John Spaven who died on 27th September 1958. He gave
his residuary estate to
his trustees (who were also his executors) upon trust to sell, with power to
postpone the sale ; to set aside
out of the proceeds of sale two sums of
15,000 and 10,000 pounds, in which he gave a life interest to Miss Hoult and a
respectively : and subject thereto the capital and income of the
residue was given to the appellant and her brother as "tenants in
equal shares". The appellant and her brother - Reginald Spaven - were
respectively the niece and nephew of the testator.
3. Pursuant to this last provision the appellant and her brother were each
entitled to one-half of the proceeds of sale of certain
land at Rockingham
south of Fremantle. Or, if they wished to have the land instead and hold it as
tenants in common they could do
so if the executors assented. It was not
necessary for the purposes of the administration of the estate that the land
should be sold.
4. Reginald, the brother, however wanted the land sold as soon as possible,
and in 1962 told one of the executors that he had been
offered 40,000 pounds
for his half-share and that the same buyer would pay another 40,000 pounds for
the appellant's share. She,
however, did not wish to sell, believing that over
the years the land would appreciate in value. It comprised some 3,600 acres
development potential. Accordingly she asked her brother to grant her an
option to buy his half-share for the 40,000 pounds he said
he had been
offered. He agreed, and granted it. This was on 26th July 1962. The option was
to expire on 15th September 1962. (at
5. The appellant did not have 40,000 pounds at her disposal. Accordingly she
decided to sell part of the land in order to raise
it. Acting on advice she
prepared a plan dividing the land into three portions, known as portions 4, 5
and 6. The plan was submitted
to and approved by the local Town Planning
Board. Portions 4 and 6 being nearest to the beach were the portions which the
particularly wished to keep as being more likely to appreciate in
value. These two portions comprised 525 acres. Portion 5 comprised
3,073 acres
but on the other hand most of it was back land away from the beach. (at p490)
6. Eventually after declining a number of less attractive offers the
appellant on 5th October 1962 with the assent of the executors
accepted an
offer of 150,000 pounds for portion 5, the purchasers agreeing to pay a
deposit of 50,000 pounds on the execution of
the contract and the balance upon
acceptance for registration of a transfer of the land at the Land Titles
Office Perth. (at p490)
7. The executors' assent was made conditional upon the appellant and her
brother each depositing 10,000 pounds as further security
above-mentioned settled legacies of 15,000 and 10,000 pounds ; the executors
being uncertain whether the investments they
had set aside for these would
prove sufficient. (at p490)
8. With some foreknowledge of the terms of the eventual contract of sale the
appellant had on 10th September 1962 exercised her
option to buy for 40,000
pounds her brother's half-share in the whole of portions 4, 5 and 6. (at p490)
9. The sale went through as planned. Out of the deposit of 50,000 pounds the
appellant paid her brother 40,000 pounds, lodged the
balance of 10,000 pounds
with the executors as required, and was left with the balance of the purchase
price plus the sole ownership
of portions 4 and 6 which were duly transferred
to her by the executors with her brother's assent. (at p490)
10. The respondent estimated that the appellant had made a profit of 56,951
pounds from the foregoing transaction ; and in August
1966 made an adjusted
assessment to income tax upon her in respect of this profit for the year ended
30th June 1963. He declined
a request by her solicitors to state how he
arrived at his figure, but did so at the trial before Windeyer J., who was
critical of
the computation. The result of the trial and of the subsequent
appeal have already been narrated. (at p490)
11. The question obviously suggests itself - why did the appellant have to
sell land worth 150,000 pounds simply in order to get
40,000 pounds to pay her
brother? The answer is that the appellant was advised that in order to get a
good price for portion 5 she
would have to include in that part some of the
more valuable land. (at p490)
12. The respondent made the adjusted assessment upon the appellant pursuant
to the terms of s. 26 (a) of the Income Tax and Social
Services Contribution
Assessment Act 1936-1963 (Cth). This reads:
"The assessable income of a taxpayer shall include
(a) profit arising from the sale by the taxpayer of any property
acquired by him for the purpose of profit-making by sale, or
from the carrying on or carrying out of any profit-making
undertaking or scheme." (at p490)
13. In addition he contends that the profit made by the appellant was income
and not capital according to the commonly accepted
notions of what income is,
since she had engaged in an adventure in the nature of trade. (at p491)
14. Windeyer J. held that neither limb of s. 26 (a) applied to the present
case. The appellant had not acquired property for the
purpose of profit-making
by sale. She acquired an undivided half-share through the bounty of the
testator. She acquired the other
half-share by purchase from her brother but
her dominant purpose in doing this was to ensure that as far as she could do
so the land
would not be sold until some time in the future. The appellant -
so far as she had been obliged to sell - had done no more than realize
capital asset. (at p491)
15. On appeal by the respondent to the Full Court Barwick C.J. agreed with
the foregoing conclusions. He took the view that the
"realization of an
inheritance even though carried out systematically and in a businesslike way
to obtain the greatest sum of money
it will produce does not . . . make the
proceeds either profit or income for the purposes of the Act" (1969) 118 CLR,
It would be different if the inheritance had been adventured as the
capital of a business, for example, land jobbing or development,
but no such
thing had been done here. (at p491)
16. Kitto J. was of the opinion that liability to income tax had been
established. He considered, for reasons which will presently
be specified,
that the profit made by the appellant was caught by the second limb of s. 26
(a) and was also income as being the result
of an adventure in the nature of
trade. (at p491)
17. Menzies and Owen JJ. concurred with Kitto J., delivering no separate
judgments. (at p491)
18. This division of opinion reflects the difficulty in deciding when an
isolated transaction involving the acquisition, whether
by purchase or
otherwise, of an asset, and its resale at a profit, yields to the seller a
profit in the nature of income or, instead,
an accretion to capital. Judicial
decisions, whether in the Commonwealth, or in the United Kingdom, yield no
touchstone by which
all cases may be easily resolved. In the United Kingdom
the test is whether the transaction is "an adventure in the nature of trade"
see the definition of trade in s. 526 of the Income Tax Act 1952 (U.K.).
Although there is no similar provision in the Australian
Act, the respondent
invokes the same test in his argument that the profit accruing to the
appellant was income according to ordinary
concepts "because (she) was engaged
in an adventure in the nature of trade" (see par. 5 of his reasons). But his
primary contention
is that the appellant is liable under the express
provisions of s. 26 (a) and this contention their Lordships now examine. (at
19. The first question is whether the appellant acquired property for the
purpose of profit-making by sale. Windeyer J. held that
she had not. She had,
he said, acquired an undivided share in the land by the bounty of the
testator. "This was given to her. It
was not acquired by her for the purpose
of profit-making" (1969) 118 CLR, at p 359 . She acquired the other half-share
by purchase
but "so that she might realize her plan of retaining her interest
under her uncle's will as far as possible in the form of land"
(1969) 118 CLR,
at p 360 . (at p492)
20. The statement that an undivided share in the land came to the appellant
by the bounty of the testator was challenged by the
Solicitor-General on
behalf of the respondent. What the appellant was entitled to under the will
was, he said, not a half-share in
land but a half-share in the proceeds of the
sale of the land which the testator directed his trustees to effect. She
acquired the
land by agreement between herself and her brother and the
executors, and did so at a time when she had already formed her plan for
and had received an offer which would yield a profit. So that within the words
of s. 26 (a) she acquired land for the purpose
of profit-making by sale. (at
21. If one looks no further than the terms of the residuary gift it is true
that the appellant was entitled to a share of the proceeds
of sale. There was
no specific devise of the land. But she and her brother were the sole
beneficiaries in respect of the land ; and
if the state of administration
allowed it, they could have called for the transfer of the land to them. In
fact specific power enabling
the trustees to do this is contained in cl. 8
(iii) of the will. Not only did the state of administration allow such a
transfer (subject
to the above-mentioned deposits as additional security for
the settled legacies) but the evidence strongly suggests that not only
appellant but her brother wanted the land transferred to them in specie. Thus
Mr. Medcalf, one of the executors, said that about
May 1962 the appellant "and
her brother discussed the purchase by one of the other's share, and Mr. Spaven
said he had a buyer at
40,000 pounds for his half-share". And the option given
by him to the appellant begins "I hereby agree to give you an option to
my 1/2 share in Rockingham land of the estate of the late H. J.
Spaven . . .". It is clear therefore that rather than let the trust
be executed according to the will both beneficiaries wanted the land in specie
as soon as the executors could properly transfer
it : and that being so it is
not inaccurate to describe sister and brother as acquiring the land through
the bounty of the testator.
On that footing it would be quite inappropriate to
say of the appellant that she acquired land through the bounty of the testator
"for the purpose of profit-making by sale". This may well explain why there is
no separate mention in the majority judgment in the
High Court of any argument
based on the first limb of s. 26 though your Lordships were assured that one
was advanced. (at p493)
22. The second limb of the section poses the question whether the appellant
derived profit from the "carrying on or carrying out
of any profit-making
undertaking or scheme". Kitto J. rested his affirmative answer on these
grounds : (i) The appellant purchased
her brother's half interest in the
Rockingham land for the purpose of enabling her to sell the fee simple in
those lands.
(ii) She had no other purpose than to sell the entirety of those lands, part
of them immediately and the rest at a future time.
(iii) She wished to do this in a way which would bring in the best price.
(iv) These premises involve the conclusion that the plan the appellant
adopted was a plan for the making of profit.
(v) This profit answered the description of profit in the second limb of s.
(vi) It would also be income according to ordinary concepts since it would
be the net proceeds of an adventure in the nature of
(vii) Windeyer J. had not given due weight to the point that the appellant's
purpose was one of profit-making by uniting both half-interests
in the lands
in her own hands and then selling the resulting entirety in sub-division over
a period for more than the entirety had
cost her. (at p493)
23. It is not easy to reconcile with the evidence the learned Judge's
assertion that the appellant had no other purpose than to
sell the entirety of
the land, part immediately and the rest at a later date. (at p493)
24. The relevant testimony is that of the appellant herself, and the nearest
she gets to the purpose so ascribed to her is in one
answer which she gave in
examination in chief. After saying that she had wanted to retain the
Rockingham land because in time it
would become very valuable she was asked
"How would it be realized?" To which she replied "Later on I thought it could
be sub-divided
: it was near the beach and beach cottages could be built on
it". (at p493)
25. Their Lordships would hesitate to draw from this single answer the
conclusion that the appellant's sole purpose in 1962 was
the sale of the whole
land. She reiterated constantly in her evidence that she wanted to keep it
unsold : and at one stage implied
that this would be for the benefit of her
family. Moreover if the implication be read into the evidence that it was the
herself who would build the cottages, or cause them to be built, she
said nothing which proved her intention to sell them, rather
than to let them
and retain them as investments. It is fair to say that the learned Judge did
not rest his conclusion in favour of
the respondent solely on his assumption
regarding the intentions of the appellant. Nor could he have done so
consistently with a
considerable body of judicial authority, to the effect
that a landowner may develop and realize his land without making a profit
which partakes of the character of income : even though he goes about the
realization in an enterprising way so as to secure the
best price. Looking at
Australian authorities alone one need only instance Scottish Australian Mining
Co. Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner
of Taxation
[1950] HCA 16
(1950) 81 CLR 188
and White v.
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1968] HCA 41
(1968) 120 CLR 191
pp 219, 220 . What
clearly helped
to tip the scales in favour of the respondent was the further
fact which Kitto J. describes
"a process which involved bringing
(i.e. the brother's) "half-interest and her own to an end by uniting them in
hands etc.". (at p494)
26. The process thus described, if spelt out in more detail, comes to this :
the appellant found herself in a position where, desiring
to retain the land,
she had a prospective tenant in common with herself who desired to sell. To
avoid becoming tenant in common with
a stranger she decided to try and acquire
her brother's interest. She accordingly obtained the option. When she
exercised it she
became in equity the owner of the fee simple, owing her
brother 40,000 pounds. At this point as Barwick C.J. points out she made
profit in the sense that the fee simple was much more valuable than the sum of
the former interests in common : but this profit,
being unrealized
appreciation, was not a taxable profit in her hands. She then had to pay her
brother, and to enable her to do so
she had to sell part of the land. (at
27. Do these facts disclose a "profit-making undertaking or scheme" within
the meaning of s. 26 (a)? It is clear in the first place
that not all such
undertakings or schemes are caught by the section. Otherwise every successful
wager would be within it. So also
would the purchase of investments bought by
a private investor as a hedge against inflation and sold - perhaps long
afterwards -
at more than the purchase price. The participator in a lottery
would also be liable if he drew the winning ticket. The undertaking
if it is to fall within s. 26 (a), must be a scheme producing assessable
income, not a capital gain. What criterion is
to be applied to determine
whether a single transaction produced assessable income rather than a capital
accretion? It seems to their
Lordships that an "undertaking or scheme" to
produce this result must - at any rate where the transaction is one of
acquisition and
resale - exhibit features which give it the character of a
business deal. It is true that the word "business" does not appear in
section; but given the premise that the profit produced has to be income in
its character their Lordships think the notion of
business is implicit in the
words "undertaking or scheme". They are reinforced in their view by the
opinion expressed by the respondent
in par. 19 of his case. Referring to the
fact that he did not submit in the High Court that the appellant had engaged
in an adventure
in the nature of trade, he nevertheless asked to be allowed to
raise this contention before the Board on the ground that "it is only
alternative way of presenting the respondent's case under s. 26 (a)". (at
28. Did the appellant engage in such an undertaking or scheme? One must look
at all the facts to decide. She obtained her share
in the land through the
bounty of her uncle. She desired to keep it and not to sell it. Her
co-beneficiary had the opposite desire.
She was thus faced with the prospect
of a tenant in common who was a stranger with all the difficulties which that
situation might
produce. There were two possible solutions: to sell her share
also as her brother suggested, or to buy him out. She chose the latter
as the one which would enable her to salvage as much as possible of her
original purpose. (at p495)
29. Like Barwick C.J. and Windeyer J. their Lordships cannot think that this
is the kind of undertaking or scheme caught by s. 26
(a). It is true that the
appellant set about selling sufficient land in an enterprising way. But in
argument the Solicitor-General
on behalf of the respondent rightly admitted
that this was inconclusive. What he strongly relied upon was the prior
purchase of the
brother's interest and its inclusion in the sale. Their
Lordships take the view that the facts bring out clearly that this was simply
a means to an end, i.e. the retention of the more valuable land. (at p495)
30. The final contention of the respondent is that the profit which arose to
the appellant is income according to ordinary concepts,
since it arose from an
adventure in the nature of trade. Whilst this claim is quite independent of s.
26 (a) it seems to their Lordships
to introduce no new element into the
problem such as would lead to some different conclusion. The whole of the
facts have still to
be considered; the same criteria have to be applied; the
question to be asked and answered is still whether the facts reveal a mere
realization of capital, albeit in an enterprising way, or whether they justify
a finding that the appellant went beyond this and
engaged in a trade of
dealing in land albeit on one occasion only. To this question their Lordships
think that, as in the case of
the question arising under s. 26 (a) the answer
should be in the negative. (at p496)
31. As in most cases of this kind a wealth of authorities was cited, ranging
from Californian Copper Syndicate Ltd. v. Harris (1904)
5 Tax Cas 159 down to
White v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1968] HCA 41
(1968) 120 CLR 191
. No useful
purpose would be served
by examining
them all. The governing principle is
clear: it is the application of it to cases
exhibiting a wide variety of
circumstance
that constitutes
the difficulty. In Californian Copper Syndicate
v. Harris the Lord Justice
Clerk formulated the question which must
like the present:
"Is the sum of gain that has been made a mere enchancement of
value by realizing a security, or is it a gain made in an operation
of business in carrying out a scheme for profit making?" (1904) 5
Tax Cas., at p. 166. (at p496)
32. So far as s. 26 (a) is concerned, the Solicitor-General pointed out that
the words "an operation of business" do not occur therein.
Their Lordships'
view, already stated, is that in a case where the profit is made by the
acquisition and sale of some asset a similar
notion must be implied if the
profit is to partake of the character of assessable income. (at p496)
33. So far as concerns the claim that the appellant's profit is income
according to ordinary usages and concepts it is common ground
that this can be
established only if what the appellant did was an adventure in the nature of
trade. (at p496)
34. Applying these tests it must be a question of fact in each case whether
liability to income tax has been incurred or not. (at
35. A word should be said however about two cases strongly relied upon by the
respondent, one is Official Receiver v. Federal Commissioner
of Taxation
[1956] HCA 63
(1956) 96 CLR 370
. In that case the Official Receiver as administrator in
bankruptcy of the estate of
one Fox (also
known as Rankin) carried on after
interval a business which Fox had conducted during his lifetime. This was to
Queensland, top dress the reclaimed
soil, construct drains and
water channels, make roads and then sell the land in plots.
Official Receiver sold 32
plots so reclaimed and developed by him. In the
second year he sold 66 such plots: and
on hand 235 more waiting to
after the necessary expenditure had been laid out upon them. It was
held that although
the Official
Receiver's duty was to realize
the estate for
the benefit of creditors he had adopted a set plan to do so and the profit
under s. 26 (a). It was
also held, however, that the basis of
computation of the profit adopted by the Commissioner
was wrong, and
report does not indicate
whether his victory was a pyrrhic one or not. But
although he succeeded in principle
the facts are so
different from the present
case that the decision does not really help. (at p497)
36. The other case is Iswera v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue
(1965) 1 WLR
This was an appeal heard by the Board from a decision
of the Supreme Court
of Ceylon. The appellant wishing to live near a school
which her daughters
were attending, bought a site of
2 1/2 acres in the locality. It was more than
she wanted but the vendor would
sell only the whole. The appellant divided the
into 12 lots selling 9 to sub-purchasers, reconveying one to the vendor,
keeping one for herself. She made a profit and was assessed
income tax upon it as being profit from an adventure in the
nature of trade.
The Board of Review in Ceylon on appeal to
them by the appellant found that
her dominant motive was to divide the
land and to sell the surplus lots so as
to make a profit,
and obtain a lot for herself below market value. They
therefore upheld
the assessment. An appeal lies to the Supreme Court of Ceylon
from the Board of Review only on a point of law. The Supreme Court
no error of law had been made. On appeal to the Judicial
Committee the same
view was taken, Lord Reid however indicating
that it was a borderline case,
and that the Board of Review might
properly have taken a different view of
some of the evidence. (at
37. The case illustrates the difficulty of applying the accepted tests. It
differs sharply from the present case since Mrs. Iswera
intended from the
first to divide and sell off the greater part of the land. Mrs. McClelland
wanted to keep it, but circumstances
forced a sale upon her. (at p497)
38. Having carefully considered the evidence and the arguments their
Lordships have reached the conclusion that the decision of
Windeyer J. and
Barwick C.J. ought to prevail: and in the circumstances they do not need to
consider the validity of the respondent's
method of calculating the figure of
56,951 pounds. They will humbly advise Her Majesty that this appeal should be
allowed. The respondent
must pay the costs here and below. (at p498)
39. A dissenting judgment, concurred in by LORD MACDERMOTT, was delivered by
LORD PEARSON: - (at p498)
40. I would hold that s. 26 (a) of the Income Tax and Social Services
Contribution Assessment Act 1936-1963 (Cth) applies to this
case. Being in a
minority, I will state my reasons shortly. (at p498)
41. Section 26 provides that:
"The assessable income of a taxpayer shall include -
(a) profit arising from the sale by the taxpayer of any property
acquired by him for the purpose of profit-making by sale, or from
the carrying on or carrying out of any profit-making undertaking
or scheme." (at p498)
42. This provision was introduced in the Act in the year 1930 a few months
after the decision of the House of Lords in Jones v.
(1930) AC 415
and, as Windeyer J. said in White v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1968)
120 CLR, at p 208 , seems to have
been introduced for
the purpose of
overcoming the decision in Jones v. Leeming as it might have applied to
Australia. In Jones v.
Leeming four persons
had joined in obtaining options to
purchase rubber estates in Malaysia, and they ultimately sold them at a
The Crown's claim
that this profit was assessable to income tax was
rejected. There was a supplementary finding by the Commissioners
transaction
was not a concern in the nature of trade. In the course of his
judgment in the Court of Appeal Lawrence L.J.
"It seems to me in the case of an isolated transaction of purchase
and resale of property there is really no middle course open. It is
either an adventure in the nature of trade, or else it is simply a
case of sale and re-sale of property."
(1930) 1 KB 279
This passage in the judgment of Lawrence L.J. was cited with approval by Lord
Buckmaster (1930) AC, at p 421 , Lord Dunedin (1930)
AC, at p 422 , and Lord
Thankerton (1930) AC, at pp 427, 428 Lord Warrington said:
"Here we have a case of the acquisition of an item of property and
a profit made by the transfer thereof to another. In this I can find
nothing but a profit arising from an accretion in value of the item
of property in question and the realization of such enhanced value.
There is in this nothing in the nature of revenue or income. The
fact that the parties intended from the first to make a profit if
they could does not in my opinion affect the question we have to
determine. The case seems to me a clear one against the Crown . . ."
(1930) AC, at pp 425-426 (at p499)
43. Section 26 (a) enacted the opposite of the ratio decidendi in Jones v.
(1930) AC 415
. In s. 26 (a) there is no requirement
acquisition and subsequent sale or the carrying out of a profitmaking scheme
not be an isolated transaction or must
amount to, or be in the course of,
a business or trade or adventure in the nature of trade.
In Official Receiver
v. Federal Commissioner
of Taxation
[1956] HCA 63
(1956) 96 CLR 370
the judgment of the
Court (Dixon C.J., Williams, Webb, Fullagar and Kitto JJ.) contained
"Although s. 26 (a) is founded on language which was used in
judicial decisions (see Premier Automatic Ticket Issuers Ltd. v.
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1933] HCA 51
(1933) 50 CLR 268
, at pp 297,
298.) yet it provides a statutory criterion which must be applied
directly and cannot be treated as going no further and producing no
different result than would a criterion expressed as 'exercising
trade' or 'carrying on a business'. English cases applying those
tests cannot govern the application of s. 26 (a), although no doubt
they may give some assistance" (1956) 96 CLR, at p 387 (at p499)
44. In the case referred to in that passage - Premier Automatic Ticket
Issuers Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1933) 50
CLR, at pp 297,
298- Dixon J had said:
"In Ruhamah Property Co. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation in
the judgment of Knox C.J., Gavan Duffy, Powers and Starke JJ. the
rule was re-stated
[1928] HCA 22
(1928) 41 CLR 148
, at p 151: 'The principle
of law is that profits derived directly or indirectly form sources
within Australia in carrying on or carrying out any scheme of profit
making are assessable to income tax, whilst proceeds of a mere
realization or change of investment or from an enhancement of
capital are not income nor assessable to income tax (Commissioner of
Taxes v. Melbourne Trust Ltd.
[1914] UKPCHCA 5
(1914) AC 1001
(1914) 18 CLR 413
Ducker v. Rees Roturbo Development Syndicate
(1928) AC 132
Commissioner of Taxation (W.A.) v. Newman
[1921] HCA 37
(1921) 29 CLR 484
v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1923] HCA 2
(1923) 31 CLR 503)'
alternative 'carrying on or carrying out' appears to cover, on the
one hand, the habitual pursuit of a course of conduct and, on the
other, the carrying into execution of a plan or venture which does
not involve repetition or system." (at p499)
45. This last sentence was cited and adopted by Taylor J. in Clowes v.
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1954] HCA 10
231 (at p499)
46. Dixon J had also said in the same judgment, in relation to s. 26 (a), 'It
is not easy to say whether the expression 'profit-making
by sale' refers to a
sole purpose or a dominant or main purpose, or includes any one of a number of
purposes" (1933) 50 CLR, at p
298 . But I think it can now be taken as settled
by later cases that the "purpose" referred to in the phrase in s. 26 (a) "for
purpose of profit-making by sale" is the dominant or main purpose: Evans
v. Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation (S.A.)
, at p 99 ,
per Rich, Dixon and Evatt JJ. ("The purpose of which it speaks is the dominant
purpose actuating
the acquistion
assets - the use to which they are to
be put"); Buckland v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1960) 12 ATD
, at p 62, per Windeyer J. ("When a person buys property, as a
commercial money-making transaction and not
for his personal
the purpose he has in view is the use to which he intends to put the property
to achieve this
end. He may intend
to sell it at a profit, or to keep
it as a revenue-producing asset. In relation to s. 26 (a) it is the
dominant purpose
the acquisition that is significant. If a property, say a
house or farm, were bought for the purpose
of resale at a profit it
immaterial that the purchaser also had in mind to take the rents and profits
in the meantime or
pending selling to use it
some purpose of his own.")
and Pascoe v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation, per Fullagar J.
, at p 112;
, at p 404. (at p500)
47. Does the first part of s. 26 (a) apply to the present case? Was there in
the year of assessment a profit arising from the sale
by the appellant of any
property acquired by her for the purpose of profitmaking by sale? (at p500)
48. In July 1962 the estate of the deceased had not been completely
administered. The executors had to set aside two sums of 15,000
10,000 pound respectively and pay the income thereof to two named
beneficiaries for their lives. The executors considered
that they had not made
sufficient provision and they wished the appellant and her brother to lodge
10,000 pound each for this purpose.
49. The appellant and her brother did not yet have any property in the land:
Commissioner of Stamp Duties (Q.) v. Livingston
(1964) 112 CLR
They were entitled to have the estate duly administered with the result
that either the
land would be sold
and the nett proceeds
of sale, after making
provision for setting aside the 15,000 pound and the 10,000 pound
divided equally
between them, or
the lodgments would be made and the land
would be transferred to them as tenants in common
in equal shares. Neither
them yet had
any tenancy in common or other estate in the land. Each of them
had a conditional and prospective
right to acquire
a tenancy in common.
appellant on 10th September 1962 exercised her option to acquire her brother's
40,000 pound but
the right would not
pass to her until she paid the
price for it. (at p501)
50. That was the position at the beginning of 5th October 1962. On that date
several things happened. The appellant contracted to
sell to certain
purchasers portion 5 of the land at a price of 150,000 pound (which was
subject to adjustment on measurement) and
the purchasers paid a deposit of
50,000 pound. This enabled the appellant to pay 40,000 pound to her brother
for his right and to
lodge 10,000 pound with the executors. Then the executors
transferred to her the ownership in fee simple of the entirety of the land.
That is what she acquired. (at p501)
51. Did she acquire it for the purpose of profit making by sale? In my
opinion the answer is in the affirmative. The evidence and
the findings of the
learned judges show that she acquired the ownership of the land for the
purpose of selling it at a profit. She
was going to sell portion 5 of the land
immediately to the purchasers in pursuance of the contract, which gave her a
large profit,
and her intention was to keep the rest of the land (portions 4
and 6) while its market value would greatly increase and eventually
sell it at a very large profit. (at p501)
52. Subject to a question to be considered in a moment, it seems to me that
this transaction does fall within the first part of
s. 26 (a) and also within
the second part which refers to "profit arising . . . from the carrying out of
any profit-making . . .
scheme". (at p501)
53. The question remaining to be considered is whether the profits of this
transaction, though prima facie within s. 26 (a), are
to be excluded as being
"proceeds of a mere realization or change of investment or from an enhancement
of capital": Premier Automatic
Ticket Issuers Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of
Taxation (1933) 50 CLR, at p 297 (at p501)
54. In Commissioner of Taxes v. British Australian Wool Realization
Association
(1931) AC 224
, at p 250 Lord Blanesburgh said:
"To their Lordships, therefore, there is disclosed, on their view
of the facts here, a case entirely within the terms of the following
words from the judgment in Californian Copper Syndicate v. Harris
(1904) 5 Tax Cas 159, at pp 165-166 which have been since so
often cited with approval: 'It is quite a well-settled principle in
dealing with questions of assessment of income tax that where the
owner of an ordinary investment chooses to realize it, and obtains a
greater price for it than he originally acquired it at, the enhanced
price is not profit . . . assessable to income tax.' Equally
applicable, in the view of their Lordships, are the words of Lord
Dunedin in Commissioner of Taxes v. Melbourne Trust
, at p. 1009., where he says: 'If the liquidator of one of the
banks had made an estimate of the various assets held by him for
realization, and then on realization had obtained more than that
estimate, such surplus would not have been profit assessable to
income tax'." (at p502)
55. There have been English and Australian cases in which advantageous
disposal of an inheritance or of property no longer required
for the use for
which it was acquired has been held to be "mere realization", so that the
profit was not assessable to income tax,
but I have not found any statement of
the principle wide enough to cover the present case. In the present case there
was an elaborate
scheme not merely to enlarge the inheritance but to acquire
something different and much more valuable. The appellant put into the
transaction (i) the 40,000 pound paid to her brother for his prospective right
to receive one-half of the net proceeds of sale of
the land or a tenancy in
common (ii) her own similar right (iii) the lodgment of 10,000 pound. She took
out of the transaction the
fee simple of the entirety of the land. She also
sold immediately a portion of the land for a good profit and was able to
the rest in the expectation of eventually selling it at a very high
profit. In my opinion this transaction went beyond mere realization
not excluded from the operation of s. 26 (a). There may be doubts as to the
proper method of assessing the taxable profit,
but I agree with Kitto J. that
the assessment made has not been shown to be excessive. (at p502)
56. Lord MacDermott has asked me to add that he agrees with this judgment and
would dismiss the appeal for the reasons I have given.
Appeal allowed with costs in the High Court and in the Privy Council.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter