URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/SSATACSA/2011/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Morris v Herbert [2011] SSATACSA 27 (9 November 2011)
DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
Brian Morris
OTHER PARTIES
Joan Herbert
Child Support
APPEAL NUMBER
DECISION UNDER
A decision made by an objections officer on 21 April 2011
partly allowing an objection to a Senior Case Officer’s departure
determination on 30 November 2010 and making a departure determination as
For the period
14 April 2009 until William ceases to be an eligible child the adjusted taxable
income for Mr Morris is set at $132,403
For the period 3
February 2011 until William ceases to be an eligible child the annual rate of
child support payable by Ms Herbert
The Senior Case
Officer’s departure determination was as follows:
adjusted taxable income of Mr Morris is set at $132,403 from 23 July 2010 until
William ceases to be an eligible child.
The application was heard on 5 September 2011 and 9 November
The members of the Tribunal were: XXXXXXXX, Presiding
On 5 September 2011 the Tribunal adjourned to obtain
further information. On 9 November 2011 the hearing was reconvened to take
Mr Morris attended the
hearing on 5 September 2011 and gave sworn evidence. On 9 November 2011 he
attended by conference telephone
and gave affirmed evidence.
attended the hearing by conference telephone and gave affirmed
Mr John Walker attended to give evidence for Mr Morris on 5
September 2011 and gave affirmed evidence. He also attended the hearing
November 2011 by conference telephone and gave affirmed evidence.
Jennifer Prior represented the Child Support Registrar at the hearing 5
September 2011.
On 9 November 2011 the Tribunal
decided to set aside the decision under review, and replace it with the
following decision:
For the period 14 April 2009 until 14 December 2010, the annual rate of
child support payable by Mr Morris is set at $15,000.
For the period 15 December 2010 until 15 May 2011 the annual rate of child
support payable by Ms Herbert is the minimum annual rate.
For the period 16 May 2011 until William ceases to be an eligible child,
the annual rate of child support payable by Mr Morris is
DATE OF DESPATCH
17 November
REASONS FOR DECISION
Morris and Ms Herbert are the parents of William, who was born in 1994. This
application is about the amount of child support Mr
Morris and Ms Herbert should
pay each other to support William. In the absence of any change to the
assessment, Mr Morris’
adjusted taxable income would be based on his
2009/2010 taxable income of $42,000.
matter commenced with the Child Support Registrar initiating a change to the
administrative assessment on 14 October 2010. Mr
Morris was selected by the
Child Support Agency for a review of his capacity to pay due to his links with a
company, BAM & Son
Pty Ltd (‘BAM’) and the Brian Morris Property
Trust (‘the Property Trust’). BAM is the business and the Property
Trust holds the property used by the business, another commercial property, Mr
Morris’ home and a block of land. Mr Morris
is the sole director and
shareholder of BAM, which in turn is the trustee of the Property
report on Mr Morris’ capacity to pay recommended that his income be set at
$144,804, an amount reached by adding his current
taxable income to the average
net profit of the company over the previous five years.
report was considered by a Senior Case Officer, who found that Mr Morris’
adjusted taxable income should be set at $132,403
from 23 July 2010 until
William ceases to be an eligible child. In finding Mr Morris’ adjusted
taxable income was $132,403
the Senior Case Office made the following
observations (in summary):
An employee has
an income of approximately $77,000 per annum according to the Government website
‘Joboutlook’.
contended that there had been a downturn in business, however this was not
supported by the Business Activity Statements.
During its 10
years of operation, BAM has unappropriated profit of $1,123,783, of which
$203,978 was from the 2009/2010 financial
year. A lower profit of $2,585 was
recorded in 2008/2009. The average accumulated profit over a five year period
was $103,838. From
this it is reasonable to expect some profit to be retained to
expand the business.
The Property
Trust owns property which is rented to BAM and to another business. It also owns
a block of land. There is $219,225 equity
in the Property Trust. The income paid
to the Property Trust exceeds its costs. Trust income is distributed to Mr
Morris and his
spouse. The profit of the Property Trust for the 2009/2010
financial year is $57,477, and this is a financial resource to Mr
obtains a personal benefit of $40,000 from BAM paying his
Taking into
account annual payments for plant and equipment, which are entered as an
interest expense in BAM’s profit and loss
statement, the net profit of BAM
for 2009/2010 is $149,851.85. Half the net profit is a financial resource for Mr
BAM purchased
equipment valued at $1,182,000 during 2010. It is unlikely Mr Morris would make
purchases of this magnitude if this
would not be beneficial to the business
income and profitability.
There would be
other benefits to Mr Morris in operating his own business such as the use of
vehicles, payment of his credit card and
telecommunications costs. As these are
difficulty to quantify, half the net profit has been used.
adjusted taxable income was calculated using the profit from the Property Trust
of $57,477 and half the net profit of BAM
which is $74,926. This gives an
adjusted taxable income of $132,403.
Ms Herbert is
employed full time as a PAYG employer on a base salary of $48,450. Her 2009/2010
adjusted taxable income is $51,138.
On the basis of
these adjusted taxable incomes, the annual rate of child support is
approximately $10,683.
Mr Morris has
the ability to meet arrears due to the amount he has in his bank account. Mr
Morris has been under assessed for some
time. Ms Herbert has been aware of the
change of assessment option and has chosen not to pursue this option. The
departure will apply
from 23 July 2010 as Mr Morris was on notice from that his
assessed income could be increased from this date.
Morris objected to this decision, and said (among other things) that William had
moved in with him from 15 December 2010. He was
granted an extension of time to
lodge his objection. Additional information was provided that William was
working full time from
February 2011.
Child Support Agency accepted the change of care of William. This had the effect
that Ms Herbert was liable to pay Mr Morris child
support. The Child Support
Agency issued an assessment that Ms Herbert was liable to pay Mr Morris child
support of $7,119 based
on an adjusted taxable income of $51,138 for Ms Herbert
and an adjusted taxable income of $42,000 for Mr Morris.
Herbert lodged an objection to the decision of the Senior Case Officer and
The assessment
had been incorrect from 1996 to 2010 due to Mr Morris’ income, property
and financial resources
income should be taken into account as he has been working fulltime since
January 2011 earning approximately $450
William pays $50
per week to Mr Morris but stays at his cousin’s house
William pays Mr
Morris for his mobile phone which is through BAM.
Herbert’s contention that William’s income should be taken into
account was treated by the Child Support Agency as
an application to depart from
the administrative assessment.
Morris lodged a further objection letter dated 17 May 2011 in which he said
(among other things):
He has to pay
interest from the profit of the Property Trust. There is no income from the
block of land.
There is no
financial resource available to him through the company
His personal
expenses on the (company) credit card were $27,857.45 in a 10 month period. A
personal benefit of $40,000 is at the top
end of the scale
One of his main
debtors has gone into administration owing him approximately $110,000 and he has
been offered three cents in the dollar.
He is entitled
to a one quarter share of payments in advance of $29,037
They rely on his
wife’s income.
allowing Ms Herbert’s objection in part, an objection officer decided on
21 April 2011 to set Mr Morris adjusted taxable
income at $132,403 for the
period 14 April 2009 until William ceases to be an eligible child. This varied
the original decision by
commencing the departure from the administrative
assessment from 14 April 2009 rather than 23 July 2010. The objections officer
set the annual rate of child support payable by Ms Herbert at $360 per
arriving at this decision, the objections officer was satisfied Mr Morris’
income is at least that calculated by the senior
case officer. The objections
officer was also satisfied Mr Morris has been significantly under assessed for a
considerable period
of time, and that this income should be used for the maximum
period allowed by the legislation, being from 14 April 2009. This created
significant arrears for Mr Morris.
was earning $470 per week. As this was
significantly more than the maximum rate
of Youth Allowance, which Child Support Agency policy states must be exceeded
before affecting
the assessment, the Objections Officer considered this made the
assessment of the amount of child support Ms Herbert should pay to
unfair. The Objections Officer and set her child support liability at the
minimum allowed by the legislation, being $360
23 May 2011 Mr Morris applied to this Tribunal for a review of the
to this matter being heard, the Child Support Registrar made a further decision
that from 16 May 2011 Mr Morris has 49% care
of William and Ms Herbert has 51%
care. The result of this decision, when using the adjusted taxable income for Mr
Morris set by
objections officer, is that the annual rate of child support
payable by Mr Morris to Ms Herbert in the period 14 April 2009 to 2
2011 is between $10,534 and $10,683, and for the period from 16 May 2011 is
central issues for the Tribunal to determine in this case are:
(i) Whether, in the special circumstances of the case, the administrative
assessment of child support would result in an unjust and
inequitable
determination of the level of financial support to be provided by Mr Morris for
William because of:
(A) Mr Morris’ income, earning capacity, property and financial resources;
(B) William’s income, property and financial resources
(ii) Whether it would be:
(A) just and equitable as regards the child, the liable parent, and the carer
entitled to child support; and
(B) otherwise proper;
(iii) to make a particular determination to depart from the administrative
assessment of child support;
DOCUMENTARY
Tribunal had before it documents provided by the Child Support Agency under
subsection 95(3) of the
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
which were marked as exhibit C1.
Morris provided further documents which were marked as exhibits A1 to A73. Ms
Herbert provided documents marked as exhibits B1
the hearing, the Child Support Agency provided further documents marked as C2,
which were provided to the parties. The parties
were given a further opportunity
to provide written submissions on these documents.
Tribunal directed Mr Walker to provide further documents. The documents provided
by Mr Walker were marked D1 to D129. These documents
were provided to the
parties. The parties were given a further opportunity to provide submissions on
these documents at the reconvened
hearing of 9 November
CONSIDERATION
The child support
legislation relevant to this decision is contained in the Child Support
(Assessment) Act 1989 (the ‘Act’) and in the
Child Support
(Registration and Collection) Act 1988 (the ‘Registration and Collection
rate of child support payable by the liable parent is usually based on an
administrative assessment under
Child Support (Assessment) Act
(the Assessment Act). This requires the application of a statutory formula
which takes into account factors such as the number of
children, the level of
care provided and the income of each parent.
administrative assessment can be changed in two ways that are relevant to this
application; the Child Support Registrar can initiate
a change to the
administrative assessment under section 98K of the Assessment Act or a parent
can apply to the Child Support Registrar
for a determination to depart from the
administrative assessment under section 98B of the Assessment Act. Both of these
avenues for
changing the administrative assessment have been used in this
this case, the Child Support Registrar first initiated a change of assessment
under section 98K on the basis of Mr Morris’
income, property and
financial resources, and it is convenient to address this issue first. After
this decision was made, Ms Herbert
objected to the decision, and cited (among
other things) William’s income as a reason for her objection. This has
been treated
by the Child Support Agency as an application by Ms Herbert to
depart from the administrative assessment under section 98B.
section 98B and section 98K require a consideration of whether any particular
departure determination is just and equitable and
otherwise proper as defied in
section 117(4) and 117(5).
The Registrar initiated change
of assessment
a change of assessment application is initiated by the Registrar, section 98L of
the Assessment Act provides the matters which
must be established before a
departure determination can be made, and states:
(1) Subject to this Part, the Registrar may make the determination
(a) the Registrar is satisfied that, in the special circumstances of the
case, application in relation to a child of the provisions
of this Act relating
to administrative assessment of child support would result in an unjust and
inequitable determination of the
level of financial support to be provided by
the liable parent for the child because of the income, earning capacity,
property and
financial resources of either parent; and
(b) that it would be:
(i) just and equitable as regards the child, the liable parent, and the
carer entitled to child support; and
(ii) otherwise proper;
to make a particular determination under this Part.
the absence of any change to the administrative assessment, Mr Morris would be
assessed on his taxable income. His 2009 taxable
income was $36,000 and his 2010
taxable income was $42,000. This produces an annual rate of child support of
$707 for the period
1 November 2009 to 30 September 2010 and $1,397 for the
period 1 October 2010 to 31 December 2011.
considering the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources we
must have regard to subsections 117(7A) and 117(7B)
of the Act. Subsection
117(7B) is not relevant in this case. Subsection 117(7A)
(7A) In having regard to the income, property and financial resources of a
parent of the child, the court must:
(a) have regard to the capacity of the parent to derive income, including
any assets of, under the control of, or held for the benefit
of, the parent that
do not produce, but are capable of producing, income; and
(b) disregard:
(i) the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of any
person who does not have a duty to maintain the child, or
who has such a duty
but is not a party to the proceeding, unless, in the special circumstances of
the case, the court considers that
it is appropriate to have regard to them;
(ii) any entitlement of the child or the carer entitled to child support
to an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.
Magistrate Slack defined financial resources in
Costa v Fairbank
[2010] FMCAFam 39
as ‘... something which is
not property but from which a financial benefit is or may be gained’.
Federal Magistrate Slack went on to say:
The term financial resource in the light of the objects of the Assessment
Act should be broadly defined and would in my consideration
refer to any
financial benefit that would enhance the capacity of parents to provide a proper
level of financial support for their
Morris has an interest in BAM, and in the Property Trust. The taxable income of
a person who is self-employed may not be an accurate
reflection of their earning
capacity and financial resources. (
DJM and JLM
[1988] FamCA 97
Scott - v- Scott
FLC 92-457;
Carey -v- Carey
[1994] FamCA 74
(1994) FLC 92-489)
A ground for departure can be established if a self-employed person is
able to derive additional benefits from their businesses, and
also has greater
control over the structure of their finances than a PAYG employee. The financial
benefit Mr Morris receives from
BAM and from the Property Trust must be examined
to determine if any financial benefit he receives from these sources would
his capacity to pay child support. Mr Morris’ personal finances
taken into account.
personal finances
Morris holds a bank account in his own name. This had $49,370 in it at 30 June
2011. Mr Morris declared an amount of $40,000 in
his statement of financial
circumstances. Mr Morris said this amount is needed in the account for a
possible surgery to his back.
He said that as this was the result of a work
injury as he would have to pay for the surgery himself.
Morris also declares a portion of the Property Trust profit in his annual tax
return. His 2010 tax return declares an income of
$42,000 from the Property
Trust from total profit of $57,446. In 2011, the profit of the Property Trust is
$56,598, and it can be
assumed a similar sum will be distributed in the 2011
financial year.
Walker said the income from the Property Trust does not take into account that
capital and interest payments are made on the loan,
and only interest expenses
can be declared as deductions. The Property Trust does not claim any costs for
the properties as BAM pays
these costs, and the costs appear in BAM’s
costs. This decreases the profit of BAM and increases the assets in the Property
Trust. It was also suggested that the loans on the properties were redrawn to
assist BAM to pay the deposit on a new equipment.
consider that accumulating assets in the Property Trust by decreasing the debt
on the properties cannot be prioritised over the
payment of child support, and
that the income from the Property Trust should be taken into
BAM & Son Pty Ltd
Morris is the sole director and shareholder of BAM. In issue in this application
is the financial resource BAM represents to Mr
financial investigator from the Child Support Agency found that Mr Morris has
not drawn a wage from the company. Significant purchases
had been made by the
company in 2009/2010 and new loans for equipment taken out, with the balance
owing on the new finances totalling
more the $1,000,000. The financial statement
of the company showed that a director’s loan increased from $65,132 in
$113,284 in 2010. The company made a profit in every year except
2008/2009, and significant funds are now retained in the company.
The financial
investigator obtained copies of Mr Morris’ credit card, and said it was
difficult to determine which transactions
were for personal expenses, but
estimated Mr Morris would obtain at least $40,000 per annum in personal benefits
from the company
paying his credit card.
financial investigator recommended Mr Morris income be set at $144,804, of which
$102,804 was considered income from the company.
In setting this amount as
income from the company, the financial investigator said:
Mr Morris does not take a regular salary/wage from the company. Mr Morris
has advised he works a minimum 36 hours per week for the
company plus overtime.
Net profit for 2009/2010 was in excess of $200,000 and retained earnings in the
company re now in excess of
$1,000,000. I have looked at the last 5 years of
trading for the company & used the net profit/loss incurred by the company
year to obtain an average profit made by the company.
Senior Case Officer found, and the Objections Officer agreed, that Mr Morris
should be attributed 50% of the average business
profit over the last five
years. This totalled $74,926.
Morris provided the 2011 financial statements for BAM prior to the hearing, as
well as the more recent business activity statements
for BAM. These financial
statements show a loss from ordinary activities before tax of $4,738.17. The
unappropriated profit is $1,118,744.81.
Morris and Mr Walker said that the unappropriated profit in BAM must be retained
to pay for principle reductions in the chattel
mortgages on BAM’s
equipment as required by the bank. Mr Walker said that Mr Morris has chattel
mortgage commitments of $614,000,
of which $174,000 is the interest component.
BAM’s books show interest of this amount per annum.
Morris said that BAM has a number of bad debts. At hearing, Mr Walker said this
amounted to $524,608. Mr Walker referred to the
main debtors. After the hearing,
Mr Walker provided evidence of one trade debtor who has gone into liquidation.
BAM lodged a proof
of debt of $11,742.48 on 20 August 2009. In his objection
dated 17 May 2011, Mr Morris said one of his main debtors has gone into
administration owing him $110,000, and he has been offered three cents in the
Morris has said that he has recently had to reduce his staff numbers. This is
not reflected in his wages costs for 2011, which
increased from 2010. Mr Morris
said this was a result of paying out annual leave for four full time staff
members and replacing them
with casual staff. He said he currently has six full
time staff members, and this time last year he had nine. He generally has
6 and 10 full time staff.
Morris says he has never drawn a wage and has always drawn from the
director’s loan. The 2010 director’s loan of $113,284.18
paid in full. Mr Walker said this was from unappropriated profit. The loan at
the end of the 2011 financial year was $nil.
Mr Walker said this was because the
bank wanted the amount of the director’s loan reduced. As the loan is
being paid from unappropriated
profit, this represents a financial benefit to Mr
Walker, and the value of this benefit must be evaluated.
matter has been approached by the Child Support Agency looking at the
unappropriated profit in the company as a source of income
for Mr Morris. We
consider more in keeping with the formulation of a financial resource as being
the financial benefit available
to a person, to examine the financial benefits
Mr Morris receives from BAM in looking at what financial resources he
figures do not match with Mr Morris evidence or the increase to the
Director’s loan. The financial statements of BAM show
that in 2009, the
Director’s loan was $65,132.88, in 2010 was $113,284.18 and then in 2011
went to $nil. Mr Morris told us
that the increase to the Director’s loan
of about $48,000 in the 2010 financial year was unusual, and that the loan was
$30,000 to $40,000 per year. He said in his objection dated 17 May
2011 that he thought a personal benefit of $40,000 was at the
top end of the
directed Mr Walker to provide ledger for the director’s loan for the 2010
and 2011 financial years. The hearing was reconvened
for the parties to give
further evidence on these ledgers as the method used to compile the ledgers was
not evident on the face of
the documents. Mr Walker said that he adds an amount
each quarter or annually to the director’s loan that is derived from Mr
Morris’ credit card statements. Mr Walker said that utilities from Mr
Morris’ home are added to the directors loan, with
the exception of
electricity which is apportioned 50% to BAM.
Walker told us that the amounts in the ledger for the director’s loan
represent costs paid by the company, with the exception
of some credits that
should be removed from the total. This results in private expenses being met by
the company to the value of
$86,320.59 in 2011 and $59,361 in 2010. As these
loans have been paid from BAM’s unappropriated profit, there is no doubt
company has paid for these personal benefits received by Mr
Walker also provided the ledgers for loans to the Property Trust from BAM which
include private expenses for Mr Morris. These totalled
$17,047 in 2011 and
$10,268 in 2010.
Morris also said that BAM is paying $1,500 per month into his superannuation. In
his statement of financial circumstances, Mr Morris
disclosed superannuation to
the value of $154,675. Mr Walker states he does not handle Mr Morris’
superannuation, but that
for the past few years the company has paid $1,500 per
month in superannuation. This equates to $18,000 per annum.
Morris says that his wife has been repaying the cost of some of his household
expenses to BAM. Mr Walker asserted to the Child
Support Agency that
‘Brian relies on his wife’s income to pay household costs’ and
that Mr Morris’ household
‘survives on his wife’s income and
she is certainly not assessable by CSA’. Mr Morris said that ‘we
do rely on my wife’s income’. Mr Morris’ wife, Ms
Michelle Morris, is paid $62,400 per annum consultancy fees by
BAM. This is paid
to her company. Mr Morris says his wife works full time for BAM. We consider it
a little disingenuous to maintain
that Ms Morris finances the household while
neglecting to mention that she also receives her income from BAM. Mr Morris says
wife makes payments to either the business cheque account or the visa card
towards household costs, and that this occurs through
his wife’s company.
We could not locate any such payments to the company credit card, and limited
payments to the business
cheque account, and do not consider any payments
sufficient to make an allowance for Ms Michelle Morris paying household
has also been paying $500 to $1,000 per month to Mr Morris’ savings
account in the last financial year with the exception
of May and June 2011. Mr
Morris said this was for general maintenance of his home. Mr Morris said these
payments have not occurred
in recent months, but have not ceased. In the last
financial year this equates to a further $8,000 per annum.
consider the financial benefit Mr Morris receives from the company is the total
for the following items:
loans paid by the company of $86,320.59 in 2011 and $59,361 in
Private expenses
met by a loan from BAM to the Property Trust of $17,047 in 2011 and $10,268 in
Superannuation
of $18,000 per annum
Payments into Mr
Morris’ bank account of approximately $8,000 per annum.
provides a total financial benefit to Mr Morris of $129,367 in 2011 and $95,629
of the benefits available to Mr Morris are subject to tax. To compare his
situation to a PAYG taxpayer, tax needs to be added
benefits he receives from the company. A PAYG taxpayer would need to earn
approximately $165,182 in 2011 and
$119,418 in 2010 to get financial benefits to
this value.
Brian Morris Property Trust
Property Trust holds the property from which BAM operates at 10 Anne Street, a
further property at 8 Anne Street, a share in a
block of land and Mr
Morris’ home.
Walker said that the conditions of the loan require monthly payments of $1,260
on the property at 8 Anne Street and payments of
$3,520 on the property at 10
Anne Street.
Property Trust also receives the benefit of BAM paying the costs for the
commercial properties it owns. It also receives a higher
rent from BAM than from
its other tenant, with BAM paying $70,000 per annum and other rental income of
approximately $42,000 in 2011.
In the previous two years BAM has paid $76,363
per annum. Mr Walker said that the $56,000 net profit of the Property Trust does
take into account the principal reduction on two loans. Mr Morris said that
the two properties were similar apart from that the property
rented by BAM is at
the rear as opposed to street frontage.
bank statements for a business line of credit held by the Property Trust show
loans to BAM of $55,000 in June 2011. The ledgers
of BAM show a loan from the
Property Trust. Other than these loans, there is a monthly amount of $9,383
being paid into this account
and $6,682 being debited from this account. The
Property Trust declares interest payments as an expense that reduces its net
of $43,545 in 2011 and $41,620 in 2010. We find Mr Morris is able to
reduce the debt on the assets of the Property Trust and reduce
the profit of BAM
through BAM paying a higher rent.
Morris acknowledged that the Property Trust pays the mortgage on his home. In
his statement of financial circumstances, he says
his mortgage payments amount
to $295 per week, or $15,340 per year. After adding back tax, this is a benefit
of approximately $21,000.
Summary of Mr Morris’
income, property and financial resources.
have found Mr Morris has a financial benefit equivalent to a PAYG of $165,182 in
2011 and $119,418 in 2010 from BAM. He has an
annual financial benefit of
approximately $21,000 from the Property Trust. In addition, he has $42,000 in
income distributed from
the Property Trust.
Calculating
a person’s financial benefit from a company and a trust is not precise. It
necessarily involves an approximation
from the available evidence of the amounts
a person can be taken to receive from entities which they control. We find Mr
Morris obtained
a financial benefit in the vicinity of $220,000 in 2011 and
$180,000 in 2010. A certain leeway is required. We consider Mr Morris’
income, property and financial resources equate to an income of approximately
$180,000 in 2011 and $140,000 in 2010.
is considerably different from an adjusted taxable income of $42,000 in 2010 and
$36,000 in 2009 and we find this makes the administrative
assessment unjust and
inequitable. It follows that we find paragraph 98L(1)(a) of the Assessment Act
is made out.
Change of assessment application –
William’s income
liable parent or a carer may apply to the Child Support Registrar for a
determination to depart from the child support administrative
assessment under
Part 6A of the Assessment Act (section 98B). Section 98C provides that the
Registrar may make a determination to
depart from the formula assessment and
establishes a three step process. The Registrar, and the Tribunal standing in
place of the
Registrar, must be satisfied:
(i) that one, or more than one, of the grounds for departure referred to in
subsection 117(2) exists; and
(ii) that it would be:
(A) just and equitable as regards the child, the liable parent, and the carer
entitled to child support; and
(B) otherwise proper;
to make a particular determination under this Part;
grounds for departure from an administrative assessment of child support are
those set out in section 117(2) of the Assessment
Act. If satisfied that a
ground or grounds exist and that it would be just and equitable and otherwise
proper to make a particular
determination, the Tribunal must make one of the
determinations prescribed in section 98S of the Assessment Act. Section 98S sets
out a range of determinations that may be made under the departure
provisions.
the legislation, each ground for departure is prefaced by the words, ‘in
the special circumstances of the case’.
Therefore, when considering
whether one or more ground exists, the Tribunal must be satisfied that there are
‘special circumstances’
in the case. The phrase, special
circumstances of the case’ is not defined in the Act. The Full Family
Court, in the case of
Gyselman and Gyselman
[1991] FamCA 93
(1992) FLC 92-279
, held that,
‘it is intended to emphasise that the facts of the case must establish
something which is special or out of the
ordinary. That is, the intention of the
Legislature is that the court will not interfere with the administrative formula
the ordinary run of cases’.
98C(3) of the Act provides that subsections 117(4) to (9) of the Act apply to
the Registrar and these must be considered when
deciding whether it would be
just and equitable or otherwise proper to make the departure decision. As these
are the same sections
that apply to assessing whether a change of assessment
should be made by the Registrar, these have been considered jointly
Subparagraph
117(2)(c)(i) of the Act provides a ground for departure exists where, in the
special circumstances of the case, application
of the provisions of the Act
relating to the administrative assessment of child support would result in an
unjust and inequitable
determination of the level of financial support to be
provided by the payer for the child because of the income, earning capacity,
property and financial resources of the child. This is referred to as reason 4
by the Agency. The Full Court of the Family Court
in the decision of
[1986] FamCA 3
[1986] FLC 91-716
at paragraph 45
(b) above refers to the financial capacity of the child to meet his own
needs. In the vast majority of cases that would hardly be
an issue. Section
76(1)(c) gives it unusual emphasis by requiring the court to take into account
‘the income, earning capacity,
property and other financial resources of
the child’. Obviously it would not be appropriate for an Australian Boris
to look to Mr and Mrs Becker for his support. On the other hand it would
in ordinary circumstances be unreasonable to expect that
pocket money and other
small sources of income derived from paper rounds and casual work after school
and the like ought to be taken
into account in diminishing the financial
responsibility of the parents for the needs of that child.
is no precise test as to the income level regarded as sufficient to warrant a
change of an assessment. The Child Support Agency
will not regard a
child’s income as sufficient to warrant a change to the assessment unless
that income is regular and exceeds
the equivalent of the maximum rate of youth
allowance payable to a child less than 18 years of age living at home plus the
free threshold applicable to students/new apprentices. The Agency’s
policy in this regard is set out in Chapter 2.6.10 of the
CSA Guide. The
Objections Officer said as at 1 January 2011, a child would need to earn more
than $224.35 per week (approximately
$11,706 per annum) or more for the earnings
to be considered sufficiently significant to be capable of affecting the
assessment.
Child Support Agency contacted William’s employer to determine his income
from employment. His employer advised that he
started working full time on 31
January 2011, and earns an average of $940 gross per fortnight or approximately
$24,440 per annum.
Herbert contended that William was also working for Mr Morris on weekends. Mr
Morris said this was not the case, and that William
comes to the yard to visit
him or to fix his car. There is no evidence of William being employed by Mr
Morris, and on the evidence
available to us, we find William’s income is
that provided by his employment.
Morris said he had given William $2,500 in a bank account. Mr Morris
acknowledged William had borrowed some money from his wife
and was repaying her.
Mr Morris said that William’s car insurance and telephone are in Mr
Morris’ name, and that William
meets the cost of these.
income from his employment is a significant income, and is ongoing. The special
circumstances in William’s case
is that he is working full time, and is
able to contribute to his own support. Failing to take into account his income
the administrative assessment unfair, and we are satisfied this
ground is made out.
the ground is made out, the effect of this on the assessment must be considered
in light of all of the factors provided by the
Act in assessing whether any
departure is just and equitable.
Is it just and equitable
to make a particular departure determination?
Tribunal next considered whether it would be just and equitable as regards the
children, the liable parent, and the carer entitled
to child support to make a
particular determination in accordance with subsection 98L(1)(b)(i). Subsection
98L(2) of the Assessment
Act provides that subsections 117(4) to (9) of the
Assessment Act apply to the Registrar and these must be considered when deciding
whether it would be just and equitable to make a departure determination. This
in turn requires the Tribunal to consider the matters
discussed below, which are
as set out in subsection 117(4) of the Assessment Act.
section 98C(3) same factors must be taken into account where a parent applies
for a change to the assessment, as had occurred
in relation to William’s
Tribunal has addressed a number of the factors in detail above, and has taken
these into account in assessing what is a just and
equitable determination in
this case. The Tribunal does not intend to repeat all the matters discussed
above in detail. The Tribunal
also noted that in Gyselman’s case the court
However, some of the matters listed in sub-section (4) may overlap with
matters already considered under sub-section [117](2) and
some of the paragraphs
in sub-section (4) may be more significant in one case than they would be in
another or of little relevance
in a particular case. It is an essential part of
the s.117 exercise to carry out the obligation under sub-section (4). However,
does not mean that it is necessary in each case to slavishly go through
each of the paragraphs. The extent to which it is necessary
to do so will depend
upon the facts and conduct of the individual case and the analysis already
performed under sub-section (2).
The nature of the duty of a parent to maintain a
3 of the Act makes it clear that the parents of a child have the primary duty to
maintain the child, and that this duty has
priority over all commitments of the
parents other than commitments necessary for self-support or the support of
another person the
parent has a duty to maintain. In this case Mr Morris and Ms
Herbert have the primary duty to financially support William.
duty has priority over all commitments other than those necessary for
self-support. In this case, it has priority over commitments
of Mr Morris
involved in accumulating assets in BAM or the Property Trust and over building
up his business.
The proper needs of the
determining the proper needs of a child it is necessary to have regard to the
manner in which the child is being, and in which
the parents expected the child
to be, cared for, educated or trained, and any special needs of the child
(subsection 117(6)). In
Eades & Cadell (SSAT appeal)
[2009] FMCAfam 275
at paragraph 22
, Federal Magistrate Slack said:
In considering the proper needs of the child [s.117(4)(b)], the
ordinarily consider the evidence of the parties about the needs of the children
to assess the reasonableness and quantum of
those needs;
have regard to publish guidelines as to the needs of the children (see Hallinan
& Witynski @ 94.323).
also have regard to the costs of children used in the assessment of child
support under the existing formula arrangements [although
it is not sufficient
or appropriate to rely upon the formula to perform that task, Lindenmayer J in
Dwyer & McGuire (1993) FLC92-420
(and see also Gyselman (supra) @
Morris and Ms Herbert do not consider William has any special needs, nor did he
have a private education. Ms Herbert did not include
any costs for William in
her statement of financial circumstances. Mr Morris said he included costs for
his daughter Jane and for
William in his statement of financial
circumstances.
costs of the children table with Mr Morris having an income of $180,000 per
annum and Ms Herbert having an income of $51,138
(as found below) results in
costs for William of approximately $21,000 to $22,500 per annum over the period
under consideration.
parent identified William as having any special needs or private school
expenses. Ms Herbert said William has done courses
at some cost to her, together
with costs for sports.
The income, earning capacity,
property and financial resources of the child
have already considered William’s income and have found that he earns in
the order of $24,440 per annum.
The income, property and
financial resources of each parent who is a party to the
117(7A) makes it clear that, in having regard to the income, property and
financial resources of a parent of the child, it
is necessary to disregard the
income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of any person who
does not have a duty to
maintain the child unless, in the special circumstances
of the case, it is appropriate to have regard to them; and any entitlement
the child or the carer entitled to child support to an income tested pension,
allowance or benefit.
considered Mr Morris’ income, property and financial
resources at length.
Herbert has been employed by the same company for the previous
years. There is no suggestion that she has income from sources other than her
employment and some board from Andrew, an adult
son of $150 per week. Ms
Herbert’s taxable income in 2008/2009 was $50,977, and her adjusted
taxable income in 2009/2010 was
$51,138. Ms Herbert provided her PAYG payment
summary for 2011, which shows gross earnings of $51,862. We are satisfied Ms
income is adequately reflected by her taxable income. We do not
consider any further adjustment is required to reflect board paid
Andrew, as this reflects his expenses.
The earning
capacity of each parent who is a party to the proceeding
parent’s earning capacity can only be taken into account in limited
circumstances, as set out in section 117(7B). The Tribunal
is satisfied that
none of these circumstances apply in this case in relation to either
The commitments of each parent who is a party to the
proceeding that are necessary to enable the parent to support himself or
or any other child or another person that the person has a duty to
Morris provided in his statement of financial circumstances a list of expenses
for himself, children and for other adults. Mr Morris
acknowledged that BAM or
the Property Trust pays for electricity, phone, mortgage, his credit card and
medical insurance. This means
that he has minimal necessary
commitments.
Morris has another dependent child, Jane, who is eight years old. There is no
suggestion that she has special needs. We are satisfied
that the cost of Mr
Morris’ daughter can be addressed through the additional dependent child
amount in the administrative formula
of $15,398 per annum.
her statement of financial circumstances, Ms Herbert lists costs of $889 per
week, together with tax of $180 per week and credit
card repayments of $10 per
week, bringing her expenses to $56,108 per annum. The administrative formula
allows $19,618 per annum.
Ms Herbert’s expenses are within her budget,
with Andrew paying board. Her main expense is her mortgage of $530 per
The direct and indirect costs incurred by the carer
entitled to child support in providing care for the child
117(8) provides that, in having regard to the direct and indirect costs incurred
by the carer entitled to child support in
providing care for the child, the
decision maker must have regard to the income and earning capacity foregone by
the carer entitled
to child support in providing that care.
Herbert said that in the past childcare fees restricted her working hours. She
currently works full time.
Any hardship that would be
caused to the child; or the carer entitled to child support by the making of, or
the refusal to make, the
order; and to the liable parent; or any other child or
another person that the liable parent has a duty to support; by the making
or the refusal to make, the order.
117(4) of the Act requires the Tribunal to take into account whether any
departure determination or failure to make a departure
will cause any hardships
to the children, the carer, the liable parent or any other person the liable
parent has a duty to support.
Morris said that at the moment things are very tight. He said if the child
support remained the same or was increased, they would
have to do without going
out, and doing other things they want to do. He has a younger daughter and wants
to give her the best they
Herbert said that in the past William has had to miss out. She has done without
holidays, and that meeting childcare fees restricted
her working hours. She has
struggled to pay bills and food expenses.
the financial resources we have found available to Mr Morris, we do not accept
his account of hardship, as he has considerable
resources available to him. A
decision that extends back to 14 April 2009 will create significant arrears. We
consider Mr Morris
has the capacity to meet these arrears from funds held in his
name. Mr Morris said he needs these funds available to him for future
reasons. We consider he has the resources through director’s loans with
BAM to meet any significant health needs in
the future.
contrast, we find Ms Herbert has experienced significant hardship in supporting
William in the past. Ms Herbert can only meet her
current costs with Andrew
paying board. Ms Herbert’s hardship in supporting William will be reduced
from the time William started
work, and we consider this supports reducing the
child support payable by Mr Morris from this date, as does the change in care
that William is in Mr Morris’ care 49% of the time from 16 May
Any other relevant matters
accordance with subsection 117(9) it is open to the Tribunal to take into
account any other matters that the Tribunal may consider
relevant in making a
particular departure determination. In this case it is significant that Mr
Morris has been assessed based on
his taxable income for some time. His business
turnover has increased, and has been paying his expenses for some time, as Mr
says he has never drawn a wage.
What is the
particular determination that should be made taking into account the above
considered all of the oral and documentary evidence before us, we consider it is
just and equitable to make a departure determination
from the administrative
assessment issued in accordance with the Act. In the place of the Registrar, we
can make a departure determination
in accordance with section 98S of the
have considered Mr Morris and Ms Herbert’s financial situation for the
previous two financial years, and sought submissions
on any significant changes
to each of their financial situations since 14 April 2009.
to subsection 98S(3B), we can make a departure determination for any of the days
in a child support period up to 18 months
before the date on which the Registrar
notified the parties under section 98M(1) that a change to the assessment is
being considered.
We find from the documents and submissions from the Child
Support Agency that the parties were notified under section 98M(1) on 14
2010, and we can make a determination from 14 April 2009.
section 98SA, we cannot set an annual rate of child support that is less than
the minimum annual rate unless a parent has at
least regular care of William.
Section 5(2) defines regular care as being at least 14% care. For the relevant
period, Mr Morris had
17% care of William. This increased to 100% care from 15
December 2010 and then reduced to 51% care of William from 16 May
we are satisfied William earns slightly more than his costs from when he
finished work, given the level of Mr Morris’
financial resources, we
consider it reasonable that he continues to provide some financial assistance to
support William until he
turns 18. In coming to this conclusion we have been
mindful of the object of the Act as provided in section 4, in particular
4(2)(d) which states that children should share in the standard of
living of both parents. We have found Mr Morris has a relatively
high standard
of living, and William should share in the standard of living whether he is
living with Mr Morris or with Ms Herbert.
Tribunal considered that a departure determination in the following terms would
be just and equitable:
For the period 14 April 2009 until 14 December 2010, the annual rate of
child support payable by Mr Morris is set at $15,000.
For the period 15 December 2010 until 15 May 2011 the annual rate of child
support payable by Ms Herbert is the minimum annual rate
For the period 16 May 2011 until William ceases to be an eligible child,
the annual rate of child support payable by Mr Morris is
set at $3,000.
primary reasons for this departure determination are the level of Mr
Morris’ financial resources, William commencing work
and the changes to
the level of care each parent has of William. We have considered Mr
Morris’ and Ms Herbert’s financial
situation from the relevant time,
and consider a small decrease to the amount that would otherwise be calculated
through using an
adjusted taxable income of $180,000 in 2011 and $140,000 in
2010 for Mr Morris is warranted to allow for changes over time.
will result in considerable arrears payable by Mr Morris. We are satisfied he
can met these arrears from the cash he holds in
Is it otherwise proper to make a particular
departure determination?
third step is to consider whether it would be otherwise proper to make a
particular departure determination in accordance with
subsection 98L(1)(b)(ii)
of the Act. Subsection 117(5) sets out the matters that must be considered when
deciding whether it would
be ‘otherwise proper’ to make a departure
determination. Subsection 117(5) focuses on the balance of support carried
between the parents on one hand and the taxpayer on the other. It is appropriate
for the children to be primarily supported by their
parents rather than by
government assistance. Subsection 117(5)(b) of the Assessment Act means that the
Tribunal must consider whether
the level of a benefit, in particular family tax
benefit, received by the party caring for the children may be affected by the
of child support.
Tribunal finds that Ms Herbert has received family tax benefit from Centrelink.
An increase in the child support paid by Mr Morris
may reduce the cost to the
community, as it is likely to result in Ms Herbert having to repay some family
tax benefit. We consider
increasing the child support payable is appropriate,
therefore consider it otherwise proper to make the particular
determination.
Presiding Member
for the Tribunal
The publication of Social Security Appeals Tribunal child support
decisions is authorised under
subsections 16(2AB)
(2AC) of the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act
Personal particulars of parties to an appeal and their children are
removed to protect their privacy. Names used in all published
decisions are
pseudonyms. Reasons for decisions are published in full (with any information
which may identify involved individuals
to a member of the public removed) to
ensure that the full context and basis for the decision can be understood. The
Social Security
Appeal's Tribunal's decisions in relation to child support
matters demonstrate the application of the Child Support legislation to
individual circumstances of the case being decided. Different fact situations
or subsequent changes to legislation may result
in different outcomes.
The CSA reviews all SSAT decisions to identify opportunities to improve
its services and ensure its processes and policies are robust
and accurate. The
CSA publishes further information about SSAT decisions on their website
www.csa.gov.au/publications/1313.aspx#ssat
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.39 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter