Reference by APRA AMCOS (Program for the Conduct of the Reference) [2022] ACopyT 1 (16 February 2022)
Reference by APRA AMCOS (Program for the
Conduct of the Reference)
[2022] ACopyT 1
File number:
CT 1 of 2021
Judgment of:
PERRAM J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
Date of Determination:
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant
Mr M Hall SC with Ms R De Stoop and Ms M Evetts
Solicitor for the Applicant
Banki Haddock Fiora
Counsel for Netflix, Inc.
Mr P Brereton SC with Ms L Thomas
Solicitor for Netflix, Inc.
Simpsons Solicitors
Counsel for Stan Entertainment Pty Ltd
Mr J Hennessy SC with Ms A Campbell
Solicitor for Stan Entertainment Pty Ltd
MinterEllison
Counsel for the Walt Disney Company (Australia) Pty Ltd
Ms J M Beaumont
Solicitor for the Walt
Disney Company (Australia) Pty Ltd
Solicitor for Network Ten All Access Pty Ltd
Baker McKenzie
Solicitor for Apple Pty Limited
Clayton Utz
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 1 of 2021
REFERENCE BY:
AUSTRALASIAN PERFORMING RIGHT ASSOCIATION
LIMITED ABN 42 000 016 099
AUSTRALASIAN MECHANICAL COPYRIGHT
OWNERS’ SOCIETY LIMITED ABN 78 001 678 851
PERRRAM J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
1. The parties confer and provide a short minute of order giving effect to
these reasons within 7 days.
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
PERRAM J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT):
1 The Applicants on the present reference are the Australasian Performing
Right Association Limited and the Australasian Mechanical
Owners’ Society Limited (‘APRA/AMCOS’). A number of matters
were canvassed at the case management hearing
on 16 February 2022. I would
resolve the matters in dispute as follows:
SEPARATION OF THE STAN SCHEME
2 I do not think that it is clear that the Stan
scheme can be dealt with separately at this stage. If the Netflix or APRA/AMCOS
are adopted they will, in terms, apply to Stan. Accordingly, Stan will
need to be heard on why their schemes ought not to apply to
it. Any separation
of the Stan scheme would not therefore achieve the total economy that Stan
suggests as the issues its scheme raises
must be determined when considering
what the scope of the APRA/AMCOS schemes should be.
3 Accordingly, I do not think that it would be useful at this stage to seek
to separate out the Stan application. On the other hand,
if the two sets of
schemes are dealt with together this will involve the parties in making two sets
of hypothetical submissions.
Stan will need to have a case on the Netflix and
APRA/AMCOS schemes in the event that its view of coverage is not accepted.
Correspondingly,
at least APRA/AMCOS will need to have a position on the Stan
scheme in the event that its view of coverage is accepted. This is,
accepted, burdensome but the separation of the Stan scheme from the current
reference is filled with a degree of procedural
complexity which I think it too
risky to undertake.
4 It may be that as the matter progresses it becomes clear that some degree
of separation is possible. For example, the topic of coverage
may be able to be
debated in isolation. If the question of coverage be concluded in favour of Stan
then it may be possible to conduct
a subsequent hearing on what the terms of the
Stan scheme should be. I am to a degree sceptical that this will turn out to be
but would not wholly exclude the possibility at this stage. I accept
that such a course would avert the necessity for the preparation
of hypothetical
evidence depending on the outcome of the coverage question. I do not think,
however, that the picture is presently
clear enough to take the procedural risks
this potentially entails.
SHOULD THE STAN AND NETFLIX SCHEMES BE REQUIRED TO MOVE IN
CHIEF THROUGH PHASE 4?
5 The Respondents have submitted that all of the
issues which arise from the Stan and Netflix schemes are presently in the
of Issues. On that understanding, I do not see that there is any
utility in making the Stan and Netflix schemes go through the phase
In effect, those schemes contain disputes with the APRA/AMCOS scheme. In any
event, I accept that there is a considerable
risk of over complicating the
proceeding if three schemes are separately advanced in chief, particularly where
all the points in
the second and third are already present in the Statement of
Issues arising from the first. It will also carry the risk, as Apple
of the schemes passing like ships in the night.
ADJUSTMENTS TO PHASES 6, 7 AND THE ADDITION OF PHASE 7A
6 That being so, it is necessary to adjust phases
6-7 to distinguish the Respondents’ submissions and evidence responsive to
APRA/AMCOS’ submissions from their submissions and evidence which advance
in chief the Stan or Netflix schemes. It is also
necessary to put in place a
right of APRA/AMCOS to respond to the Respondents’ material in chief and
for the Respondents to
have a corresponding entitlement to reply. Provision is
already made for APRA/AMCOS to reply on its case in chief. Netflix propounded
some changes to the Program for the Conduct of the Reference which amended
phases 6 and 7 and propounded a new phase 7A. I agree
with those changes and the
program will be amended accordingly.
APRA/AMCOS AND PHASE 4 - EXPERTS
7 APRA/AMCOS seeks to be relieved of the obligation
to deal with its expert evidence as part of phase 4. Instead, the Tribunal
require the parties to agree what kinds of experts will be called so that
APRA/AMCOS can deal with this in chief. I do not accept
this submission. All
parties can call who they wish. If one of the Respondents calls an expert of a
kind which APRA/AMCOS did not
rely upon in phase 4, APRA/AMCOS may call such an
expert in reply. I am keen to limit the number of rounds of evidence which tend
to proliferate in Tribunal proceedings in a way which is not helpful.
APRA/AMCOS AND PHASE 4 – LAY WITNESSES
8 I do not accept APRA-AMCOS’ contention that
its expert evidence should be postponed until the lay evidence of the
Respondents
has been put on. This will create the risk, I accept, that the
expert opinions in chief of APRA/AMCOS and the Respondents may be
different evidentiary foundations. To the extent that this is a problem it is
adequately addressed by the ability to reply
and the mechanisms in phases 8-11
which will provide increased structure over the evidentiary phase.
DOCUMENT PRODUCTION
9 I accept APRA/AMCOS’ submission that it
should have an entitlement to seek document production prior to the preparation
its expert evidence. There will therefore be inserted into the Program a new
phase 3A which provides for document production at the
instance of APRA and
AMCOS. I will leave phase 5 in place for the benefit of the Respondents although
I will permit APRA/AMCOS to
take advantage of phase 5 as well.
STATEMENT OF ISSUES
10 I note the Respondents’ submission that the
Statement of Issues document is a working document which will be amended over
time as positions are clarified and/or resolved. On that basis, I will not
require definitive positions to be taken at this stage
and encourage the parties
to continue to progress the Statement of Issues.
EARLY DETERMINATION OF WHETHER THE STAN AND NETFLIX ALTERNATE
SCHEMES ARE SCHEMES?
11 Since all the issues in these two schemes are
captured in the Statement of Issues, I do not think that this would be useful at
this stage. It seems likely that as the Program progresses these schemes will
undergo modification, especially in relation to the
issue of rates. In any
event, the scheme which is ultimately likely to be propounded will not be the
scheme put forward by any party.
The more likely outcome is that in its final
determination the Tribunal will invite APRA/AMCOS to propound a further scheme
effect to its conclusions. As such the question of whether these two
schemes are actually schemes is not of such importance to the
preparation of the
hearing that it should be dealt with at this stage. In my view, there is a high
likelihood of this issue receding.
NETFLIX PROPOSED ORDER 3
12 The parties agree that this order should be
13 I note that the parties have commenced the
process of resolving so far as possible the issues in the Statement of Issues
are thought to be able to be progressed under an ADR regime.
AGREED STATEMENT ON THE NATURE OF APRA/AMCOS AND SVOD
14 Although at the case management hearing I raised
as a possibility the preparation of a working document on these issues, upon
I do not think that this will be necessary in light of phase 8.
PROGRAM FOR THE CONDUCT OF THE REFERENCE
15 The amended Program for the Conduct of the
Reference is attached to these reasons in Annexure A.
16 The parties should bring in short minutes of
order to give effect to so much of phases 1, 2, 3, 3A and 4 as remains to be
It appears to me that phase 3A may take some time. Orders along the lines
proposed by APRA/AMCOS for document production should
be included although they
should be adjusted to take account of the fact that only APRA/AMCOS will be
seeking documents at phase
3A. It appears to me that phase 4 should take around
3-4 months and I will indicate that this is what I propose the respondents
have in due course for phase 6. The timing for the reply elements in
phases 7 and 7A need not be presently addressed. The short minutes
should therefore provide for phases 3A and 4 together with Netflix’s
proposed Order 3. If there are any further debates
which need to be resolved
(i.e. as to the timing of phase 3A) this can be resolved in chambers or with a
further case management
hearing if necessary. The matter should come back for
directions after phase 4 for review on a date to be determined with my
Associates.
I certify that the preceding sixteen (16)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for the Determination of the
constituted by the Honourable Justice Perram (Deputy
Dated: 16 February 2022
CT1/21 – Reference by APRA AMCOS re SVOD licence scheme
Tribunal’s suggested program for conduct of reference Updated February
Explanation
General issue identification. Parties’ initial positions on issues
(as per draft table of key issues). Commencement of ADR process
to resolve such
issues as can be resolved using a registrar of the Tribunal as a facilitator.
This process to continue for as long
as necessary in parallel with the other
phases. The Tribunal is open to any method the parties favour for facilitating
this process
(such as an expert panel)
if the parties would prefer that.
Articulation of any further schemes in addition to the APRA-AMCOS scheme
the Stan scheme (e.g. the Netflix scheme).
Phase Three
Identification of issues for determination by the Tribunal (this may be
progressively as Phase One continues) – production of Initial Issues
Document production at the instance of APRA and AMCOS
Preparation of APRA-AMCOS submissions and evidence
Format for submissions:
Findings of
non-expert facts which will be sought
Findings on
expert matters which will be sought
Submissions on
each issue in the Initial Issues List. Effort should be made to ensure that the
submissions match the Initial Issues
List so that the parties’ are talking
Brief comments
on each clause of each scheme cross-referenced to
submissions
Evidence to consist of:
Document bundle
(documents do not need to be attached to affidavits)
Document production – issue of summonses by all parties if
Preparation of respondents’ submissions and evidence in same format
AMCOS submissions and evidence (see Phase Four), being submissions and
evidence that (1) – responds to APRA-AMCOS’s submissions
evidence; and (2) advances evidence and submissions in respect of any further
scheme or licence advanced by any other party (see
Phase Two).
Phase Seven
Preparation of APRA-AMCOS submissions and evidence in same format, being
submissions and evidence that: (1) is in reply in so far
as the APRA-AMCOS
scheme is concerned (should include nil entries if no reply necessary); and (2)
responds to evidence and submissions
in respect of any further schemes advanced
by any other party (see Phase Six).
Preparation of respondents’ submissions and evidence in reply in
respect of any further scheme or licence advanced by any other
party in same
format (should include nil entries if no reply necessary).
Phase Eight
Preparation of:
statement of facts which are agreed
List of facts
which are not agreed with each such fact accompanied by the submissions of each
relevant party on that fact (reproduced
from the submissions)
Statement of
agreed matters of expert evidence
Statement of
disagreed matters of expert evidence with the relevant parties’ respective
submissions on the disagreements set
Parties to lodge any objections to evidence.
Tribunal to rule on objections to evidence.
Phase Eleven
Preparation of hearing book. Hearing book to consist of:
Statements marked up with rulings
Part III: Formal
documents such as applications
Hearing book to be in electronic format (detailed instructions will be
provided by chambers).
Phase Twelve
Conference to determine scope of cross-examination of witnesses and
scheduling of witnesses. It is not necessary for these to be sequential
done in a block.
Phase Thirteen
Cross-examination of witnesses. Transcript to be added to hearing book as
Phase Fourteen
Parties to submit revised narrative statements from Phase Eight.
Phase Fifteen
Parties to prepare Final Statement of Issues and Final Submissions in same
format as Phase Four (based on Final Statement of Issues).
Phase Sixteen
Parties to submit Submissions Book containing Final Submissions and
Statement of Issues to the Tribunal. References in the Submissions Book
must be hyperlinked to the electronic hearing book.
Tribunal to produce draft determination.
Phase Eighteen
Oral hearing.
Tribunal to make final determination.
SCHEULE OF PARTIES
Respondents
NETFLIX, INC.
STAN ENTERTAINMENT PTY LTD (ABN 94 168 856 924)
THE WALT DISNEY COMPANY (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD (ABN 30 054 610
NETWORK TEN ALL ACCESS PTY LTD (ABN 60 629 391 117)
APPLE PTY LIMITED (ABN 46 002 510 054)
RTF format (384 KB)
Signed PDF/A format