Complainant v ACT Government Solicitor [2003] PrivCmrACD 1 (2 April 2003)
Complaint Determination No. 1 of 2003
"Complainant"
Complainant
ACT Government Solicitor
This determination relates to a
complaint lodged by "complainant" in March 2002 under
(Cth) against the ACT Government Solicitor, the
respondent, regarding an alleged unauthorised disclosure of his personal
information.
1. Evidence
The complainant lodged a complaint with
Domestic Animal Services, Department of Urban Services ACT (DAS), against the
owner of a dog
(the "third party dog owner") in August 1997. On 16 September
1998 the respondent received a brief to represent DAS in proceedings
against the
third party dog owner under section 3 of the
Animal Nuisance Control Act
(ACT) (the "animal nuisance proceedings"). The complainant had advised
DAS that he did not wish his identity to be revealed to the
third party dog
owner and he also advised the respondent that he did not wish his identity to be
revealed to the third party dog
owner on 23 September 1998. He wished to remain
anonymous until the day of the hearing when he would be required to appear as a
On 25 September 1998 the animal nuisance proceedings were commenced by
the respondent on behalf of DAS against the third party dog
November 1998 the Registrar of Dogs at DAS typed a file note (the "DAS file
note") of a conversation she had with the third
party dog owner. On the bottom
of that file note in handwriting, the Registrar noted, "[third party dog owner]
spoke to [X –
respondent lawyer] on 26/11/98 - [X] released the
complainant’s name – nothing further is expected". This note was
2 December 1998 and its veracity was verified by the author in a letter
addressed to the complainant on 23 May 2002 written by the
Director, City
Operations, Department of Urban Services. The letter also advised that either
the third party dog owner or X [respondent
lawyer] would have provided the
Registrar of Dogs with the information she wrote in the hand written note dated
2 December 1998,
but she could not recall which it was.
The DAS file note
also contained a statement which read that the third party dog owner "intends to
apply to the courts to have [DAS]
release the name of the
complainant".
On that same day, 26 November 1998, the respondent spoke
with the third party dog owner and an Officer of the Department of Urban
Services over the telephone. The file note (the "respondent file note") made by
X [respondent lawyer] of the conversation it had
with the Officer of the
Department of Urban Services stated that "I confirm identity of complainant (not
by name)...".
On 23 March 1999 proceedings initiated by the respondent on
behalf of DAS against the third party dog owner were discontinued due
evidence. Accordingly, the complainant did not need to appear as a
On 9 March 2001 the third party dog owner commenced legal
proceedings (the "restraining order proceedings") against the complainant
identity he had obtained as a result of the disclosure by X which is the subject
of the determination) in order to obtain
a restraining order against the
complainant. The proceedings were dismissed by the Magistrates Court of the ACT
without a hearing
on 21 August 2001.
During my Office’s
investigation of this complaint, the third party dog owner provided the
respondent with affidavit evidence
to suggest that he had deduced the identity
of the complainant on his own and that X [respondent lawyer] had not disclosed
the identity
of the complainant to him. The process outlined in the affidavits
by which he had made that deduction were found to be incorrect
through evidence
obtained from the complainant and the subsequent admission of the third party
dog owner that the information was
in fact incorrect.
Personal information is defined in
section 6(1)
(Cth) (the "Act") as follows:
information or an opinion (including information or an opinion forming part of a
in a material form or not,
ascertained, from the information
or opinion.
Information
1. A record-keeper who has possession or control of a record that contains
personal information shall not disclose the information
to a person, body or
agency (other than the individual concerned)
(a) the individual concerned is reasonably likely to have been aware, or made
aware under Principle 2, that information of that kind
is usually passed to that
person, body or agency;
(b) the individual concerned has consented to the
disclosure;
(c) the record-keeper believes on reasonable grounds that the disclosure is
necessary to prevent or lessen a serious and imminent
threat to the life or
health of the individual concerned or of another
(d) the disclosure is required or authorised by or under law;
(e) the disclosure is reasonably necessary for the enforcement of the criminal
law or of a law imposing a pecuniary penalty, or for
the protection of the
public revenue.
2. Where personal information is disclosed for the purposes of enforcement of
the criminal law or of a law imposing a pecuniary penalty,
or for the purpose of
the protection of the public revenue, the record-keeper shall include in the
record containing that information
a note of the disclosure.
3. A person, body or agency to whom personal information is disclosed under
clause 1 of this Principle shall not use or disclose
the information for a
purpose other than the purpose for which the information was given to the
person, body or agency.
3. Findings
I find the respondent in breach of IPP 11
since it disclosed the identity of the complainant to the third party dog owner
in circumstances
where it was unauthorised to do so.
The respondent
denied that it disclosed the identity of the complainant to the third party dog
owner. The respondent argued that the
third party dog owner had enough
information available to him to identify the complainant. However, in light of
all the evidence
it appears more probable than not that the respondent disclosed
the identity of the complainant to the third party dog owner.
note made by X [respondent lawyer] states that "I confirm identity of
complainant (not by name)...". Personal information,
(the disclosure of which is
prohibited by IPP 11) is information through which the identity of the
individual can be reasonably ascertained
or apparent. The respondent argued that
the third party dog owner had deduced enough information himself to identify the
complainant.
However, I find that the affidavit material provided by the third
party dog owner was factually incorrect in terms of how he allegedly
deduced the
identity of the complainant. It can be inferred from the typed DAS file note
dated 26 November 1998 that the third party
dog owner was unaware of the
complainant’s identity at the time as the DAS file note referred to the
fact that: "[the third
party dog owner] intends to apply to the courts to have
[DAS] release the name of the complainant". I am, therefore satisfied that
respondent disclosed the identity of the complainant to the third party dog
owner in breach of IPP 11.
4. Economic and non-Economic Loss
The complainant
seeks compensation of $6,873.65 in respect of legal costs incurred and a further
$1,336.85 in associated travel expenses
and loss of income which are
attributable to the restraining order proceedings. The restraining order
proceedings were eventually
dismissed by the Magistrates Court of the ACT
without a hearing. In order for the third party dog owner to have commenced the
restraining
order proceedings, he needed to know the identity of the
complainant. I have determined that the respondent unlawfully disclosed
identity of the complainant to the third party dog owner. The third party dog
owner could have lawfully obtained the identity
of the complainant by
subpoenaing the information from DAS whilst the animal nuisance proceedings
commenced by the respondent on
its behalf were underway, ie: between 25
September 1998 and 23 March 1999. The third party dog owner did not obtain the
of the complainant through subpoena.
I have determined that the
disclosure of the complainant’s identity by the respondent took place on
26 November 1998. The animal
nuisance proceedings were still underway after that
date until 23 March 1999. If a breach of the Act causes detriment to the
complainant
and that detriment would otherwise not have eventuated, but for the
breach, then that detriment should be fully compensated by the
respondent. The
detriment suffered by the complainant was the legal costs, associated travel
expenses and loss of income resulting
from the restraining order proceedings. If
the identity of the complainant could have been obtained lawfully by the third
owner through subpoena or in some other manner, then compensation
needs to be apportioned to reflect the breach itself and a percentage
legal costs, associated travel expenses and loss of income resulting from the
action instituted against the complainant by
the third party dog
The third party dog owner had the intention of applying to the
courts to have the name of the complainant released, as is evidenced
file note dated 26 November 1998. I consider it appropriate in the circumstances
to compensate the complainant for the
breach itself and 20 per cent of the legal
costs, associated travel expenses and loss of income incurred by him in the
restraining
order proceedings instituted by the third party dog owner. This 20
per cent apportionment recognises that it is likely that had the
occurred and his identity obtained lawfully by subpoena as foreshadowed, the
complainant would still have had to pay legal
and associated costs for the
action that would most likely have been launched against him by the third party
dog owner. In this regard,
I also note the lengthy period of time between the
unlawful disclosure by the respondent and the restraining order proceedings and
the on-going dispute.
5. Determination
I declare, in accordance with section
52(1)(b)(iii) of the Act, that the complainant is entitled to $1,000 as
compensation for the
loss of his privacy as a result of the unlawful disclosure
which has given rise to these proceedings. I also declare, in accordance
section 52(1)(b)(iii) of the Act, that the complainant is entitled to $1,643,
which represents 20 per cent of the legal costs,
associated travel expenses
loss of income incurred by the complainant in the restraining order proceedings
instituted by the
third party dog owner. The
total amount payable by the
respondent to the complainant is thus $2,643.
Federal Privacy Commissioner
Dated 2 April 2003
No downloadable files available