Suleiman Hakim v Australian Postal Corporation [1999] IRCA 1 (5 February 1999)
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DISTRICT REGISTRY
POSTAL CORPORATION
FEBRUARY 1999
MINUTES OF ORDER
THE COURT ORDERS:
1. That the application be dismissed.
Note: Settlement and entry of orders are dealt with in Order 36 of the
Industrial Relations Court Rules.
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DISTRICT REGISTRY
POSTAL CORPORATION
FEBRUARY 1999
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
The applicant, who was born in Lebanon, came to Australia from Syria in January
1969. He commenced employment as a temporary officer
with the respondent (then
the Postmaster-General's Department) on 22 January 1969. Having failed a test
set by his employer, his
employment was terminated on 4 February 1969.
However, after a period at night school, the applicant was re-employed on 21
1969 in the respondent's mail delivery service as an Assistant Postal
Officer. Subsequently, in November 1977 he was promoted to,
or confirmed in,
the position of, Mail Officer.
From 1979 the applicant was approved by the respondent, which had by then
become "Australia Post", to act in the position of Senior
Mail Officer. From
1981 he frequently acted in that position and for increasingly longer periods.
On or about 4 May 1983, the applicant
lodged a complaint with the officers or
agents of Australia Post to the effect that one of his supervisors was
victimising him and
jeopardising his prospects for promotion. Australia Post
conducted an investigation into the applicant's complaint and found it
unfounded. In April 1986, Australia Post assessed the applicant's work
performance and considered him suitable for promotion
to the position in which
he had been acting and while so acting had been receiving a higher duties
allowance. However, he was less
suitable than another person for promotion to
the senior position. Subsequently, the applicant submitted a claim for what he
to have been a work-related injury, namely nervous stress allegedly
caused by his disappointed career aspirations within Australia
Post. On 27
June 1986 a sequestration order was made against the applicant. The applicant
stated that the reason for his insolvency
was that he had been on leave without
pay from his employer, and that the money received from Social Security had not
been enough
to cover his outgoings including the cost of servicing a bank loan.
He also gave evidence that at that stage he had been a problem
The applicant appealed against the decision of Australia Post not to offer him
a position as Senior Mail Officer. The appeal was
successful and, in February
1987, he returned to work in the position as Senior Mail Officer.
In September 1991, the applicant's claim for compensation for a work-related
injury was heard by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
("the AAT") and was
successful. The AAT concluded that the applicant's condition was work-related
and was compensable under the
Commonwealth Employees' Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act
. Australia Post subsequently sought, unsuccessfully,
to challenge the AAT's decision in the Federal Court (see
Australian Postal
Corporation v Suleiman Hakim
(Keely J, unreported, 12 March 1992)).
The applicant's condition, however, meant that he was increasingly away from
work for longer periods and from some time in 1991
he was continuously absent
from work. On 2 June 1993, Australia Post stopped the applicant's compensation
payments. The applicant
appealed to the AAT against that decision but the
matter was settled on 31 May 1994 upon Australia Post's agreeing to pay to the
applicant a sum of money with respect to his compensation claim for the period
ending 30 December 1993. The applicant later obtained,
and continued to
receive, a disability support pension. In August 1994, the applicant had open
heart surgery involving a quadruple
by-pass operation.
On 3 September 1992 criminal charges were brought against the applicant for
obtaining property by deception. These arose out of
incidents unconnected with
his employment in which he obtained from persons located overseas seeking to
migrate to Australia money
in return for supposed assistance in relation to
their immigration applications. On 26 February 1993, the applicant pleaded
to the charges and was sentenced to imprisonment for six months,
suspended for two years. An eighteen-month community-based order
imposed upon him.
On or about 1 June 1993, the applicant received a letter from Australia Post
dated 1 June 1993 which was in the following terms:
Dear Mr Hakim
Please be notified that an Inquiry will be held into your conduct as an
employee of Australia Post.
The subject of the Inquiry will be that you have been charged and convicted
of criminal offences and whether your conduct which resulted
in these charges
prejudices your employment with Australia Post.
The Inquiry will be conducted by Glen Shilling, Manager - Melbourne Airmail
Transit Centre, Tullamarine 3045.
If you require further details of the subject of the Inquiry, you may
So that you are given the opportunity to present any relevant information,
it is intended that an interview take place at the [State]
Head Office of
Australia Post, 90 Collins Street Melbourne. It is proposed that we meet on
Floor at 12 noon on Wednesday 9
June. Should
these arrangements be inconvenient, please contact me so that other
arrangements can be made.
In accordance with the Code of Employee Conduct and Employee Discipline
Process, if the Inquiry Officer finds your misconduct proven,
he may recommend
dismissal, transfer, or other disciplinary processes relevant to the
Glen Shilling
Manager - Melbourne Airmail Transit Centre
On the next day, 2 June 1993, the applicant was interviewed at his place of
employment by a Mr Stephen Smith, a Mr Skien and a Ms
A letter dated 3 June 1993 was sent to the applicant and was in the following
Dear Mr Hakim
I refer to your interview yesterday, 2 June 1993, with Mr Skien, Ms Munro
and myself.
As promised the following is confirmation of what we spoke about at
yesterday's interview and what action is proposed in relation
employment and Compensation claim.
Code of Conduct Inquiry
Mr Glen Shilling has been asked to conduct a Code of Conduct Inquiry in
relation to your employment with Australia Post. Mr Shilling
is the Manager at
the Melbourne Airmail Transit Centre and will be in contact with you before 11
June 1993 to arrange an interview.
Compensation Claim
As advised your Compensation claim will cease close of business 2 June 1993.
Please find enclosed a letter outlining the reasons for
this decision.
Taxi Vouchers
Your claims for reimbursement of taxi vouchers was handed to our Security
and Investigation Branch yesterday. Australia Post has suspended
reimbursement of any monies in relation to these claims until an investigation
has been conducted and completed.
A representative from our Security and Investigation Branch will be in
If you wish to discuss any of the above matters further, please feel free to
Yours sincerely
Stephen Smith
for Manager Human Resources
Mails Business Unit
In response to the letter dated 1 June 1993, the applicant attended on 9 June
1993 for interview with Mr Shilling, the Manager of
the Melbourne Airmail
Transit Centre of Australia Post. The applicant's union representative was
also present at this interview
as was a Mr Murphy, another officer of Australia
Post, whose sole purpose was to take notes of the meeting.
The applicant was then sent by hand delivery on 18 June 1998 this letter marked
"hand delivered Monday 18/6/93":
Dear Mr Hakim
You will recall that we met on the 9 June to discuss issues relating to an
Inquiry I am conducting into your conduct as an employee
of Australia
During the discussions, I raised the issue of your claim for re-imbursement
for taxi fare costs associated with your (then) compensation
claim. At that
stage you declined to discuss the issue on the basis that the "taxi fare" issue
[had] not been advised to you as being
part of the Inquiry. You noted that a
letter had been sent to you stating that the issue had been referred to the
Security and Investigation
Branch of Australia Post.
I wish to broaden the Inquiry to include some questions on the "taxi fare"
issue because it may help me to more fully understand your
conduct. Please note
that these questions are separate from Security and Investigation Branch's
I have made arrangements to again meet with you at Australia Post's State
Office at 90 Collins Street on the 7
floor, at 12 noon on
Wednesday 23
June. If this date, time or place is not convenient,
would you please contact me to make other arrangements.
Glen Shilling
Manager Melbourne Airmail Transit Centre
Following legal advice from his union solicitor, the applicant left a telephone
message with Mr Shilling that he would not be attending
the meeting scheduled
for the next day, 23 June, and that he would require one week's notice of any
further proposed meeting. The
applicant then received this hand delivered
letter from Australia Post marked "22/6/93":
Dear Mr Hakim
Thank you for telephoning the office today; I am sorry that you declined to
attend the meeting arranged for Wednesday 23
I note that you declined to attend on legal advice, and that, in future you
require notification one week in advance. I also note
that in my letter
advising of the meeting for the 23
, I asked that "if this date,
time or place is not convenient", then for you to contact me to make other
arrangements. I am sorry
that you did not take the opportunity offered to make
a more suitable arrangement.
The Code of Employee Conduct and Employee Discipline Process does not
stipulate the degree of advance notice required prior to a meeting
an employee's conduct. Accordingly, I did not send you the notice with any
time-frame in mind; I simply thought that
if the appointment was
unsatisfactory, then you would elect a time convenient to you.
I also note that you declined to attend the meeting on "legal advice". The
spirit of the Code of Employee Conduct is to give the
employee an opportunity
to give every explanation of his conduct in an informal face-to-face
discussion. It is an internal (Australia
Post) process, free of undue delay
and external intervention.
I hope that you reconsider my offer for a meeting, so that you can explain
any circumstances which may not be evident from the documentation
available to
me. In the interests of not protracting this matter unreasonably, I would
expect to hear from you by 10am Thursday
if you wish to take the opportunity to
As mentioned in my previous letter to you, the intention of broadening the
Inquiry to include aspects of the claim for re-imbursement
of taxi fares is to
assist me to gain a better knowledge of your conduct - it is not to determine
whether an offence has been committed.
Glen Shilling
Manager - Melbourne Airmail Transit Centre
Subsequently, this letter marked 29 June 1993 was sent to the applicant:
Dear Mr Hakim
I have completed an Inquiry into your conduct as an employee of Australia
Post. You will recall that discussions took place on Wednesday
June with regard to charges and convictions of criminal offences, and whether
your conduct which resulted in these charges prejudiced
your employment with
Australia Post.
You will recall that you received two subsequent letters from me advising
that I wished to broaden the Inquiry. I wished to discuss
with you the issue
of your claim for re-imbursement for taxi fare costs associated with your
(then) compensation claim. I note that
you declined those two requests for a
It cannot be contested that you have been convicted of 9 counts of obtaining
property by deception; you admitted guilt both during
the court proceedings,
and also at interview.
I gave you the opportunity to discuss irregularities with regard to the taxi
fare re-imbursement claims, however, as mentioned above,
you declined that
opportunity. On the available documentation, I have concluded that the
irregularities are a deliberate deception
by you, arranged to obtain a
financial gain.
I have recommended to the Regional manager (Central), Mails Business Unit,
that you be dismissed. The Regional Manager will advise
you of his decision on
my recommendation. He will also advise you of your rights of appeal with
regard to any decision he may make.
I have made no recommendation with regard
to your existing work status, I assume it will remain as it is at
Glen Shilling
Manager - Melbourne Airmail Transit Centre
Mr Shilling had earlier sent a letter dated 28 June 1993 which was received by
Mr McBride, Deputy General Manager of the Mails Business
Unit of Australia
Post. That letter was in the following terms:
Regional Manger - Central
Mails Business Unit.
CODE OF EMPLOYEE CONDUCT - INQUIRY INTO THE CONDUCT OF MR. S. HAKIM
I have conducted an Inquiry into the conduct of Mr. S. Hakim, Senior Mail
Officer, State Mail Officer, and recommend that Mr Hakim
be dismissed. It is
considered that Mr. Hakim's conduct makes him an unacceptable risk to the
integrity of the postal service.
I interviewed Mr. Hakim on 9/6/93 in reference to 9 criminal charges to
which he had pleaded guilty, and was subsequently convicted.
The charges
related to 9 counts of obtaining property by deception. During our interview
Mr. Hakim claimed he was innocent, although
he was not able to satisfactorily
explain why he pleaded guilty in court, or why his barrister told the court
that Hakim offended
because of his heavy betting habit.
My recommendation for dismissal is not based solely in the above
convictions. Mr. Hakim has a history which suggests that he is not
entitled to
our trust and confidence.
I wanted to ask Mr. Hakim about more than $4,000 in taxi fare expenses he
has claimed as part of a Compensation entitlement. There
irregularities in the vouchers he has submitted. Some of the irregularities are
that (i) he claimed taxi fares on dates
for which his specialist did not see
him, (ii) on five dates he has submitted 2 vouchers, and (iii) his specialist
claims to have
seen him arrive for an appointment in a taxi -
despite several years of appointments. Mr Hakim, however, declined three
invitations
to discuss the issue - once during our interview of June
, and two subsequent letters from me hand delivered to his home
Hakim was convicted on 2 counts of forging and uttering in 1987. He was
declared bankrupt in June 1986, having borrowed over $44,000
to support a
gambling habit. He was served with a second bankruptcy notice in 1992 for
$20,000. Whilst bankruptcy in no way suggests
that a person is unfit for
employment, when combined with the other characteristics of his behaviour which
relate to financial deception,
the bankruptcies provide support to the
conclusion that he has had undesirable ongoing financial pressures on him which
that he is not trustworthy.
The convictions in 1987 and 1992 prove characteristics in Mr. Hakim that
make Australia Post unable to place our trust and confidence
in him, and which
prejudice the interests of Post. His dismissal is therefore recommended.
Glen Shilling
Manager - Melbourne Airmail Transit Centre
Mr McBride then wrote to the applicant this letter dated 9 July 1993 ("the
letter of dismissal") which recited:
Dear Mr Hakim
I have received a report from the Inquiry Officer appointed to conduct an
inquiry into your behaviour as an employee of Australia
Post. The initial
Inquiry related to charges and convictions for criminal offences, and whether
your conduct which resulted in those
charges prejudices your employment with
Australia Post. The Inquiry was broadened to include questions relating to
your claim for
reimbursement for taxi fare costs associated with your (then)
compensation claim.
In accordance with the CWU (APTU) Awards and the Australia Post Code of
Employee Conduct, I notify that you are dismissed from the
employment of
Australia Post, effective immediately.
You have been dismissed because the deceptive nature of the convictions
indicate that you are of untrustworthy character, and this
represents an
unacceptable risk to the security and integrity of business operations. You
have also been dismissed because it has
been concluded that you deliberately
attempted to fraudulently claim reimbursement of taxi fares.
It is also noted that these deceptive characteristics have been prevalent
for some time, further exacerbating Australia Post's concern.
You have a right to appeal against this decision if you consider it to be
harsh, unreasonable or unjust. You must lodge your appeal
General-Manager, Australia Post, within 21 days of the date of this
notification.
Yours sincerely
Mr P. McBride
Regional Manger - Central
On 27 July 1993 the applicant's solicitors wrote to Mr McBride indicating a
desire to appeal against Mr Hakim's dismissal and setting
out various
circumstances which were said to make it harsh, unreasonable and unjust.
A Board of Reference ("the Board of Reference") was subsequently constituted on
19 August 1993 and 6 September 1993 to review the
decision to dismiss the
applicant. A letter was sent to Australia Post and signed by a Mr Kennedy, who
was referred to at the foot
of the letter as the "Chairman Board of Reference".
That letter, which was undated, had attached to it what was described by Mr
in the letter as " a copy of my decision in the matter of the appeal of
Mr S. HAKIM against his dismissal by Australia Post".
The attached "decision" was in these terms:
In the Australian Industrial Relations Commission
In the matter of an appeal by S. HAKIM against his dismissal by Australia
Post on July 9
Board of Reference Thursday August 19
Monday September 6
Senior Mail Officer S. HAKIM was dismissed from his position at the State Mail
Centre following his conviction for offences the
nature of which caused
Australia Post to regard his continued employment as an unacceptable risk to
the security of its business
operations. In addition Australia Post has
concluded that Mr HAKIM had fraudulently attempted to claim reimbursement for
taxi fares.
Mr P. McBRIDE appeared for Australia Post with Ms L. KEEFE as an observer on
September. Mr J. GATTO of the C.W.U. appeared for Mr HAKIM with
Mr C. CHIODO (CHIODO and MADAFFERI) as an observer on August 19
Mr HAKIM also spoke on his own behalf.
Before finalising the appeal the Board spoke with D. HORGAN, G. SHILLING and A.
Mr McBRIDE said that Mr HAKIM's conviction involved misappropriation of funds
belonging to migrants. Postal Security drew Australia
Post's attention to the
conviction and also to other previous offences all involving considerable sums
of money as well as to Mr
HAKIM's gambling habit. Despite a lapse of three
months from the date of the conviction (Mr McBRIDE stated that Human Resources
was in the process of reorganisation) it was decided that an Inquiry would be
held into Mr HAKIM's conduct. The Inquiry Officer
notified Mr HAKIM after the
Inquiry had begun that he wished to broaden the scope of his discussions to
include an allegation that
Mr HAKIM had fraudulently attempted to obtain money
for taxi fares incurred whilst he was visiting a psychiatrist. Mr HAKIM on
refused to discuss this matter. The Inquiry Officer had concluded on
the evidence that the allegation was proved and on all the
evidence before him
had recommended dismissal. Mr McBRIDE after due consideration concurred with
this recommendation.
Mr GATTO objected to the action of Australia Post in broadening the Inquiry.
He maintained that there should have been two Inquiries.
He drew the Board's
attention to Mr HAKIM's twenty five years service with Australia Post during
which period he had not been accused
of any wrongdoing by his fellow employees
or supervisors. There were others with convictions who were working for
Australia Post.
Mr HAKIM had a workers compensation claim settled in his
favour by the Federal Court and taxi fares at least up to that date of
settlement should not be subject to further investigation by Australia Post.
Mr HAKIM viewed the actions of Australia Post as vengeful. His honesty had
never been doubted before and whilst he gambled a bit
he was not a gambling
The Board is required to determine the appeal having regard to whether the
action of Australia Post is unfair, unreasonable, unjust
Under the Code of Conduct this Board is concerned with Mr HAKIM's conduct as an
employee of Australia Post. As Mr GATTO stated
a conviction does not
necessarily imply than an employee is an unacceptable risk. It is the nature
of the conduct which led to the
conviction and the relevance of that conduct to
the daily duties of Mr HAKIM as an employee which has caused Australia Post
in this matter. Whilst I share the concern of both Mr GATTO and Mr
HAKIM that the scope of an Inquiry should not be arbitrarily
broadened it is
clear that Mr HAKIM was given ample opportunity to present his side of the
story. It is difficult to see how separate
Inquiries would have afforded Mr
HAKIM a greater measure of procedural justice than he has received. It seems
quite reasonable that
when confronted with claims for reimbursement of taxi
fares after the date of the compensation settlement a competent administration
would check such claims.
At all events Mr HAKIM offered the board explanations in answer to the
allegations re taxi fares made at Inquiry. I did not find
these explanations
convincing. Mr HAKIM is a family man and has served Australia Post for a
considerable period. He stated that
his gambling had moderated, that he had
made one mistake and Australia Post was "in my blood". Nevertheless his record
justifiably
gives cause for serious concern. This concern has not been
lessened by any enquiries I have made nor by my examination of all the
and information before me.
I consider that Australia Post has acted reasonably under the Code of Conduct.
Dismissal is a severe penalty but in all the circumstances
of this case it is
The appeal is therefore dismissed.
In his application to this Court ("the application"), the applicant claimed,
amongst other things:
1. An Order under
Industrial Relations Act 1988
imposing penalties
for breaches of the Australia Post (Postal Workers) Award 1985.
2. An order that any penalties so imposed be paid to the applicant.
3. An order that the respondent, by its servants or otherwise, be restrained
from treating as valid or acting upon the purported
notice of termination of
the applicant's employment.
4. A declaration that the contract of employment between the applicant and the
respondent is still subsisting.
5. In the alternative a declaration that the respondent in trade or commerce,
engaged in unconscionable conduct in terminating the
applicant's
employment.
At the trial of the application, it was accepted that the then pending judgment
of the High Court in the appeal from the decision
of a Full Court of this Court
Byrne v Australian Airlines
[1994] FCA 888
(1994) 47 FCR 300
was likely to impinge
on the present application. It was therefore agreed between the parties that
this Court should confine itself
to the discrete question of whether Australia
Post had committed a breach of the relevant provisions of the
Australia Post
(Postal Workers) Award
1985 ("the Award").
The applicant contended that Australia Post had been guilty of a breach of cl 4
of the Award which stipulated:
4 - EMPLOYEE CONDUCT AND DISCIPLINE
(1) Subject to the provisions of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
, as amended,
and notwithstanding anything else contained in this Award or in Division 6 of
Postal Services Act 1975
(or the related Regulations and By-Laws
made under the Act):
(a) Australia Post shall have the right to dismiss, or transfer to another
position of the same or a lower classification, an employee
for misconduct,
wilful neglect of duty or incompetence or inefficiency for reasons within the
employee's control, which warrants
such action.
(b) In exercising the right in paragraph (a) Australia Post:
(i) shall ensure that employees are aware of the general standards of
behaviour and performance expected of them by issuing to
all employees a Code
of Conduct;
(ii) shall not take action which is harsh, unreasonable, unjust or unfair;
(iii) shall, except where behaviour constitutes serious and wilful misconduct,
ensure that employees are counselled and/or given
a warning in order to assist
them to maintain acceptable standards of behaviour and performance;
(iv) shall, except where behaviour constitutes serious and wilful misconduct,
ensure that no employee is dismissed or transferred
for a first breach of the
Code of Conduct;
(v) may, where it is necessary to do so prior to reaching a decision, only
suspend an employee with pay except where criminal proceedings
are pending in
which case the suspension may be without pay;
(vi) shall furnish written advice to an employee of a decision to transfer or
dismiss and of reasons for the decision together
with details of the procedures
for lodging an application for review.
(c) Where action to dismiss or transfer under paragraph (a) is considered to
have been harsh, unreasonable, unjust or unfair, the
employee concerned may
submit an application for review of the action taken to a Board of Reference
provided under sub-clause (2).
Any such application must be lodged within 21
days of the dismissal or transfer, in accordance with procedures established by
(2) Board of Reference
(a) A Board of Reference shall be appointed in each State, as necessary, to
deal with any application for review arising from paragraph
(b) Each Board of Reference shall be appointed by the Industrial Registrar
of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission and shall
be constituted by a
chairman as may be agreed upon by the parties or, where the parties are unable
to agree, as nominated by the
Industrial Registrar.
(c) The Board of Reference shall seek to resolve any application for review
submitted to it having regard to whether the action was
harsh, unreasonable,
unjust or unfair.
(3) Transitional Arrangements
Where disciplinary action had commenced under the provisions of Division 6 of
Postal Services Act 1975
before the operation of this clause, the
matter that is the subject of the action shall be dealt with to finality under
Postal Services Act 1975
, as if this clause were not in
The applicant's statement of claim ("the statement of claim") contained these
allegations of breaches of the Award by Australia
14. In breach of clause 4(1)(a) of the award and/or in breach of the agreement
the respondent terminated the employment of the applicant
on grounds other than
misconduct, wilful neglect of duty or incompetence, or inefficiency for reasons
within the employee's control,
and which grounds did not warrant termination of
employment.
15 In breach of clause 4(1)(b)(ii) of the award and/or in breach of the
agreement the respondent terminated the applicant's employment
in a manner
which was harsh, unjust, unreasonable or unfair.
PARTICULARS
(a) The respondent failed to consider the applicant's previous 25 years loyal
and faithful service and good conduct in the business
of the respondent;
(b) The respondent failed to investigate or otherwise make adequate inquiries
into the alleged conduct of the applicant;
(c) The respondent failed to establish that the alleged conduct of the
applicant had any or any sufficient relevant connection to
the applicant's
employment;
(d) The respondent failed to hear the applicant in defence of the allegations
against the applicant;
(e) The respondent failed to inform or adequately inform the applicant of the
allegations or any of them against him;
(f) The respondent had regard to matters extraneous to the scope of the
inquiry into the conduct of the applicant;
(g) The respondent failed to afford the applicant any opportunity to persuade
the respondent to take action that fell short of
termination of employment;
(h) The respondent failed to investigate alternatives to the termination of
the employment of the applicant;
(i) The respondent dismissed the applicant for reasons other than those
disclosed in the reasons for dismissal.
16. In breach of clause 4(1)(b)(iii) of the award the respondent failed to
provide the applicant with counselling and/or a warning
conduct in order to assist him to maintain acceptable standards of
PARTICULARS
The respondent did not give the applicant any counselling or prior warnings
that his employment was in jeopardy prior to the events
which led to the
termination of his employment.
17. In breach of clause 4(1)(b)(iv) of the award the respondent terminated the
employment of the applicant for alleged conduct which
would have been a first
breach of the code of conduct and which did not otherwise constitute serious
wilful misconduct.
PARTICULARS
Prior to the alleged conduct which led to the dismissal of the applicant he
previously had not breached the code of conduct.
Although paragraph 14 of the statement of claim pleaded that Australia Post had
terminated the employment of the applicant for reasons
other than those set out
in cl 4(1)(a) of the Award, Mr Friend of Counsel for the applicant tended to
confine his submissions to
the contention that, if the conduct of the applicant
which had resulted in his dismissal constituted "misconduct" for the purposes
of cl 4(1)(a) of the Award, Australia Post had been in breach of cl 4(1)(b)(ii)
of the Award because its actions were nevertheless
"harsh, unreasonable, unjust
or unfair".
Mr Friend then submitted, in the alternative, that the conduct of the applicant
had not amounted to "serious and wilful misconduct"
for the purposes of sub-cll
4(1)(b)(iii) and (iv) of the Award. It followed, so the argument went, that
the failure by Australia
Post to counsel the applicant (which was not disputed
by Counsel for the respondent) or to give him a warning in order to enable
"to maintain acceptable standards of behaviour and
performance"
constituted a breach of sub-cl 4(1)(b)(iii) of the Award. The
same argument also entailed that the actions of Australia Post in
the applicant "for a first breach of the Code of Conduct" constituted a breach
of sub-cl 4(1)(b)(iv) of the Award.
In my view however a significant preliminary question, not addressed by
Counsel, is what, for the purposes of the Award, was the
operative decision
that the applicant be dismissed from the employment of Australia Post. It was
common ground that Mr Shilling
had, in his letter dated 29 June 1993, notified
the applicant that:
I have recommended to the Regional Manager (Central), Mails
Business Unit, that you be dismissed. The Regional Manager will advise
this decision on my recommendation. He will also advise you of your rights of
appeal with regard to any decision he may make.
It was also not in dispute that, after receiving Mr Shilling's letter of 28
June 1993, Mr McBride sent to the applicant the letter
of dismissal which
included this passage:
I have received a report from the Inquiry Officer appointed to conduct an
inquiry into your behaviour as an employee of Australia
Post. The initial
Inquiry related to charges and convictions for criminal offences, and whether
your conduct which resulted in those
charges prejudices your employment with
Australia Post. The Inquiry was broadened to include questions relating to
your claim for
reimbursement for taxi fare costs associated with your (then)
compensation claim.
In accordance with the CWU (APTU) Awards and the Australia Post Code of
Employee Conduct, I notify that you are dismissed from the
employment of
Australia Post, effective immediately.
It is also common ground that the applicant submitted an application for review
of that decision to the Board of Reference pursuant
to cl 4(1)(c) of the Award
which is set out above.
Sub-clause 4(2) of the Award, it will be recalled, provided for a Board of
Reference to be constituted in each State to deal
application under cl 4(1)(c) and contained machinery for a Chairman to
constitute the Board of Reference to be appointed
by agreement of the parties
to the reference or, in default of such agreement, on the nomination of the
Industrial Registrar of the
Australian Industrial Relations Commission. By
paragraph 4(2)(c) the Board of Reference was directed: "
seek to resolve any
application for review submitted to it having regard to whether the action was
harsh, unreasonable, unjust or
In my view, the sub-clauses of the Award to which I have just referred erected
machinery whereby an
"employee concerned
" could exercise a right to
obtain a review of a decision of Australia Post by an independent Board of
Reference. In exercising its
function of seeking to
"resolve any
application for review"
, the Board of Reference I consider, and this was
not disputed by the parties, was empowered to make a determination binding on
Australia Post and the "employee concerned". This view was apparently
shared by the writer of the letter of dismissal who notified
the applicant:
You have a right to appeal against this decision if you consider it to be
harsh, unreasonable or unjust. You must lodge your appeal
with the General
Manager, Australia Post, within 21 days of the date of this
notification.
Preston v Carmody
[1993] FCA 377
(1993) 31 ALD 309
at 319 Wilcox J usefully
summarised in this way the observations of the Privy Council in
[1979] UKPC 1
[1980] AC 574:
Calvin v Carr
[1979] UKPC 1
[1980] AC 574
, one of the issues the
judicial committee of the Privy Council had to consider was the effect of a
denial of natural justice at first
instance (a stewards' inquiry held pursuant
to the rules of a racing club) where there had been a fairly conducted appeal
club committee) at which the issues were canvassed de novo and new
evidence received. The appellant contended that the stewards'
natural justice was not cured by the appeal proceedings. The judicial
committee disagreed.
The committee's advice was read by Lord Wilberforce. He dealt with this
issue at AC
591-7; ALR 427-33.
592; ALR 428
his Lordship disclaimed any
absolute rule. But he identified some typical situations. At one extreme
"...cases where the rules provide for a rehearing by the original body, or
some fuller or enlarged form of it. This situation may
be found in relation to
social clubs. It is not difficult in such cases to reach the conclusion that
the first hearing is superseded
by the second, or, putting it in contractual
terms, the parties are taken to have agreed to accept the decision of the
hearing body,
whether original or adjourned."
At the other extreme, Lord Wilberforce said, were cases:
"...where, after examination of the whole hearing structure, in the context of
the particular activity to which it relates (trade
union membership, planning,
employment, etc) the conclusion is reached that a complainant has the right to
nothing less than a fair
hearing both at the original and at the appeal
593; ALR 429
Lord Wilberforce referred to an intermediate class of
"In them it is for the court, in the light of the agreements made, and in
addition having regard to the course of the proceedings,
to decide whether, at
the end of the day, there has been a fair result, reached by fair methods, such
as the parties should fairly
be taken to have accepted when they joined the
association. Naturally there may be instances when the defect is so flagrant,
consequences so severe, that the most perfect of appeals or rehearings will
not be sufficient to produce a just result. Many rules
(including those now in
question) anticipate that such a situation may arise by giving power to remit
for a new hearing. There may
also be cases when the appeal process is itself
less than perfect: it may be vitiated by the same defect as the original
proceedings:
or short of that there may be doubts whether the appeal body
embarked on its task without predisposition or whether it had the means
a fair and full inquiry, for example where it has no material but a transcript
of what was before the original body. In such
cases it would no doubt be right
to quash the original decision. These are all matters (and no doubt there are
others) which the
court must consider."
In the present case the Board of Reference was required pursuant to cl 4(2)(c)
of the Award to resolve any application for review
by the applicant, having
regard to whether the actions of Australia Post had been "harsh, unreasonable,
unjust or unfair". In my
view, it follows that the Award required the Board of
Reference, in resolving an application for review, to consider the merits of
the case which gave rise to the decision under review. I am confirmed in this
view by the absence from the Award, an industrial
instrument binding on both
Australia Post and its employees, of any restriction on the procedures to be
adopted by a Board of Reference
in coming to its resolution. In common with
one of the features in
Calvin v Carr
instanced by Lord Wilberforce, the
Award does not empower the Board of Reference to remit the decision of
Australia Post for reconsideration.
Nor was there any restriction on the way in
which the Board might receive evidence. In my view, the Award clearly
contemplated that
the Board of Reference, upon being seised of an application
for review, would conduct a fresh hearing of the matter and come to a
resolution by forming its own opinion, in the light of the evidence before it,
of whether the action of Australia Post had been harsh,
unreasonable, unjust or
unfair. In this regard, the procedure contemplated by the Award was, in my
view, akin to that described by
Lord Wilberforce in that "...the first hearing
is superseded by the second, or, putting it in contractual terms, the parties
taken to have agreed to accept the decision of the hearing body, whether
original or adjourned."
It follows therefore that the decision of Australia Post to dismiss the
applicant could not constitute a breach of cl 4 of the Award.
In my view, the
Award contemplated that a decision of Australia Post would be superseded by a
decision of the Board of Reference
if the employee elected to apply for review
of a decision taken by Australia Post under cl 4(1)(a). There has been no
that Australia Post attempted to frustrate or prevent the applicant
from exercising his rights pursuant to cl 4(1)(c) of the Award.
Consequently,
this Court is not required to consider what, if any, procedural irregularities
or substantive errors of law may have
attended the decision of Australia Post
on 9 July 1993 to dismiss the applicant. Nor has it been necessary for this
Court to review
the resolution of the Board of Reference to dismiss the
application. On its proper construction, the Award did not subject a
of the Board of Reference, unlike a decision by Australia Post, to
the requirements of cl 4(1) of the Award. Rather, the Award created
of Reference as an independent arbiter to ensure that an employee's dismissal
would not be harsh, unreasonable, unjust
Of course, in discharging its functions under the Award, the Board of Reference
was under a duty to act judicially and accord natural
justice to the applicant
and was, accordingly, amenable to judicial review in the exercise of the
apart from the tender in evidence of the
reasons for decision of the Board of Reference, no attention has been directed
to the proceedings
before the Board or the validity of its conclusion. Since,
for the reasons which I have explained, the events which led to the resolution
of the matter by the Board of Reference could not amount to a breach of the
Award, the application must be dismissed.
certify that this and the preceding (17) seventeen pages are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment herein of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 5 February 1999
for the Applicant:
for the Applicant:
for the Respondent:
P Burchardt
for the Respondent:
Stephen Jaques
of Hearing:
16 and 17 May 1995
of Judgment:
February 1999
No downloadable files available