McKenna v Chief of Navy [2017] ADFDAT 1 (10 February 2017)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
McKenna v Chief of Navy
[2017] ADFDAT 1
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 2 of 2016
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), LOGAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND GARDE (MEMBER)
Date of decision:
Date of publication of reasons:
Catchwords:
– application for extension
of time within which to appeal – extension granted – Appellant
convicted on charges
1, 4, and 6 – certain appeal grounds conceded by
Respondent and, on that basis, also conceded by Respondent that conviction
charge 1 should be quashed – concession accepted by Tribunal –
appeal ground in relation to charges 4 and 6 not pressed
by Appellant –
whether retrial should be ordered – where Director of Military
Prosecutions did not consider that new
trial should occur, whether or not the
Tribunal minded to order retrial – retrial not ordered
Legislation:
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Cases cited:
Gilham v The Queen
[2012] NSWCCA 131
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12
Date of hearing:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr P Walker SC and Mr M Hay
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms J Woodward and Mr J Nottle
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 2 of 2016
DENIS MCKENNA
CHIEF OF NAVY
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), LOGAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND
GARDE (MEMBER) JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
period within which the appeal and application for leave to appeal is required
to be lodged be extended to 10 February 2017.
the extent necessary, leave to appeal be granted.
appeal be allowed in part.
appellant’s conviction on ground 1 be quashed.
appeal otherwise be dismissed.
REASONS FOR
THE TRIBUNAL:
Tribunal heard this matter in Sydney on 10 February 2017. At the conclusion of
argument the Tribunal pronounced the following
period within which the appeal and application for leave to appeal is required
to be lodged be extended to 10 February 2017.
(2) To the extent necessary, leave to appeal be granted.
(3) The appeal be allowed in part.
(4) The appellant’s conviction on ground 1 be quashed.
(5) The appeal otherwise be dismissed.
advised the parties that we would, at a later date, publish reasons for making
those orders. These are those reasons.
Petty Officer Naval Police Coxswain Denis McKenna had made application for an
extension of time within which to appeal against
convictions recorded by a
Defence Force Magistrate (“DFM”), on 7 December 2015. The
application was made on 28 July
2016. This was outside the period
prescribed by
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
(Cth) (“the DFDA Act”). The reasons for the delay were
explained on affidavit affirmed by CPO McKenna. They included
an overseas
deployment immediately after the DFM had handed down his decision. The Chief of
Navy did not oppose the granting of
an extension of time. We considered that
the delay had been satisfactorily explained and that the application should be
The appeal was taken to have been instituted and heard
on 10 February 2017.
a charge sheet dated 2 September 2015, CPO McKenna faced eight charges.
Four of these were withdrawn, and by amended charge sheet
dated 9 November
2015, CPO McKenna faced four charges, as
First Charge
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
subsection 61(3)
subsection 474.17(1)
Engaging in conduct outside the Jervis Bay Territory that is a Territory
offence, being the offence of using a carriage service to
menace, harass or
cause offence
Being a defence member at HMAS Waterhen, in the state of
New South Wales on 27 May 2014 used a carriage service, in such a way that
reasonable persons would regard that use as being offensive in all the
circumstances.
Particulars of the use
27 May 2014 around 0906 hours, CPO McKenna used his desktop telephone number ...
located at HMAS Waterhen and contacted CPO W.
L. Robinson on number ... and said
to him words to the effect of, ‘Billy, you’re a fat cunt, get out
and do some fucking
sea time, ya cunt’ before terminating the call.
phone call lasted approx 6–7 seconds.
Second charge
(In the Alternative to the First charge)
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
subsection 33(d)
Using insulting words on Service Land
Being a defence member at
HMAS Waterhen, in the state of New South Wales on 27 May 2014 used insulting
words to CPO Robinson by saying
to him words to the effect of, ‘Billy,
you’re a fat cunt, get out and do some fucking sea time, ya
Fourth charge
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
subsection 29(1)
Failing to comply with a general order
Being a defence member at
HMAS Waterhen, in the state of New South Wales
on 5 Mar 2014 did not
comply with a lawful general order that was applicable to him by being critical
of CPO Robinson to CPO Aaron
Parker and stating ‘In fact the bloke is a
toolster’ through the Microsoft Defence Lync system and thereby engaging
abusive conduct contrary to paragraph 20(j) of Defence Instruction (General)
CIS 6-1-001
Appropriate and inappropriate use of Information and
Communication Technology Resources
Sixth charge
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
subsection 29(1)
Failing to comply with a general order
Being a defence member at
HMAS Waterhen, in the state of New South Wales on 27 May 2014 did not comply
with a lawful general order
that was applicable to him by being critical of CPO
Robinson to CPO Aaron Parker and stating ‘That grub Robinson ended up at
Penguino. Seems if you don’t do your job you are rewarded’ through
the Microsoft Defence Lync system and thereby engaging
in abusive conduct
contrary to paragraph 20(j) of Defence Instruction (General) CIS 6-1-001
Appropriate and inappropriate use of Information and Communication Technology
CPO McKenna
pleaded not guilty to all charges. The DFM found CPO McKenna guilty of the
first, fourth, and sixth charges. The second
was not proceeded with.
28 July 2016, CPO McKenna filed his application for an extension of time
within which to appeal. His proposed grounds of appeal
“a. the conviction WRT [sic] count 1 was unreasonable or cannot be
supported having regard to the evidence;
conviction WRT [sic] count 1 was, in all the circumstances of the case, unsafe
or unsatisfactory
the learned Defence Force Magistrate made an error of law by failing to give
Murray direction
, which was, in the circumstances,
DFM made an error of law by failing to give proper consideration to the sworn
evidence of the appellant denying the offence, and
failed to identify his
reasons for preferring the evidence of the complainant where the evidence of the
two sailors was in conflict;
DFM made an error of law by effectively reversing the onus of proof with respect
to certain telephone records;
reversal of the onus of proof (as described in e.) represented an irregularity
in the proceedings that led to a substantial miscarriage
of justice;
DFM made an error of law by incorrectly applying the ‘abusive’ test
with respect to counts 4 and 6.”
this was not made explicit in the proposed grounds of appeal, it is apparent
from CPO McKenna’s written submissions that
each of proposed grounds
(a)–(f) relates to the conviction on charge 1. Ground (g) relates to
the convictions on each of charges
CPO McKenna
filed written submissions dated 1 December 2016. The Chief of Navy filed
written submissions dated 21 December 2016.
The Chief of Navy’s written
submissions contained concessions that grounds (d), (e), and (f) had been made
good. It will
be necessary, later in these reasons, to consider the
implications of these concessions. The Chief of Navy submitted that grounds
(a), (b), (c), and (g) had not been established.
directions hearing was convened before the President on 25 January 2017.
Somewhat obliquely, Senior Counsel for CPO McKenna intimated
that, if the
Tribunal were minded to act on the concessions of the Chief of Navy,
CPO McKenna would consider whether or not to press
ground (g) of his
Tribunal considered the parties’ written submissions. On 30 January 2017
the President’s Chambers sent to the parties
an email advising
“The members of the Tribunal have ... had the opportunity of considering
the parties’ submissions and the material on
which those submissions were
based. The Tribunal is of the view that the appeal should be allowed on the
basis conceded by the Director.
The question of whether a new trial should be
ordered and the remaining grounds of appeal (if pressed) will be considered by
Tribunal at the scheduled hearing on 10 February
3 February 2017, Junior Counsel for CPO McKenna emailed the
President’s Chambers confirming that:
“... the Appellant intends to withdraw ground of appeal (g) on 10 Feb
the hearing, counsel for CPO McKenna confirmed that ground (g) had been
The basis for allowing the appeal in respect of the conviction on
grounds that were conceded by the Chief of Navy were, as re-phrased in
CPO McKenna’s written submissions, as
“(iv) that the DFM made an error of law by failing to give proper
consideration to the sworn evidence of the appellant denying
the offence, and
failed to identify his reasons for preferring the evidence of the complainant
where the evidence of the two sailors
was in conflict (DFDAA
(v) the DFM made an error of law by effectively reversing the onus of proof with
respect to certain telephone records;
(vi) The reversal of the onus of proof (as described in paragraph v above)
represented an irregularity in the proceedings which led
to a substantial
miscarriage of justice (DFDAA
a statement of agreed facts dated 9 November 2015 it was accepted that
CPO McKenna had made a call from his desktop telephone to
telephone of CPO Robinson, and that the duration of the call was six
seconds. CPO McKenna, however, denied that he had
uttered the words set
out in the charge in the course of that telephone call.
CPO McKenna’s written submissions on appeal
confirmed that
“[t]he defence case was always that [he] did not at any stage make an
anonymous call to CPO Robinson in which
he said ‘Billy, you’re
a fat cunt, get out and do some fucking sea time, ya cunt’ or any words to
that effect.”
principal factual issue in dispute in relation to charge 1 was whether
CPO McKenna spoke these words. Grounds (a)–(f) are,
various ways of attacking CPO McKenna’s conviction on charge 1. Not
all were conceded. The Chief of Navy accepted
that some of the grounds must be
upheld. The precise basis for those concessions is set out in his written
submissions, in particular
at [65]–[71]. It is appropriate that those
paragraphs be set out:
“65. Certainly, there are identifiable reasons in the DFM’s judgment
that could found an argument that he by implication,
correctly applied the law
in his rejection of the appellant’s evidence. However, it is conceded by
the respondent that this
is seriously compromised by the statement:
there remains the oral testimony of Chief Robinson which must be
weighed up against the denial of saying those words by the
it may be argued that this may be simply an example of inelegance, the
respondent concedes that there is no specific statement
in his reasons for
decision that the DFM rejected the appellant’s evidence, which makes his
judgment vulnerable to the contention
by the appellant that the DFM did weigh up
the two versions against each other.
difficulty is further compounded by the passage referred to by the DFM as the
‘critical findings’. The DFM
To reject the evidence of Chief Robinson relating to the content of the call
he received on 27 May would require the Court to find:
(1) that he was not a
witness of truth; (2) that the diary entry on 27 May is a fabrication; (3) the
statement which became exhibit
34 is false in relation to the entry of 27 May.
It would require the Court to uphold the assertion, which was expressly denied,
of fabrication of the diary
CAPT Cowdroy,
the DFM, is a very experienced judicial officer and a very experienced Navy
Legal Officer, having served as a member
of this Honourable Tribunal. It could
be argued that he could not have meant this in the terms that it implies.
However, it is
conceded that when considered literally, the passage suggests
that there is some onus of proof on the appellant.
Furthermore,
in order to acquit the appellant in this case the DFM would not have to make any
of the positive findings listed. The
court would simply have to find that any
of these matters was a reasonable possibility. From the text of the passage it
appear that this is the way that the task was approached. It is
further conceded that even reading the judgment as a whole does
not assist to
remedy the impression created.
a matter of law the DFM was not required to uphold the assertion that the diary
entry was a fabrication to have a reasonable doubt
complainant as such a course would clearly reverse the onus of proof.
respondent further concedes that upon a reading of the whole of the evidence,
the DFM did not explicitly reject the evidence of
the appellant and, at least as
the judgment reads, appears to have approached a consideration of the evidence
of the complainant
in a manner inconsistent with the onus and standard of proof
of beyond reasonable doubt.
respondent concedes that this ground of appeal has been established.”
relation to grounds (e) and (f), the Chief of Navy accepted that certain
legally-erroneous submissions in relation to telephone
records were put to the
DFM by the prosecutor. The error was that the submissions—which were
to the effect that the defence
had not been able to impugn the evidence of
CPO Robinson—reversed the onus of proof. The Chief of Navy submitted
issue pertaining to the telephone records was peripheral only, and
that, had it not been for an incorrect test being applied to the
rejection of
CPO McKenna’s evidence (which was the subject of ground (d)), no
substantial miscarriage of justice would have
the light of the concession of ground (d), the Chief of Navy accepted (at [85])
that there had been a substantial miscarriage of
justice in respect of the
conviction on charge 1 and that the conviction on that charge should be
quashed. In other words, taking
all conceded errors together, the Chief of Navy
agreed that grounds (e) and (f) should be upheld. The Chief of Navy would not,
have so conceded were it not for the error which was the subject of
ground (d).
Chief of Navy disputed other contentions advanced by CPO McKenna. They
(a) on the evidence, it was not open to the DFM to
convict on charge 1 (such that, for that reason, the conviction was
unreasonable,
unsafe, or unsatisfactory);
(b) the DFM erred by failing to give the kind of direction contemplated in
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12
(c) the DFM erred by failing to give a direction under
Evidence Act 2011
(d) the DFM failed to warn himself, either adequately or at all, regarding
the weaknesses associated with aural identification evidence;
(e) the DFM failed to give himself standard directions concerning the conduct
of a criminal trial.
consider that the concessions were properly made for the reasons articulated in
the Chief of Navy’s submissions. The appeal
was allowed on the basis of
the concessions set out at [65]–[72] and [85] of those submissions, but
not for any of the disputed
Should there be a retrial?
24 of the DFDA Act provides that, where the Tribunal quashes a conviction, it
may, if it considers that it is in the interests
of justice that the person
should be tried again, order a new trial of the accused person for the
particular offence.
CPO McKenna
opposed the making of such an order.
Director of Military Prosecutions (“DMP”), who appeared on behalf of
the Chief of Navy, advised the Tribunal that
she did not consider, as a matter
of prosecutorial discretion, that a new trial should occur whether or not the
Tribunal was minded
to make an order under s 24 of the DFDA Act.
parties accepted that it was a matter for the Tribunal to determine whether the
interests of justice required that a new trial
be ordered.
CPO McKenna
advanced a number of reasons which, he submitted, rendered it inappropriate to
order a new trial. They included that:
The relevant
events had occurred almost three years ago, in May 2014.
The trial had
proceeded over nine days and nine witnesses were called.
ultimate findings turned on his assessment of the credibility of some of those
The offence
which was the subject of charge 1 was not of sufficient
CPO McKenna also contended that the
prosecution should not get a “second go” at bolstering what he said
was a weak case.
already noted the DMP advised the Tribunal that she did not consider it
appropriate to proceed with a new trial. She explained
her reasons for this
“... I have considered the authorities and taken into account a number of
factors. Those factors are that there has been a
withdrawal of appeal in
relation to the fourth and the sixth counts and, in my view, that there is some
reflection of the misconduct
of the appellant in relation to the standing
convictions in relation to those matters that were almost contemporaneous with
the conduct
in the first charge. The offending is at the lowest end of the
scale of offending of this type. It is a serious criminal offence,
but this is
very much at the lower end of the scale, as my learned friend has said, that
there was no – there were no threats,
it was just a – there were
offending comments.
Another factor that – that there is a delay. The question of general
deterrence weighs very low in prosecuting the matter
again. The appellant has
continued to serve on deployment with distinction since the conviction on the
power to award a new trial is discretionary. Some of the considerations which
guide the exercise of the discretion were summarised
by McClellan CJ at CL
Gilham v The Queen
[2012] NSWCCA 131
“The relevant principles were discussed in
Reid v The Queen
Fowler: R v Anderson
(1991) 53 A Crim R 421
(Gleeson CJ). The overriding consideration is whether the interests of
justice require a new trial:
at 630. Unless the interests of
justice require the entry of a verdict of acquittal, an appellate court should
ordinarily order a
new trial of a charge where a conviction in respect of that
charge has been set aside but there is evidence to support the charge:
v The Queen
[2000] HCA 43
(2001) 201 CLR 603
. The court determines
where the interests of justice lie by considering various factors,
interest in the due prosecution and conviction of offenders (
R v Taufahema
[2007] HCA 11
(2007) 228 CLR 232
the seriousness
of the alleged crimes (
[2008] NSWCCA 209
(2008) 188 A Crim R 331
(Johnson J));
the strength of
the Crown case (
desirability, if possible, of having the guilt or innocence of the accused
finally determined by a jury, which, according to the
constitutional
arrangements applicable in New South Wales, is the appropriate body to make such
a decision (
the length of
time between the alleged offence and the new trial, and in particular whether
the delay will occasion prejudice to the
Parker v The Queen
[1997] HCA 15
(1997) 186 CLR 494
at 520 (Dawson,
Toohey and McHugh JJ);
whether the
grant of a new trial would impermissibly give the prosecution an opportunity to
supplement or "patch up" a defective case
or to present a case significantly
different to that presented to the jury in the previous trial (
[1948] HCA 22
(1948) 77 CLR 511
King v The Queen
[1986] HCA 59
(1986) 161 CLR 423
at 433 (Dawson J);
at 520 (Dawson, Toohey
and McHugh J);
the interests of
the individual accused, and in particular whether it would be unduly oppressive
to put the accused to the expense
and worry of a further trial (
significant part of the sentence imposed upon conviction has already been served
Jiminez v The Queen
[1992] HCA 14
(1992) 173 CLR 572
(McHugh J));
the expense and
length of a further trial (
successful appellant to the Court of Criminal Appeal has been released from
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
at 302 (Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ);
(1981) 28 SASR 362
; (1981) A Crim R 5 at 367–68
(King CJ)); and
acquittal would usurp the functions of the properly constituted prosecutorial
authorities, which are entrusted with responsibilities
and discretions to act in
the public interest in the initiation and conduct of criminal prosecutions (
v Thomas (No 3)
[2006] VSCA 300
(2006) 14 VR 512
can be seen there are many potentially-relevant considerations which, depending
on the circumstances of a particular case, may
tend both for and against the
ordering of a new trial.
weighed the competing considerations the Tribunal concluded that a new trial
should not be ordered. It was mindful of the
considerations raised by the DMP
and the long period which had elapsed since the offence had allegedly been
committed. In the meantime,
CPO McKenna had rendered distinguished
service to the Navy and the nation on deployment. We gave considerable weight
to the advice
that the DMP did not, despite any order which might be made by the
Tribunal, propose to prosecute a new trial. She had made this
decision for reasons which we found to be persuasive. It would be a rare case
in which the Tribunal would consider it
to be in the interests of justice to
order a new trial where the prosecuting authority had determined, for good
reason, not to proceed
with such a trial.
I certify that the preceding twenty-eight (28)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision herein of the
Justices Tracey, Logan and
Dated: 6 March 2017
RTF format (312 KB)
Signed PDF/A format