Petru Ghirocian v J Blackwood & Sons Limited t/as Total Fasteners - re Termination of employment [2009] AIRC 979; (30 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Termination of employment
Petru Ghirocian
J. Blackwood & Sons Limited T/A Total Fasteners
(U2009/3271)
COMMISSIONER RAFFAELLI
SYDNEY, 30 DECEMBER 2009
Termination of employment.
This matter concerns an application made pursuant to
section 643
Workplace Relations Act 1996
by Mr Petru Ghirocian (the Applicant) who alleges that his termination by his former employer, Blackwood and Sons Limited t/a Total
Fasteners (the Respondent) was harsh, unjust and unreasonable.
In short, the termination followed an incident that involved a physical exchange between the Applicant and another person. The other
person, a woman, was a contract cleaner engaged at the Respondent’s premises. She was also removed from the site.
It was said by the Respondent in its termination letter of 27 March 2009, that the Applicant displayed “serious misconduct,
including abusive language and violence within the workplace”.
A number of witnesses gave evidence. Some of these were in the work area where the incident occurred. Mr J. De Mattia, the Applicant’s
solicitor put that not one witness was able to say that the Applicant hit the cleaner; much less that he commenced any fight. Some
witnesses felt that he may have been either defending himself or attempting to restrict the cleaner’s aggression.
In those circumstances, it is helpful to consider the Applicant’s evidence.
In his written evidence (exhibit G1), the Applicant said as follows:
“20. When I started working at the factory, Amy was already working there as a cleaner. I saw her around the factory about 2
times or so a week.
22. From time to time I had to go to the showroom at the factory to pick up something. On one occasion, in about 2007, I was in the
showroom with some employees who worked in the office. Amy was also in there. Something was said by someone, I believe it was some
sort of joke, and Amy said to me something like “that is inappropriate to say that”. I said “sorry” and left
the showroom.”
23. This was the only occasion that I had some discussion or exchange with Amy that was unpleasant until the incident on 25 March
24. On occasions, while I was doing my job, Amy would pass by where I was working and she would make comments out aloud such as: “You
talk too much, get on with your job, don't talk so much, do your job.” These comments were sometimes made in the presence of
Chris Borg. Mr Borg never said anything to Amy when she made these comments, nor did he say anything to me when she made these comments.
I did not respond. I just continued doing my job.
25. On 25 March 2009 (Wednesday), I was doing my job at about 2:40pm. I was standing at a table near the scales. Another person was
working at the other end of the table, about 2 to 3 metres away. Chris Borg and Amy walked past where I was working. They were walking
towards another section of the warehouse. Chris did not say anything to me as he went past. Amy however said in a loud voice, “You
talk too much, do some work.” Chris said nothing. Both Chris and Amy kept walking past my table. As they were walking away
from where I was working, I said: “Who are you? I have to tell you a couple of things.”
26. At this point Chris and Amy stopped but then kept walking again. They then stopped about a metre or so in front of my table because
I said to Amy: “Do you work in my place? Are you my boss? Do you pay me? You are not supposed to be on the floor, you are not
wearing a safety vest. Please go out.” When I said these things I was still standing behind my table. Amy and Chris kept walking
again. Chris said nothing to me and he said nothing to Amy. Amy than stopped perhaps 3 to 4 metres away from my table to talk to
somebody else. Chris kept walking and then he brought something back to me to do and he said: “You have to pack this because
I have to do an order.” He never said anything to me about the exchange between Amy and myself. At this stage I was still working
at my table. Someone else came up to me and said: “What happened?” Amy was still about 3 to 4 metres away in front of
my table. Amy started shouting in a very high pitched voice: “Shut the fuck up.” She said this several times.
27. I said to Amy: “Why should I shut the fuck up?” I said this maybe two or three times. Amy was at this time talking
to someone else.
28. Amy then started shouting louder still: “Shut the fuck up. You should retire.” When she said this I became very annoyed.
I left the area where I was working and I approached her. I had my hands behind my back. She was talking to someone else at that
time. Chris was standing nearby. I went up to Amy and I said: Why should I shut up? Who are you to tell me to shut up?” She
then punched me in the face. My glasses fell to the floor. I put my hands up to defend myself. She scratched at me: she scratched
my face and my left arm. I bent down to pick up my glasses and she scratched me and she tore my work uniform. She tried to step on
my glasses while they were on the floor. As I put my hands up to try to defend myself I believe that I struck her. It happened as
I was pushing my right arm towards her to push her away from me to protect myself. I was also trying to get my glasses. At this stage
Chris still said nothing. Amy then stopped trying to hit or scratch me and I bent over to pick up my glasses. Chris then approached
and took her away upstairs.”
In his oral testimony, the Applicant’s evidence included that:
he never had any cause to make any complaint about anything that the cleaner said to him up until the incident (PN70);
he agreed that when on 25 March 2009, the cleaner said that he talked too much and to do some work and that this was no different
from what she said on other days (PN82);
on this day he became upset because she said it in front of the boss (PN85);
he agreed that the cleaner and Mr Borg then moved away from him (PN87);
later, the cleaner shouted to him “shut the fuck up”. He responded in the same way (PN102);
at that point the cleaner was four or five metres away (PN103);
the cleaner later started screaming “shut the fuck up, shut the fuck up” (PN180);
he told her that he won’t shut up because she is not his boss (PN183);
he used the same language as the cleaner (PN205);
he then left his work area and approached the cleaner (PN216). She was talking to someone else at this time (PN222)
the cleaner had said to him “If you’re man enough come here and say it” and he accepted her challenge and went
up to her (PN239);
as to how close he was to her, he said “face to face” (PN240);
she then hit him. He tried to restrain her (PN242);
he agreed that the cleaner was a small person (PN258-269);
he agreed that if he hadn’t accepted the challenge and hadn’t left his work area there would presumably have been no
physical exchange (PN292);
he agreed that he was aware of the Respondent’s policy called Workplace Harassment and Environments (PN363);
In a matter such as this, the Commission needs to have regard to several matters referred to in
section 652(3).
Firstly as to whether there was a valid reason for the termination related to the employee’s conduct I rely on the Applicant’s
own evidence. That evidence establishes that:
Other than on one occasion in 2007, he had a reasonable relationship with the cleaner;
On 25 March 2009, the cleaner made comments not dissimilar to those she often made, but did it in front of the supervisor;
he challenged her comments;
the cleaner had moved 4 to 5 metres away and shouted and swore at him. He swore back;
he then while she was talking to someone else, moved out of his work area and moved the 4 to 5 metres and came up to her face.
In my view, in circumstances where he and the cleaner had traded verbal abuse and swear words, the Applicant’s actions, in moving
four or five metres across the factory floor to be face to face with a smaller woman was an act of provocation. That the cleaner
reacted violently does not excuse the Applicant’s conduct. In my view (and seemingly the view of the Applicant) but for his
action the fight would not have occurred.
Standing face to face in front of someone is generally unacceptable behaviour, to do it in the middle of an episode of verbal abuse
is most serious. I consider that it amounts to workplace violence.
While the cleaner was no innocent in the episode, the Applicant’s own evidence was that her initial comments were not at odds
with past exchanges. The difference seemed to be that they were said in front of the supervisor. Although I observe that this was
not the first time that she had said something in front of Mr Borg (see paragraph 24 of his written evidence). In my view it does
not justify his act in moving up to her.
Nor does the alleged (by the Applicant) conduct of Mr Borg in not taking a firmer hand early in the episode, excuse the applicant’s
I find that his action as described in his own evidence establishes that there was a valid reason for the Applicant’s termination.
I find that the Applicant was notified of the reason for his termination.
As to whether the Applicant was given an opportunity to respond, I agree with Mr De Mattia that what seemed to have occurred was that
an investigation as to what happened on 25 March was conducted. Employees were interviewed including the Applicant and the cleaner.
On the basis of that, the Applicant was terminated. While the Applicant was given an opportunity to tell his story as to what had
occurred, he does not seem to have been asked to respond to the allegation that he had engaged in serious misconduct including abusive
language and violence.
I find that, the Applicant was not given an opportunity to respond to the allegations against him.
The provisions of
section 652(3)(d)
, (e) and (f) are not directly relevant here.
As to any other matters of relevance I accept that the termination has had a serious impact on the employee in that he will find it
difficult to find other employment.
I also note that the Respondent acted against the cleaner also. Whether they (as opposed to her employer) terminated her employment
or not, she was certainly removed from engagement at the Respondent’s business.
Taking all matters into consideration, I find that the Applicant’s termination was not harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
In coming to this conclusion, I have also been conscious to afford a “fair go all round” to both the Applicant and the
Respondent.
The application is dismissed.
BY THE COMMISSION:
COMMISSIONER
Appearances
J. De Mattia
, solicitor for the Applicant.
for the Respondent.
Hearing details:
August 20, December 10.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR992091>
No downloadable files available