Dunford v Chief of Army [2024] ADFDAT 1 (14 October 2024)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Dunford v Chief of Army
[2024] ADFDAT 1
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 1 of 2024
Judgment of:
WRIGHT J (MEMBER), HALLEY J (MEMBER) AND
CROWLEY J (MEMBER)
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
DEFENCE AND WAR
– appeal against
conviction by Defence Force Magistrate (DFM) – where the applicant
convicted of two counts of assault
by unlawful touching – whether the
convictions unreasonable or could not be supported having regard to the evidence
whether, on the whole of the evidence, there was a reasonable
possibility that the touching was conduct which did not go beyond ordinary
social interaction or that which was generally acceptable in the ordinary
conduct of daily life, in the circumstances, and was thus
not unlawful –
no such reasonable possibility raised on the whole of the evidence –
whether the DFM erred in failing
to consider whether the prosecution had
properly negatived beyond reasonable doubt any mistake, within s 9.1 of the
Criminal Code
(Cth), as to the issue of consent that was available to the
applicant – issue of mistake not raised before the DFM –
applicant identified evidence discharging the evidential burden under
s 13.3(2) of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) so as to require the DFM to
consider the issue of mistake – no evidence sufficient to discharge the
evidential burden
identified – whether mistake as a basis for relief from
criminal liability available in the present case in light of s 9.1(a)
Criminal Code
(Cth) – no error by the DFM in failing to
consider mistake as to the issue of consent – appeal dismissed
Legislation:
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 5.4, 5.6, 9.1, 10, 13.3
Cases cited:
Boyson v Chief of Army
[2019] ADFDAT
Carmichael v Chief of Navy
[2009] ADFDAT 3
Collins v Wilcock
[1984] 1 WLR 1172
[1984] 3 All ER 374
Dansie v The Queen
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2022] HCA 25
Fingleton v The Queen
(2005) 227 CLR 166
[2005] HCA 34
Gallo v Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
(1990) 64 ALJR 458
Kantibye v Chief of Army (No 2)
[2022] ADFDAT 4
Kentwell v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
Pell v The Queen
(2020) 268 CLR 123
[2020] HCA 12
Pemble v The Queen
[1971] HCA 20
(1971) 124 CLR 107
Poulton v Chief of Navy
[2023] ADFDAT 1
Private R Army v Chief of Army
[2022] ADFDAT 1
Secretary, Department of Health and Community Services v JWB and SMB
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218
SKA v The Queen
(2011) 243 CLR 400
[2011] HCA 13
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr R Clutterbuck
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Taylor Rose Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr R de Vietri with Mr J Thomson
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 1 of 2024
LUKE EVAN DUNFORD
CHIEF OF ARMY
WRIGHT J (MEMBER), HALLEY J (MEMBER) AND CROWLEY J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
time for lodging of the applicant’s Notice of appeal and Application for
leave to appeal is extended to 4 June 2024.
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
applicant is granted leave to appeal.
appeal is dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE TRIBUNAL:
Introduction
a notice filed on 4 June 2024, the applicant Sergeant Luke Evan Dunford seeks an
extension of time in which to appeal and, if an
extension is granted, he appeals
or seeks leave to appeal against his conviction on 21 November 2023 on two
charges of assault.
background to this matter is that the applicant was charged with two service
offences contrary to
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(1) being a defence member at the Airmen’s Mess, RAAF Base Williamtown, in
the State of New South Wales, on or about 18 April
2023 he assaulted Leading
Cadet T by touching his upper body or thereabouts; and
(2) being a defence member at the Airmen’s Mess, RAAF Base Williamtown, in
the State of New South Wales, on or about 18 April
2023 he assaulted Leading
Cadet V by touching his upper body or thereabouts.
both cadets were children at the time of the incident giving rise to the charges
against the applicant and it is not necessary
for a proper understanding of
these reasons to identify them by name, the two children complainants have been
referred to by a letter,
T or V, rather than by name.
prosecution case was that while the two cadets had been waiting in line at the
Airmen’s mess to be served lunch, the applicant
assaulted them by placing
his hands on their upper bodies in order to move them aside so that two of his
“real soldiers”
could proceed closer to the food.
the hearing of this matter before a Defence Force Magistrate (
November 2023, the elements of the offences were identified and the defending
officer effectively confined the defence case
to whether the prosecution had
proved beyond reasonable doubt that the conduct, the touching of the cadets, was
unlawful, having
regard to the principle in
Collins v Wilcock
[1984] 3 All ER 374
Collins v Wilcock
), in that the
conduct was submitted not to have gone beyond ordinary social interaction.
21 November 2023, the applicant was convicted by the DFM of the two charges and
on that same day, he was sentenced in respect of
both convictions to be severely
reprimanded.
proceedings were reviewed as required by
of the DFDA by Brigadier Calhoun
DSC, as a competent reviewing authority, after receiving a report under
of the DFDA from a legal officer, Major Barnes. Brigadier Calhoun
determined that the conviction and punishment should be upheld.
notification of outcome of automatic review of DFM trial was apparently dated 1
February 2024. It is not known when the applicant
received that
notification.
27 February 2024, the applicant lodged with the reviewing authority a petition
for a review under
of the DFDA. A report dated 7 March 2024 was obtained
in accordance with
s 154(1)(a)
of the DFDA from Brigadier his Honour Judge
P E Smith, Deputy Judge Advocate General.
26 March 2024, in a minute noting the outcome of the petition, Brigadier Calhoun
upheld and approved the applicant’s convictions
but quashed the punishment
of a severe reprimand and imposed a lesser punishment of a reprimand for each
offence. A copy of the
Deputy Judge Advocate General’s report was
enclosed with that minute.
22 May 2024, a notice of appeal to the Tribunal was lodged on the
applicant’s behalf but apparently there were deficiencies
The appeal, application for leave to appeal and application
for extension of time
4 June 2024, a document headed “Appeal/Application for leave to
appeal/Application for extension of time” was filed
on behalf of the
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Appeals Act
), an appeal or an application for leave to appeal must be lodged
within the “appropriate period”, or within such further
the Tribunal, either before or after the expiration of the appropriate period,
(2) of s 21 relevantly defines “appropriate period” to mean 30 days
commencing immediately after the earlier
(1) the day on which the results of a review under s 152 of the DFDA are
notified to the convicted person, which in the present case
could not have been
earlier than 1 February 2024; or
(2) the last day of the period of 30 days after the conviction, which was 21
December 2023.
in the present case, the “appropriate period” commenced on 22
December 2023 and expired on 20 January 2024. Accordingly,
the applicant
requires an extension of time in which to lodge his appeal and application for
leave to appeal.
The grounds of appeal or proposed appeal
applicant’s grounds of appeal or proposed appeal were formulated as
the learned Defence Force Magistrate in finding the Appellant guilty of the
offences of Assault contrary to Section 33A [sic,
Defence Force
Discipline Act
of 1982 erred in so finding as the finding was, upon analysis,
against the weight of the evidence given by the majority of witnesses
present at the scene of the incident and as a whole the evidence as presented
was not capable of excluding a reasonable
doubt as to the Appellant’s
that the learned Defence Force Magistrate erred in failing to consider whether
the Prosecution had properly negatived beyond
reasonable doubt any defence of
mistake as to the issue of consent that was available to the
applicant’s right to appeal is governed by s 20(1) of the Appeals Act
which relevantly provides:
Subject to this Act, a convicted person ... may appeal to the Tribunal against
his or her conviction ... but an appeal on a ground
that is not a question of
law may not be brought except by leave of the Tribunal.
23(1) of the Appeals Act sets out the grounds on which the Tribunal may quash a
conviction and it relevantly includes:
..., where in an appeal it appears to the Tribunal:
(a) that the conviction ... is unreasonable, or cannot be supported, having
regard to the evidence;
(b) that, as a result of a wrong decision on a question of law, or of mixed law
and fact, the conviction ... was wrong in law and
that a substantial miscarriage
of justice has occurred;
(c) that there was a material irregularity in the course of the proceedings
before the court martial or the Defence Force magistrate
and that a substantial
miscarriage of justice has occurred; or
(d) that, in all the circumstances of the case, the conviction ... is unsafe or
unsatisfactory;
it shall allow the appeal and quash the conviction ....
first ground of appeal, which includes that “as a whole the evidence as
presented was not capable of excluding a reasonable
doubt as to the
Appellant’s guilt”, raises in substance the question of whether the
convictions “cannot be supported,
having regard to the evidence” and
thus falls within s 23(1)(a) of the Appeals Act. Given the nature of this
ground, it involves
an appeal on a ground that is not a question of law:
Boyson v Chief of Army
[2019] ADFDAT 2
(Brereton JA, with Perry J
agreeing). Consequently, leave to appeal in respect of the first ground of
appeal is required.
second ground of appeal concerns whether the DFM erred by not considering
whether the prosecution had negatived beyond reasonable
doubt that the applicant
was acting under a mistake “as to the issue of consent”. It was
accepted that this ground involves
the contentions that there was a material
irregularity in the course of the proceedings and a substantial miscarriage of
occurred, falling within s 23(1)(c) of the Appeals Act. Since the
ground goes beyond an appeal on a question of law, leave to appeal
required in respect of this second ground of appeal.
dealing with the issues of whether there should be an extension of time and
whether leave to appeal should be granted, it is
appropriate to consider the
second ground of appeal which raises a specific error before addressing the more
general, first ground
Extension of time to appeal
relation to the question of whether an extension of time should be granted, the
evidence of the applicant’s solicitor, Mr
Niven, established that the
applicant, an Army Reserve senior non-commissioned officer, did not generally
have access to his Australian
Defence Force email other than when he was serving
at a Defence Force establishment. As explained above, the review on petition,
under s 153 of the DFDA, of the applicant’s conviction and punishment was
not determined until 26 March 2024 and we are prepared
to accept, in light of Mr
Niven’s evidence and that of Flight Lieutenant Hiatt, that the applicant
did not become aware of
the outcome until about 10 April 2024, several weeks
after it was provided to the applicant’s defence email address.
6 May 2024, Mr Niven was retained to represent the applicant in relation to the
present proceedings. On 10 May 2024, Mr Niven
prepared a brief for counsel, Mr
Clutterbuck, who advised Mr Niven that he had several interstate matters that
required his urgent
attention. It was not until 22 May 2024 that a notice of
appeal to the Tribunal was lodged on the applicant’s behalf but the
Registry required further information to be included in the form. With
Mr Clutterbuck’s assistance, Mr Niven prepared revised
documentation
which was eventually filed on 4 June 2024.
the Tribunal should grant an extension of time to appeal against convictions
depends on what the interests of justice require
in all the circumstances,
having regard to the principles stated by McHugh J in
Gallo v Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
(1990) 64 ALJR 458
Carmichael v Chief of Navy
(Tracey, Mildren and Duggan JJ) and
Kentwell v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
(French CJ, Hayne, Bell and Keane JJ).
The grant of an extension of time should not be seen as automatic and the object
of the power
to extend the “appropriate period” effectively
conferred by s 21(1)(b) of the Appeals Act is to be understood as being
ensure that the appropriate period fixed by that section does not become an
instrument of injustice. Consequently, one essential
consideration when
determining whether an extension of time should be granted is the prospects of
success of the person seeking the
extension. Other considerations include
whether there is a satisfactory explanation for the delay and whether there is
any prejudice
to the other party caused by the failure to comply with the
relevant time limit.
the present case, part of the delay can be accounted for by the time taken for
the automatic review and the review on petition,
under ss 152 and 153 of the
DFDA. As observed by the Tribunal on numerous occasions, it is reasonable that
an appellant should exhaust
these other review mechanisms before being expected
to file an appeal to the Tribunal:
Poulton v Chief of Navy
[2023] ADFDAT
) at [12] (Logan, Perry and Slattery JJ). There is,
however, an additional period of delay which is said to have been caused by the
applicant’s lack of access to his Defence Force email, then a delay in
instructing a solicitor and a further period of delay
attributable to
counsel’s other work commitments and some deficiencies in the
documentation originally filed. The explanation
for these periods of additional
delay appeared to us to be somewhat exiguous.
Nonetheless,
having regard to the lack of prejudice to the respondent and the fact that the
grounds of appeal are reasonably arguable
and raise a point of significant
general concern regarding whether physical contact between more senior service
personnel and very
junior service personnel could reasonably possibly be
characterised as occurring in the ordinary course of social interaction in
circumstances so as not to constitute an offence of assault, we are satisfied
that it is in the interests of justice that an
extension of time should be
Leave to appeal
applicant also requires leave to appeal in respect of both proposed grounds of
appeal for the reasons we have outlined above.
The principles in this regard
are well established and were recently stated in
As the Tribunal has observed in the past (
Angre v Chief of Navy
[2017] ADFDAT 2
, at [42] – [43]), by analogy with observations which have
been made in relation to purpose of a requirement for leave to appeal
Coulter v R
(1988) 164 CLR 350
, at 359), the purpose of the requirement
for leave found in s 20(1) of the Appeals Act is to serve as a filter on
unmeritorious or
trifling appeals, or those which would obviously fail. But
where, as particularised, a proposed ground of appeal is reasonably arguable
and, if upheld, would result in a conviction being set aside if leave were to be
granted and the appeal heard, it is difficult to
envisage circumstances in which
it would be appropriate to refuse leave.
we observed in relation to the question of whether an extension of time should
be granted, the proposed grounds of appeal in the
present case are reasonably
arguable and raise a point of general concern. Accordingly, it is appropriate
to grant leave to appeal
in the present case.
Second ground of appeal
second ground of appeal was that the DFM erred in failing to consider whether
the prosecution had properly negatived beyond reasonable
defence of mistake as to the issue of consent that was available to the
Appellant”. The mistaken belief relied
upon in the present case was
formulated at one point by Mr Clutterbuck of counsel, who appeared for the
applicant, as being that
the applicant “had lawful authority to touch the
two cadets in the way in which he did to move them out of the way”.
was implicit that this belief that the touching of the cadets was not unlawful
was based on the contention that it did not go
beyond ordinary social
interaction, relying on the principle in
Collins v Wilcock
at WLR 1177.
a person is criminally responsible for a service offence when acting under a
mistake of fact is governed by s 9.1, in Ch 2
Criminal Code
the Criminal Code
). Chapter 2 of the Code is applicable to all
service offences under the DFDA by virtue of s 10 of that Act.
9.1 of the Criminal Code states:
(1) A person is not criminally responsible for an offence that has a physical
element for which there is a fault element other than
negligence if:
(a) at the time of the conduct constituting the physical element, the person
is under a mistaken belief about, or is ignorant of,
(b) the existence of that mistaken belief or ignorance negates any fault
element applying to that physical element.
(2) In determining whether a person was under a mistaken belief about, or was
ignorant of, facts, the tribunal of fact may consider
whether the mistaken
belief or ignorance was reasonable in the circumstances.
the present case, the relevant physical element for the purposes of s 9.1 of the
Criminal Code was that the applicant’s conduct
of touching the two cadets
was unlawful and the corresponding fault element, in accordance with s 5.6 of
the Code, was that the applicant
was reckless as to whether the conduct was
unlawful. Since the fault element was one other than negligence, s 9.1 was
potentially
however, a defendant, such as the applicant, wishes to rely on the exemption
from criminal responsibility such as that arising
under s 9.1 of the Criminal
Code, s 13.3 of the Code applies and relevantly provides:
(2) A defendant who wishes to deny criminal responsibility by relying on a
provision of Part 2.3 [which includes s 9.1] ... bears
an evidential burden in
relation to that matter.
(4) The defendant no longer bears the evidential burden in relation to a matter
if evidence sufficient to discharge the burden is
adduced by the prosecution or
by the court.
(5) The question whether an evidential burden has been discharged is one of
(6) In this Code:
evidential burden
, in relation to a matter, means the burden of
adducing or pointing to evidence that suggests a reasonable possibility that the
exists or does not exist.
[emphasis in original]
the hearing before the DFM, the applicant contended that his conduct was lawful
Collins v Wilcock
, being nothing more than ordinary social
interaction. The question of whether the applicant was mistaken as to whether
his conduct
was lawful on that basis, and therefore he was not criminally
responsible under s 9.1 of the Criminal Code, was not expressly raised
the DFM. Nevertheless, we accept that the failure to raise the matter during
the hearing before the DFM does not foreclose
consideration of the issue. The
DFM was required to consider any defence reasonably available to the applicant
on the evidence adduced:
Pemble v The Queen
[1971] HCA 20
(1971) 124 CLR 107
(Barwick CJ);
[1971] HCA 20
Fingleton v The Queen
(2005) 227 CLR 166
[2005] HCA 34
(McHugh J).
the hearing in the Tribunal, the applicant identified the relevant evidence said
to discharge his evidential onus on this issue
as the following answers he had
given in response to questions asked of him by Military Police when they
interviewed him about the
assault allegations on 21 April 2023:
Q60. Just something to reiterate what Mel asked earlier, is it common practice
for ARA or G Res to get in front of a line of the
again, that depends on the scenario on the day. It depends on the –
I’ll use the term “supervisor”. If
there’s a supervisor
of the cadets, some of them will ensure that every single time an air force or
an army or tri-service
person walks in, that they are to get out of the road.
Some of them don’t police that. Other kids will do it of their own accord.
Other cadet kids themselves will tell other kids to get out of the road, and
some don’t care. There is - I'll say there’s
no written law or rule
nowhere to be, I don’t care.
I’ll stand in there and, you know, to
be honest the mess food isn't that great. I don’t really need to be at the
of the queue. It’s not exciting, right, but as a general rule
someone will instruct them to get out of our road, because they’re
the lack of a better word, more important things than a bivouac on school
Q61. Yes, okay. So more like an unspoken, unwritten SOP type thing?
roundabout way, yes. Once again, depending on who is overseeing at the time and
- and whether they do or don’t police that
and - and at what level they
Q62. Yes, all right. Thanks for that. The next question I do want to ask is,
you’ve just mentioned “real soldiers”
a couple of times. I
just want to get an understanding of what you mean by “real
A As opposed to cadets.
Q63. Okay. So that’s not like ARA, G Res? Just anyone other than cadets?
A Anyone other than cadets.
Yes, okay. Thank you.
Q64. Just to sum up what you’ve already explained to us, and then what -
is that - particularly with the cadets, is that you
had noticed that there was
the cadet instructor there. At that time she wasn't really policing your guys
coming through. You’ve
approached them, just placed your hands on their
shoulders, asked them to move, as the other guys needed to come in. You
hear them say anything, or you can’t recall if they did say
anything, but they’ve stepped back, allowed them to go through,
was pretty much it; you’re all done.
A That was it.
Q65. Just to reiterate with the questions, is that you have been to Williamtown
numerous times before, but you’ve got here
the start of this week, so
Monday, and that usually, if you’re doing a course, you’ll eat at
the airmen’s mess.
It’s kind of just a thing, that you guys all eat
together, and that you’ve just mentioned that, when you’re referring
to real soldiers, it’s ones that are not cadets, that are school-aged.
That’s the ones that - - -
but yeah, permanent air force, reserve air force, permanent army, reserve army,
Q66. That’s what you’re referring to as - - -
A The delineation was not a cadet.
Q67. Yes, and you can’t speak for others, but usually you’d say that
when they go in it’s usually a one for one.
Some of the cadets will tell
people to move out of the way if other ones are coming through that are required
to be served earlier,
and that when you did approach them their backs were
facing towards you. They were facing the bain-maries. They hadn’t received
their food yet. They were just waiting there in line.
applicant contended that this portion of his interview amounted to evidence that
suggested a reasonable possibility that he held
a mistaken belief as to the
lawfulness of his touching of the cadets.
is apparent that the answers given by the applicant were with respect to his
general understanding of how cadets lining up to be
served at the Airmen’s
mess might be supervised and what practices might be adopted to allow other
personnel to be served before
them. His answers were not specific to his state
of mind on the particular occasion in question, when it was apparent that the
were not under his command and there were numerous supervisors on hand,
proactively regulating the flow of cadets in the meal line.
Further, the
applicant said nothing that might suggest he had a mistaken belief that he was
authorised or entitled to touch the
cadets as part of any supervision of their
activities. By his own admission, when it was necessary to intervene someone
would “instruct”
the cadets to make way for other personnel.
Moreover, as we discuss further below, when later asked in the interview why he
touched the cadets the applicant said, “I don’t
our view, there was no evidence adduced at the hearing before the DFM capable of
discharging the evidential burden cast upon the
applicant by virtue of s 13.3 of
the Criminal Code. Consequently, there was no defence of mistake as to the
issue of consent available
to the applicant for the DFM to consider.
any event, the terms of s 9.1 of the Criminal Code present a number of other
difficulties for this ground of appeal. First, in
order to come within the
operation of that section, the applicant must at the relevant time have been
“under a mistaken belief
9.1(1)(a). If the belief that “he had lawful authority to touch the two
to move out of the way” identified in oral submissions is relied
on, such a belief appears to be about a matter of law, or
mixed fact and law,
rather than a belief about facts. Consequently, s 9.1, which is relevantly
limited to mistaken beliefs about
facts, would not be available to the applicant
in respect of that mistaken belief. If, however, the relevant belief was that
conduct did not go beyond ordinary social interaction, this would be a
belief about facts, and would attract the operation of s 9.1,
otherwise applicable.
even if the applicant was at the relevant time acting under a mistaken belief
criminal responsibility under s 9.1 if
the existence of that mistaken belief negated the fault element applying to the
physical element,
namely the unlawfulness of the touching, by virtue of s
9.1(1)(b). As noted above, the fault element in relation to the circumstance
that the touching was unlawful is recklessness. Under s 5.4(1) of the Criminal
Code, a person is reckless with respect to a circumstance
(a) he or she is aware of a substantial risk that the circumstance exists or
will exist; and
(b) having regard to the circumstances known to him or her, it is unjustifiable
to take the risk.
Accordingly,
the fault element in relation to the unlawfulness of the touching would be
established if the applicant was aware of
a substantial risk that the touching
was unlawful and, in the circumstances known to the applicant, it was
unjustifiable to take
the risk. Assuming for the purposes of argument that
there was a reasonable possibility that the applicant was acting under a
belief that the touching was lawful because it did not go beyond
ordinary social interaction, that would not by itself negate the
fault element
of recklessness. This is because even if the applicant was mistaken as to
whether his conduct was lawful this would
not negate that, as the DFM found, he
was also aware of a substantial risk that his conduct was not lawful and, in the
circumstances
known to him, it was unjustifiable to take the risk. If the
existence of the mistaken belief would not negate the relevant fault
element, as
required by s 9.1(1)(b), the applicant could not be relieved of criminal
responsibility under s 9.1(1) and thus there
would be no material irregularity
as a result of the DFM’s failure to consider the issue of mistake.
even if the applicant had a mistaken belief that the touching was lawful because
it did not go beyond ordinary social interaction,
we consider that would not
have been a reasonable belief for the applicant to have held in all the
circumstances.
the DFM did not err by failing expressly to consider whether the prosecution had
“properly negatived beyond reasonable
doubt any defence of mistake as to
the issue of consent available to the Appellant”. The relief from
criminal responsibility
provided by s 9.1 of the Criminal Code was not
“available to the Appellant” in the circumstances of the present
Thus, there was no “material irregularity in the course of the
proceedings before the ... Defence Force Magistrate”
within s 23(1)(c).
this conclusion, the issue of whether a substantial miscarriage of justice has
occurred, for the purposes of s 23(1)(c) of the
DFDA Act, does not arise.
these reasons, the second ground of appeal should be rejected.
First ground of appeal
noted above, the first ground of appeal raised the issue of whether the two
convictions were unreasonable or could not be supported,
having regard to the
Relevant principles
principles to be applied by the Tribunal in determining such a ground of appeal
are well established and reflect the principles
applied by Courts of Criminal
Appeal in civilian criminal appeals involving the same, or substantially the
same, ground of appeal.
The principles have been summarised in
Army v Chief of Army
[2022] ADFDAT 1
(Logan, Perry and Barr JJ) as follows:
(a) The Tribunal must address the question whether, upon the whole of the
evidence, it was open to the DFM to be satisfied beyond
a reasonable doubt that
the applicant was guilty?
(b) To address that question, the Tribunal must make an independent assessment
of the sufficiency and quality of the evidence.
(c) The conviction must be set aside if the Tribunal decides that the DFM
, not might, have had a reasonable doubt about the appellant’s
guilt, even if there is sufficient evidence in law to support
(d) A doubt experienced by the Tribunal will be a doubt which a DFM ought also
to have experienced, except where the DFM’s
advantage of seeing and
hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by the
[Emphasis in original]
appeal from a DFM is analogous to an appeal from a judge sitting alone in a
civilian criminal trial:
at [36]. For this reason, the
comments by the High Court in
Dansie v The Queen
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2022] HCA 25
) concerning an appeal from a judge alone
trial on an unreasonable verdict ground are applicable, mutatis mutandis, to the
in the present case. In
, Gageler, Keane, Gordon, Steward
and Gleeson JJ held at [7], [16] and [17]:
Nevertheless,
as the decision under appeal illustrates, undue attention to the factual
findings on which the trial judge relied in
returning a verdict of guilty can
distract the Court of Criminal Appeal from the proper performance of the
assessment required of
it ... when determining on an appeal against conviction
whether the verdict ‘should be set aside on the ground that it is
unreasonable
or cannot be supported having regard to the evidence’. That
is because the function to be performed by the Court of Criminal
Appeal when
determining an appeal on the unreasonable verdict ground is not to determine
whether there was error in the factual findings
on which the trial judge relied
in ultimately finding the accused guilty of the offence tried. The function to
be performed by the
Court of Criminal Appeal is to determine for itself whether
the evidence was sufficient in nature and quality to eliminate any reasonable
doubt that the accused is guilty of that offence.
the trial has been by judge alone, the reasons of the trial judge must be
approached by the court of criminal appeal performing
that function with
circumspection lest the findings of fact made by the trial judge divert the
court from undertaking the requisite
independent assessment of the evidence. The
court will be required to consider the arguments of the parties in the appeal
be entitled to treat findings of fact made by the trial judge about
which no issue is taken in the appeal as an accurate reflection
of so much of
the evidence as bore on those findings. But the question for the court in every
case will remain whether the court's
assessment of the totality of the evidence
leaves the court with a reasonable doubt as to guilt which the court cannot
having regard to such advantage as the trial judge can be taken to
have had by reason of having seen and heard the evidence at trial.
advantage that a trial judge might have had over a court of criminal appeal by
reason of having seen and heard the evidence at
trial will vary from case to
case depending on the form in which the evidence was adduced at the trial and
depending on the nature
of the issues that arose at the trial. ...
short, the question for the Tribunal in relation to the first ground of appeal
is whether the Tribunal’s assessment of the
totality of the evidence
leaves it with a reasonable doubt as to guilt which cannot be assuaged by having
regard to such advantage
as the DFM had by reason of having seen and heard the
evidence at first instance.
it can be noted that the evidence in the present case included Exhibit 2, a
video recording of the applicant’s interview
with Leading Seaman Slade and
Corporal Ryan on 21 April 2023. In
Pell v The Queen
(2020) 268 CLR
[2020] HCA 12
), the High Court held, at [36] (Kiefel
CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle, Gordon and Edelman JJ), that a Court of
Criminal Appeal
should not, as a general rule, view a video recording of a
witness’s evidence when making its independent assessment of the
for the purposes of determining an unreasonable verdict ground of appeal. Their
Honours went on, however, to say at [36]:
... There may be cases where there is something particular in the
video-recording that is apt to affect an appellate court’s
assessment of
the evidence, which can only be discerned visually or by sound. In such cases,
there will be a real forensic purpose
to the appellate court’s examination
of the video-recording. But such cases will be exceptional, and ordinarily it
expected that the forensic purpose that justifies such a course will be
adopted by the parties, rather than upon independent scrutiny
by the members of
[Footnotes omitted]
issue was also considered by the High Court in
SKA v The Queen
[2011] HCA 13
(French CJ, Gummow and Kiefel JJ) where,
, their Honours endorsed the reasoning of Simpson J in the
Court of Criminal Appeal that viewing the recording of one witness might
an imbalance, given that the Court would not be viewing video recordings of the
evidence of other witnesses.
general approach endorsed by the High Court was said to reflect the functional
demarcation between the province of the jury (or
other tribunal of fact) and the
province of the appellate court, which demarcation had not been superseded by
the improvements in
technology that have made the video-recording of witnesses
at [38]. Similar reasoning applies to the Tribunal in its
role in dealing with appeals from a court martial or a DFM.
approach identified above has been taken in the Tribunal in relation to an
appellant’s video recorded interview, in
Kantibye v Chief of Army (No
[2022] ADFDAT 4
(Logan J, Brereton JA and Perry J). In
that case, however, the Tribunal determined to view a portion of the video
recording on the
basis that the relevant part – a relatively short excerpt
– was identified and the appellant in that case wished to submit
DFM erred in considering the appellant’s response on that occasion to be
“unnecessarily defensive and combative”
such as to contribute to a
conclusion that his evidence was unconvincing and that submission could not
fairly be evaluated without
reviewing that portion of the video recording.
the present case, a limited portion of Exhibit 2 was identified and was accepted
by both parties as being appropriate for the Tribunal
to view as it contained a
demonstration by the applicant of what he did not and did do when touching the
two cadets, and this demonstration
was not described in the transcript. In our
view, it was necessary and appropriate to view this portion in order to
understand the
applicant’s answer and to carry out an independent review
of the evidence as a whole.
Review of the evidence as a whole
light of these principles, the members of the Tribunal have each conducted their
own independent assessments of the evidence, taking
into account the
parties’ arguments in the appeal and treating the DFM’s findings of
fact with circumspection so as not
to be diverted from the task required to be
performed but taking into account, where appropriate, the DFM’s findings
which no issue was taken in the appeal.
the commencement of the hearing before the DFM on 20 November 2023, the
applicant was arraigned and pleaded not guilty to both
charges of assault. The
elements which the prosecution was required to prove beyond reasonable doubt in
respect of each charge were
identified in opening as follows:
(1) The accused was a Defence member;
(2) The accused was at least reckless as to the fact that he was a Defence
(3) The accused was on service land;
(4) The accused was at least reckless as to being on service land;
(5) The accused engaged in conduct alleged in the charge, mainly [sic namely]
that he touched the upper bodies of LCDTs [T] and [V];
(6) The accused’s conduct alleged in the charge was intentional;
(7) The accused’s conduct resulted in the infliction of force on
LCDT’s [T] and [V];
(8) The accused was at least reckless as to whether his conduct would inflict
force on the LCDTs [T] and [V];
(9) That LCDT’s [T] and [V] did not consented to the conduct of the
(10) The accused was at least reckless as to whether LCDTs [T] and [V] consented
to the conduct of the accused;
(11) The accused’s conduct was unlawful; and
(12) The accused was at least reckless as to the unlawfulness of the conduct.
the prosecution opening, the defending officer identified that the defence case
was that, whilst it was conceded that the applicant
touched the cadets, that
touching was lawful in that it was nothing more than ordinary social
interaction, relying on
Collins v Wilcock
. In other words, and as was
made clear during closing addresses, the only elements in issue were elements
(11) and (12). The DFM
was satisfied that each of the elements (1) to (10) had
been proved beyond reasonable doubt and there was no challenge on this appeal
that aspect of the DFM’s reasons.
the evidence has been reviewed, as a whole. For the purposes of these reasons,
however, it is sufficient to note that the most
pertinent aspects of the
evidence include what follows.
1 was the CCTV footage of the foyer of the Airmen’s mess, which also
provided a limited view of the area of the mess
between the bain-marie and the
meal pass table and other tables. Exhibit 3 was a timeline aide-memoire which
identified persons
and activities shown on the CCTV footage at various time
stamps on the footage. Portions of the footage were played during the hearing
and the entire footage has also been reviewed separately. From the CCTV
footage, it was not possible to see exactly what occurred
in the interaction
between the applicant and the two cadets in the meal line. The significant
aspects of the footage included that:
(1) both in the foyer of the Airmen’s mess and in the meal line, the Air
Force Cadets including Leading Cadets T and V were
supervised by Air Force Cadet
instructors (Corporal Hinton, Leading Aircraftwoman Davies and Aircraftwoman
Jimmieson) and the cadets’
conduct was appropriate and orderly;
(2) other Air Force and Army personnel were in the meal line from time to time
and the meal line appeared to be progressing smoothly
prior to the incident;
(3) Army personnel, Corporal Cheriyapaniyeri and Private Crangle, were in the
meal line behind Leading Cadets T and V;
(4) after the applicant approached the cadets in the meal line, the cadet
farther away from the bain-marie appeared to take a step
(5) the incident took place at about 11:49 am; and
(6) less than 30 seconds after the interaction between the applicant and the two
cadets, Corporal Hinton, who had been supervising
the cadets in the meal line,
came out into the foyer and spoke to Flying Officer Hinton, who was the officer
in charge of the cadets,
and two other Air Force Cadet staff members. Corporal
Hinton could be seen demonstrating the nature of the touching of the cadets
she had seen in the meal line. Her demonstration was of pushing from the front
at about the level of the upper chest just below
the shoulder with flat, open
it is difficult to ascertain precisely what occurred from the CCTV footage, it
appeared that as a result of the applicant’s
intervention, Corporal
Cheriyapaniyeri and Private Crangle were served before Leading Cadets T and V
and may have received their
meals up to about a minute earlier than would have
been the case if the two cadets had not been moved out of their place in the
next exhibit played at trial was Exhibit 2, the video recording of the interview
with the applicant. Exhibit 4 was a transcript
of the interview. As explained
above, the members of the Tribunal watched the portion of Exhibit 2 played
during the Tribunal hearing
in which the applicant explained how he did and did
not touch the cadets but otherwise reviewed the transcript of the interview.
have taken into account all of that material except for the last question in Q92
and the answer to that question, which the DFM
rejected. Salient aspects of the
interview included that:
(1) Corporal Cheriyapaniyeri and Private Crangle were instructing on a course
with the applicant and they were held up as a result
of a task that they were
completing. The applicant saw them enter the mess and attempt to get their
meals but he noticed that there
were two Air Force Cadets in front of them.
(2) The applicant was aware that there was an Air Force Cadet staff member who
was prioritising Air Force and Army soldiers to overtake
cadets to get their
meals “as a matter of respect or the fact that we’ve got places to
be and jobs to do...”.
(3) As to the specific incident, the applicant’s account was “I
placed my right hand on the right shoulder of the right
[cadet] and my left hand
on the left shoulder of the left [cadet]” and asked them to “jump
out of the road” to
make way for two “real soldiers” who were
on a tight schedule and the two cadets stepped rearwards and to the left and
corporal and private moved to the front of the queue.
(4) The applicant was first informed that there had been a complaint in a
telephone call from the Regimental Sergeant Major about
five hours later.
(5) The applicant did not speak to the Air Force Cadet staff member supervising
the cadets.
(6) When the applicant approached the two cadets they had their backs to him as
they were facing the bain-marie. The interview then
Q51. Was it just, like, or how did you get their attention to tell them to move
out of the way?
speaking to them. ‘Excuse me, guys. Can use jump out of the road?
I’ve got real soldiers need to come through’.
I didn’t pick
them up and throw them out of the road. There was absolutely no violence
involved in it whatsoever, and any referral
to that is a complete fabricated
bullshit. So I placed my hand on their shoulders.
Q54. Did they make any comments?
they say anything? I didn’t hear them say anything, but they obliged by
standing back, and I would say they did it at their
will. At no stage did I have
to physically draw them back.
(7) The applicant explained that in the mess as a general rule someone would
instruct cadets to get out of the road for other Defence
Force personnel
“because they’re on, for the lack of a better word, more important
things than a bivouac on school holidays”.
He also clarified that when he
referred to “real soldiers” he was referring to “anyone other
than cadets”.
(8) The applicant had undertaken mandatory awareness training in relation to
Defence youth protection on 30 March 2023 and explained
his understanding of
aspects of this training.
(9) The applicant specifically denied that in touching the cadets he put his
hands out in front of himself and then separated the
cadets by pushing one hand
fully out to the left and the other to the right. He said, and demonstrated,
that he put his hands with
flat palms down on the cadets’ shoulders and
“moved them, essentially, beside me [indicating to his left] to allow
people to walk to their front”. The applicant said the cadets
“moved under their own steam” and he “did
not physically shove
them from anywhere”.
(10) The interview then included:
Q99. Why did you place your hands on them?
A I don’t know.
Q100. Did you think that your voice would be able enough to get their attention
A I don’t know.
Q106. Right. Just to clarify, is that usually – to get someone’s
attention, be it child or adult over the age of 18,
would you typically place
your hand on them to get their attention if they were facing away from you, or
is that something that’s
A Depending on the scenario.
was not in dispute that both cadets were 13 years old at the relevant time.
first witness called to give evidence was Leading Cadet V. A sketch of the
Airmen’s mess and some photographs of the mess
became Exhibits 5, 6 and 7.
Leading Cadet V’s evidence included:
I had already grabbed a plate and I let two RAAF members in front of me, which
they did go in front of me. And after that, there
were also two RAAF members
behind me, and so which I insisted on letting them in front. But one of my staff
members told me not to,
as we had places to be, and so I didn’t let them
in front. And a few moments later, a sergeant in green camo with a bald head
glasses, he intercepted and he put his right hand just below my shoulder, and he
held my friend [T] with the other, and he pushed
us behind in order to let two
RAAF members in front, which I wasn’t too sure what happened after that.
Cadet V said that he felt “pretty confused” by what occurred and he
“kept replaying the event when [he]
sat down for lunch because [he]
wasn’t too sure if [he] was right or wrong during that incident”.
He also said that
he did not consent to the person putting his hand on him.
cross examination, Leading Cadet V said that he spoke to the Military Police and
the person in command of his detachment about
the incident and that he and
Leading Cadet T, that night or over lunch, “asked each other what sort of
happened” but
otherwise denied that he had spoken to anyone about what
happened in the period before his interview with the Military Police.
Cadet V agreed that in the Airmen’s mess there was general noise of people
having conversations. When the applicant
came over to him, Leading Cadet V said
he was facing towards the front of the line and Leading Cadet T was behind him.
The applicant
came from his right side and put his hand on his left shoulder,
which the witness demonstrated by placing “his right hand between
breast and collarbone of his left shoulder with a flat hand”. The cadet
in effect denied that the applicant said “excuse
me guys” and only
remembered him saying that “they had places to go”. He believed
that the applicant put his hand
on both himself and the other cadet at about the
same time. Leading Cadet V said that as soon as the applicant put his hand on
shoulder, he “felt his force against when [he] was trying to walk
forward so [he] just walked back to let those two members
in front” but he
did not stumble. He agreed that he felt the weight of the applicant’s
hand directing him back so that
he could let the two members in front. Although
he had previously described the two members as being from the RAAF, he said he
not remember whether they were Air Force or Army. The witness also agreed
that he felt “a small amount of force that was directing
[him] where to
go” and it was not a shove or anything like that; nor was he grabbed or
restrained. Rather, he said “[h]e
just pushed me back”. The cadet
also agreed that in his statement to the Military Police he described what
occurred as “kind
of pushed us back” and agreed that his memory at
that time was better than it was when he gave evidence. He said that he did
remember any of the Air Force Cadet staff coming over to him and asking how he
was after the incident.
next witness was Leading Cadet T whose account of what happened
It was a really busy day, we lined up to get food, me and [V], and I saw two
people in green flight suits. I let them in front of
me and then the LACW told
me not to do – not let anyone in front of me because we have a really busy
day and we can’t
really – we have to rush it. So – and then I
saw – and then a loud noise happened. I had to look. I didn’t
see what it was, looked back and continued my conversation with [V], and then
picked up my plate. I was about to grab the
spoon for my food and I got left
– I believe touched on the back of my neck in the back of my right
shoulder and pulled away.
witness said that the person, whom he identified as a sergeant, said
“[w]e’ve got places to be” with an angry
face. He said it
made him feel shocked and surprised. The cadet also described what happened as
“[h]e pulled me towards like
the cutlery and I stumbled a bit. I was
grab food and then the staff, which was the LACW, the ACW and
Corporal ... came up to me and asked if I was all right and if [V]
right”. He denied that he had given consent for the applicant to touch
him and also said that he believed that Corporal
Hinton had spoken to him just
when he sat down to get food.
Cadet T explained how he came to provide a statement to the Military Police. He
then agreed that he was facing towards the
food and the plates and [V] was to
his left, although he could not remember which way he was facing just before the
applicant touched
him. The witness said that he felt two hands, one on the back
of the neck and another hand on the shoulder, and agreed that he was
pulled back
and he remembered seeing the applicant grab the other cadet on his upper body
after the applicant had touched the witness
for two or four seconds. The cadet
said that when he stumbled it was “kind of short but it ... wasn’t
like just one
step it was like five, six, seven steps” backwards towards
the cutlery. The cadet maintained that the applicant did place
a hand on his
shoulder and rejected the suggestion that the applicant did not touch the back
of his neck or that he was not dragged.
He also said that he saw the applicant
grab food, pick up a plate, put food on his plate and walk away towards the
Cadet T said it was when he was sitting at the table with his food that Corporal
Hinton came and spoke to him after two minutes.
The witness also confirmed that
he did not consent to the applicant touching him.
Crangle was the next witness. He was an instructor on a course designed to
qualify drivers on various vehicles along with
the applicant and Corporal
Cheriyapaniyeri, also known as Raj. The private recounted that he and Raj
turned up to lunch late at
There was quite a big lineup. There was a lot of people in there at the time so
at least three or four Defence personnel in the front
of the line and then
followed by two Air Force cadets and then myself and Raj. And then [the
applicant] came over to the air cadets,
came up behind them and placed his right
hand on the right shoulder of the cadet on the right because they were both
facing towards
the... cafeteria like where you have the food. So there were
facing towards that, ... and then his left hand on the left shoulder
behind, next to that air cadet. I believe it would have been for no longer than
five seconds. He didn’t apply any
force or push them in any way and he
asked them to move behind myself and Raj as we had timings to meet, and then try
push us forward
through the line.
witness said that he left the mess at about 12:30 pm. He also said that the
mess was not extremely loud. In cross examination,
Private Crangle said that he
was about a metre behind the cadet on the left of the applicant.
Hinton was called as the next witness and gave evidence of her service with the
Australian Air Force Cadets. She said that
on 18 April 2023 at lunch in the
Airmen’s mess her role was, as a staff member, to supervise the cadets,
making sure they were
using appropriate manners, lining up correctly, washing
their hands and just keeping a general eye on them, together with other
instructors,
Aircraftwoman Jimmieson and Leading Aircraftwoman Davies. Corporal
Hinton described what she saw as follows:
I saw a member stand-up, who was sitting at the table directly in front of me.
He was on the second chair to the right. I saw him
stand up, pushed his chair
backwards, and walk over to the bain-marie at the front of the line, with two of
the detachment cadets
were standing. From there, I saw the member raised both
his left and right hands, with an open palm, and place them on the
shoulder/chest
region, pushing the two cadets backwards. [Her demonstration was
recorded as being “a pushing motion forward”] ... From
cadets had to grab themselves, so take a small step pace just to steady
themselves so they didn’t fall over, and
then I saw the member indicate
with his left hand to call what I believe are members that were with him, to
move forward to the front
of the line so they could be served before the two
cadets that were there.
witness said she took steps to identify the member who had pushed the cadets
including his name and rank. Her evidence was that
she then walked directly
from where she was standing to meet the two other staff members and asked if
they had seen what occurred.
She then said that after making sure the member
had returned to his seat and there were no other incidents, she went directly
of the door to tell the detachment commander, who was standing in the foyer,
what had happened. The corporal then returned and checked
on the cadets, asking
them if they were okay.
cross examination, Corporal Hinton said that from memory the two cadets were
facing the bain-marie and she was standing at the
back of the drink station
which she estimated to be about no more than 10 to 12 m away, also saying
“it wasn’t far”.
She described the applicant approaching them
as “definitely [not] straight on. There was movement around to the
but he approached them from their front. The witness agreed that
the mess was largely full and that there was a hum of conversation.
gave evidence that she was instructed by her detachment commander to write up an
incident report which she did separately
from ACW Jimmieson.
Hinton’s evidence was that the applicant had one hand on one cadet and one
hand on the other cadet’s shoulder
or chest region, “like the
collarbone area”, and she could see an open palm of each hand. She
rejected the suggestion
that the applicant had touched the cadets from behind
reaching over their shoulders because she remembered him with openhanded palms
pushing forward not from behind. The corporal said that Leading Cadet V
stumbled backwards maybe about 0.2 m, saying “it wasn’t
lot”, and she confirmed that her evidence was that the applicant just
walked up to the cadets and pushed them backwards.
Aircraftwoman
Jimmieson was called next and she explained her role in the Australian Air Force
Cadets. On 18 April 2023 in the Airmen’s
mess her role was to supervise
the cadets, ensuring that everything ran smoothly and there was no impeding of
Air Force members and
service personnel who were in the mess at the same time.
Her evidence was that at the relevant time she was standing at the table
people swipe their passes as they come in from the foyer into the mess hall and
what occurred was as follows:
... that day we were in at the same time as the military personnel, realised
that it was going to be quite a mission to get our cadets
through at the same
time as the Defence personnel and maintain the schedules that we needed to. So
on that day we decided to single
file in a zipper fashion with the cadets and
the serving members, that way we could all go to where we normally go, because
we would let the Defence personnel in. So that day we were doing
... we had two of our cadets that were waiting ready to go. There were two army
members behind them, and one of – a senior
sergeant from the army walked
from somewhere behind me towards our cadets in the mess line, and essentially
moved them out of the
way, or directed them out of the way, and gestured for his
men, I guess, to jump in front of them as they had places to be.
went on to describe the applicant coming in front of the cadets and moving them
towards his left to get the two members to come
forward. In doing so, she said
“he touched them on the shoulders essentially and moved them towards
– it wasn’t
an extremely aggressive movement or anything, but it was
more like just a tap on the shoulder. It wasn’t going to knock them
their feet or anything like that”. She clarified that it was a “tap
kind of push” and it was not a “forceful
push” and the cadets
stepped backwards, as they were touched, and she said they looked confused. As
to what she did next,
the witness said:
I looked for one of my superior or supervising staff members to ask them
essentially if they’d seen what I saw, and that’s
where Georgia
[Hinton] came up beside me and I’d asked her did she see that, and she
said yes, and then she went and reported
to Andrew Hinton as well, and I just
continued to supervise the cadets.
cross examination, Aircraftwoman Jimmieson estimated that she was roughly 2 to 3
m away from the two cadets at the time of the
Cheriyapaniyeri was the next witness called. His evidence was that on 18 April
2023 he was an instructor on a drivers’
course along with the applicant,
Private Crangle and others. He said that he and Private Crangle were a little
late getting to the
mess for lunch and while they were in the line waiting to be
served the applicant “came in and asked us to move forward and
air force cadets in front of us, and they moved back”. On this
witness’s account, the cadets moved back behind
them because the applicant
asked them to but he did not hear what was said. The witness said that he was
in the mess for 15 to 20
cross examination, the corporal said that the cadets were approximately 3 m or
so in front of him and he could not remember properly
seeing any cadets stumble
backwards or anything like that. The witness accepted that there was nothing
the applicant and the cadets that drew his attention to
them. As the Tribunal understood it, this witness’s evidence was not
the incident did not occur but rather that he did not observe anything that
relevantly occurred.
Aircraftwoman
Davies gave evidence next and she indicated that on 18 April 2023 at lunchtime
in the Airmen’s mess, her role
was supervising cadets in the mess. Her
evidence was that she was standing 2 or 3 m away from the table where members
passes as they come in from the foyer. Her account of what occurred
was as follows:
... I do remember kind of turning around and seeing I suppose what was happening
and there was someone standing there in front of
our two cadets sort of like
– I remember somewhat of an arm being up I suppose. And then two Defence
Force members wearing
the green cams were kind of pointed at and said like,
‘get over here’, and they moved in front of our cadets and just
carried on with their mess from there.
person with their arm up was described as tall, wearing green cams as well with
short hair or bald hair but the witness only saw
the back of their head at the
time. The witness’s evidence was that it was very noisy in the mess that
cross examination, Aircraftwoman Davies said that her attention was drawn to the
incident as it was happening and “it was
quite abrupt ... The way that he
kind of went about saying that”. She also said that she did not
“particularly see [the
cadets] take any steps, but they looked quite,
like, taken aback, I suppose, from what was happening. Confused, ... as was
last witness called was Sergeant Tustian who was the ADF Investigations Team
Leader who conducted the investigation, took witness
statements from Leading
Cadets T and V and obtained the CCTV footage from the Airmen’s mess. In
cross examination, the witness
was asked questions concerning the conduct of the
investigation and the obtaining of evidence.
the applicant’s case, three character references were tendered: a
reference from Major Green dated 6 November 2023, Exhibit
9; a reference from
Major Taylor dated 2 November 2023, Exhibit 10; and a reference from Squadron
Leader Machan dated 2 November
2023, Exhibit 11. Furthermore, it was
expressly agreed by the parties that the applicant had no service offences on
his record and
that he was of good character.
the close of the defence case, the DFM expressly confirmed with the parties that
“the only element in question ... the
only fact in issue is whether [the
applicant’s placing hands on the cadets] was unlawful” and thus
“the prosecution
have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt it’s
unlawful, that any application of force, however slight, has gone beyond that
be expected in ordinary social intercourse”. In addition, apart from a
good character direction and standard directions,
no other directions were
sought by defence counsel when the DFM enquired in that regard.
Consideration of whether the DFM must have had a reasonable
doubt about the applicant’s guilt
was no dispute about elements (1) to (10). The evidence provided more than
adequate support for each of those elements to be
found to have been proved
beyond reasonable doubt and the DFM made such findings, which were unchallenged.
Most significantly, there
was no dispute and the applicant conceded in his
interview that he touched the two cadets. There was also unchallenged evidence
that those cadets did not consent to being touched by the applicant.
a review of the evidence as a whole, it appeared that Leading Cadet T’s
evidence of being grabbed by the applicant and stumbling
back “five, six,
seven steps” was inconsistent not only with what could be seen on the CCTV
footage but also with the
evidence of the other witnesses who actually observed
the interaction between the applicant and the two cadets. Accordingly, there
would be a reasonable basis for rejecting Leading Cadet T’s evidence to
the extent that it was inconsistent with the evidence
of the other witnesses.
The rejection of that evidence would not, however, give rise to a reasonable
doubt about the applicant’s
touching the two cadets or the circumstances
in which that occurred.
there were some minor differences in descriptions by the witnesses who observed
what occurred from different perspectives
and positions, their accounts were in
substance consistent with one another and with the CCTV footage. On the
evidence as a whole,
it appeared that the applicant left the table at which he
was sitting, walked towards the meal line, did not speak to the Air Force
instructors who were supervising the cadets in the meal line, put his open palms
on the two cadets and moved them to his left
in order to make way for Private
Crangle and Corporal Cheriyapaniyeri, saying something to the effect that the
cadets should get
out of the way of the “real soldiers”. There was
no basis to entertain a reasonable doubt as to whether the applicant
touched the cadets by putting his open palms on their upper chests or shoulders
in order to move them out of the way.
The only matter in issue was, in
substance, whether that touching went beyond ordinary social interaction and was
thus unlawful
and, when taken into account with the other relevant elements,
amounted to an assault.
this regard, the principles in relation to battery, which apply equally to
assault in the present case, were stated in
Collins v Wilcock
Goff of Chieveley (then Robert Goff LJ) at WLR 1177 as follows:
The fundamental principle, plain and incontestable, is that every person’s
body is inviolate. It has long been established
that any touching of another
person, however slight, may amount to a battery. So Holt CJ held in 1704 that
‘the least touching
of another in anger is a battery’: see
6 Mod Rep 149,
The breadth of the principle reflects the
fundamental nature of the interest so protected; as Blackstone wrote in his
Commentaries,
‘the law cannot draw the line between different degrees of
violence, and therefore totally prohibits the first and lowest stage
every man’s person being sacred, and no other having a right to meddle
with it, in any the slightest manner’ (see
3 Bl Com 120). The effect is
that everybody is protected not only against physical injury but against any
form of physical molestation.
But so widely drawn a principle must inevitably be subject to exceptions. For
example, children may be subjected to reasonable punishment;
people may be
subjected to the lawful exercise of the power of arrest; and reasonable force
may be used in self-defence or for the
prevention of crime. But, apart from
these special instances where the control or constraint is lawful, a broader
exception has been
created to allow for the exigencies of everyday life.
Generally speaking, consent is a defence to battery; and most of the physical
consented to by all who move in society and so expose themselves
to the risk of
bodily contact. So nobody can complain of the jostling which is inevitable from
his presence in, for example, a supermarket,
an underground station or a busy
street; nor can a person who attends a party complain if his hand is seized in
friendship, or even
if his back is (within reason) slapped (see
Tuberville v
[1669] EWHC J25
(1669) 1 Mod Rep 3
86 ER 684).
Although such cases are regarded as
examples of implied consent, it is more common nowadays to treat them as falling
within a general
exception embracing all physical contact which is generally
acceptable in the ordinary conduct of daily life. We observe that, although
the past it has sometimes been stated that a battery is only committed where the
action is ‘angry, or revengeful, or rude,
or insolent’ (see 1 Hawk
PC c 62, s 2), we think that nowadays it is more realistic, and indeed more
accurate, to state the
broad underlying principle, subject to the broad
principles in relation to assault have been endorsed by the High Court in
Secretary, Department of Health and Community Services v JWB and SMB
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218
at 233 (Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ)
A further exception of this kind is reflected in
Collins v. Wilcock
[(1984) 1 WLR 1172, at p 1177;
(1984) 3 All ER 374
, at p 378] where it was said
that in respect of physical contact arising from the exigencies of everyday life
– jostling in
a street, social contact at parties and the like –
there is an implied consent ‘by all who move in society and so expose
themselves to the risk of bodily contact’, or that such encounters fall
‘within a general exception embracing all physical
generally acceptable in the ordinary conduct of daily life’.
physical contact is generally acceptable in the ordinary conduct of daily life
will depend on the particular circumstances
in which it occurs.
first ground of appeal effectively requires the Tribunal to consider principally
whether, on the whole of the evidence, there
was a reasonable possibility that
the applicant’s touching the cadets was conduct which did not go beyond
ordinary social interaction
or that which was generally acceptable in the
ordinary conduct of daily life, in the circumstances, and was thus not unlawful.
circumstances in which the touching of the cadets occurred in the present case
were not substantially disputed. The circumstances
included that the applicant
was a senior non-commissioned officer and the cadets were young children, under
the supervision of their
instructors. The cadets along with the Defence Force
personnel were entitled to be present and to be served meals in the
mess, the cadets were being supervised both in the foyer and in
the meal line by Air Force Cadet instructors and the cadets were
permitting adult service personnel to go in front of them in the meal line
except where they were directed not to do so
by their instructors. There was no
evidence to suggest that the cadets were misbehaving in any way or causing any
undue delay to
the service of meals in the mess. In his interview, the
applicant acknowledged that Air Force Cadet staff were supervising the cadets
and were prioritising Air Force and Army personnel getting their meals.
only inference reasonably available on the evidence was that the
applicant’s concern was that his fellow instructors on
the drivers’
course should not be delayed in being served their meals by the presence of two
Air Force Cadets in front of them
in the meal line. There was no evidence to
suggest that the applicant was responsible for organising or supervising the
in the Airmen’s mess. Nor was there evidence to suggest that
Corporal Cheriyapaniyeri and Private Crangle going in front of
the two cadets in
the meal line would have achieved any substantial time saving for the Army
the evidence as a whole, there was no, or no sufficient, basis to conclude that
it was reasonably necessary for the applicant himself
to move the two cadets out
of the way to allow the Army personnel to go ahead of them in the meal line.
Moreover, even if the applicant’s
intervention had been reasonably
necessary, the obvious option available to him was to ask the Air Force Cadet
instructors to direct
the two cadets to allow Corporal Cheriyapaniyeri and
Private Crangle to go ahead of the two cadets in the meal line. If that had
been unsuccessful, the applicant might himself have asked, or directed, the two
cadets to allow the corporal and the private to go
ahead of them. On the
evidence as a whole, it could not be concluded that the applicant was unaware of
these options or that there
was a reasonable possibility that he was not aware.
Indeed, in his interview he responded to the question “how did you get
their attention to tell them to move out of the way?” with the answer
“[b]y speaking to them”. There was no explanation
on the evidence
as to why the applicant could not or did not address his concern about the
position of the private and the corporal
in the meal line in those ways rather
than by touching the cadets.
Furthermore,
it is significant, when considering whether on the evidence in the present case
there was a reasonable possibility that
the applicant’s touching the
cadets did not go beyond ordinary social interaction or that which was generally
acceptable in
the ordinary conduct of daily life, that Leading Cadets T and V
were young children, 13 years of age, members of the Australian Air
Force Cadets
under appropriate supervision, and that the applicant was a senior
non-commissioned officer in the Army Reserve with
significant authority but
without any responsibility or role in respect of the cadets.
of these considerations in the circumstances of the present case support the
conclusion that the evidence as a whole did not raise
the reasonable possibility
that the applicant’s conduct in touching the cadets in order to have them
move out of the way was
conduct which was generally acceptable in the ordinary
conduct of daily life, particularly in the Australian Defence Force. What
occurred in the present case was not reasonably necessary or appropriate in
order to address the applicant’s concerns about
his fellow instructors
being fed and was far removed from a person tapping someone on the shoulder
because it was a reasonable way
to get the person’s attention, inevitable
jostling in a supermarket, train station or a busy street, or social physical
between adults.
conclusion that the evidence as a whole did not raise the reasonable possibility
that the conduct was such as to be generally
acceptable in the ordinary conduct
of daily life in the Australian Defence Force was reinforced by the evidence of
a number of witnesses
as to their reactions to the incident. Leading Cadet V
and Leading Aircraftwoman Davies described being confused by what occurred.
Leading Cadet T said he was shocked. Corporal Hinton immediately reported what
had occurred to the officer in charge of the cadets
and Aircraftwoman Jimmieson
discussed what had occurred with her fellow cadet instructors. The evidence of
these reactions, viewed
in light of the evidence as a whole and not piecemeal,
was inconsistent with what occurred being not out of the ordinary or being
of the usual conduct of daily life, in the circumstances.
addition, having regard to the evidence as a whole, including what has been
referred to in some detail above and the applicant’s
evidence in his
recorded interview that he did not know why he touched the cadets, we did not
experience any reasonable doubt as
to whether the applicant was aware of a
substantial risk that his conduct was unlawful, in that it was not such as to be
acceptable in the ordinary conduct of daily life, or as to whether it
was justifiable for the applicant to take the risk in the circumstances
these reasons, on the independent assessment of the sufficiency and quality of
the evidence made by each of us, we concluded that
there was no, or no
sufficient, reason why the DFM must have had a reasonable doubt as to any of the
elements or as to the applicant’s
guilt on either charge. Accordingly, we
reject the first ground of appeal to the effect that the applicant’s
conviction on
each charge of assault was unreasonable, or could not be
supported, having regard to the evidence.
these reasons, the orders of the Tribunal are:
(1) Pursuant to
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act
(Cth), the time for lodging of the applicant’s Notice of appeal
and Application for leave to appeal is extended to 4 June 2024.
(2) Pursuant to
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
(Cth), the applicant is granted leave to appeal.
(3) The appeal is dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
three (103) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of
the Honourable
Justices Wright, Halley and
Dated: 14 October 2024
RTF format (434 KB)
Signed PDF/A format