Sre Janani Kularajah v Just Sort It Out Pty Ltd [2025] ATMO 210 (7 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by Sre Janani
Kularajah to registration of trade mark application 2399725 (42) –
– in the name of Just Sort It Out Pty Ltd
Nicholas Smith
REPRESENTATION:
Opponent: Self-represented
Applicant: Mark My Words Trademark
Services Pty Ltd
2025 ATMO 210
Trade Marks Act 1995
opposition:
considered – none established
– trade mark to proceed to registration
decision concerns an opposition brought by Sre Janani Kularajah
’) to the registration of the trade mark which is
the subject of the application detailed below in the name of Just Sort It
Application Number:
Filing Date
Information services relating to information technology; Providing information
relating to computer technology and programming via
a website; Provision of
information relating to information technology; Information technology (IT)
support services (troubleshooting
of software); Computer security services in
the nature of providing authentication, issuance, validation and revocation of
certificates; Development of software; Software development in the
framework of software publishing; Information technology (IT)
services (computer
hardware, software and peripherals design and technical consultancy); Advisory
services relating to computer software;
Computer security services (programming
and software installation, repair and maintenance services); Computer software
advisory services;
Computer software consultancy; Computer software design;
Computer software programming services; Computer software engineering; Computer
support services (programming and software installation, repair and maintenance
services); Computer support services (software advisory
and information
services); Design of computer software; Computer software development; Computer
security services (design and development
of secure computer hardware, software
and systems); Consultancy in the design and development of computer software;
Design and development
of computer software; Design and development of computer
software for others; Design and development of computer software for cloud
computing; Providing information, including online, about design and development
of computer hardware and software; Development of
computer software; Development
of computer software application solutions; Diagnosis of faults in computer
software; Installation
and maintenance of computer software; Maintenance of
computer software; Installation of computer software; Writing of computer
Repair of computer software; Rental of computer software; Technical
support services, namely, troubleshooting of computer software
Upgrading of computer software; Updating of computer software; Providing online
non-downloadable computer software for
minting non-fungible tokens [NFTs];
Providing online non-downloadable computer software
Applicant’s Services
Trade Mark:
Property Pal
otherwise indicated, any references to sections or regulations in this decision
are references to sections or regulations of
Trade Marks Act 1995
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
Regulations
’), respectively.
the advertisement of the application’s acceptance for possible
registration, the Opponent filed a Notice of Intention
to Oppose the possible
registration followed by a Statement of Grounds and Particulars (later rectified
by this office) (‘
’) on 30 May 2024. The SGP raised
grounds of opposition under
, 60 and 62A. The Applicant filed
a Notice of Intention to Defend on 20 June 2024.
parties filed the following evidence in this matter:
Declarant and Position
Annexures or Exhibits
Evidence in support
Sre Janani Kularajah (‘
declaration
Evidence in answer
N/A (None filed)
Evidence in reply
N/A (None filed)
the time allowed for filing evidence had ended the parties were given an
opportunity to request a hearing in this matter or a
decision without hearing.
The Applicant requested that the matter proceed to a decision without hearing
and paid the appropriate
fee. As a result the matter has been allocated to a
delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks (‘Registrar’) for a
based on the written record.
am a delegate of the Registrar and I am to decide the opposition as required by
which provides that, unless the proceedings are discontinued, dismissed, or
have lapsed under s 54A the Registrar must, at the end,
(a) to refuse to register the trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations)
in respect of the goods and/or services then specified
in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
In doing so I take account of the written record comprised of the materials
mentioned in the preceding paragraphs.
The Opponent
Opponent is an individual who since April 16, 2023 has operated a property
buyer’s agency under the name ‘Property
of the material in the Kularajah declaration consists of submissions that do not
need to be summarised in this section. What
is relevant is that the Kularajah
declaration provides evidence of the Opponent operating a property buyers agency
under the name
‘Property Pals’ since April 16, 2023, including
registering a business name and domain name from which the Opponent operates
website. The Opponent has marketed her business through various social media
(created on or around the end of June 2023) and through
various merchandise such
as branded t-shirts. The Opponent also gives evidence that her business was a
finalist in the ‘Real
Estate Buyer’s Agency’ category in the
Inner West Local business awards in 2024 and has clients who have left positive
reviews for its service. The Opponent also asserts that the Applicant has not
yet commenced any business under the Trade Mark.
annexures to the Kularajah declaration display various marketing material that
use the ‘Property Pals’ brand, in various
formats and with various
taglines. The Opponent does not provide any evidence of sales or number of
employees, number of customers
or advertising spend since her business was
established in April 2023.
The Applicant
Applicant has not filed any evidence and as such I have no information about it
other than what is set out on the Register.
Grounds of Opposition, Onus and Standard of Proof
indicated above, in the SGP the Opponent nominated grounds of opposition under
, 60 and 62A. To successfully oppose the application the
Opponent needs to establish one of the nominated grounds.
onus of proof in an opposition rests upon the
The relevant standard of
proof is the ordinary civil standard based on the balance of
probabilities.
The date at which
the rights of the parties are to be determined is the relevant date, which is
also the priority date for the purposes
relevant provisions of
and 10 are reproduced
- Identical etc.
trade marks
(2) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), an application for the registration
of a trade mark (applicant's trade mark) in respect of
services (applicant's
services) must be rejected if:
(a) it is substantially identical with, or deceptively similar to:
(i) a trade mark registered by another person in respect of similar services or
closely related goods; or
(ii) a trade mark whose registration in respect of similar services or closely
related goods is being sought by another person; and
(b) the priority date for the registration of the applicant's trade mark in
respect of the applicant's services is not earlier than
the priority date for
the registration of the other trade mark in respect of the similar services or
closely related goods.
Note 1: For
deceptively similar
see section 10.
Note 2: For
similar services
see subsection 14(2).
Note 3: For
priority date
see section 12.
Note 4: The regulations may provide that an application must also be rejected
if the trade mark is substantially identical with, or
deceptively similar to, a
protected international trade mark or a trade mark for which there is a request
to extend international
registration to Australia: see
(3) If the Registrar in either case is satisfied:
(a) that there has been honest concurrent use of the 2 trade marks; or
(b) that, because of other circumstances, it is proper to do so;
the Registrar may accept the application for the registration of the
applicant's trade mark subject to any conditions or limitations
Registrar thinks fit to impose. If the applicant's trade mark has been used only
in a particular area, the limitations may
include that the use of the trade mark
is to be restricted to that particular area.
Note: For limitations see section 6.
(4) If the Registrar in either case is satisfied that the applicant, or the
applicant and the predecessor in title of the applicant,
have continuously used
the applicant's trade mark for a period:
(a) beginning before the priority date for the registration of the other trade
mark in respect of:
(i) the similar goods or closely related services; or
(ii) the similar services or closely related goods; and
(b) ending on the priority date for the registration of the applicant's trade
the Registrar may not reject the application because of the existence of the
other trade mark.
Note 1: An authorised use of the trade mark by a person is taken to be a use
of the trade mark by the owner of the trade mark (see
subsection 7(3)).
Note 2: For
predecessor in title
see section 6.
Note 3: For
priority date
see section 12.
Section 10 - Definition of
deceptively similar
For the purposes of this Act, a trade mark is taken to be
deceptively
to another trade mark if it so nearly resembles that
other trade mark that it is likely to deceive or cause confusion.
successfully oppose the application pursuant to
the Opponent must establish
the requirements of
, i.e. that at least one of the trade marks upon
which it relies, being a trade mark registered or sought to be
by a person other than
the Applicant:
has a priority
date which is earlier than that of the Trade Mark (‘
requirement
is substantially
identical with or deceptively similar to the Trade Mark (‘
requirement
is in respect of
similar services, and/or goods which are closely related to, the
Applicant’s Services (‘
requirement
the event that each of these requirements is satisfied by the Opponent it may
still be possible for me to allow the application
to proceed to registration if
I am satisfied, pursuant to
(4), that there has been honest
concurrent use of the Trade Mark, there are other circumstances which would make
registration of the
Trade Mark proper, or that the Applicant has continuously
used the Trade Mark beginning before the priority date of the Opponent’s
relied upon mark. In the present case as the Applicant has provided no evidence
of use prior to the relevant date or other circumstances
that would make
registration of the Trade Mark proper it is not necessary to consider these
provisions.
Opponent has particularised the ground of opposition in the SGP by reference to
the trade mark below (owned by a third party)
Mark has a priority date that is earlier than the
priority date of the Trade Mark.
Priority Date
PropertyPals
: Financing of home loans
Similar Services
14 relevantly provides:
Definition of
similar goods
similar services
(2) For the purposes of this Act, services are
to other services:
(a) if they are the same as the other services; or
(b) if they are of the same description as that of the other services.
factors relevant to the consideration of whether services are similar include
their nature such as their origin and characteristics,
uses made of the services
including their intended purposes, source of supply, respective trade channels
and whether the ordinary
consumer of the services would regard the services as
being from a single source.
can be conveniently summarised as: whether the respective services are of the
same nature; whether they are used by the same
people for the same purposes; and
whether the trade channels are the same. No single consideration is conclusive
Goodman Fielder Pte Ltd v Conga Foods Pty Ltd
, Burley J in considering
‘goods of the same description’ in the context of a
action said the following, much of which is equally relevant to considering
whether the services are services of the same
description:
Southern Cross Refrigerating Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
; 91 CLR 592 at 606 the High Court (Dixon CJ, McTiernan, Webb, Fullagar and
Taylor JJ) observed that there may be many matters to
be considered in
determining whether one product is a good of the same description as another.
One is the inherent nature of the
respective goods. Others include: their
respective uses; the trade channels through which they are each sold; their
origin; their
purpose; whether they are produced by one and the same
manufacturer or distributed by the same wholesale houses; whether they are
in the same shops over the same counters during the same seasons and to the same
class or classes of customers; and whether
they are regarded by those engaged in
their manufacture and distribution as belonging to the same trade. No single
consideration
is conclusive in itself. The classifications contained in the
schedules to the
Trade Marks Act
are not a decisive criterion.
Broadly, it may be said that the authorities establish that there are three
principal factors to be considered in this regard. They
are: (1) the nature of
the goods, including their origin and characteristics; (2) the uses made of
them, including their purpose;
and (3) the trade channels through which the
goods are bought and sold....
Accordingly, courts in recent times have consistently found it to be of
significance that the policy underlying the expression “goods
of the same
description” is the need to avoid any confusion and deception in the
market place which would be likely to arise
should a mark become available for
use by two or more different companies upon goods of the same description. That
policy, when considered
in the context of modern shopping practices in large
stores where multiple products can be displayed near each other, such as in
supermarkets, tends to expand the likelihood that products that at first blush
are of quite different character and which are manufactured
differently will
nonetheless be goods of the same description because there is an increased
likelihood that goods will be placed
in close proximity to each other in the
same store.
fail to identify any of services for which the
Mark are registered that are
similar to the Applicant’s Services. The Applicant’s Services are
IT services. The
Mark is registered for financing of home loans. The
Applicant’s Services are services of a different nature for a different
purpose and offered in different channels from services for which the
is registered.
find that the Opponent has failed to establish the ground of opposition under
is reproduced below:
Trade mark likely to deceive or cause confusion
An application for the registration of a trade mark in respect of
particular goods or services must be rejected if, because of some
connotation
that the trade mark or a sign contained in the trade mark has, the use of the
trade mark in relation to those goods or
services would be likely to deceive or
cause confusion.
establish a ground of opposition under
, there must be an inherent
connotation within the trade mark. As Gyles J in
Pfizer Products Inc v Karam
‘Connotation’ is a secondary meaning
implied by the mark. The likelihood of deception or confusion must flow from the
secondary meaning inherent in the mark itself. It is apparent that the
underlying purpose of
is a similar purpose to that lying behind
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth). It is to prevent the public
being deceived or confused as to the nature of the goods offered by reason of a
secondary meaning
connoted by the mark in question...
Winton Shire Council v Lomas
Spender J said:
directed to the mark itself. It is not concerned with any deception or confusion
caused by the reputation in Australia of some
other trade mark. That aspect of
the matter is dealt with under
ground of opposition pursuant to
was particularised in the SGP as follows:
The proposed trademark "Property Pal" is deceptively similar and likely to cause
confusion with my common law ownership of the mark
“Property Pals”
and my established business name "Property Pals" for several reasons:
High Degree of Similarity: Both marks share the core terms "Property" and "Pal,"
creating a high degree of similarity. Consumers
are likely to misinterpret or
confuse the two names.
Target Audience: Both trademarks target the same consumer base –
individuals, small businesses and selfmanaged super funds
seeking real estate
related services. This overlap increases the risk of confusion for potential
Impact on My Established Business: My business, "Property Pals," has built a
strong reputation through various avenues:
Loyal Client Base: We've cultivated a loyal client base who recognize and trust
the "Property Pals" brand.
Positive Online Reviews: Clients have consistently left positive reviews for
"Property Pals" on various platforms, reflecting our
established reputation.
Marketing: We've conducted successful letterbox drop campaigns within the local
area, further solidifying brand awareness with "Property
Pals." We have also
printed our Property Pals business logo on office decals, business cards,
T-shirts, notebooks and other stationary.
Social Media Presence: We have hundreds of followers on Facebook, Instagram, and
LinkedIn, actively engaging with the "Property Pals"
Granting the "Property Pal" trademark will likely mislead consumers into
believing the applicant is associated with my established
business. This could
damage my brand reputation, potentially divert customers, and negatively impact
the positive client experiences
which the "Property Pals" name has become
synonymous for.
The high similarity between the trademarks, their relevance to the real estate
industry, and the shared target audience create a
strong likelihood of confusion
for consumers. Granting the "Property Pal" trademark would be detrimental to my
established business
and will likely mislead the public.
1.My business has built a strong reputation and market presence since April
2023. As noted in my initial response, I have built a
strong and loyal client
base, I enjoy 5-star online reviews and a commanding online and social media
presence. I have invested significantly
in marketing activities and have built
strong industry networks with financial institutions, mortgage brokers,
builders, property
managers, architects, accountants, selling agents and other
buyers agents. As a result of our brand recognition, Property Pals was
selected as a finalist for the local business awards. I would therefore consider
“Property Pals” to be a famous
trade mark.
The applicant’s trade mark is likely to deceive and/or cause confusion, as
consumers may wrongly believe the applicant has
a licensing arrangement, or some
other association, with my business and/or my common law trade mark (Property
Pals). This is particularly
a concern as the applicant intends to use the trade
mark in the same or similar industry in which I have built my brand recognition
(being the real estate industry).
2. The filings in relation to the proposed trade mark “Property Pal”
suggests that the applicant will use the trade mark
in connection with the
provision of certain technology products / services relating to real estate. The
term “Pal” is
commonly associated with natural persons.
The term “Property Pal” is likely to be considered by the average
and ordinary person to mean a natural person or persons
who are in the business
of providing property services to consumers. The average and ordinary person is,
therefore, likely to be
deceived in circumstances where the trade mark is used
in connection with a technology product or service.
to operate to prevent the registration of the Trade Mark, the
requisite confusion or deception must arise from a connotation within
Mark itself rather than as a result of the reputation the Opponent may be able
to demonstrate in its own marks or confusion
between the Trade Mark and the
trade marks owned by the Opponent or third parties. The first step in
establishing this ground of
opposition requires the Opponent identify some
connotation inherent in the Trade Mark. The statements in the SGP and the EIS
the reputation the Opponent has in ‘Property Pals’ are not
relevant in considering this provision and hence cannot support
a ground of
opposition under
Furthermore,
even if I was satisfied that the Trade Mark contained the connotation proposed
in the final part of the SGP, I do not
consider that the use of the Trade Mark
in respect of IT services would mislead; it is entirely possible that the IT
services offered
under the Trade Mark could relate to property and hence the use
of the Trade Mark would not mislead.
a consequence, I am not satisfied that if the Trade Mark is used in relation to
the Applicant’s Services, there is an apparent
connotation within it which
is likely to result in deception or confusion. I find that the ground of
opposition under
has not been established.
is reproduced below:
Section 58.
Applicant not owner of trade
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the
applicant is not the owner of the trade mark.
owner of a trade mark is the person who first uses it in Australia, or first
files a trade mark application in Australia (while
having an intention to use
the applied-for mark), whichever is the earlier. It is now well established at
law that in order to succeed
under this ground of opposition the Opponent must
establish three factors. These are:
that the Trade
Mark is identical, or substantially identical, to the trade mark(s) relied upon
by the Opponent (‘
Applicant’s Services are the ‘same kind of thing’ as the
services for which the trade mark(s) relied upon
by the Opponent was used
that a person
other than the Applicant has the earlier claim to ownership of the Trade Mark
based on use of the trade mark(s) relied
upon by the Opponent prior to whichever
is the earlier of: (a) the application to register; or (b) any actual use of the
by the Applicant (‘
ground based on
was particularised in the SGP as
Ownership of a trade mark at common law is established
through use of that trade mark (Food Channel Network Pty Ltd v Television Food
[2010] FCAFC 58).
As mentioned previously, I began using "Property
Pals" for my real estate business on 16th of April 2023, demonstrably predating
the applicant's October 22nd, 2023 filing date. Furthermore, I have continued to
use the mark “Property Pals” as the
cornerstone of my business since
that time. In contrast, the applicant has no prior use of the mark. Nor has the
applicant sought
to use the “Property Pal” mark since the time of
registration. In contrast, my established use is further supported by:
Registration of the business name "Property Pals" on October 5th, 2023.
Creation of my business Facebook Page under ‘Property Pals’ on
June 29th, 2023
Creation of my Instagram account with the handle ‘property.pals’
on June 29th, 2023
Creation of my Linkedin Business Page ‘Property Pals Buyers
Agency’ on June 29th, 2023
Extensive use of my “Property Pals” business logo on my website,
social media, office decals, business cards, T-shirts,
notebooks and other
stationary since June 29th, 2023
Securing the domain name www.property-pals.com.au on April 16th, 2023,
demonstrating my prior use of the mark online.
Creation of, and use of, my official business email address, being
info@property-pals.com.au since April 16th, 2023
respect of the second factor the delegate in
Sola Tube Australia Pty Ltd v
Gabriel Andrews
The “same kind of thing” in respect of the goods or services of the
parties does not equate to goods or services which
may be “of the same
description” (the latter being a term of art for goods or services which
are not the same but which
consumers are likely to believe come from the same
source). It is a narrower test that applies in the context of a claim to
Opponent has used ‘Property Pals’ for a property buyer’s
agency. The Applicant’s Services are IT services.
self-evidently not the ‘same kind of thing’.
the Opponent has failed to establish the second factor (and must establish all
three factors to succeed in the
ground of opposition), I find that the
Opponent has failed to establish the ground of opposition pursuant to
is reproduced below:
- Applicant not intending to
use trade mark
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the
applicant does not intend:
(a) to use, or authorise the use of, the trade mark in Australia, or
(b) to assign the trade mark to a body corporate for use by the body Corporate
in Australia;
in relation to the goods and/or services specified in the application.
relevant date for assessing the Applicant’s intention to use the Trade
Mark is the filing date being 22 October
nature of the intention in
was considered by Jacobsen J in
Health World
Ltd v Shin-Sun Australia Pty Ltd
Health World
where he stated:
In my view, the intention, or lack thereof, to
is directed, is a ‘real and definite intention’ of the
applicant for registration, to use the mark publicly as a trade
mark, although
it is not necessary that the intention be immediate or within a limited
is a presumption that where an application has been filed, the applicant has the
requisite intention.
There is authority for the proposition that where an
applicant for registration has been put on notice that its intention to use the
mark was in issue, and has not responded to the opponent’s evidence, a
finding of lack of intention may be made.
The principle which underlies these authorities seems to me to be that the
evidentiary onus shifts to the applicant for registration
where an opponent
makes a prima facie case of lack of intention to use the
J also recognised the difficulty that an opponent has in establishing a ground
, stating in the same case:
The subjective nature of the
intention, the presumption of intention flowing from the application for
registration and the onus on
an opponent usually make it difficult for an
opposition or an application for rectification, to succeed on this
view of the authorities discussed above,
the onus of establishing the
ground of opposition pursuant to
remains with the Opponent until it has
established a
prima facie
case that on the relevant date the Applicant
lacked the requisite intention. If the Opponent establishes a
prima facie
case the onus then shifts to the Applicant for rebuttal. The relevant
intention requires that an applicant must have ‘a real
intention to use,
not a mere problematic intention, not an uncertain or indeterminate possibility,
but it means a resolve or settled
purpose which has been reached at the time
when the mark is to be
registered’.
There must be
‘a real and definite intention’ to use the mark publicly as a trade
mark in connection with the services
Opponent has particularised this ground of opposition in the SGP as
The applicant's attempt to register "Property Pal" for real
estate services raises questions of integrity and bad faith intentions.
believe the applicant has a bona fide intent to use the mark, but instead has
made the application to unfairly disrupt my
brand and business.
It has been over six months since the application for registration of the
trademark was submitted by the applicant. Yet, the applicant
has not commenced
any business activities resembling, utilising and referencing “Property
Pal” since the registration
date. Nor is there any ascertainable online
presence for “Just Sort it Out Pty Ltd”, or a business run by the
which leverages the “Property Pal” mark.
Accordingly, I consider the application was made without any intent to use
the trademark, but instead to disrupt my established business
confusion amongst my clientele. I consider such an application to be made in bad
faith, warranting rejection under
sections 59
While the applicant's intent is suspect, my opposition primarily relies on
the strong arguments already presented:
Not capable of distinguishing under
Prior use of, and common law ownership of, the “Property Pals”
Sections 44
Likelihood of confusion under
Section 43.
Pre-existing reputation under
section 60.
While I agree that the act of registration of a trade mark brings about a
presumption that the applicant held an intention to use
it, in the current case,
I consider that presumption to be rebutted.
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
acknowledged that “use (or non-use) after the date of application may be
relevant in drawing inferences as to the issue of
intention as at the date of
application”. I consider the non-use of the trade mark either before or
after the date of application
to be relevant when considered in light of other
circumstances.
Separate to the failure by the applicant to use the trade mark to date, the
applicant has also not commenced any business activities
which resemble,
utilizes or references anything associated with “Property Pal” or
real estate services. Furthermore,
not only has the applicant not commenced any
relevant business activities, but it is also evident that the applicant has not
any preparatory activities in connection with the commencement of such
a business activity. For example:
• Just Sort it Out Pty Ltd has not registered a domain name which
resembles “Property Pal” or the provision of real
• Just Sort it Out Pty Ltd has not registered any business names which
resembles “Property Pal” or the provision
of real estate
• Just Sort it Out Pty Ltd does not appear to have a social media
presence which resembles “Property Pal” or the
provision of real
estate services;
• Just Sort it Out Pty Ltd does not appear to have any other online
presence which resembles “Property Pal” or the
provision of real
estate services;
• Just Sort it Out Pty Ltd does not appear to have any other offline
presence which resembles “Property Pal” or
the provision of real
estate services – for example, the registered address is not connected
with any business which resembles
“Property Pal” or the provision of
real estate services.
Accordingly, I consider the applicant has no intention of using the trade
Opponent has not provided sufficient evidence in support of this ground of
opposition to shift the evidentiary onus. Noting that
the Applicant’s
Services is confined to IT services, and I am not satisfied (addressed elsewhere
in the decision) that there
is any evidence of bad faith intention around
registration, the mere fact that the Opponent is unable to identify any evidence
the Applicant using the Trade Mark is not a sufficient basis to shift the
onus. The Opponent has failed to establish a prima facie
case that the
Applicant lacked the requisite intention as at the filing date, and has,
consequently, failed to establish a ground
of opposition pursuant to
is reproduced below:
- Trade mark similar to trade mark that has acquired a reputation in
The registration of a trade mark in respect of particular goods or services
may be opposed on the ground that:
(a) another trade mark had, before the priority date for the registration of
the first‑mentioned trade mark in respect of those
goods or services,
acquired a reputation in Australia; and
(b) because of the reputation of that other trade mark, the use of the
first‑mentioned trade mark would be likely to deceive
establish a ground of opposition under
, an opponent must demonstrate that
as at the relevant date there was another trade mark which had acquired a
reputation in Australia
amongst a significant or substantial number of persons
in the relevant market such that use of the trade mark would be likely to
deceive or cause confusion.
of the relevant principles of
are summarised in the recent case of
Ragopika Pty Ltd v Padmasingh Isaac trading as Aachi Spices and Foods
The first of these elements calls for a factual inquiry into the extent and
nature of the reputation that had been acquired by the
existing trade mark
– here, the Aachi mark – in Australia. The second element calls for
an assessment of the likelihood
of deception or confusion arising from use of
the new trade mark as a consequence of that reputation.
The existing trade mark need not even be registered for
to be engaged
Fry Consulting Pty Ltd v Sports Warehouse Inc
201 FCR 565
Fry Consulting
(Dodds-Streeton J);
Qantas Airways Ltd v Edwards
Qantas Airways
) at [144] (Yates J)). The classes of
goods and/or services in respect of which the existing trade mark has been used,
and those in
which the new trade mark is intended to be used, may be very
relevant to the likelihood of confusion (see
Qantas Airways
GAIN Capital UK Limited v Citigroup Inc (No
[2017] FCA 519
(Markovic J)), but the fact
that the classes are not the same cannot be determinative. The reputation of the
existing trade mark
need not relate specifically to the goods or services that
are the subject of the proposed application (
Qantas Airways
Rodney Jane Racing Pty Ltd v Monster Energy
[2019] FCA 923
Rodney Jane Racing
(O’Bryan J)). The question is simply whether the reputation of the
existing trade mark in Australia is such that the
use of the new trade mark is
“likely” to be deceptive or cause
McCormick & Co Inc v
considered what is intended by the word ‘reputation’ as used in
Her Honour consulted the
Macquarie Dictionary
basis of the definition provided concluded that it was ‘the recognition of
the [trade mark] by the public
generally’.
quoted with approval the following words of Lockhart J in
Re ConAgra Inc v
McCain Foods (Aust) Pty Ltd
[R]eputation within the jurisdiction may be proved by a variety of means
including advertisements on television or radio, or in magazines
and newspapers
within the forum. It may be established by showing constant travel of people
between other countries and the forum
and that people within the forum, (whether
residents there or persons simply visiting there from other countries) are
the goods of the overseas owner
the subject of reputation, Kenny J also referred to
Hugo Boss AG v Jackson
International Trading Co Kurt D Bruhl GmbH & Co KG
, where the
Registrar’s delegate observed:
[I]t is true that the assessment of the reputation of a trade mark goes far
beyond mere examination of sales or turnover of goods
sold under that trade mark
and contemplation of the advertising and promotional figures.
As regards a trade mark, its reputation derives both from the quantum of sales
under that mark and also its esteem, or image, projected
by that trade mark. The
quantum of sales, advertising and promotion contributes to the
‘recognition’ component of the
trade mark’s reputation. The
credit, image and values projected by a trade mark attaches to the
‘esteem’ component
of the reputation as do the public events and
other trader’s marks with which [the] owner of the trade marks in question
to associate the trade marks via sponsorships, cross-promotions,
‘contra deals’ and so forth.
It follows that a trade mark used in relation to goods with comparatively low
sales may have a high and strong reputation by virtue
of the high credit or
esteem in which it is held, or, conversely, that a trade mark which has very
high sales may have a strong reputation
notwithstanding the lack of esteem that
attaches to it. The particular popular images, or sets of values, that attach to
mark are also, therefore, important parts of the reputation of the
trade mark and may be as strong an associative force in the minds
of the public
as the association of the trade marks with the goods or services
themselves.
stated above, in assessing reputation under
, what constitutes a
significant or substantial number of persons in the relevant market must be
considered. The case of
Le Cordon Bleu BV v Cordon Bleu International
was decided under
of the (now repealed)
Trade Marks Act 1955
(Cth). That provision
did not refer to ‘reputation’ at all, only that use of the impugned
trade mark would be ‘likely
to deceive or cause confusion’.
Nevertheless the words of Heerey J provide some guidance:
What is ‘significant’ or ‘substantial’ will depend on
the nature of the goods or services in question. For
some highly specialised
products, awareness among a few thousand persons, or even less, might be
sufficient ... We are here concerned
with foodstuffs sold in supermarkets,
delicatessens, milk bars and other retail outlets. The relevant market is
virtually the entire
Australian population from early teenage years
Opponent has particularised the ground of opposition in the SGP in the manner
set out below:
The trade mark/s had acquired reputation before the priority date of the trade
mark being opposed I have clearly established a reputation
for the mark
“Property Pals”. This is demonstrated by consumer appreciation,
significant marketing efforts, industry
recognition and an extremely strong
social media presence.
As an example:
Social media presence: I have hundreds of followers on Facebook, Instagram, and
LinkedIn, actively engaging with the "Property Pals"
Industry recognition: "Property Pals" is consistently recognised at industry
events. Most recently, it was a finalist in the Real
Estate Buyer's Agency
category for the Inner West Local Business Awards 2024, demonstrating industry
recognition of our brand. A
LinkedIn post celebrating Property Pals’
recognition of this award received over 4,500 impressions on the LinkedIn
Positive online reviews: Clients have consistently left positive reviews for
"Property Pals," reflecting our established reputation.
Extensive marketing efforts: We've conducted letterbox drop campaigns within the
local area, further solidifying brand awareness
with "Property Pals." We have
also printed our Property Pals business logo on office decals, business cards,
T-shirts, notebooks
and other stationary.
When viewed in the context of our prior use of the “Property Pals”
brand and demonstrably established reputation, the
granting of the
applicant’s mark will likely cause significant deception or confusion, due
to the similarity of the two trade
marks. That is, there is a real tangible
danger that granting the applicant’s “Property
Pal” trademark will create deception or confusion among a significant and
substantial number of our clients (who are familiar
with our reputable and
continuously used “Property Pals” brand).
the relevant date the Opponent’s business had been established for
approximately 6 months. Noting the absence of evidence
of sales or number of
employees, number of customers or advertising spend, I am not satisfied that the
Opponent’s ‘Property
Pals’ mark had, before the relevant date,
acquired a reputation in Australia for real estate buyer’s agency
sufficient for the requirements under s 60(a). I reach this
conclusion noting the significant market for real estate buyer’s
services in Australia and the somewhat descriptive nature of the ‘Property
Pals’ mark in the context of services
assisting buyers to acquire
the requirements under s 60(a) have not been satisfied, it is not necessary to
consider s 60(b). I find that the Opponent has
failed to establish the ground
of opposition pursuant to s 60.
Section 62A
62A is reproduced below:
Application made in bad faith
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the
application was made in bad faith.
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Trade Marks Amendment Bill 2006
some non-exhaustive examples of applications made in bad faith:
persons who
monitor new property developments, register the names of new developments as
trade marks for a number of services and
then threaten the property developers
with trade mark infringement proceedings unless the developers licence or buy
the trade marks;
persons who have
a history of applying for trade marks that are deliberate misspellings of other
registered trade marks;
persons who
identify trade marks used overseas but with no Australian use as yet who then
apply to register the trade marks in Australia
for the express purpose of
selling them to the overseas owners.
Fry Consulting Pty Ltd v Sports Warehouse Inc (No 2)
is a current
leading Australian authority on s 62A. In that case, Dodds-Streeton J made the
following comments, quoting from
Harrison’s Trade Mark
Application
the court, when considering bad faith, cannot apply a purely subjective test,
called by Lord Hutton ‘the Robin Hood
test’. The dishonest person or
one with low standards cannot be permitted to obtain trade mark registrations in
circumstances
where a person abiding by a reasonable standard would not. The
registration of a trade mark is designed to enable bona fide proprietors
protect their proprietary rights without having to prove unfair trading.
Registration is not provided to help those with low moral
... The words ‘bad faith’ suggest a mental state. Clearly when
considering the question of whether an application to register
is made in bad
faith all the circumstances will be relevant. However the court must decide
whether the knowledge of the applicant
was such that his decision to apply for
registration would be regarded as in bad faith by persons adopting proper
Honour continued later in the same decision:
The formulation in
United Kingdom authority of bad faith as falling short of the standards of
acceptable commercial behaviour observed
by reasonable and experienced persons
in a particular area is, in my view, an apt touchstone. An overly literal
application may,
however, tend to negate the relevance attributed to the
applicant’s mental state in the combined test preferred in
Further, in my view, mere negligence, incompetence or a lack of prudence to
reasonable and experienced standards would not, in themselves,
suffice, as the
concept of bad faith imports conduct which, irrespective of the form it takes,
is of an unscrupulous, underhand or
unconscientious
Opponent has particularised this ground of opposition in the SGP as
The close similarity of the applicant's "Property Pal" to
my established "Property Pals" brand name, particularly within the real
industry, raises concerns about the integrity of the application under Section
The application was curiously made a few weeks after I successfully
registered my business with the Australian Business Registry.
It was also
following a period in early 2023, when my business was gaining significant
momentum, reputation and growth online and
in social media. Consistent with Fry
Consulting Pty Ltd v Sports Warehouse Inc (No 2)
[2012] FCA 81
, persons adopting
proper standards would regard the applicant’s decision to register
“Property Pal” as having been
made in bad faith. Reasonable and
experienced persons in the field would view such conduct as falling short of
acceptable commercial
behaviour, as it is intentionally directed at disrupting
and undermining my legitimate business activities. The application seeks
weaponize the intellectual property laws of Australia in a manner that is
unfair, in bad faith and illegitimate.
onus is on the Opponent to establish bad faith and it will not be found easily
given the serious nature of the
allegation.
Based on the
evidence before me I cannot conclude that the decision of the Applicant to adopt
and seek to register the Trade Mark
in respect of IT services was a decision
made to take advantage of the reputation of the Opponent in Property Pals. I
consider that
the Opponent’s reputation in Property Pals was very limited
at the time and the parties appear to be offering/intending to
offer quite
different services. Furthermore, the Opponent provides no evidence about the
Applicant (as opposed to assertions regarding
its business name registration and
social media use) that would suggest that the Applicant was aware of the
Opponent at the relevant
date. In circumstances where the evidence in support
of the s 62A ground of opposition is very limited and the Opponent bears the
onus, I am not satisfied the Applicant’s conduct in filing the application
was unscrupulous, underhanded or unconscientious
in character.
it also bears repeating here that ‘mere knowledge before the relevant date
of another person’s trade marks, without
more, does not in itself
constitute the basis for a finding of bad faith.’
The Opponent’s allegation of
bad faith here does not rise above an assertion of prior knowledge of its mark
by the Applicant.
Consequently, I find that the Opponent has failed to
establish the ground of opposition under s 62A.
Decision and Costs
Opponent has failed to establish any of the grounds of opposition it nominated
in the SGP. Trade mark application number 2399725
may proceed to registration
not less than one month from the date of this decision. If the Registrar is
served with a notice of
appeal before that time, I direct that registration
shall not occur until either the appeal is withdrawn or discontinued. Otherwise
the disposition of the Application should be in accordance with the
Court’s order or direction.
Applicant has sought an award of costs in its favour. I see no reason to depart
from the general rule that costs follow the event.
I accordingly award costs
against the Opponent under s 221 in the relevant amounts under Schedule 8 of the
Regulations.
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
October 2025
Also known in this decision
Channel Network Pty Ltd v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
(Keane CJ, Stone and Jagot JJ).
Pfizer Products Inc v Karam
[2006] FCA 1663
, [6]-[26] (Gyles
Telstra Corporation Limited v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot and Edelman
Southern Cross
Refrigerating Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 82
, [4] (Kitto J)
Southern Cross
’), see also s 29(1)
Trade Marks Act
international registration designating Australia protected or sought to be
protected under Reg 4.15A
Jellinek’s Application
[1946] 63 RPC 59 (Romer
Southern Cross
Refrigerating Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
(1954) 91 CLR 592, 606 (Kitto
[2020] FCA 1808
[279]-[280].
[2006] FCA 1663
(2006) 70 IPR 599
[2002] FCA 288
(2002) 119 FCR 416
(2002) 56 IPR 72
Carnival Cruise
Lines Inc. v Sitmar Cruises Limited
[1994] FCA 936 (Gummow
Re Hicks’ Trade
[1897] VicLawRp 118
(1897) 22 VLR 636
, 640 (Holroyd
Settef SpA v
Riv-Oland Marble Co (Vic) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 IPR 402
Sola Tube Australia
Pty Ltd v Gabriel Andrews
[2014] ATMO 103
, [14]-[18]
Hearing Officer
Colorado Group
Limited v Strandbags Group Pty Ltd
(2007) 74 IPR 246
Krone AG v Brook (t/as Cannon Watch Co)
[1996] ATMO 16
(1996) 34 IPR 340.
discussion of the authorities in
Foxtel Management Pty Ltd v 111Pix.com
[2012] ATMO 29
, [31] (Hearing Officer Kirov). The relevant
authorities are
Suyen Corporation v Americana International Limited
[2010] FCA 638; (Dodds-Streeton
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd v
Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58; (Keane
CJ, Stone and Jagot
Aston v Harlee
Manufacturing Co
[1960] HCA 47
, [21] (Fullagar
Health World Ltd v
Shin-Sun Australia Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 100
, [162]-[163] (citations
(citations omitted).
Ducker’s Trade Mark
(1928) 45 RPC 397
Health World
[2023] FCA 487
, [20]-[21]
(Kennett J)
(1992) 33 FCR 302,
[1999] ATMO 23
(1999) 47 IPR 423
, 436 (Hearing
Officer Thompson).
(emphasis in original). Justice Heerey’s decision was overturned on
appeal to the Full Federal Court, although not
on the point quoted. Indeed the
court specifically noted that his approach contained no error; see
Cointreau v Cordon Bleu International Ltee
[2001] FCA 1170
(Moore, Tamberlin and Goldberg
[2004] EWCA Civ 1028
[2005] FSR 10 (Lord
Justice Pill, Lady Justice Arden, Sir William
[2012] FCA 81
[165]-[166].
Hard Coffee
Pty Ltd v Hard Coffee Main Beach Pty Ltd
[2009] ATMO 26
(Hearing Officer
Nancarrow).
1872 Holdings
VOF v Havana Club Holding SA
[2017] ATMO 12
, [64] (Hearing Officer
RTF format (458 KB)
Signed PDF/A format