Neman & Neman (No 2) [2025] FedCFamC2F 1056 (4 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Neman & Neman (No 2)
FedCFamC2F 1056
File number(s):
SYC 3682 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Application for Review
– Interim parenting – substantive review of a Senior Judicial
Registrar’s decision
– the father has commenced unsupervised time – the mother now
unsupervised time – the father seeks to significantly increase
time as of 2026 and enrol the child in school close to his home
from where the child lives with the mother – orders made to vary the days
on which time occurs in 2025 –
orders made for time in 2026 –
overnight time on special occasions only – changeover location moved to
the midway point
– order for vaccinations - Application otherwise
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (Family Law)
(Cth) rr 1.04, 14.05, 14.07
Family Law Amendment Bill 2023
Cases cited:
Deiter & Deiter
[2011] FamCAFC 82
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
(2022) FLC 94-092
(1988) 166 CLR 69
Redmond & Redmond
[2014] FamCAFC 155
[2010] FamCAFC 13
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Ms Jones, Conditsis Lawyers
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Ms Rabadi, TRA Law
Independent Children's Lawyer:
Ms Blundell, Jennifer Blundell & Associates
SYC 3682 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1 – 4 of the Order made on 12 June 2025 be discharged.
(‘X’), born in 2021, shall spend time with the Father as follows:
(a) As of the date of this order, each Tuesday from 10:00am to 4:00pm and each
Sunday from 10:00am to 4:00pm;
(b) On Father’s Day from 10:00am to 4:00pm;
(c) From 10:00am on 25 December until 10:00am on 26 December each year;
(d) From 7:00pm Easter Saturday until 7:00pm on Easter Monday commencing in 2027
and each alternate year thereafter.
X commencing Kindergarten in 2026, X shall spend time with the Father as
(a) Commencing in the first week of the school term, each Tuesday from 3:00pm to
6:00pm, with such time to occur in Region B;
(b) Commencing on the second weekend of school term 1, each alternate Saturday
from 10:00am to 4:00pm and each Sunday from 10:00am
(c) On Father’s Day from 10:00am to 4:00pm
(d) From 10:00am on 25 December until 10:00am on 26 December each year;
(e) From 7:00pm Easter Saturday until 7:00pm on Easter Monday commencing in 2027
and each alternate year thereafter.
pursuant to Order 2 and Order 3(b)-(e) above shall be facilitated by a
supervision agency, with the location to be C Venue
at Town D or another
location as determined by the supervision service.
changeovers pursuant to Order 3(a) above, the Father shall collect X from
school, if a school day, and otherwise changeover shall
occur at Suburb E
McDonalds and be facilitated by a supervision agency.
Mother shall be permitted to organise for X to obtain her immunisations in
accordance with a catch-up schedule.
Mother shall be permitted to provide a copy of Dr F’s Single Expert Report
dated 25 April 2025 to her counsellor and psychotherapist,
Ms H for the purposes
of the mother’s therapeutic support only.
supervision agency referenced at Order 3 and 4 above, is G Contact Service in
accordance with the Order made on 26 June 2025.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR
INTRODUCTION
Application for Review was filed by the mother on 19 June 2025 seeking a review
of a decision made by a Senior Judicial Registrar
(“SJR”) on 12 June
2025 in relation to parenting matters. The father is the respondent to the
application for review
and the applicant in the substantive proceedings.
Parties commenced living together in or about 2015, married in 2020 and
separated on 18 March 2023. That was a relationship of
is one child of the relationship, being
born in 2021. She is age 4
years. The child lives with the mother. In accordance with orders made by the
SJR on 12 June 2025 she
has commenced unsupervised time with the father on
Tuesday and Thursday each week from 10:00am to 4:00pm. Time has also been
on Father’s Day and Christmas Day from 10:00am to 4:00pm on each
day and there is provision for other times as may be agreed
in writing.
Changeover is to occur through a nominated contact supervisor at the Suburb J
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
father commenced the substantive proceedings on 25 May 2023. By that application
he seeks final orders for joint long term decision
making and a week about
living arrangement to commence on the child’s sixth birthday. On an
interim basis he proposed that
the child spend time as agreed between the
parents but for two weeks to occur on each second day from 9:00am to 7:00pm,
each week from 9:00am Friday until 7:00pm Sunday and that the child
“spend time” with mother during the times she is
not with the
father. He also sought orders that his application be heard urgently and on an
ex parte basis.
mother filed a Response on 29 June 2023. By that application she sought final
orders that the child live with her and she have
sole parental responsibility.
She sought to particularise final orders for the child’s time with the
father at a later date.
On an interim basis she proposed the father spend time
with the child supervised by an accredited supervision service on two occasions
each week for no longer than three hours on each occasion.
were made by consent on 4 August 2023 for the father to spend supervised time
with the child each Tuesday and Thursday for
three hours, pending the contested
interim hearing. That interim hearing took place on 12 September 2023 and the
decision was delivered
on 6 October 2023. In accordance with those orders
the father’s time continued to be supervised by a professional service,
was ordered to undertake hair follicle testing, to enrol in drug and alcohol
rehabilitation, undertake an anger management course
and both parties were
ordered to do a parenting after separation course. Orders were also made for the
parties to communicate via
a parenting app. By consent a psychiatric report was
20 November 2023 orders 2 – 9 inclusive of the orders made on 6 October
2023 were discharged, being the time spending orders,
drug testing and courses
to be undertaken by the father. Orders were instead made appointing an
independent children’s lawyer,
requiring the father to submit to hair
follicle testing by 4:00pm on 27 November 2023, and for the father to consult
with his treating
GP as to whether he would be assisted by drug and alcohol
rehabilitation. Orders were made for supervised time between the child
father for two hours each Tuesday and Thursday commencing 21 November. Orders
were made for ongoing hair follicle testing
as requested by the independent
children’s lawyer.
Family Report was ordered on 8 December 2023. The parties jointly appointed Dr
F, a child adolescent and adult forensic psychiatrist
to provide a single expert
matter was listed for another interim hearing on 19 March 2024. On that date
consent orders were made for the father to spend
supervised time with the child
for two hours each Tuesday and Friday but using a different supervision service,
an additional two
hours in the week after Easter Sunday and on the child’s
birthday, and 28 hours of makeup time in the form of an additional
30 minutes on
the twice weekly time ordered. Notations to the order reflect that the mother
maintains that the previous supervisor
did not provide adequate supervision and
that a conflict of interest had arisen. The father maintains that he and that
supervision
service did not pose a risk of harm to the child and that adequate
supervision that had been provided, but had consented as he wished
time with the child.
matter was listed for another interim hearing 29 August 2024, with the father
having filed an Application in a Proceeding on 4
July 2024. On 29 August 2024
leave was granted to release documents for use in apprehended domestic violence
order proceedings. The
balance of the application was put over to 6 September
2024. That date was subsequently vacated.
applicant filed another Application in a Proceeding on 27 December 2024 which
was listed for hearing on 21 January 2025. That
hearing was adjourned part head,
with the notations reflecting there was a current child protection investigation
into unacceptable
risk arising from the child’s supervised time with the
father on 18 October 2024. The matter was listed for finalisation on
the matter was heard on 28 March 2025, the notations reflect that the court was
advised of the following matters:
(a) No time had occurred since November 2024.
(b) The supervision service, K Contact Service, had advised the parties they
were unable to continue to work with the family.
(c) The mother informed the court in December 2024 the NSW police and the
department had an open investigation.
(d) The father informed the court he had not been contacted by or interviewed by
the police.
(e) The mother advised the court the child was at risk of harm when spending
time with the father supervised by K Contact Service
and urged that the only way
to ensure the safety of the child spending time with the father was at a
supervised contact centre.
(f) The court was also advised that the police and departmental investigation
was closed and the parties were in receipt of information
regarding that
investigation.
interim hearing was adjourned to 29 May 2025 and the decision delivered on 12
June 2025. Those orders provided for the father
to spend time with the child on
Tuesday and Thursday 10:00am to 4:00pm, Father’s Day, Christmas Day and
other times as agreed
between the parties. That time was to be unsupervised but
with the changeovers facilitated and supervised by K Contact Service. This
the decision the mother sought to review, filing the Application for Review on
19 June 2025. As noted earlier she now accepts
the unsupervised time and it is
the competing proposals for time in 2026, changeover location and other child
related matters that
now require determination.
consent on 26 June 2025 the service to assist with changeover was changed to G
Service terminated its service
agreement with the parties citing the mothers conduct as the basis. The mother
disputes the assertions
made by K Contact Service.
have been other court events, not only of a procedural nature but also to deal
with a number of subpoena objections. On 4 July
2025 the matter proceeded to a
compliance and readiness hearing. At that time an order was made that no further
Applications in a
Proceeding could be filed without the leave of the court
noting that six Applications in a Proceeding and three Applications for
had been filed prior to that date.
ORDERS SOUGHT
Application for Review filed by the mother on 19 June 2025 seeks to revert to
supervised time at a contact service. The mother
has however softened her
position noting that unsupervised time has occurred on a number of occasions to
date. She now seeks orders
as attached her Outline of Case document and
summarised in her affidavit as follows:
Order 2A in
respect to time occurring each Tuesday and Sunday instead of Tuesday and
respect to the changeover location – seeking changeover in a mid-way
location rather than at Suburb J Library which
is close to the father’s
Orders for time
once X commences kindergarten in 2026 – limited to day time contact;
That the mother
be permitted to organise X’s vaccinations by way of a catch-up schedule,
noting that the child has been unvaccinated;
That the parties
facilitate X engaging with and attending upon a child therapist.
The father by his Outline of Case document seeks orders summarised as
The parties
agree on a primary school in the Suburb L area in Region M, Sydney (close to his
Independent Children’s Lawyer (ICL)
nominate the school;
If the school
determines X should commence in 2027 rather than 2026 then the parties will
follow the school’s recommendation;
commences school the father will spend time with the child each Tuesday and
Sunday 10:00 am to 4:00 pm and on special days
- being the father’s
birthday, the child’s birthday, Father’s Day, Christmas Day and
Easter Sunday;
Once the child
commences school the father proposes overnight time each Wednesday to Thursday
and then 4:00 pm Friday to 4:00 pm Sunday
each week, one week in the mid-year
school holidays, half of the Christmas holidays and time on special days. In
short, the father
proposes the child live with him each and every weekend and an
overnight during the week;
Changeover at
the Suburb J library to be supervised by G Contact Centre;
Make up time
where time is missed due to reasons beyond the father’s control;
An expedited
final hearing – this was not pressed at the hearing; and
A proposal for
the mother to provide a catch up vaccination schedule and father to respond
within 21 days. Failing agreement, the
parties to jointly nominate a suitably
qualified practitioner such as a paediatric immunologist or GP to review the
schedule and
provide a written recommendation.
the commencement of the hearing the court enquired whether the parties had taken
the opportunity for discussions while waiting
for the independent
children’s lawyer to become available. They had not. A review of each
party’s position reflected
that they agreed the father’s
unsupervised time on the Thursday should move to occur on the Sunday in 2025 and
that the father
should have time with the child on Father’s Day. All other
issues remained in dispute.
ICL’s position was mainly in support of the mother’s position, but
with overnight time for the child with the father
at Christmas and
RISK FACTORS/ ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
outlined in the single expert
the mother alleges family
violence perpetrated against her by the father including physical assaults,
sexual assaults, financial
abuse, verbal abuse, denigration, threats to kill
while holding a gun and an occasion where he put his hands around her throat.
allegations are denied by the father. There were no reports to the police
prior to separation but the single expert noted the clinical
records reflect
reports of family violence by the mother to her doctor. The father acknowledged
that he made suicidal comments but
he denied being
father expressed concern to the single expert about the mother’s mental
health and reported substance use.
Those concerns were not pressed at the Review hearing. The focus of submissions
was on the alleged unfounded nature of the mother’s
concerns about the
father with submissions made that this reflected a true intention on the
mother’s part of damaging or severing
the child’s relationship with
father advised the single expert he did not currently use drugs. He does however
have a history of same summarised as
His reporting of
recreational cocaine use in his early 20s was inconsistent with hospital records
that reflected weekly use in 2016.
He conceded use
of benzodiazepines.
Hospital records
reflect cocaine use in 2020.
follicle test the father did on 23 November 2023 was positive for cocaine and
metabolites.
follicle test the father did on 28 March 2024 was positive for cocaine and
metabolites
The records
reflected use of alcohol in conjunction with cocaine.
single expert formed the view the father minimised his historic drug use. She
noted, however, that subsequent hair follicle tests
had been clear of drugs and
at the time of the interviews the father had been drug free for eight months.
That was a 15 month period
at the time of the Review hearing.
The Parties
party filed an Outline of Case document setting out material relied on. Material
was read into the record and that was considered
together with material tendered
in accordance with the Exhibit List and the written and oral submissions of the
father was granted leave to rely on material filed out of time. That was opposed
by the mother however given that her case had
substantially changed since the
Application for Review had been filed, the leave was granted. I do not consider
however that the
mother’s failure to file an affidavit in reply is an
acceptance of the father’s evidence. That is because the mother’s
position was that the evidence should not have been accepted by the court such
that the father’s evidence was challenged through
those objections but not
in affidavit form.
Expert Evidence
court was assisted by single expert report of Dr F released on 30 April 2025
– noting interviews were undertaken on 5 August
F is a child adolescent and adult forensic psychiatrist. In undertaking the
detailed report extensive material was reviewed and
the parties and child were
interviewed and assessed. The relevant
factors (as at that date) were
assessed and are addressed in the consideration and determination later in these
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
Review of a Registrar’s Decision
is a matter where the court is asked to review a decision of an SJR. Section
256(1) of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia Act 2021
(“the FCFCOA Act”) provides for judicial
supervision of orders made by Registrars under delegated authority by enabling
party to seek a review of an exercise of that power.
to r 2.01 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court
of Australia (Division 2) (Family Law) Rules 2021
(“the Division 2
Family Law Rules”), the rules which form the Family Law Rules 2021 apply
to Division 2 matters including
that presently before the court.
14.05 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(“the Family Law Rules 2021”)
sets out when a party may apply for a review and rule 14.07 sets out the
procedure. Noting
that today is a hearing de novo.
190 and 191 of the FCFCOA Act relevantly set out the overarching purpose of
civil practice and procedure provisions. The
core principles are set out in the
Central Practice Direction – Family Law Case Management (“Central
Practice Direction”).
When participating in proceedings in this Court the
parties must act in accordance with r 1.04 of the Family Law Rules 2021
The overarching purpose of these Rules, as provided by section 67 of the Federal
Circuit and Family Court Act, is to facilitate the
just resolution of disputes
according to law and as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible.
Interim Parenting
application is governed by the principles set out in Part VII of the
Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”). The court is generally guided by
s 60B of the Act which sets out the two objects of Part VII of the
objects are:
(a) to ensure the best interest of children are met, including by ensuring their
safety; and
(b) to give effect to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
done at New York
on 20 November 1989.
accordance with s 65D of the Act, the court may make such parenting orders
“as it thinks proper”, subject to s 65DAB
which requires the court
to have regard to any parenting plan to the extent that doing so is in the best
interests of the child.
Very wide powers.
of 6 May 2024, the
Family Law Amendment Bill 2023
now applies to
children’s matters. Significantly what has changed as relevant to these
proceedings are the s.60B objects, the
s.60CC factors and the legislative
determining what parenting order to make, the best interests of the child remain
the court’s paramount consideration. How
a court is to determine what is
in child’s best interests is assisted by s 60CC.
court will ensure that any Order made is consistent with any family violence
order and does not expose a person to an unacceptable
risk of family violence to
the extent that doing so is consistent with the child’s best interest
being treated as paramount
(1988) 166 CLR 69
, the High Court held that a parenting Order ought
not be made if such Order exposes the child to an “unacceptable
of harm. The “unacceptable risk” test has since been
authoritatively applied to any
potential risk of harm to a child and is
not limited to sexual abuse. I am to consider “unacceptable risk” in
each party’s parenting proposals and the availability of any
appropriate safeguards.
The Full Court in
has clarified
that the test is one of possibility rather than probability with a consideration
of the severity of harm that would
arise form the risk. Nothing about the new
legislation impacts or varies the application of those tests.
THE LIMITATIONS OF AN INTERIM HEARING
Court is hearing the matter on an interlocutory basis. The Court’s
determination therefore is based only on the documents
before it, including the
affidavits read, the documents tendered along with the submissions of the
parties’ legal representatives.
There is no provision for evidence to be
tested in cross-examination, and so the Court cannot make findings of fact about
in dispute. The court is left to review the respective claims and weigh
up the questions of risk and do the best that it can with
the information to
Full Court in
Redmond & Redmond
[2014] FamCAFC 155
has made it clear
that the Court does not need to wait until the last piece of evidence is to hand
prior to making a decision. The
overriding factor must always be the safety and
wellbeing of the child.
the court must decide at this interim stage centres on child protection issues.
The court must decide the level of risk to the
child in the care of each parent.
In that process the court will take into account the Full Court decision in
Deiter & Deiter
[2011] FamCAFC 82
The assessment of risk is one of the many burdens placed on family law decision
makers. Risk assessment comprises two elements –
the first requires
prediction of the likelihood of the occurrence of harmful events, and the second
requires consideration of the
severity of the impact caused by those events. In
our view, the assessment of risk in cases involving the welfare of children
be postponed until the last piece of evidence is given and tested, and
the last submission is made. We accept, however, that it
is always a question
of degree depending on the evidence that is before the Court.
[2010] FamCAFC 13
in the context of discussing the obligations of
the court, whilst conducting interim children’s proceedings, in
circumstances
where the evidence available was contradictory in nature, but
nonetheless raised significant welfare concerns for the children concerned,
Full Court stated as follows:
from relying upon the uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes
have little alternative than to weigh the probabilities
of competing claims and
the likely impact on children in the event that a controversial assertion is
acted upon or rejected. It is
not always feasible when dealing with the
immediate welfare of children simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy
put in issue.”
all of that means is that at an interlocutory hearing the court cannot ignore
allegations made about risk. Because those issues
are at the stage of
allegations that are denied and no findings have as yet been made, does not mean
that there is no risk for the
child. The court must weigh the evidence in the
balance and the overriding consideration will always be the safety and
of the child X.
CONSIDERATION
the process of making this determination, while I may not address each and every
piece of evidence in these reasons, I have considered
the totality of the
evidence and the section 60CC considerations in the context of the paramountcy
making any determination about care arrangements for children, safety must be at
the forefront of the court’s mind. The risk
factors alleged by the mother
are family violence, and the allegations that the child is at risk in the
father’s care through
inappropriate touching and drug use by the father.
The risk factors alleged by the father are the allegations that the mother is
alienating the child and that she is the greater risk of harm.
cannot, as suggested by the father, ignore the allegations of family violence
simply because the mother has not detailed those in
her affidavit for this
Review hearing. Those allegations are detailed in the single expert report and
there is an ADVO in place.
Lapsing or otherwise, there is legislation in place
which grounds the circumstances in which an interim ADVO is made. They are not
handed out like lollies; there are grounds which must be satisfied before an
order is made in the first place, whether it is final
or provisional.
father’s affidavit filed on 21 July 2025 reflects that the interim family
violence order was made on 27 May 2025. The matter
had been listed for trial
that day but was adjourned at the request of the prosecutor to allow a review of
the evidence. The lapsing
DVO made until 25 November 2025. It is
unchallenged that it will lapse on that date unless breached by the father. He
gives evidence
as to the police report including an opinion as to the
mother’s motivation in making the application - being to gain the upper
hand in these proceedings.
father asks the court to consider that he has not been charged with any criminal
offences, that there are orders for unsupervised
time and no criticism arising
from that time has been made. Indeed, the court can accept that to date all has
gone well as the mother
accepts that unsupervised time should continue.
family violence allegations will be tested at trial and findings made about
them. I cannot make findings about those allegations
but nor can I simply ignore
them where, if true, that may mean the child is placed at significant risk of
harm and may explain some
of the mother’s more challenging behaviours. On
the other hand, if findings are made that the allegations of family violence
untrue or exaggerated then the trial judge may well make findings adverse to the
while the father submits that there is no evidence that the child is unsafe in
his care, there are allegations of family violence
perpetrated by him, there is
an allegation of inappropriate behaviour by the father during supervised time,
and there is his history
of drug abuse with the single expert of the opinion
that he was in early remission at the time of interviews – noting that
almost a year ago. Certainly, such a long period of abstinence is impressive,
and the father is to be commended for his commitment
to remaining drug free.
have considered the letter tendered from his
psychologist
to the effect that the
father is now engaging in counselling to address stress and anxiety around
“losing” his daughter,
psychoeducation to prevent drug relapse and
understanding and better managing relationships. It is heartening that the
finally commenced this engagement. It was first ordered in 2023,
noting that order was vacated. Given the history reflected in the
single expert
report and the concerns that he has minimised his past drug use, this is a wise
move on the father’s part. He
is in the midst of highly litigious
proceedings and that places an enormous stress on parties, and it is sensible to
ensure the work
he has done to remain drug free for 15 months continues. If the
father can remain drug free then that can only be of benefit to the
considered those matters I cannot agree that there is no evidence of risk; there
is evidence of risk as outlined above but
that evidence is challenged by the
father and has been addressed, at least in part so far as drug use is concerned
through the testing
and now the therapy, and the allegation of inappropriate
touching is addressed by independent evidence from the supervision service.
father submits that it is the mother who poses a risk of harm to the child.
Those are allegations that the court must consider
but they do not cancel out
the other allegations of risk in this matter. It cannot be argued that that we
just forget the allegations
made by the mother as to the risks that may lie with
the father because there is evidence that the mother has behaved badly at times,
if the opinions of the contact supervisors are accepted.
fact that three different services have provided written criticisms of the
mother is indeed concerning. I have however considered
that the correspondence,
in particular Exhibit F4, is highly critical of the mother, and in that case
comes from a person against
whom the mother has lodged a formal complaint. That
correspondence is highly emotive. It is hardly a calm, rational recitation of
concerns. It is instead a full blown and rather vitriolic attack. That may be
justified, it may not, but it raises questions about
the reliability of the
evidence. That is however a matter for findings at trial. I have also considered
that victims of family violence
are not always consistent and reliable in their
conduct or their approach to challenges and at times do not present well.
father asks the court to consider that if his concerns are correct, then the
mother is maliciously and deliberately attempting
to destroy his relationship
with the child; first through the unilateral relocation, and now through false
allegations and attempts
to alienate him from the child. He asks the court to
consider the differences between what the child says when she refuses or resists
time with the father and her pleasure in his company. This resist /refuse may
indeed be due to the mother influencing the child either
deliberately or
inadvertently. Or it may be due to the child having lived in a house where
family violence was routinely perpetrated
by the father. It is not uncommon for
children who have lived with family violence to find pleasure in time with a
loved parent but
to be anxious in advance of that time for fear of further
violence. This court is not in a position to make findings about any of
Certainly, I have considered that the single expert was concerned about the
child’s exposure to the mother’s belief
system about the father.
have considered the mother’s evidence that she is seeking psychological
supports to address the issues raised in the single
expert report. I commend her
for taking that step. She has also stepped back from her former insistence on
supervised time and now
seeks only that unsupervised time be limited to daytime
only at this interim stage.
while the father argues that the mother poses the far greater risk, the court
simply cannot make that finding at an interim hearing.
It is but one of the
risks the child faces.
the mother is correct in her fears about the child in the father’s care,
then the risks are great indeed. That is ameliorated
by the time that has been
spent in supervision, the father now engaging in therapy and the clear drug
screens. The mother’s
fears of inappropriate touching are addressed in the
supervision reports, which state that no such touching occurred, despite what
the child has said to the mother.
the father is correct in his fears that the mother is attempting to alienate the
child, then the risk of emotional and psychological
harm to the child is very
was three years old at the time of the interview with the single expert such
that her views were not sought. The single expert did
however express that she
is securely attached to both parents and has a sense of connectedness to both
father asked the court to consider the contact supervisor notes tendered; that
they reflect the child routinely asking to spend
more time with her father and
that the time was positive. I have considered that evidence. I have also
considered that those records
also reflect some resist and refuse at times.
single expert noted that X is of Country N and Country O heritage. She was of
the opinion that X’s presentation may indicate
ADHD and that as she gets
older or it affects her functioning she may benefit from further testing. She
noted however that trauma
symptoms often present as behavioural symptoms which
can mimic those of ADHD.
single expert expressed concern for X in the future if she is repeatedly exposed
to the parental conflict, and if the mother continues
to denigrate or instil
fear of the father in her. She did not however make any recommendations for
therapy for or assessment of the
child at the current time.
single expert was satisfied that each parent has a good understanding of
X’s needs. She spoke positively of each parent’s
parenting style.
court has concerns about capacity of both parents arising from the risk factors
addressed earlier in these reasons. The court
urges both parties to review the
single expert evidence with an eye to the recommendations for courses and
counselling. The court
has considered that each parent gives evidence of taking
steps to address those concerns and, through that, both parents are seeking
ensure that risks for X are minimised.
F considered the likely psychological harm to the child if she continues to be
exposed to the parental conflict. The court will
focus on orders that will
likely reduce parental conflict and minimise risk for X.
F expressed the opinion that the mother had periods consistent with a major
depressive episode and indicators consistent with a
diagnosis of borderline
personality disorder. She is of the opinion that the mother has a
pattern of anger-fuelled reconstruction of the current
and is clearly sceptical as regards the risks the mother
perceives in the father
F expressed the opinion that the father has a diagnosis of substance use
disorder, “
specifically stimulant use disorder (cocaine) –
moderate severity in early remission
” and indicators also consistent
with a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder. She expressed the opinion
that he may
have normalised aggression in close relationships and that he may
have experienced a major depressive
father submits that Dr F was troubled about the mother exposing the child to a
loyalty conflict. It was submitted that if the
mother continued to denigrate the
father, fear may be instilled in the child. I have considered that submission
however that was
only one of the many concerns expressed in the report. The
father’s submissions failed to acknowledge Dr F’s opinions
expressed about him and that there are great complexities to the issues with
both parents.
father’s submission that the mother is vexatious in her concerns and
allegations in a bid to destroy the father/child relationship
is simplistic. It
overlooks the other side of the coin and the positives that Dr F saw in the
mother. As explored by Dr F, if the
mother’s evidence as to family
violence in the relationship are true, then her motivations and belief system
are likely to
be far more complex. Certainly, Dr F perceived a shift in the
mother’s view of the father, as she recognised that risks could
mitigated by the father engaging in treatment, maintaining good mental health
and being drug free.
considered that the mother has a capacity to facilitate and encourage a close
and continuing relationship between the
child and the
Dr F saw positives in the father, she also expressed concern about a potential
prioritisation of his own needs above that of
the child in his expressed desire
to become X’s primary
She expressed the opinion
that each parent exhibits a degree of anger towards the other and a sense of
hurt, but that was likely
to attenuate over time once the proceedings were over
and with the assistance of
father argues that if the child attends school and experiences changeover closer
to his home, it will allow for improved relationships
with both the extended
maternal and paternal family. There is no evidence before the court from
extended family members at this interim
hearing. I have considered that each
parent has the capacity to facilitate extended family relationships,
particularly now the father
is spending greater periods of time and that time is
no longer supervised.
father made submissions as to the mother’s history of withholding. If the
mother held genuine and well-founded fears for
the child’s safety and
wellbeing, then that conduct may be said to have a reasonable excuse. If
findings are made adverse to
the mother, then the opposite applies. The court
can consider circumstances such as the withholding coinciding with the refusal
the father to change contact centres but the meaning of that is beyond an
interim hearing. The father submits that the mother withheld
for no reason, but
that is not the mother’s evidence. The court has differing versions of
events and motivations and cannot
make any such finding as sought by the father.
have considered the evidence from the contact centres. I have considered that
evidence is not yet tested. I have considered that
it is persuasive evidence as
it appears four centres have withdrawn their services and in doing so are
critical of the mother.
DETERMINATION
a preliminary issue the father asked the court to consider that the initial
relocation by the mother with the child in or about
May 2023 was a unilateral
relocation. He submits that is an underlying pervasive issue which should inform
the decision to be made.
I have considered that submission in making this
determination but again it does not override the risk factors each party
Time spending 2025
parties are in agreement that for the remainder of the 2025 year the child
should continue to see the father twice a week from
10:00am to 4:00pm –
and they also agree those days should incorporate one weekend day. That makes
eminent sense and the court
is satisfied that it is in the child’s best
interests that she spend time with the father from 10:00am – 4:00pm on
and from 10:00am – 4:00pm on Sunday each week.
do not propose to make the orders sought by the father for time spending on the
father’s birthday and the child’s birthday.
I agree with the
Independent Children’s Lawyer that this involves significant travel for
the child on those special days when
instead she can simply have a second
celebration either before or after the event.
father proposes that time on Easter and Christmas Day be extended to include
overnight time while the mother proposes that time
remain daytime contact only.
The ICL supports the father’s position. She submits that in five
months’ time, there would
be no reason why an overnight on Christmas Day
could not occur. She expressed a similar view as to the father’s proposal
overnight time at Easter. In her opinion the orders sought by the father for
those two special occasions were appropriate.
am of the view that there should not be any rush to overnight time. The single
expert and the authorities all urge caution and a
gradual approach. I am of the
view that introducing overnight on special days only is the perfect cautious and
gradual approach;
it allows the first overnights to be on those special
occasions where family and celebrations will create a positive environment.
those reasons I will make orders for Easter and Christmas as proposed by the
Time spending 2026
mother opposes the father’s application to increase time in 2026 to
incorporate significant overnight time. Her proposal
is that time should remain
daytime only, and shift to two days each alternate weekend. She concedes that 12
days between time with
the father would be too long for the child and therefore
proposes that the father travel to the area where the child lives to spend
with the child after school for three hours each Tuesday. In support of this she
(a) The father gives evidence of having flexible work hours;
(b) Her proposal would allow the father to attend the child’s school, meet
her teachers and be involved in her education;
(c) Starting school in 2026 will be a significant change for the child. To also
start overnight time three nights each week with
the father is not in line with
the single expert recommendation for gradual change;
(d) The child will not have turned 5 years when she commences school in 2026 so
a cautious approach to overnight time is urged;
(e) The cautious approach is also urged because of the father’s history of
substance abuse. Although the clear hair follicle
tests since April 2024 were
conceded, the court was referred to the evidence of the father’s treating
therapist that he had
attended only one session regarding drug and alcohol
relapse prevention at the time of the report.
father submits that time should be significant and substantial if not equal as
there is no risk in his care and further submits
that this is supported by the
single expert. I do not agree. As is clear from these reasons I do not accept
that the mother’s
failure to address family violence in her affidavit
allows the court to ignore the issue. This determination is about the
best interests, and the legislation is clear as to safety being a
significant issue in that process.
the father’s proposal X would do a lot of travelling or the mother would
be forced to relocate. The ICL expressed confidence
that the court would not
make interim orders for the child to commence school 100kms from where she
currently lives or for the child
to live with the father on an interim basis.
She was correct. The court will take a slow and cautious approach with the
history and
risk factors in this matter. For those reasons the mother’s
proposals for time in 2026 are preferred. This is particularly
so for school
days and special days where travel will be minimised.
the same reason that I made orders as proposed by the father for overnight time
on Christmas Day and Easter in 2025 I will make
those same orders applicable in
2026 and thereafter.
School Enrolment
child currently attends P Preschool and Q Preschool near where she lives with
the mother. She is due to start Kindergarten in
2026. The mother seeks no orders
her at her current
education facilities and feed into kindy in her local area.
The father wants the child to be enrolled next year in a school in the
area near where he lives. The ICL does not support the child being enrolled in a
school in Region M Sydney when she lives
in Region B. She supports the
mother’s orders as being the most practical.
do not propose to make interim orders that in 2026 X attend school 100kms from
where she lives with her mother and where she has
lived for over two years. The
father’s submission that because the mother unilaterally relocated the
child in 2023 the court
would be justified in this determination was not
persuasive.
make orders to change a long-standing status quo on an interim basis is beyond
the scope of what the court can do in the circumstances
of this case. There is
no evidence that satisfies the court to make such a substantial change. None of
these issues are new; what
is new is that the father now has the opinion of
third parties who agree with him. As noted during submissions, however, the
is unable to make findings. The parties are at odds about so many risk
factors – the alleged family violence, the extent of
the father’s
historical drug use - although it appears to be conceded that up to late April
he had 15 months drug free.
I am therefore unable to make the findings urged upon me that the mother has
acted maliciously and deliberately
to undermine the father’s relationship
with X, not just in the relocation but in her subsequent withholding of the
the allegations she has made about the father.
make orders that the child be enrolled in school in the Suburb L area is to
enrol her 100km away from her primary home, requiring
her to travel 200km return
to school each day. That makes no sense, particularly when you factor in busy
peak hour traffic. That
application can only be a back door relocation to seek
the mother’s return to Region M Sydney. Such an application will not
determined at an interim hearing after two years. That is a matter for
father made submissions to the effect that the single expert supported a move to
substantial and indeed equal time. This was disputed
by the mother and I was
unable to find such a recommendation in that report. If I am wrong about that
the report also says that
any changes to the child’s living arrangements
must be gradual.
nothing gradual about the father’s proposals for the child’s
education or indeed her living arrangements in
2026. For those reasons I decline
to make the orders as proposed by the father.
Changeover location
changeovers on the Tuesdays in 2026 the mother proposes those occur in the
region where the child lives. Given that the time is
to occur after school and
for a period of three hours only I propose to make orders in those terms. It is
not in the child’s
best interest to travel any distance mid-week after
school for a relatively short time.
mother proposes to move the location for the other changeovers to a halfway
point between herself and the father. In accordance
with the current orders the
mother is required to do all the travel and prior to that the father has done
the travel. It is undisputed
that the parties live about 100km apart, such that
if the mother does the travel she must either do two round trips of about 200km
or wait in the area for six hours while the child spends time with the father.
Whilst it appears to be undisputed that the mother
has extended family in the
area, it is not the same as being in your own home or workplace.
mother submits that while the child will always be required to do the travel, if
the changeover location is moved to the halfway
point, the child can get up
later in the morning and will be home earlier in the day, such that what is
currently a long day will
be significantly improved. The mother also submits
that undertaking all the travel impacts on her ability to study and work.
father’s position is that up until the current orders he did all the
travel - in effect his submission means that in his
view it is the
mother’s turn. He further argues that it is no longer appropriate for him
to do all the driving or that the
child should be limited to an area to suit the
mother’s convenience. I have considered that the mother is not proposing
continue where she lives but rather that it occur at the midway
point. It is the father who seeks a changeover location now that
is convenient
to him. The court understands the basis for that and his frustration that the
distance has been created by the mother’s
relocation, but the decision of
this court will be guided by the best interests of the child and not what is
fair for the father,
or indeed for the mother.
father argues that meeting in the middle will halve his time with the child. The
mother disputed this submission. No independent
evidence of the estimated travel
time was provided however it seems unlikely that travel of about 50km will take
an hour and a half,
even in Sydney traffic. Currently the six hours the father
spends with the child involves little travel time.
father submits that by seeking to vary the changeover location, the mother is
seeking to reduce his time with the child. I have
however considered that travel
is a real part of the equation where the parents live so far apart, and I am
uncertain why travel
time cannot be fun time. The father does not have to set
the child up with an iPad and ignore her – they can sing songs, tell
stories, and play games. Extended family could join them for the travel, and
some of the time could be spent on outings on the way
or in the area of the
changeover location. I therefore do not accept the submission that moving the
changeover location would reduce
the child’s time with the father. It
simply places a greater burden on him to make that part of their time together
productive.
father submits that the mother’s family are in Region M Sydney, and thus
available to spend time with the child and maintain
connections with her if
changeover is near his home. It is however a matter for the mother to choose
when and how she facilitates
those extended maternal relationships.
father submits that the child should be enrolled in school in Region M Sydney
and therefore it is appropriate that changeover
also occur in that location. I
have already determined that the interim orders sought by the father regarding
education will not
ICL was of the view that it was important for X to spend as much quality time as
possible with the father, but she was also conscious
that whatever the
changeover location it was X who would be in the car.
risk factors in this matter will not be ameliorated by having the changeover
location closer to the father or more rapidly introducing
overnight time. Rather
those risk factors will be addressed by both parties recognising and working on
the issues of concern raised
by the single expert and ensuring that their
conduct and communications are child focussed. The parties each bring evidence
they are now doing that work for which the court commends them.
am of the view that the child will be assisted by shortening the day, rather
than insisting that all of the father’s time
with the child must be
exclusive of travel. I therefore propose to make the orders as sought by the
mother, noting that she narrowed
it down to the C Venue in submissions. I shall
leave it with the father to work on making travel time a positive part of the
he spends with the child.
Immunisations
is not up to date with her vaccinations. The mother proposes that the
child’s vaccinations be done based on a catch-up schedule
imposed by her
doctor. The father wants to see that schedule, have the chance to get his own
medical advice and if they can’t
agree undertake further consultations.
mother submitted that she was not “going rogue” so far as
vaccinations were concerned. She was simply seeking to undertake
schedule and that this would be done in conjunction with the standard
vaccinations under the care of the child’s
court agrees with the ICL that given the number of Applications in a Proceeding
and Applications for Review filed in these proceedings,
any orders that propose
the parties reach an agreement may well lead to further conflict. The father
agrees in principle that the
child should be vaccinated but is concerned about a
family history of reactions. I have no medical evidence about that, however it
is a simple matter for the parties to advise the child’s GP of that family
history so that it can be taken into account by
the GP when planning the
catch-up schedule. I therefore propose to make the orders as sought by the
Make up time
court will not make orders that require the parties to negotiate or attempt to
negotiate make up time where they clearly have
limited ability to agree, noting
the number of applications already filed.
Art Therapy
mother gives evidence of challenges faced by the child – separation
anxiety not only at changeovers but at preschool. The
father’s evidence is
that he has seen no signs of this but the mother submits that as primary care
giver she would simply have
more exposure. She hopes that this could be
addressed through play therapy but would have no objection to family therapy as
an alternative.
father opposes individual therapy for the child given her young age but would
support family therapy. The ICL agrees with the
father, in circumstances where
it would be without the consent of both parties and involving a four-year-old.
single expert has not made a recommendation for therapy for X at this time.
Given X’s young age in circumstances where it
is opposed by the father and
not one of the single expert’s recommendations, I do not propose to make
the order sought by the
mother at this time. It may however be something that
will benefit X as she gets older if the parental conflict continues.
parties advise the court that they are supportive of attending family therapy
and the ICL does not oppose it, although expresses
some cynicism give the long
term and highly litigious conflict between the parties. If the parties are able
to agree on a family
therapist it would no doubt be of benefit to the child for
that to occur, and I encourage them to jointly make those arrangements.
Expedited Trial
is not a matter where there is any urgency which would allow the final hearing
to be leap-frogged over the many matters awaiting
trial. It was sensible of the
father not to press this order in oral submissions. Most matters in the court
system involve parents
who want finalisation as soon as possible. To expedite
this trial in circumstances where the father has only recently commenced
unsupervised time with the child twice each week and where there are
risk factors alleged in the care of both parents would be premature.
Other Orders
mother seeks leave to release the single expert report to her own treating
therapist. I propose to make orders as sought in the
expectation that it will
assist her therapist to support her in addressing the concerns raised by the
single expert, but limited
to that purpose only.
court is satisfied that the orders now made are in the best interests of the
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
nine (109) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Dated: 4 August 2025
Report of Dr F released on 30
April 2025 at pages 24 - 27
Report of Dr F released on 30 April 2025 at page
Report of Dr F released on
30 April 2025 at page 58
of Dr F released on 30 April 2025 at page
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
(2022) FLC 94-092
Report of Dr F released 30
April 2025 Pages 52 - 53
of Dr F released 30 April 2025 Pages 53 -
Report of Dr F released 30
2025 Page 57
at line 1715 -
Report of Dr F released
2025 Page 58
line 1735 -
Report of Dr F released
2025 Page 58
line 1741 -
Report of Dr F released
2025 Page 58
lines 1758 -
the most recent hair
follicle test
Report of Dr F
released 30 April
Mother’s affidavit
filed 10 July 2025 at [42]
RTF format (647 KB)
Signed PDF/A format