He v Secretary, Department of Social Services [2021] FCCA 2036 (27 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
He v Secretary, Department of Social
[2021] FCCA 2036
File number(s):
BRG 559 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE JARRETT
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
– Social Security
– Appeal from decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal –
decision of Administrative Appeals
Tribunal affirmed decision of Social Services
and Child Support Division of the Tribunal – Social Services and Child
Division affirmed decision of Department of Human Services.
Legislation:
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Federal Circuit Court Rules 2001
(Cth), Sch. 1
Social Security Act 1991
Cases cited:
He and Secretary, Department of Social
Services (Social services second review)
[2020] AATA 1491
He v Secretary, Department of Social Services
[2021] FCCA 2035
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
The Applicant appeared in person
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Mills Oakley
The Second Respondent appeared in person
BRG 558 of 2020
SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL
First Respondent
JUDGE JARRETT
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The amended notice of appeal filed on 9 October, 2020 is dismissed.
2. The applicant pay the first respondent’s costs of and incidental to
the amended notice of appeal fixed in the sum of $7,200.
REASONS FOR
JUDGE JARRETT:
1 In this application, Jian He challenges a decision of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal made on 19 June, 2020:
He and Secretary, Department of
Social Services (Social Services Second Review)
[2020] AATA 1848.
decision concerned the percentage of care of a child born to the applicant and
the second respondent as between them for parenting
payment purposes.
2 The applicant and second respondent are the
parents of one child Alex who is now about 11 years of age. Alex’s
parents separated
on 26 May, 2016. Initially, there was some litigation between
them in the Federal Circuit Court of Australia about the parenting
arrangements
for Alex. However that conflict ended and the parties agreed on a parenting
plan which, over time changed, for Alex’s
welfare. The plan progressed
such that when Alex commenced at school at the beginning of 2018, he was living
for equal amounts of
time in each of his parents’ households from about 22
January, 2018.
3 On 6 August, 2018 the applicant lodged a claim for parenting payment in
respect of Alex with the Department of Human Services.
At the time of the
application, the applicant and the second respondent were recorded as each
50% care of Alex. Further, the second respondent was recorded as
Alex’s principal carer and was in receipt of parenting payment.
4 On 30 August, 2018, the first respondent (by his delegate) made a decision
to reject the applicant’s claim for parenting payment.
The applicant
sought internal review of the original decision. On 29 November, 2018, an
authorised review officer affirmed the
original decision.
5 The applicant lodged an application for review of that decision by the
Social Services and Child Support Division of the Administrative
Tribunal. On 14 May, 2019 the Tribunal affirmed the internal review
6 The applicant lodged an application for second review of the first review
decision by the General Division of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal.
7 On 19 June, 2020 the Tribunal affirmed the first Tribunal decision.
8 On 16 July, 2020 the applicant filed this appeal in the Federal Court of
Australia. On 9 October, 2020 he filed an amended notice
of appeal. The appeal
was transferred to this court on 14 October, 2020.
THE CONTEXT OF THE PRESENT APPLICATION
9 I recently considered the nature of an appeal
pursuant to
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
in relation to another appeal brought by the applicant against the first
respondent in this case: see
He v Secretary, Department of Social Services
[2021] FCCA 2035.
I will not repeat those observations here.
PARENTING PAYMENTS
Section 500
Social Security Act
(Cth) sets out the qualifications for parenting payment. It
500 Qualification for parenting payment
(1) A person is qualified for parenting payment if:
(a) the person has at least one PP child (see
section 500D)
(b) the person is an Australian resident; and
(c) in a case where the person is not a member of a couple and does not have at
least one PP child who has not turned 6—the
person meets any participation
requirements that apply to the person under
section 500A
(ca) in a case where the person is in a class of persons specified by
legislative instrument under subsection (2)—the person
participation requirements that apply to the person under
section 500A
(d) at least one of the following conditions is satisfied:
(i) the person is not a member of a couple and the person was not a lone parent
at the start of the person’s current period
as an Australian resident;
(ii) the person has, at any time, been in Australia for a period of, or periods
adding up to, at least 104 weeks during a continuous
period throughout which the
person was an Australian resident;
(iii) the person has a qualifying residence exemption for parenting
(iv) the person satisfies subsection (3).
11 It will be observed that the first requirement is that the person has at
Section 500D
defines the term as follows:
500D PP child
(1) A child is a PP child of a person if:
(a) the child is a child of the person; and
(b) the person is a member of a couple; and
(c) the child has not turned 6; and
(d) the person is the principal carer of the child.
(2) A child is a PP child of a person if:
(a) the child is a child of the person; and
(b) the person is not a member of a couple; and
(c) the child has not turned 8; and
(d) the person is the principal carer of the child.
Note: For principal carer see
subsections 5(15)
of the Act sets out family relationship definitions as they
relate to children. Relevantly
(24) of the Act define who is the
principal carer of a child.
Section 5(15)
of the Act provides that a person is the principal carer of
a child who has not turned 16 years of age and is a dependent child of
person. Significantly for present purposes
of the Act provides that a
child can only have one principal carer at a time.
Subsection 5(19)
(19) If the Secretary is satisfied that, but for
subsection (18), 2 or more persons (adults) would be principal carers of the
child, the Secretary must:
(a) make a written determination specifying one of the adults as the principal
carer of the child; and
(b) give a copy of the determination to each adult.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
14 In its reasons for decision, the Tribunal
identified the issue for its consideration as whether the applicant was
qualified to
receive the parenting payment at the date of his claim on 6 August,
15 The Tribunal set out the statutory framework against which it needed to
make its decision. It observed that the
Social Security Act
does not prescribe
how a principal carer of a child should be determined in situations where two
parties share equally in the care
of the child. Accordingly, the Tribunal
referred to the
Guide to Social Security Law,
a policy document used by
officers who administer the
Social Security Act
to assist them in interpreting
and applying the Act. The Tribunal noted that it was not bound by policy or the
Guide, but to aid
consistency, policy will usually be taken into account and
followed unless there are cogent reasons not to. The Tribunal’s
in that regard was unremarkable.
16 The Tribunal recorded that the Guide at 1.1.P.416 provides:
If the difference in the level of care provided by the 2 carers is less than
10%, care is considered to be shared equally.
: Where care is shared 54/46% or 50/50%.
In situations of equal care where only 1 of the carers is claiming or receiving
income support, that person should be determined
as the principal carer. If both
carers are claiming or receiving income support, the carer who is most in need
of a favourable determination
should be deemed principal carer.
A decision maker MUST take into account the following factors when deciding
which carer is in most need of a favourable determination:
· whether 1 carer already qualifies as principal carer of
another child (see below for further detail on determinations
involving more
than 1 child)
· whether only 1 carer would be eligible for PP
· which carer would receive the higher rate of payment
· any other sources of income the carers may have, whether actual
or potential, including both employment and investment
Note: If either carer has income that fluctuates, the assessment officer may
need to look at average income levels over an extended
period of time, such as
12 weeks, and
· the asset levels of each carer.
The following factors MAY be taken into consideration by the decision maker, if
further information is required to make the determination:
· the expenses of each carer
Example: Rent, child care
· workforce experience, education levels and future employment prospects of
· the duration that each carer has been on income support and their
principal carer status during this time. If there are no
substantial differences
between the parties, then generally the determination should be favoured which
maintains the 'status quo',
· any other factors considered relevant by the decision maker.
: Mary and John are separated and equally share the care of their
daughter Cathy. Mary has been receiving JSP with principal carer
status since
April 2020, and John lodges a claim for JSP in June 2020. The rate that would be
payable to John is approximately the
same as that being paid to Mary. Neither
John nor Mary owns any substantial assets such as a house or car. John has
recent workforce
experience, which increases his employment prospects in the
area. It is fair to argue that a decision that cancelled Mary's status
principal carer would have a more significant impact than a decision to reject
John's claim to be deemed principal carer, especially
as John has greater
employment prospects than Mary. Therefore, Mary should continue to be specified
as the principal carer of Cathy
while John should have generic JSP
requirements/concessions.
17 The Tribunal noted the evidence provided to it by the parents. The
Tribunal considered that the evidence was limited and consisted
invoices in relation to activities or costs that were attributed to Alex’s
care for the time spent by Alex in each
parent’s care. The applicant
provided documents relating to the care he provided to Alex, the proceedings in
the Federal Circuit
Court of Australia, parenting arrangements, and Centrelink
notices in proceedings in the Magistrates Court of Queensland.
18 The Tribunal set out in its reasons the evidence, both oral and written
and the lengthy submissions of the applicant and the not
so lengthy submissions
of the second respondent.
19 The Tribunal found that the expenses of both parties exceeded their
disclosed income in the period around August, 2018 and the
evidence showed both
engaged in businesses during and after the marriage that “operated on at
least a semi cash basis”.
It thought that both the applicant and the
second respondent gave evidence that conflicted with the documentary evidence
the Tribunal, their own evidence and the evidence given by each other.
The Tribunal thought that the applicant did not provide a
“clear view of
his true financial situation”. It thought the same about the second
respondent.
20 The Tribunal thought that the second respondent evaded answering questions
put to her, particularly in respect of her financial
circumstances and that she
was unable to explain or provide evidence in support of assertions made by her
his income.
21 The Tribunal recorded that both parties had equal care of Alex and either
could be considered to be his principal carer. To assist
it to resolve the
dilemma, the Tribunal considered the “Equal Care factors” set out in
the Guide I have extracted earlier
in these reasons.
22 The Tribunal considered that there was no evidence before it that either
party was unable to meet their financial commitments or
provide support for Alex
at any time. It considered that the workforce experience and education level of
the parties was similar
and so were their future employment prospects.
23 Ultimately, the Tribunal:
45. ... considers that based on the information before
it the circumstances of the Applicant and Other Party at the relevant time
August 2018 were not all that different. This finding is not inconsistent with
the evidence of the Applicant.
Section 5(18)
of the Act clearly provides that a child can only have one
principal carer at a time. In situations where there are no substantial
differences between the parties, the Guide provides that generally the
determination which should be favoured is that which maintains
the ‘status
47. For the reasons set out above, given the paucity of the evidence before the
Tribunal there is no clear picture or clear evidence
that leads the Tribunal to
being able to clearly distinguish between which parent is more in need of a
favourable determination.
Both Parents despite the disclosed discrepancies in
the shortfall between their income and expenses always appear to have been able
to meet their financial commitments while also providing for the needs of the
Child when in their care. Consequently, the Tribunal
considers there is no basis
to make a determination that does not maintain the status
24 The Tribunal affirmed the decision under review.
25 The applicant’s questions of law said to
arise out of the Tribunal’s decision are set out in his amended
application
filed on 9 October, 2020 in the following terms (faithfully
reproduced):
1. If the Tribunal has failed to give which previously
determination need be following on the Decisions? Or failed to check if there
one previous determination exist?
2. If there are any evidence or any legal base support the Tribunal’s
claim that “The expenses outlined by both the Applicant
and Other Party
far exceed what they say their income was”? if so, where is the
calculation and comparison on the
3. If the Tribunal has intended to ignore the information that the Mother of the
child has just Mortgaged her property and bough
a brand-new luxury SUV at end of
2017, as it were strong evidence the mother herself was very confident
higher and more dependable sources of income or assets of the great
”, if the ANZ Bank believe it, why the tribunal ignored?
4. If there are a written determination of “
principle carer
was made by Centrelink on 27th May 2016 or nearby date as no document has
indicated it exist?
5. if the applicant has been denied his legal right to be treated fairly when 4
same decisions with 4 different reasons by Department
26 As the first respondent submits, the applicant’s case is somewhat
difficult to discern. He has represented himself in these
proceedings and
English is not his first language. That has presented some difficulty in
understanding the written grounds of the
appeal and the written submissions
belatedly delivered by him. His oral submissions did not really advance the
27 When read together with his written submissions and taking into account
his oral submissions, each of the five purported questions
of law set out above
are nothing more than arguments with the merits of the Tribunal’s
decision. The Tribunal reasoned that
the financial needs of each of the parties
were effectively the same. The Tribunal went to great lengths to make it clear
considered neither the applicant nor the respondent reliable reporters
of their income and expenses. It recorded that it considered
that the applicant
and the respondent underreported their earnings both to the income tax
department and for the purposes of social
security. It concluded that it could
not reach a clear view about the financial circumstances of either party. In
those circumstances
it determined to follow policy guidance to the effect that
the status quo should be maintained.
28 That was an approach that was open to the Tribunal. The Tribunal
considered the authorities that bore on the legitimacy of following
policy that was not otherwise mandated by the legislation pursuant to which the
relevant decisions being made. The Tribunal
14. It is noted that with respect to whether the
Tribunal should apply policy, in
Re Drake and Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
(1979) 2 ALD 634
Brennan J stated at page
In my view, the Tribunal, being entitled to
determine its own practice in respect of the part which ministerial policy plays
making of Tribunal decisions, should adopt the following practice.
When the Tribunal is reviewing the exercise of a discretionary power reposed in
a Minister, and the Minister has adopted a general
policy to guide him in the
exercise of the power, the Tribunal will ordinarily apply that policy in
reviewing the decision, unless
the policy is unlawful or unless its application
tends to product an unjust decision in the circumstances of the particular case.
Where the policy would ordinarily be applied, an argument against the policy
itself or against its application in the particular
case will be considered, but
cogent reasons will have to be shown against its application, especially if the
policy is shown to have
been exposed to parliamentary
Secretary, Department of Family and Community
Services v Holmes
(2000) 98 FCR 461, Gyles J in considering an earlier
provision of the Act regarding parenting payments and determining between
relevantly provided at page 467:
... the Secretary, and
the Tribunals on appeal, have the invidious task of choosing between those
persons in circumstances where the
legislation does not provide a criterion or
This is a discretion constrained only by the purposes of the Act and the
provisions of it relating to Sole Parent Pensions:
O’Sullivan v
[1989] HCA 61
(1989) 168 CLR 210
at 216. The section does not oblige the
decision-maker to take any particular matter into account, and only prohibits
taking into
account those matters which are not relevant to the purposes of the
Act. Within those very broad limits, it is a matter for the exercise
discretion by the decision-maker which cannot be controlled by a court dealing
with errors of law:
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
at 39-42 per Mason J. Thus, it is that one decision-maker
might prefer the apparent objectivity of deciding on the basis of hours
custody, another night also take into account the qualitative factors and yet
another right also take into account the financial
circumstances of the parties.
If there is any relevant government policy guidance, then appropriate regard
should be paid to it.
It is, in circumstances such as the present, a matter for
decision by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, as it has the ultimate
the merits of the decision.
29 The status quo was that the second respondent was receiving the parenting
payment and had been doing so since 27 May, 2016. The
applicant observed that
because the second respondent had been receiving parenting payments since that
time there must have been
a written determination pursuant to
Social Security Act
. However, because the Tribunal did not identify that
written determination in its reasons, the applicant argues that without any
written determination about who was the principal carer at that point the
decision to pay a parenting payment to the second respondent
“legal”. He then argues that the Tribunal has realised that the
payment of the parenting payment to the second
respondent since May, 2016 was
wrong and so, rather than identify the “legal requirement of
“written decision””,
the Tribunal fixed on using the fact of
payment to the second respondent to justify its decision.
30 I cannot accept this argument. The requirement for there to be a written
determination specifying one of two adults as the principal
carer of a child is
only necessary if the first respondent is satisfied that, but for
provides that only one person over time can be the principal carer of a
particular child) two or more persons would be principal
carers of the same
child. When the second respondent commenced receiving parenting payment on 27
May, 2016 she was Alex’s
principal carer by reason of the fact that she
was providing Alex’s physical care for all of the time. A written
determination
was not required because Alex did not have two carers.
31 To the extent that the applicant might now seek to argue that by reason of
the order for equal shared parental responsibility made
by the Federal Circuit
Court of Australia he should be seen as a principal carer of Alex, for the
reasons I have given I reject that
argument. The order for equal shared
parental responsibility does not equate to equal care of Alex, especially when
the orders in
place provide for Alex to live with the second respondent and
spend time with the applicant.
32 Moreover, whether or not there was a written determination is beside the
point. The Tribunal’s reasons demonstrate that
it was more concerned with
maintaining the status quo, namely that the second respondent continued to
receive the parenting payment.
33 The applicant’s submissions in so far as they concern questions two
and three remonstrate with the reasoning process of the
Tribunal. It is not
suggested that the findings made by the Tribunal were not open to it on the
material before it. Rather, the
complaint seems to be that the Tribunal has
used that material in a way and characterised some of that evidence and those
in a way, with which the applicant does not agree. These arguments do
not reveal any question of law or error of law on the part
of the Tribunal.
34 The applicant’s written submissions with respect to question five
also reveal a concern with the findings made by the Tribunal
and the merits of
its decision generally, rather than the identification of any question of law or
error of law on the Tribunal’s
35 The amended notice of appeal filed on 9 October,
2020 does not demonstrate any error on the part of the Tribunal and must be
36 The first respondent seeks his costs of the application. Costs should
follow the event. There are no circumstances brought to
my attention that would
suggest that such an order is not appropriate. The amount sought by the first
respondent is $7,200 in accordance
with Schedule 1 to the
Federal Circuit
Court Rules 2001
(Cth). That amount is, in my view appropriate and
consistent with the schedule of costs contained within the Rules. I have taken
into account that this matter was heard at the same time as the
applicant’s other application in BRG558/2020. But the two
applications
dealt with different decisions of the first respondent and different decisions
of the Tribunal that required separate
consideration and separate
preparation.
37 There will be orders accordingly.
I certify that the preceding thirty-seven (37)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Jarrettt delivered
on 27 August, 2021.
Dated: 27 August 2021
RTF format (364 KB)
Signed PDF/A format