Rodney Wayne Bell v Watarra Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC and Another [2025] NNTTA 19 (14 July 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
Rodney Wayne Bell v Watarra Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC and
[2025] NNTTA 19
(14 July 2025)
Application No:
WF2024/0014
IN THE MATTER of the
Native Title Act 1993
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into a future act determination
application
Rodney Wayne Bell
(grantee party)
Watarra Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (WCD2022/002)
(native title party)
State of Western Australia
(Government party)
FUTURE ACT DETERMINATION THAT THE ACT MAY BE DONE
Member Glen Kelly
Catchwords:
Native title – future act – s 35 application for determination
– mining lease application – no agreement with
native title party
– s 39 criteria considered – no evidence from native title party
– common sense approach to
evidence – native title party providing
no evidence– economic or other significance of act – public interest
doing of act – s 39(4) consideration of agreed issues –
determination that the act may be done
Legislation:
Title Act 1993
(Cth) ss 29, 30A, 31, 36, 37, 38, 39, 109
Harrington-Smith on behalf of the Darlot Native Title Claim Group v
State of Western Australia (No 2)
Harrington-Smith v WA
Gomeroi People v Santos NSW Pty Ltd and Santos NSW (Narrabri Gas) Pty
Gomeroi v Santos
Kevin Alfred De Roma v Western Yalanji Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC and
[2022] NNTTA 40
De Roma v Western
Raymond Dann & Others on behalf of the Amangu People/Western
Australia/Warrego Energy Limited,
Dann v Warrego
Santos NSW Pty Ltd and Another v Gomeroi People and Another
[2025] NNTTA 12
Ward v Western Australia
[1996] FCA 1452
(1996) 69 FCR
Ward v Western Australia
Western Australia v Thomas and Others
(1996) 133 FLR 124
Western Australia v
Western Australia v Ward
(2000) 99 FCR 316
Western Australia/Roberta Vera Thomas & Ors (Waljen)/Austwhim
Resources Nl; Aurora Gold (WA) Ltd
(1996) 133 FLR 124
White Mining (NSW) Pty Ltd, Austral-Asia Coal Holdings Pty Ltd &
ICRA Ashton Pty Ltd/Scott Franks & Anor (Plains Clans of
the Wonnarua
People)/New South Wales
[2011] NNTTA 110
White Mining v
WMC Resources v Evans
(1999) 163 FLR 333
WMC Resources v Evans
Representative of the native title party:
Vanessa Malu Cecchi, Umanity Legal
Representative of the grantee party:
Rodney Bell
Representatives of the Government party:
Matthew Offer, State Solicitor’s Office; Simon Gamble, Department of
Mines, Petroleum and Energy
decision concerns whether
of Western Australia may grant the
M 37/1357 to Mr Rodney Wayne Bell (
grantee party
if so, whether the grant should be subject to conditions.
[2] On 7 April
2021, the State issued a notice pursuant to s 29 of the
Native Title
(Cth) that it intends to grant the lease to Mr Bell. As
set out in the notice, the lease is approximately 10 hectares in size and
located approximately 54 kilometres in a north-westerly direction from
Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC holds non-exclusive native title rights and
interests in trust for the whole of the lease area (see
Harrington-Smith v
) and is therefore a negotiation party under
Native Title
[4] Following
notice, the negotiating parties are required to conduct good faith
negotiations with a view to obtaining Watarra’s agreement
to the grant of
(s 31(1)(b)
Native Title Act
). The parties were not able to
reach agreement and, on 6 December 2024, Mr Bell applied to the National Native
for a determination under
Native Title
On 11 December 2024, the President of the Tribunal directed me to
constitute the Tribunal for the purposes of conducting an inquiry
application. Due to the need for further information however, the application
was not accepted by the Tribunal until 14
January 2025.
[5] I must not
make a determination in this matter if the native title party satisfies me that
the State or the relevant grantee party
did not negotiate in good faith
Native Title Act
). In this case, Watarra indicated at the preliminary
conference its intention to raise the issue of good faith negotiations. However,
as explained below, no submissions on this point were made.
[6] Having taken
into account the matters required by the
Native Title Act
determined that the future act may be done.
Determination
Native Title Act
provides that in determining this application, I
am required to make one of the following decisions:
a) the act must not be done;
b) the act may be done; or
c) the act may be done subject to conditions.
[8] Pursuant to
Native Title Act
, I must not make a determination if an
agreement of the kind mentioned in
has been made, which in this case
has not. The matters that I must take into account in making a determination are
those set out
Native Title Act
. The Tribunal’s
task involves a balancing of all of the mandatory considerations (see
at [382]) and the weight to be afforded to each matter will depend
on the evidence placed before the Tribunal on each occasion (see
Australia v Thomas
at page 166).
[9] Further to
this and as noted by Deputy President Sumner in
Dann v Warrego Energy
[12], the provisions impose an obligation on the Tribunal to give proper
consideration to the
criteria even when a native title party has not
participated in proceedings.
Tribunal proceedings
[10] Following
acceptance of the application, a preliminary conference was held on 30 January
2025. All parties agreed to the draft
directions circulated by the Tribunal in
advance of the conference, and these were subsequently issued to parties. The
provided its technical submissions on 12 February 2025.
[11] On 14 March
2025, being the date that Watarra were due to comply, the State on behalf of
Watarra advised the Tribunal that due
to a number of recent deaths in the
Watarra community and the legal representative for Watarra being on leave, the
required submissions
had not been provided. The State noted that the Watarra
representative would be returning the following week and requested time be
allowed for a formal extension request from Watarra. Given the circumstances, I
vacated directions and instructed Watarra to provide
an extension request or
status update by 26 March 2025.
[12] On 26 March
2025, the Watarra representative provided an update advising instructions
regarding timeframes for an extension request
had not been able to be obtained.
It was noted that Watarra’s ability to engage on this matter had been
hampered by sorry business
and a backlog of matters, and it was expected that
Watarra would need at least a month to comply. The Watarra representative
the Tribunal propose further directions and instructions would be
sought in the coming weeks.
[13] In response
to Watarra’s update, the State advised it would support a compliance date
of 5 May 2025 for Watarra or alternatively
for a further status update from
Watarra to be provided by 11 April 2025. No comments were received from Mr
[14] As conveyed
to parties by email on 31 March 2025, the timelines for determining matters such
as this are not open ended and the
Tribunal must aim to make a determination in
this matter by 14 July 2025 (per
Native Title Act
). For this
reason, directions were reinstated with Watarra compliance falling due on 17
April 2025.
[15] On 17 April
2025, the Tribunal was advised that Umanity Legal had taken carriage of this
matter on behalf of Watarra and requested
a further three weeks to provide
submissions, noting it was attending to this matter as a priority and seeking a
complete handover.
Again, given the circumstances, I amended directions for
Watarra compliance by three weeks, with compliance now due 8 May 2025.
[16] Even so, no
submissions have been provided by Watarra in this matter, either in regard to
good faith or on the
criteria. On 3 June 2025, the State provided
contentions and, on the same date, Mr Bell provided a brief email by way of
submissions.
In this email, Mr Bell outlined that he had been able to engage in
a conversation with a Director of Watarra and that as an outcome,
Umanity were
to provide an agreement draft which Mr Bell regarded as a ‘solution [that]
sound[s] really good for us
[17] On 9 July
2025, at my instruction, a Tribunal officer reached out to the parties to seek
advice on whether any agreement had
been reached. The State replied on 11 July
2025 that it was of the understanding that no agreement of the kind mentioned in
Native Title Act
Mr Bell also replied on 11
July 2025 and stated that he had not heard from Watarra’s legal
representative and that he was surprised
by this given there seemed to be some
enthusiasm about the result.
[18] The legal
representative of Watarra, Umanity Legal, replied on 14 July 2025 stating it had
provided the draft agreement on the
previous business day, being 11 July
Given the information
contained within communication from Mr Bell on this same issue, this would
appear to have occurred after the
submission made by Mr Bell.
[19] In this
same correspondence, the Watarra representative requested a 21-day deferral of
this determination to provide reasonable
time for consideration by Mr Bell. The
Watarra representative further submitted that delays in the provision of the
draft reflected
the complexity involved in developing terms that addressed all
parties’ interests and concerns and that deferral would align
‘fundamental objectives of the [
Native Title
established principles favouring negotiated outcomes, the legitimate interests
of all parties in achieving certainty and mutual
respect, and the broader public
interest in effective native title
resolution’.
[20] It would
seem more likely that the inquiry by the Tribunal on the status of an agreement
draft was the event that triggered its
delivery, which occurred more than five
weeks after it was initially committed to. At each point of this inquiry,
Watarra and its
representatives have been provided with time and space to
provide submissions and to further their interests within this process,
each of these points, there have been no submissions forthcoming from Watarra or
its representatives.
[21] It defies
credibility for the representative to now submit, on the very day the
determination is set to be made in accordance
Native Title Act
that an extension should be provided based on the fundamental objectives of the
Native Title Act
when it has failed at each point to support the Watarra
interest by providing actual submissions to the inquiry. Indeed, if as much
effort had been placed into developing submissions and an agreement draft in a
timely manner as the final extension request, the
result may have been
[22] This was
not the case however, and given the procedural history I formed the view that it
was unlikely that action would occur
in a timely manner. Additionally, I formed
the view that Watarra had been provided with sufficient opportunity to present
As a result, I declined the extension request, of which the parties
were notified on 14 July 2025.
Nature of the Future Act
act is for the grant of a mining lease, M 37/1357. This is a relatively small
mining lease in that it covers an area of approximately
10 ha and is not
associated with a broader project. This lease is a conversion from a prospecting
[24] The rights
of the holder of a mining lease are set out in s 85 of the
(WA) and include that, subject to the
and any conditions, the holder may work and mine the land for any materials,
take and remove any materials and dispose of them, take
and divert water subject
to relevant legislation and do all things necessary to carry out mining
operations in, on or under the land.
Additionally, the holder of the lease is
entitled to use, occupy and enjoy the land and owns all minerals lawfully mined
land under the mining lease.
[25] The small
mining proposal contained in the State’s technical submissions sets out a
broad scope of works. In this Mr Bell
states he intends to follow ore by
scraping in strips until it is exhausted or leads to a minable source. Mr Bell
also puts forward
that in his view, ninety percent of the area has a base of
greenstone at less than a metre of
which would appear to infer
the scrapings referred to will generally be around one metre in depth. Material
would then be processed
in which only water is used
to physically separate raw gold from the surrounding soil.
[26] Water is to
be sourced on site, presumably from a bore, and is to be used for the plant,
general camp use and dust suppression,
with water used in the wash plant
disposed of in a small on-site dam.
Water from this dam is also recycled and reused through the wash
Mr Bell provides that he
hopes to be able to process around 20 tonnes of material per day through the
wash plant.
[27] Overburden
and wash spoil are to be sorted into separate piles depending on the type of
material, with these materials subsequently
being used in rehabilitation
As the operation
involves only soil washing to physically separate gold, this same material and
any overburden is to be placed back
into the areas that have been scraped, and
then sown with previously collected seed for revegetation
[28] Ancillary
facilities include a small 6 x 4 m shed in addition to a small camp
Native Title Rights and other Land Interests
native title rights of the native title party form part of this consideration,
particularly in light of s 39(1)(a). In this
instance, the portion of the
Watarra native title determination overlapped by the lease is an area over which
non-exclusive native
title has been found to exist. The nature of these
non-exclusive rights and interests are set out in
Harrington-Smith v WA
[30] Additionally,
Native Title Act
requires me to take into account the nature and
extent of existing non-native title rights to the area and existing use of the
by persons other than the native title parties. The State’s technical
submissions show the lease fully overlaps a prospecting
licence held by Mr Bell
and the underlying tenure consists entirely of the Tarmoola pastoral lease.
Additionally, the area has previously
been subject to a number of now
surrendered or expired exploration and prospecting
to negotiate matters are subject to a requirement for the grantee and government
parties to negotiate in good faith with
a view to obtaining the agreement of the
native title party
Native Title Act
). If I am satisfied that one
of these parties did not negotiate in good faith, I must not make the
determination on the application
Native Title Act
). Principles
regarding the Tribunal’s consideration of good faith, which I adopt for
this determination, are set out in
De Roma v Western Yalanji
[32] Initially,
the representative for Watarra indicated that an assertion would be made that
the grantee party did not negotiate
in good faith. After a series of extensions
and a change of legal representation however, no submission was made by the
compliance date supporting this assertion. As a result, I have no
material before me from Watarra detailing its initial assertion
that the grantee
party did not negotiate in good faith. Additionally, no other party made
submissions on this topic.
[33] Given I
have no material before me, I am unable to come to a finding that the grantee
party did not negotiate in good faith as
initially asserted by Watarra. As a
result of this, I am able to proceed to make a determination on the
application.
CONSIDERATION OF
SECTION 39(1)
Section 39(1)(a)(i)
Effect on the
enjoyment of registered native title rights and interests:
s 39(1)(a)(i)
Effect on way of life, culture and traditions:
s 39(1)(a)(ii)
Effect on development of social, cultural and economic structures:
39(1)(a)(iii)
Effect on freedom of access to the land or waters and freedom to carry
out rites, ceremonies or other activities of cultural significance
in accordance
with traditions:
s 39(1)(a)(iv)
Effect on any area or site of particular significance:
s 39(1)(a)(v)
[34] No evidence
or contentions have been submitted by Watarra in regard to any of the
criteria. The Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence
) however must take a common sense approach. As clarified in
Ward v Western Australia
at [26], this common sense approach is not the
same as applying an onus of proof on a native title party in that if a party
not lead evidence on a particular issue, it does not necessarily mean they
must fail on this issue. Further to this however, if there
are facts that are
specifically within the knowledge of a party, failure to produce evidence may
lead to an unfavourable inference
on the part of the Tribunal. This is not
because of an evidential onus of proof, it is through the application of a
common sense
approach to
considering the effect of the act on these criteria, it is necessary to take
into account the nature of the act and the activities
associated with it so as
to undertake an assessment of any potential effect. This includes a
consideration of other land uses in
accordance with
[36] In doing
so, I understand the operation to be of a relatively small scale in terms of
landscape impact, covering a relatively
small area of land. Mr Bell’s
proposal involves minor infrastructure, with no chemical use, and rehabilitation
to occur using
the same material as that which was excavated, following the
physical separation of any gold through the wash plant.
[37] Watarra
have provided no evidence as to the enjoyment of native title, or indeed any
statement regarding the physical enjoyment
of native title in the area of the
The State contends that
with the absence of evidence, I should conclude there will not be any negative
effects on the enjoyment
of native title rights and interests, and even where
effects may exist, these are mitigated by the regulatory environment and the
small size of the lease.
contention regarding the small size of the tenement and the nature of the
activity is compelling, and the limited nature
of the activity and the small
size of the lease would suggest there will be minimal effect on the exercise of
native title in any
event. This view is not countered by evidence as to the
enjoyment of native title and the effect the act may have on this enjoyment
[39] As a result
of this, I conclude that any effect on the enjoyment of native title will be
[40] I consider
similarly in regard to
s 39(1)(a)(ii)
-(iv). Watarra have not provided evidence
in regard to any of these criteria, to which the State contends should lead me
to conclude
there will be no relevant
In regard to
39(1)(a)(ii)
, the Tribunal made remarks on the need for
evidence of the way of life, culture and traditions of the native title
White Mining v
, Deputy President Sosso provided more general remarks in that the
Tribunal could only sensibly evaluate the effect of the future
act if there is
evidence from which inferences can be drawn and scenarios
These remain sound
principles upon which to approach these matters.
[41] As a result
of there being no evidence before me in relation to
s 39(1)(a)(ii)
Watarra, I cannot sensibly assess what effect there may be and cannot reach a
conclusion there will be any effect in regards
to the subject matter of these
criteria made by the act. In any event and as remarked previously, the future
act itself and the activities
that are set to arise from it are limited. Even in
the absence of any evidence then, it seems reasonable to reach a conclusion that
any effect of the act in regard to these criteria will be minor.
[42] As with the
previous, there is no evidence before me in regard to places of particular
significance
(s 39(1)(a)(v))
, with the State’s technical submissions also
showing there are no registered or lodged sites within or near the
Given the material
before me, I conclude there are no areas or sites of particular significance
within or near the lease and as
a result, conclude that the future act will have
no effect on places or sites of particular significance.
(1)(b) – the interests, proposals, opinions or
wishes of Watarra in relation to the management, use or control of the land
affected by the future act.
correspondence during the course of the inquiry, Watarra expressed to the
grantee party that it would like to come to agreed
terms and there seemed to be
some move towards this late in proceedings. This did not occur however, and
neither did the Tribunal
receive submissions on the terms sought.
[44] As a result
of this and due to there being no contentions or evidence submitted by Watarra,
there is no information before me
in regard to the interests, proposals,
opinions or wishes of Watarra to take into account.
Section 39(1)(c)
– the economic or other significance of
the act to Australia, the State, the area in which the act occurs and the
or Torres Strait Islander people who live in the area.
, I am required to take into account the economic or other
significance of the licence to Australia, the State, the area in which
licence is located and to the Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islanders who
live in that area. This requires an evaluation
of the economic or other
significance of the licence, rather than consideration of the significance of
exploration or mining generally
Western Australia v Thomas
[46] No economic
information has been submitted in regard to this future act and neither has
there been on other types of significance
the project may have. Nonetheless a
high-level assessment can be made based on the nature of the project as
described in the Proposal
for Small Mining Operations contained with the State
technical submissions and as outlined previously.
[47] The project
described is small in nature and will operate over a small area of land. While
there is a possibility the grantee
party may make strong resource finds, these
are likely to be commensurate with the size and nature of the project. While
that on a personal level and by extension, in the local area due to
consumption, there may be a positive economic impact, on a national
level, this project could not be said to have great economic or other
significance.
[48] Given there
is no agreement in place with Watarra and given there is no likelihood of
employment or other such outcomes due to
the small size of the project, I cannot
conclude the project will be of economic or other significance to the Aboriginal
live in the area.
Section 39(1)(e)
– The public interest in the doing of
requires the Tribunal to consider whether there is any public interest
in the grant of the licence, with what may be construed as
the public interest
being examined in the Tribunals determination of
Santos v Gomeroi
[270]-[275].
[50] The State
contends that the public interest will be served by the grant of the lease given
economic benefits that may accrue
at a local level, even if there is no
significant benefit at a State or national
Aside from this, no
material has been put before me by Watarra or Mr Bell on the public interest or
otherwise, in the doing of the
[51] In light of
this, I agree with the State that public interest is served, if only in a minor
way, by the grant of the lease due
to local economic benefits.
Section 39(1)(f)
- Other relevant matters?
from those matters that are mandatory considerations in
, I am of the view there are no other relevant matters that require
consideration.
Section 39(4)
– Agreements to be given effect
are no agreements or issues relevant to the determination that the parties agree
on that the Tribunal is aware of. As such,
there are no agreements or matters of
agreement to be given consideration or effect.
the lack of submissions from Watarra, particularly in regard to s 39(1)(b), and
having regard to the limited nature of
this future act and the activities that
will arise from it, I have formed the view it would not be reasonable to impose
on this occasion.
lack of evidence from Watarra has allowed only limited examination of the s 39
criteria, particularly s 39(1)(a). Even without
this evidence however, it can be
seen that the future act is limited in size and scope, and will have limited
[56] Even so, I
have taken into account each of the mandatory criteria with equal weight and
considered the nature of the act and
the information before me in regard to each
of these criteria. Having taken this consideration and having regard to the
in each criteria, I have formed the view the act may be done without
conditions.
DETERMINATION
determine that the act may be done, namely, that mining lease M 37/1357 may be
granted to Mr Rodney Wayne Bell.
Grantee contentions
State agreement
submission.
Grantee agreement
Watarra agreement
submission.
State Book of Documents,
Ward v Western
WMC Resources v Evans
State contentions
[26], [29].
contentions [32], [35],
White Mining v
Book of Documents 33 - 41
State contentions [51].
RTF format (295 KB)
Signed PDF/A format