1400312 [2015] RRTA 309 (28 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 309
(28 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Michelle Grau
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant
a Protection visa.
Statement made on 28 May 2015 at 3:08pm
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
applicant, who claims to be a citizen of Sri Lanka, applied to the Department of
Immigration for a Protection (Class XA) visa
Migration Act
(the Act) [in] December 2012. [In] January 2014 the delegate of the
Minister for Immigration refused to grant the visa. The applicant
application for review of the decision on 17 December 2013 with this Tribunal,
which was constituted on 25 February 2015.
criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa must
meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That is,
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same
class. The relevant law is at attachment A.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 7 May 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The Tribunal hearing was conducted with
the assistance of an
interpreter in the Tamil (Sri Lankan) and English languages. The applicant was
represented in relation to the
review by a registered migration agent, who
attended the hearing.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
issues in this case are
the applicant credible?
Australia have protection obligations under the Refugee
Convention?
Australia have protection obligations under the complementary protection
applicant’s claims in his statement are summarised as
1995 soldiers shot at his family home and his father was shot [and] his brother
hit [and] both survived.
2006 he lived in [a] village in Trincomalee but due to the war they were forced
to move between refugee camps. His family are currently
living in [a] refugee
August 2008 he was asked about his [relative]’s whereabouts and later his
[relative] was abducted and they have not heard
February 2011 he was questioned on his way home by the army about a bomb blast
in an army camp [near a] college. They were slapped
and beaten.
authorities treated them that way as they believed Tamils and young Tamils were
2008 – 2012 Sinhalese have been throwing rocks at their home. In June 2011
the rocks broke windows in the house.
has been subjected to harassment, detention and interrogation by authorities and
if he returns he will be subject to even worse
April 2012 the father of a Tamil family they know was abducted shortly after he
returned from a refugee camp in India. He fears
he could be abducted as he is a
young Tamil and CID abducts young Tamils. He fears harm from authorities or
Karuna because of his
race, ethnicity and he only speaks Tamil and his perceived
support for the LTTE and his asylum application.
30 April 2015 submissions further claims were added:
family received multiple phone calls demanding money and threats following his
[relative]’s abduction. His claims are consistent
with the letter from [Mr
A]. His claims are not new but have never been the subject of inquiries.
fears abduction from criminals in the Trincomalee area as they target Tamils and
perceived LTTE supporters.
fears harm on the basis of his faith as a Hindu. His fears have evolved over
time through watching the news in Australia.
fears harm because of his unlawful departure.
letter was recently delivered to his family home demanding he present himself to
documents provided were a JP letter dated [in] February 2014 saying there was a
bomb blast in February 2011 and the applicant
was questioned; message note from
police that he was to come to the TID to give evidence [in] February
FINDINGS AND REASONS
the following reasons, the tribunal has concluded that the decision under review
should be affirmed.
Country of reference
tribunal finds the applicant is a national of Sri Lanka. He provided a copy of
his Sri Lankan identity documents and passport
to the department. He made no
claim to be a national of any other country. The tribunal accepts the
applicant’s claims should
be assessed against Sri Lanka for the purposes
of the Convention in s.36(2)(a) and as the receiving country for the purposes of
complementary protection obligations in s.36(2)(aa).
tribunal accepts that ‘applicants for refugee status face particular
problems of proof as an applicant may not be able to
support his or her
statements by documentary or other proof, and cases in which an applicant can
provide evidence of all his statements
will be the exception rather than the
rule.’ The tribunal also accepts that ‘if the applicant's account
appears credible,
he should, unless there are good reasons to the contrary, be
given the benefit of the doubt. (The United Nations High Commissioner
Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee
). However, the Handbook also states:
The benefit of the
doubt should, however, only be given when all available evidence has been
obtained and checked and when the examiner
is satisfied as to the applicant's
general credibility. The applicant's statements must be coherent and plausible,
and must not run
counter to generally known facts.
tribunal must bear in mind that if it makes an adverse finding in relation to a
material claim made by the applicant but is unable
to make that finding with
confidence it must proceed to assess the claim on the basis that it might
possibly be true (see
MIMA v Rajalingam
[1999] FCA 719
(1999) 93 FCR 220).
However, the
tribunal is not required to accept uncritically any or all of the allegations
made by an applicant. Further, the tribunal
is not required to have rebutting
evidence available to it before it can find that a particular factual assertion
by an applicant
has not been made out, see
Randhawa v MILGEA
[1994] FCA 1253
tribunal was mindful throughout the hearing to clarify the applicant’s
evidence to ensure accuracy of understanding. The
tribunal has had regard to
tribunal credibility guidelines in assessing the evidence. The tribunal took
into account nervousness
and was mindful of nuances in language when
communicating through an interpreter. The tribunal is satisfied the standard of
interpreting
at the hearing was competent and reasonable. The applicant also
sometimes tried to answer questions before they were interpreted,
apparent he understood and could communicate in English. However the tribunal
ensured everything was interpreted. (The
applicant’s job in Australia was
in [occupation]). The tribunal checked throughout the hearing that the applicant
the issues and in particular the s424AA and credit issue and he
responded that he did. The tribunal considers the applicant was able
communicate effectively, understood the tribunal proceedings and participated in
a meaningful way. The tribunal was also mindful
that the applicant was young
and only [age] years old.
Is the applicant credible?
tribunal accepts the applicant’s [relative] was abducted or disappeared in
2008; that the applicant has been questioned
and harassed at checkpoints during
the war; that in 1990 his family home was shot at and his father and brother
were injured as this
is consistent with the country information about what
happened during the war. However these incidents occurred many years ago and
the context of the civil conflict. Further, the war ended in 2009 and the
situation has improved significantly since
The tribunal
does not accept this past harm raises the applicant’s profile or means he
faces a real chance of harm in the
tribunal accepts that rocks were thrown at his home in 2008 and 2011 but does
not accept this amounted to serious or significant
tribunal does not accept the applicant was questioned in relation to a grenade
blast at a sentry post or army camp in February
2011. A search of relevant
sources found no reports of a blast in the army camp in [location] or elsewhere
in Trincomalee in February
The tribunal has
considered the JP letter (which is a general letter with limited details and
inconsistent with the applicant’s
account – bomb blast v. grenade
blast) and the submissions that even if not reported in English media it may
have occurred.
However, the tribunal considers that such an event would have
been reported given it was after the war and many other events are
reported in
international media and including Tamil net (which reports matters affecting
any event, even if the applicant was questioned by authorities as claimed, on
his evidence, he went home and as not further questioned
ever again. The
tribunal does not accept such questioning, if it took place (which is not
accepted) amounted to serious harm or that
authorities are interested in
Threatening calls
hearing the applicant said he received a threatening phone call the day after
his [relative] was abducted and told not to disclose
details of the persons who
took him. The applicant said he had seen the people and had a description of
them and their three wheeler
and he told his grandmother who reported it to the
police. The applicant also claimed that his mother received a call four or five
months later demanding 100,000 rupees. He added there was another call to his
mother threatening him.
neither of these threatening phone calls were mentioned in his 2012 statement of
claims. The agent submitted they were not
new claims but had not been enquired
[Mr A]. However
that letter was dated June 2013 and for reasons set out below
the tribunal places no weight on the letter. Further, the applicant
in his 2013
immigration interview also had not mentioned that his mother had received any
phone calls. The applicant said he had
mentioned them but did not why it had not
been recorded in his statement.
tribunal does not accept these explanations as the applicant’s statement
was read and interpreted back to him and he signed
the statement but there was
no mention of any phone threats. The tribunal does not accept he mentioned them
but they were not recorded.
If he had mentioned them then he had an opportunity
to put them in his 2012 written statement.
respect of concerns about his failure to mention the later phone call to the
mother, the applicant said it happened truthfully.
However, the tribunal
considers he had plenty of opportunity also to make those claims in subsequent
submission of July 2013 and
his department interview, but he did
Further. The
tribunal does not accept that his failure to mention these threats was due to
lack of enquiry. The applicant’s
claims were not complex or manifold.
Further, the threats to him were his only claim directed at him, which one would
expect would be mentioned, particularly given he mentioned harm
suffered by his [relative]. Further, given he mentioned minor issues
being thrown at the house but did not mention threats to him the tribunal
considers the applicant was adding to his account
as he went along and not
recalling true events. The tribunal finds his explanation that he did not
mention the last phone threat
as his mother did not know who made the call is
unpersuasive. If the applicant was threatened, regardless of by whom, the
does not accept it would be something one would reasonably decide not
to mention, particularly given the claims related to threats
of harm to the
tribunal has considered the letter from [Mr A] of June 2013 which refers to
threatening phone calls but the tribunal places no
weight on it as the letter is
inconsistent with applicant’s other claims (eg. says his [relative] was
abducted in 2006) and
is general in nature. Further, there is a prevalence of
fraudulent documents in Sri Lanka. Further, the letter is 2013 letter and
contemporaneous or support the applicant’s claims that he referred to
phone calls early in his application.
the tribunal does not accept that anyone who abducted the [relative] would wait
5 or 6 months to threaten and demand 100,000
rupees or that they would phone the
applicant’s mother, rather than the [relative]’s wife or family. The
applicant said
it might have been to scare him. The tribunal considers the
applicant was making up his answers in response to tribunal concerns
telling the truth.
tribunal accepts he may have provided information to his family about the
abduction and they reported it. However the tribunal
does not accept he received
threats from anyone or was of interest to anyone.
the fact that the applicant lived, studied and remained in the same area for 3.
5 years after his [relative] was abducted
and the claimed threats and was not
harmed or approached further reinforces the tribunal’s view the applicant
was not of interest
tribunal does not accept the applicant’s explanation that he did not leave
then because he was studying and young. If he
was in danger and feared harm it
does not make sense that he would continue to live and study in the same place.
In any event, on
his evidence nothing further happened to him after the claimed
threats, other than being questioned about the grenade blast in February
and rocks thrown at his home in 2011. The tribunal has not accepted the February
2011 incident occurred or that either of the
incidents amounted to serious harm.
Further the tribunal does not accept those incidents relate to the claimed
threats or [relative]’s
abduction. On his evidence the applicant said the
rock incidents were like little things Singhalese in the area did to Tamils from
time to time.
2015 TID/police summons
tribunal discussed at length the applicant’s claims about the letter from
the Sri Lanka police he received recently. The
police message note was dated
[in] February 2015 and required the applicant to come to the TID and given
evidence [later in] February
2015 at about 10am. However, the tribunal does not
accept the applicant has been summoned by TID to give evidence or that they are
looking for him. The applicant’s evidence about how his family got the
document and informed him about it was inconsistent
and lacked credibility. When
tribunal doubts were expressed his explanations were inconsistent and further
lacked credibility.
,he claimed the letter was sent to their old home address and a neighbour gave
it to his mother. The tribunal expressed
concerns about inconsistent evidence
that his family had moved address as at the outset he claimed they had been
living in the same
place for the last 5 years. The applicant said they were in
the house two years before he left SL but he did not know when they moved.
he added they moved 6 or 7 months ago but he did not know their address. The
tribunal considers the applicant had gave inconsistent
evidence about whether
his family had moved. The tribunal considers he was being evasive and making up
answers to coincide with trying
to explain the delay in receiving the police
letter and his inconsistent evidence about whether the family moved
applicant claimed his mother called the applicant and told him there was a
letter in his name but it was in Sinhalese. He told
them to get it read by
someone who could read Sinhalese. When the tribunal expressed doubt how they
knew it was for him if they did
not read Sinhalese, he said his name was in
English on the envelope and his [sibling] can read English. When the tribunal
doubt that it would be addressed to him in English and written in
Singhalese, the applicant did not know the reasons why. The tribunal
accept the police message, written in Sinhalese, would be addressed to him in
his name in English on the envelope. Given
many Tamils do not read Sinhalese or
English that it would be addressed to him in English is not credible.
while he said his family received the message two months ago, they did not tell
him until two or three weeks ago. That his
family would not tell him about it,
given they are in contact daily lacks credibility. The applicant initially
claimed when he called
him about the letter for him. When the tribunal expressed concern that his
family would hold onto a police document for two months and not tell him about
it, he said they did not know it was from the police
as it was in Sinhalese.
When the tribunal noted the document said Sri Lanka police in English and his
[sibling] read English, the
applicant said they did not open the letter but it
had his name on it. However, this was inconsistent with the applicant’s
earlier evidence that his parents had told him there was a letter in his name
and it was in Sinhalese. The only way they would have
known it was in Sinhalese
would have been to open it. The message headings of Sri Lanka police were
written in Sinhalese and English
and on the applicant’s evidence his
[sibling] reads English.
tribunal does not accept the agent submissions the applicant said they knew the
message was about the applicant because it had
his ID number. The tribunal
considers this was contrary to the applicant’s evidence that the family
knew it was for him because
his name was written on the envelope and is contrary
to his claim they did not open the letter (his ID no. is in the message).
tribunal has considered the applicant’s evidence and explanations about
the summons and document but finds the applicant
was not telling the truth and
making up his story as he went along.
the tribunal expressed doubt that his family would hold a letter with his name
on it for two months and not discuss or tell him
someone had kept it in the cupboard. The tribunal does not accept his
explanations and find they lack
credibility and that he was making up responses
to the tribunal concerns as he went along. The tribunal does not accept that his
family would receive correspondence with his name on it and put it in the
cupboard or not mention it for two months.
the tribunal had concerns with the document. For instance, that it would be
addressed to the applicant on the envelope but
the message say “You [are
to] inform to one [applicant name]” is inconsistent. Also that it would
require him to give
evidence at “about 10am” lacks credibility. The
tribunal does not accept that an official summons document would be that
imprecise and informal.
heard the applicant’s evidence about the document and given the prevalence
of fraudulent documents and problems with
it, the tribunal considers it is not
genuine and places no weight on the document.
tribunal does not accept that the police or TID are looking for him or summoned
him. That they would summon him in 2015 when he
had left SL in 2012 lacked
credibility. Further, according to the applicant’s claims he had no
dealings or issue with authorities
since February 2011; so that he would be
summoned in 2015 is not credible. Further, on the applicant’s evidence
nothing happened
after the message was delivered or since his failure to respond
to the message. Further, he claimed his family did not respond to
the message.
If this were a real summons or enquiry from the Terrorist investigation
division, the tribunal does not accept that
TID would not have followed up by
the summons. The authorities take suspicions of terrorism very seriously and
those suspected would
be treated very
that it was not further reinforces the tribunal view that the applicant was not
summoned or wanted by TID or anyone.
tribunal has considered the applicant’s documents provided to the
department and tribunal (from JP, bishop, former politician
documents). However it places no weight on them because they are inconsistent
with his evidence (eg.bomb blast v grenade
blast, [relative] abducted 2006 v
2008), are general in nature or otherwise problematic as set out above and there
is a prevalence
of fraudulent documents.
tribunal does not accept that he was questioned about a bomb blast in February
2011 in Trincomalee, or that he or his mother received
threatening phone calls
or that he was threatened. The tribunal does not accept TID or the police or
Karuna or anyone is looking
for him or wants to abduct him or that anyone has an
adverse interest in him. The tribunal does not accept he is perceived LTTE
he was never detained or sent to a rehabilitation camp and he also confirmed
neither he, nor his [relative] or [other relatives]
or family were involved with
LTTE, nor was he interested in reviving the conflict or
Does Australia have protection obligations under the
Refugee Convention?
Tribunal is mindful it must consider the applicant’s risk of harm not only
currently but into the reasonably foreseeable
future. In making its findings,
the Tribunal has considered PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Refugee Law
Guidelines as required by
Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the
applicant said he accepted the country information but it cannot guarantee or
prove he won’t be harmed upon return as he
is from the East, which was an
LTTE controlled area; he has been dislocated to many places as a refugee in IDP
camps; he lived in
his [relative]’s house who was abducted and threats
were made to his life; he left illegally and they will suspect he is LTTE
because of that and he is Tamil, Hindu, young and lived in an LTTE controlled
area. Further now having received the recent police
letter it is more serious
than when he left. Tamil MPs say not to return and there are photos of harm to
returnees. He provided a
2012 report of damage to Hindu temple and clash with
the cleric and said there were more in Tamil. He came for security reasons not
for economic reasons as there is a danger to his life.
agent submitted the religious claims were at paragraph 36 – 41 and are
more relevant than the [deleted] rhetoric.
Tribunal considers there is considerable interrelationship between the
applicant’s claims regarding his race, religion,
political opinion and
membership of particular social groups. In essence they are because of his Tamil
race, his imputed political
opinion of support for the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE) and opposition to the Sri Lanka government and particular
group because he is a Tamil, his origins from Trincomalee, his illegal
departure and extended presence in Australia as an asylum
seeker and his
membership of a particular social group, being Tamils , Tamils from the east or
formerly controlled LTTE areas or
failed Tamil asylum seekers, Hindu Tamils or
being displaced in IDP camps or having his [relative] abducted.
Tribunal considers irrespective of which Convention ground is considered, the
issues are substantially the same, both independently
and cumulatively.
Tribunal has considered the applicant’s claims and representative
submissions and country information. The Tribunal has
also considered DFAT
reports, UNHCR guidelines and UK upper tribunal decision country
information
it referred in the course of the hearing. The tribunal acknowledges the agent
submission the DFAT reports should be treated
with caution. However the tribunal
is satisfied that the DFAT reports are compiled with the greatest degree of
scrutiny of information,
independence and verification, with adequate research
and a great degree of accuracy. Further, the DFAT report refers to and
acknowledges
discrimination in practice and the UNHCR risk profiles and other
independent information and sources. The tribunal is also mindful
February 2015 DFAT report is considerably more recent and more detailed than
many of the reports on which the applicant
relies and gives the former more
tribunal accepts he is a young single Tamil male from the East and a Hindu. The
tribunal accepts that he will be a failed asylum
seeker having spent some time
in Australia. The tribunal accepts his [relative] was abducted or disappeared in
2008. The tribunal
accepts that his family reported the [relative] missing and
the applicant gave the details to his grandmother. The tribunal accepts
rocks have been thrown at his home in 2008 and 2011. The tribunal accepts that
he has been harassed questioned at checkpoints
during the war.
the tribunal has not accepted that threats were made to him or his mother or
that TID or the police or Karuna are looking
for him or want to abduct him, harm
him or extort money or that he is of interest to
these findings and the country information discussed below, the tribunal does
not accept that he faces a real chance of serious
harm on the basis of his race.
While the tribunal accepts independent evidence indicates, at least until the
end of the civil war
in 2009, that Sri Lankan citizens of Tamil ethnicity
suffered disproportionately at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities,
particularly
in North and East areas,
the security and humanitarian
situation in Sri Lanka has greatly improved since the end of the war.
. The tribunal also
accepts continuing detentions and torture against particular Tamils, who may be
suspected LTTE or criminals, even
since the end of the war.
tribunal accepts advice from the UNHCR that, whilst Tamil ethnicity has been a
risk factor in Sri Lanka in the past, particularly
for Tamils originating from
LTTE controlled areas, this is no longer the
According to
the UNHCR eligibility guidelines in 2010 and 2012, due to improved human rights
and security situation there was no
longer a need for group based protection
mechanisms or for the presumption of eligibility for Sri Lankans of Tamil
ethnicity. This
was also confirmed in the UK Upper tribunal country
information. The tribunal does not accept that mere Tamil ethnicity or being
Tamil male means the applicant faces a real chance of serious harm. that
tribunal accepts that persons with LTTE associations may be at risk of harm upon
UK upper tribunal decision suggests
the authorities approach is based on sophisticated intelligence as to activities
in Sri Lanka
and in the diaspora. The authorities know many Tamils travel abroad
as economic migrants and that everyone in LTTE controlled areas
had some contact
with the LTTE during the war. Rather in the post conflict environment,
authorities are interested in individuals
perceived to be a threat to the
integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they have perceived to have a
significant role in
relation to post conflict Tamil separatism or renewal of
hostilities. In the post conflict environment an individual’s past
will be relevant only to the extent that it is perceived by authorities as
indicating a present risk to the unitary state.
tribunal has considered the applicant’s circumstances and profile.
However, the tribunal does not accept that the applicant
may be suspected LTTE
or criminal or fall within any of the UNHCR risk profiles. While the
applicant’s [relative] was abducted
and this was reported and the
applicant suffered harassment during the war by way of questioning, the tribunal
does not accept this
raises the applicant’s risk profile or that it means
he will be perceived as LTTE or anti-government. The authorities know
Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone in LTTE
areas had some level of involvement with the LTTE
during the war or that many
were killed or disappeared or abducted and these have been reported. In post
conflict Sri Lanka an individual’s
past history will be relevant only to
the extent that it is perceived as indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri
Lanka state.
Further, the tribunal does not accept the applicant has reported the
[relative]’s abduction or that the family have agitated
or are politically
active in that regard. The fact that they have lived and worked in the same area
without harm for many years afterwards
reinforces the tribunal view that they
are not of interest to authorities or anyone. The tribunal does not accept the
applicant has
any antigovernment or pro LTTE or human rights activist profile.
The tribunal does not accept he is risk of abduction or extortion
by Karuna or
anyone else.
tribunal does not accept he is of adverse interest to authorities or will be in
the future. The tribunal does not accept that
he has any criminal charges,
warrants for his arrest, is suspected of being anti-government or involved in or
interested in Tamil
separatism or reviving the conflict or that he had any
connection to or association with LTTE.
on the country information the tribunal finds that Tamils do not face a real
chance of suffering serious harm solely on account
of their ethnicity from the
Sri Lankan authorities. Further, having considered the applicant’s
circumstances, the tribunal
does not accept that the applicant faces a real
chance of harm for reasons of his ethnicity.
tribunal has accepted rocks were thrown at his home in 2008 and 2011 but it does
not accept this amounted to serious harm. While
the tribunal accepts there is
some societal harassment of Tamils, the tribunal does not accept it amounts to
serious harm or that
the applicant faces a real chance of any serious harm in
that regard. Based on the evidence before it, the tribunal is not satisfied
there is a real chance of serious harm, including any denial of access to health
and education, or the ability to subsist, or
any denial or social or economic
rights, as a result of the applicant’s ethnicity (being a Tamil, a young
single male Tamil
from the East), or his Hindu religion, and / or political
association or any other reason, in the reasonably foreseeable future.
tribunal accepts he has had to move around in IDP camps the tribunal does not
accept this amounts to serious harm. Further,
his mother and siblings have moved
to Trincomalee to be closer to better education. The applicant confirmed at
hearing he completed
his A levels, worked for 4 months in [occupation] and since
then has continued to work in Australia in [occupation] earning $[amount]
week. He confirmed his [siblings are working and studying]. The tribunal finds
there is no reason the applicant could not return
to similar work in the future.
Further, the country information is that monitoring has eased since the end of
tribunal does not accept the applicant faces a real chance of suffering
mistreatment or discrimination that would constitute serious
harm for the
purposes of s91R(1)(b) having regard to the guidance provided by the examples as
set out in s.91R(2) upon return to
Sri Lanka. The tribunal has considered the
harm the applicant faces a real chance of suffering, including the harm feared
as a returnee
discussed below, cumulatively, and is not satisfied he faces a
real chance of suffering discrimination and mistreatment that would
serious harm.
Considering
the applicant’s circumstances and the independent information the tribunal
does not accept that the applicant faces
a real chance of persecution because of
Tamil race or ethnicity or membership of a particular social group as a Tamil
male or young
single male Tamils from the Trincomalee or the
Failed asylum seeker and LTTE
tribunal accepts there have been reports and some evidence, that Sri Lankan
Tamils returnees have reportedly suffered torture
and abuse from the
authorities. The Tribunal has carefully considered the submissions, country
information and these
the cases in relation to returnees overwhelmingly involve returnees who have had
some reasonably substantial form of connection
with the LTTE or who are
suspected of such linkages, or persons who have criminal connections on persons
with a political profile
or have engaged in anti-government protests while
overseas, all profiles substantially different to that of this applicant.
tribunal accepts the situation is different for returnees who have associations
with LTTE (real or perceived) or highly political
active or with outstanding
warrants but the tribunal does not accept that
asylum seekers are
imputed with anti-government or pro LTTE political opinion.
tribunal does not accept that Tamils (including those from areas formerly
controlled by the LTTE or young single Tamil Hindu males
from the East) are
harmed by Sri Lankan authorities on return to Sri Lanka because they left the
country illegally or unsuccessfully
sought asylum in a Western country or in
Australia. Two recent UK Home Office reports concluded that Tamils returning
after seeking
asylum overseas are not imputed with a pro-LTTE political opinion
and do not face persecution for that reason
DFAT notes there have been thousands of asylum seekers returned to Sri Lanka
since 2009 from Australia, US, Canada, UK and
European countries but relatively
few allegations of mistreatment, and these could not be verified.
the authorities’ main focus of the Sri Lankan authorities on return is
whether a person is suspected of being an ongoing
threat to the Sri Lankan
regime and authorities are aware that many Sri Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as
economic migrants.
The tribunal does not accept the applicant will be suspected of being an ongoing
threat to the regime or interested in reviving the
conflict as he has no
interest in it. The tribunal does not accept he will be imputed with or
perceived as LTTE connections or anti-
government sentiment or is of any adverse
interest to authorities and therefore not within a risk profile
discussed above, the tribunal has rejected the applicant’s claims of being
suspected LTTE or anti-government or TID or anyone
is looking for him or have
threatened him. The tribunal does not accept that his [relative] being abducted
in 2008 and it being reported
raises his profile either or means he is of
adverse interest. The tribunal has found he was not of interest before he left
does not accept TID are looking for him now . The tribunal has found he
fabricated his claims about threats and TID looking for him.
Even accepting his
being questioned in 2011 ( which it does not), the applicant was not of interest
before he left SL and it does
not accept he faces any upon return. The tribunal
does not accept he faces a real chance of abduction or extortion or serious
tribunal has considered the applicant’s circumstances but does not accept
that there is a real chance the applicant will
be suspected by the authorities
as someone with links or associations with the LTTE or anti-government on return
to Sri Lanka or
of any adverse interest to authorities.
tribunal is not satisfied the applicant has a real chance of being persecuted
should he be returned to Sri Lanka as a failed asylum
seeker from a western
country or Australia, or due to his extended presence in Australia (or illegal
departee as discussed below)
or for any imputed political opinion.
applicant claimed to have developed a fear of harm since seeing reports in
Australia about harm to Hindus. The applicant confirmed
at hearing that he had
not been harmed in the past because of his religion but there were reports of
harm to temples and clerics.
He confirmed he attended temple on Fridays. The
tribunal has had regard to the agent submissions at hearing and in writing.
the tribunal accepts there have been some attacks on Hindu temples and
clerics, the tribunal does not accept the applicant faces
a real chance of
serious harm in that regard. On his evidence, the applicant has practiced in the
past without harm and the country
information is that the situation has improved
and continued to
evidence before it the tribunal is not satisfied the applicant faces a real
chance of serious harm for religious reasons.
tribunal referred to the DFAT information about the treatment of returnees,
being questioned at the airport to establish identity,
charged under the
Immigrants and Emigrants Act (IEA) for illegal departure at the airport and
brought before a court to apply for
bail. In most cases returnees have been
granted bail on personal recognisance immediately by the magistrate, with the
requirement
for a family member to act as guarantor or sometimes they need to
wait until a family member comes to collect them. Eventually the
returnee will
need to return to Court to face the charges. Generally fines of 5,000 rupees are
imposed, although the Negombo magistrate
levies fines of around 50,000 to act as
a deterrent. Further, DFAT was informed in March 2014 that no returnee who was
just a passenger
on a people smuggling venture had been given a custodial
sentence for departing Sri Lanka
tribunal accepts that the applicant departed the country illegally as he came by
boat not through an authorised airport or a port
and without a passport. The
tribunal accepts on the basis of the country information that the applicant
would be subjected to such
processes on return, being charged, bailed and fined
up to 50,000 rupees.
tribunal has considered the applicant’s circumstances and does not accept
the fine amounts to serious harm because the tribunal
considers he would be able
to pay the fine because he has the support of his family and he has earned
income in SL and Australia
and there is no reason he could not earn income again
in SL. The tribunal finds he will be bailed and his family would assist with
surety if needed.
Questioning
at the airport is observed by Australian officials and they report no
mistreatment and it relates to confirming identity
and prior criminal records
and then release on bail. Based on the country information and the
applicant’s circumstances the
tribunal does not accept the applicant faces
a real chance of torture, interrogation, mistreatment on arrival in Sri Lanka or
the questioning process to establish identity and bail. The tribunal does
not accept he faces any harm as a result of authorities
checking with his home
area about his identity as the tribunal has found he is not of adverse interest
to authorities. The tribunal
does not accept he will be harshly treated, even as
a Tamil, asylum seeker or illegal departee as the country information is
are treated according to the standard procedures regardless of
Country information suggests the risk of torture or mistreatment is low and
considered with the applicant’s profile and circumstances
the tribunal
does not accept he faces a real chance of torture, interrogation or mistreatment
upon arrival or during questioning
or subsequent home visits or monitoring.
tribunal accepts based on country information if he arrives on the weekend (or
public holiday) he may be on remand until the Monday
when he can go before a
magistrate.
tribunal accepts there have been reports of a person held for two weeks on
remand. The tribunal finds the most the applicant
would be held is two weeks.
tribunal has had regard to the conditions in the prison and accepts that
conditions in Sri Lanka’s prisons are generally
poor. Conditions on remand
have been described in media
overcrowded, unsanitary. The tribunal has considered the available country
information in relation to the circumstances
of individuals who are held in
prison in Sri Lanka and notes the reports of torture and assault. However the
tribunal considers it
is prisoners who otherwise have a profile of being opposed
to the current Sri Lankan government or LTTE profile who are targeted
way. As discussed above the tribunal does not accept the applicant has such a
profile or of interest to authorities. The
tribunal does not accept he faces a
real chance of serious harm from other Sinhala prisoners given he will be in
remand and for a
short period. The tribunal does not accept the applicant faces
torture or extended pre-trial detention as submitted by the agent.
there have been some reports of questioning or reporting to local police when
returnees go home, the tribunal is not satisfied
that questioning or reporting
amounts to serious harm. UNHCR and IOM have regularly monitored returnees
and despite large
numbers of involuntary returnees to Sri Lanka and high level reporting, there is
very limited evidence of returnees
suffering serious harm and those reported to
have suffered harm had LTTE connections or criminal records. The tribunal has
not accepted
the applicant has any such profile or other particular profile or
circumstances that put him at risk. The tribunal does not accept
the applicant
faces a real chance of serious harm after arrival or upon subsequent return to
his home and in the foreseeable future.
on the applicant’s circumstances and country information, the tribunal
finds that the chance of torture or mistreatment
during questioning for the
applicant or if he was held on remand or upon subsequent return home is remote.
any event, the tribunal finds that the Sri Lanka departure laws are laws of
general application and therefore the enforcement of
the laws do not constitute
persecution. The tribunal does not accept that the I&EA provisions that deal
with breach of the departure
laws from Sri Lanka are discriminatory on their
face, or disclose discriminatory intent. The country information indicates the
Lankan departure laws are applied regardless of ethnicity to all persons who
are returnees and are not applied in a way that is discriminatory
or selectively
enforced against a particular group of those returnees.
if the applicant were held on remand for a short period of up to two weeks, the
tribunal does not accept the applicant will be
treated any differently, and
considers that questioning at the airport, the possibility of being in remand
for a short period and
charged, payment of the fine is not because of his race,
ethnicity or political opinion, but because he left Sri Lanka illegally.
tribunal is not satisfied that any problems the applicant may face as a result
of being charged, questioned, held on remand in
cramped and uncomfortable and
unsanitary conditions are aimed at the applicant for any Convention reason. The
tribunal considers
that these are factors which apply generally and not
specifically to the applicant. The tribunal is not satisfied, that questioning,
arrest, and the poor conditions in remand, or any subsequent monitoring or
questioning and the application of a penalty for illegal
departure amount to
systematic and discriminatory conduct as required by s.91R(1)(c).
tribunal finds the applicant does not face a well-founded fear of persecution
due to his illegal departure from Sri Lanka because:
the laws were not
persecution, due to lack of discriminatory intent or application. In any event,
the tribunal also finds his being
questioned, bailed and fined and any
subsequent monitoring or reporting would not amount to any harm so serious as to
assessing all the evidence and the applicant’s circumstances and being
mindful of both the process and the outcome of
the prosecution the applicant
will face from the Sri Lankan authorities arising from his illegal departure,
the tribunal is satisfied
that the applicant does not face a real chance of
serious harm due to his illegal departure, now or in the reasonably foreseeable
future if he returns to Sri Lanka.
tribunal has considered the claims of the applicant individually and
cumulatively. For the above reasons, the tribunal finds the
applicant faced no
serious harm in the past. Looking to the foreseeable future, the tribunal is not
satisfied the applicant faces
a real chance of serious harm upon return to Sri
Lanka due to his race, political opinion, religion, membership of a particular
group. The tribunal is not satisfied the applicant has a well-founded
fear of persecution for any Convention reason now, or in the
foreseeable future if he returns to Sri Lanka.
Does Australia
have protection obligations under the complementary protection
tribunal has also considered the application of s.36(2)(aa) to the
applicant’s circumstances. In making its findings, the
tribunal has
considered the Complementary Protection Guidelines as required by Ministerial
Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the
reasons set out above, the tribunal has not accepted the applicant’s
claims about threats to him or his mother or that he
was questioned in relation
to a grenade blast in 2011 or that TID or the police or Karuna are looking for
him. The tribunal does
not accept he is targeted or that faces any real risk of
significant harm in this regard in the future.
the tribunal does not accept he has faced any harm in the past in relation to
the practice of his religion and having regard
to the future and the country
information
tribunal does not accept he faces a real risk of any harm, let alone significant
harm in that regard in the future.
the tribunal has accepted he suffered harm in the past during the war, it does
not accept that he faces a real risk of similar
harm upon return to Sri Lanka in
2015 or beyond as the war ended in 2009 and the situation has
Further, the tribunal does not accept he faces a real risk of harm due to his
[relative]’s abduction or reporting of it,
or being a single young Tamil
male from the east or Trincomalee or because he sought asylum in Australia or
western country or had
an extended presence overseas. The tribunal does not
accept he faces a real risk of abduction or extortion.
it accepts that Tamils may face discrimination and harassment, such as in the
applicant’s case, rocks being thrown at
the house, the tribunal does not
accept that amounts to significant harm or will do so in the future.
regard to the applicant’s circumstances and the definition of
‘significant harm’ in s.36(2A) the tribunal
does not accept the
applicant faces a real risk of arbitrary deprivation of life, the death penalty,
torture, cruel or inhuman treatment
or punishment or degrading treatment or
punishment upon return to Sri Lanka(illegal departure discussed
Illegal departure
tribunal accepts that, as a returnee to Sri Lanka who departed illegally, the
applicant may face being questioned at the airport,
being arrested on charges of
leaving the country illegally, potentially being remanded for a relatively short
period pending a bail
hearing and be fined up to 50,000 rupees for his illegal
departure. He may also receive contact visits from the authorities on return
considering the situation for the applicant upon his return, having regard to
the fact that the applicant is likely to be questioned
at the airport, possibly
detained for a brief period in a remand centre and fined, the tribunal has had
regard to the definition
of ‘significant harm’ in s.36(2A). It
requires that there is a real risk that the applicant will suffer arbitrary
deprivation
of life, the death penalty, torture, cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment or degrading treatment or punishment.
based on the country information referred to above that returnees are not
mistreated, the tribunal does not accept questioning
at the airport, being
charged and bailed or payment of fine, or held on remand for a short period
constitutes significant harm. The
tribunal does not accept that the applicant
will suffer arbitrary deprivation of life, the death penalty, torture, cruel or
treatment or punishment or degrading treatment or punishment in those
circumstances. Further, the tribunal has found the applicant
would be able to
pay the fine, even the maximum amount of 50,000, and it would not constitute
significant harm.
tribunal has also accepted that the applicant may be remanded in conditions
which are cramped, uncomfortable and unsanitary, but
the tribunal does not
accept that spending up to a fortnight in such conditions amounts to
‘significant harm’ as defined
subsection 36(2A)
or that he faces a real risk of suffering significant harm.
and in any event, the tribunal does not accept that such treatment is
intentional as is required by the law in Australia.
The tribunal does not
accept on the evidence before it that pain or suffering caused by the
overcrowding and other problems in
prisons in Sri Lanka is ‘intentionally
inflicted’ on the applicant as required by the definition of ‘cruel
treatment or punishment’ in
subsection 5(1)
. Neither does the tribunal accept that overcrowding and other problems are
‘intended to cause’ extreme humiliation as
required by the
definition of ‘degrading treatment or punishment’.
the evidence before it, the tribunal is not satisfied that during any
questioning at the airport, bail conditions, possible detention
prison conditions or subsequent contact or monitoring visit that there is a real
risk that the applicant will suffer arbitrary
deprivation of life, the death
penalty, torture, cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment or degrading
treatment or punishment. The
tribunal finds that there is no real risk that the
applicant will suffer significant harm.
tribunal does not accept there are substantial grounds for believing that, as a
necessary and foreseeable consequence of the applicant
being removed from
Australia to Sri Lanka, there is a real risk that he would suffer significant
harm in terms of
s.36(2)(aa)
of the Act. The tribunal is not satisfied,
specifically, that there is a real risk that the applicant would be arbitrarily
of his life, that the death penalty will be carried out on him, that he
will be subjected to torture, that he will be subject to
cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment or to degrading treatment or punishment.
considered these circumstances, singularly and cumulatively, the tribunal is not
satisfied there are substantial grounds to
believe that, as a necessary and
foreseeable consequence of the applicant being removed from Australia to Sri
Lanka, there would
be a real risk that he would suffer harm which would amount
to significant harm.
CONCLUSIONS
the reasons given above, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicant is a
person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the
Refugees Convention. Therefore the applicant does not satisfy the criterion set
s.36(2)(a).
concluded that the applicant does not meet the refugee criterion in
the Tribunal has considered the alternative criterion in
s.36(2)(aa).
Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicant is a person in respect of whom
Australia has protection obligations under
s.36(2)(aa).
is no suggestion that the applicant satisfies
on the basis of being a
member of the same family unit as a person who satisfies
or (aa) and
who holds a protection visa. Accordingly, the applicant does not satisfy the
criterion in
Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant a Protection visa.
Michelle Grau
RELEVANT LAW – ATTACHMENT A
The criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and
Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for
the visa must meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or
(c). That is,
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has
protection obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same
Section 36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the
applicant for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the
Minister is satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951
Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol
relating to the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the
Convention).
Australia is a party to the Refugees Convention and generally speaking, has
protection obligations in respect of people who are refugees
as defined in
Article 1 of the Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a refugee as any
person who:
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group
or political opinion, is
outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is
unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that country; or who, not having
a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence,
unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to
If a person is found not to meet the refugee
criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may nevertheless meet the criteria for the
a protection visa if he or she is a non-citizen in Australia in respect
of whom the Minister is satisfied Australia has protection
obligations because
the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and
foreseeable consequence of the applicant
being removed from Australia to a
receiving country, there is a real risk that he or she will suffer significant
harm: s.36(2)(aa)
(‘the complementary protection criterion’).
In accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act,
the Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs
and Trade expressly for protection status determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
DFAT country
report 2.33 2.37 and
using Cisnet, Refworld, Factiva databases, google, Sri Lanka websites, NGO
Thematic report 2.7 –
Country reports – Sri Lanka February 2015 and DFAT Thematic country
report October 2014 and UNHCR
Eligibility Guidelines
Sri Lanka, 2012.
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) United Kingdom Country
Guidance Decision in
GJ v Secretary of State for the Home Department
(post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka
[2013] UKUT 319
report 2.37 2.38,4.21, 4.17 DFAT thematic report 4.7, US State Department
report, Human Rights Watch 2014, World Report 2014
– Sri Lanka, 21 January
2013. (Harrison F.2013, ‘Tamils still being raped and tortured in Sri
Lanka, British Broadcasting
Corporation, 9
country report paragraph 2.37, US State Department report, Upper tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) United Kingdom Country
Guidance Decision in
GJ v Secretary of State for the Home Department (post-civil war: returnees)
[2013] UKUT 319
‘UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the Protection Needs of Asylum
Seekers from Sri Lanka’, UNHCR, 21 December
2012 US State Department
report, Upper tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) United Kingdom Country
Guidance Decision in
GJ v Secretary of State for the Home Department
(post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka
[2013] UKUT 319
tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) United Kingdom Country Guidance
Decision in
GJ v Secretary of State for the Home Department (post-civil war:
returnees) Sri Lanka
[2013] UKUT 319
Tribunal and UK Home office guidance note July 2013 p
country report
Refworld, Asylum Research Consultancy (ARC),
http://www.refworld.org/docid/542e89fc4.html
UK Home Office Country Information and Guidance, Sri Lanka:Tamil Separatism, 28
August 2014; Operational Guidance Note OGN v14,July
country report 4.20 –
UKHomeOffice2012,
SriLanka:OperationalGuidanceNote
http://ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/documents/policyandlaw/countryspecificasylumpolicyogns/ognsrilankaogn?view+Binary
http://srilankabrief.org/2015/05/religious-freedom-us-commends-sri-lanka-new-govt/
http://www.uscirf.gov/sites/default/files/Sri%20Lanka%202015.pdf
Ibid paragraphs 5.22-
paragraph 5.26
DFAT country report paragraph
denied, a penalty waits at home,’ Ben Doherty,
Sydney Morning
8 December 2012,
http://www.smh.com.au/world/asylum-denied-a-penalty-waits-at-home-20121207-2b0qi.html
UK Home Officer 2012 Country Policy Bulletin p 8-9 and IOM
country report 3.13 – 3.19,
http://srilankabrief.org/2015/05/religious-freedom-us-commends-sri-lanka-new-govt/
http://www.uscirf.gov/sites/default/files/Sri%20Lanka%202015.pdf
DFAT Country report 2.37
RTF format (234 KB)
Signed PDF/A format