Dever & Serano [2025] FedCFamC1A 202 (7 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Dever & Serano
[2025] FedCFamC1A 202
Appeal from:
Dever & Serano
[2025] FedCFamC1F 255
Appeal number:
NAA 221 of 2025
File number:
BRC 9850 of 2019
Judgment of:
MCCLELLAND DCJ, JARRETT AND MCNAB
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – PARENTING
– Where final orders were made for a change in the primary residence of
the child from the
appellant to the respondent– Where there was
significant delay in the delivery of judgment – Where the child had lived
with the appellant and had no contact with the respondent at the time of
judgment delivery – Where the primary judge proceeded
on the assumption
that the child’s circumstances had not materially changed since the trial
– Where the primary judge
did not have the benefit of any updated evidence
or input of the child – Where the appellant asserted that the delay
in orders being made on the basis of materially outdated evidence and
circumstances – Where the child’s age was relevant
to the weight
attributed to the child’s views at trial – Where the Full Court held
that the child had a right to have
their views considered in light of their
increased maturity and level of understanding – Where costs certificates
were granted
to both parties – Where the appeal was upheld
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law (Child Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
Evidence Act 1977
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
Cases cited:
Artan & Shaheen
[2023] FedCFamC1A
Australian Coal and Shale Employees’ Federation v The
Commonwealth
(1953) 94 CLR 621
[1953] HCA 25
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[2006] NSWSC 826
Bielen & Kozma
(2022) 66 Fam LR 59
[2022] FedCFamC1A 221
CF v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2004] 2 FLR
Concrete Pty Ltd v Parramatta Design
& Developments Pty
(2006) 229 CLR 577
[2006] HCA 55
Cramond & Cramond
[2013] FamCA 368
Director-General, Department of Community Services; Re Thomas
41 Fam LR 220
[2009] NSWSC 217
Dworak & Watts
[2024] FedCFamC1F 13
Expectation Pty Ltd v PRD Reality Pty Ltd
(2004) 140 FCR 17
Fowles & Fowles
[2024] FedCFamC1A 115
G (BJ) v G (DL)
(2010) 324 DLR (4th) 367 (Yukon
Supreme Court)
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
In the Marriage of A
(1998) FLC 92-800
[1998] FamCA 25
Keane & Keane
(2021) 62 Fam LR 190
[2021] FamCAFC 1
(1988) 166 CLR 69
[1988] HCA 68
Manifold & Alderton
(2021) FLC 94-015
[2021] FamCAFC 61
Mardeen & Laith
[2025] FedCFamC1A 141
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2021] HCA 17
NAIS v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
(2005) 228 CLR 470
[2005] HCA 77
Parran v Mayfield
[2013] FamCA 992
Pierce & Pierce
(No 2) (2025) FLC 94-271;
[2025] FedCFamC1A
RCB v The Honourable Justice Forrest
(2012) 247 CLR 304
Re C (‘Parental Alienation’; Instruction of Expert)
[2023] EWHC 345 (Fam)
Royal Guardian Mortgage Management Pty Ltd v Nguyen
(2016) 332 ALR
[2016] NSWCA 88
Simmons & Simmons
(2023) FLC 94–137;
[2023] FedCFamC1A
Stephens & Stephens
(2009) FLC 93-425
[2009] FamCAFC 240
Warren v Coombes
(1979) 142 CLR 531
[1979] HCA 9
Warwickshire County Council v The Mother
[2023] EWHC 399 (Fam)
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Thyne and McCartney
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Drysdale
Solicitor for the Respondent:
McInnes Wilson Lawyers
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Ms Hallewell
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Smithson Lawyers
BRC 9850 of 2019
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
MCCLELLAND DCJ, JARRETT AND MCNAB JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal is allowed.
orders made 17 April 2025 are set aside.
matter is remitted for rehearing to a judge of the Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 1) other than the primary
appellant is granted a costs certificate pursuant to
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
(Cth), being a certificate that, in
the opinion of the Court, it would be appropriate for the Attorney-General to
authorise a payment
under that Act to the appellant in respect of the costs
incurred by her in the appeal and the rehearing.
respondent is granted a costs certificate pursuant to
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
(Cth), being a certificate that, in the
opinion of the Court, it would be appropriate for the Attorney-General to
authorise a payment
under that Act to the respondent in respect of the costs
incurred by him in relation to the appeal and the rehearing.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym,
Serano & Dever,
which has been approved pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
MCLELLAND DCJ AND MCNAB J
INTRODUCTION
appeal relates to parenting orders made by a judge of the Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 1) following
a final hearing conducted in
September 2023. Judgment was reserved for approximately 17 months, with orders
being made in April 2025.
Those orders provided for,
in the child’s primary residence and the allocation of sole parental
responsibility to the respondent father. This
was in circumstances where the
child (referred to as “X”), who was 10 years of age at trial, had
reached nearly 12 years
of age by the time orders were made; having resided with
the appellant mother since the parties’ separation in 2019 and having
no contact with the respondent father since the beginning of 2021.
delay in the delivery of judgment was central to this appeal. It is contended by
the mother that the delay resulted in orders
being made on the basis of evidence
and circumstances which had become materially outdated. She contends that the
delay, and its
associated consequences, gave rise to error in respect of
procedural fairness and infected the adequacy of judicial reasoning and
primary judge’s assessment of the child’s best interests.
trial, the father had sought orders for sole parental responsibility and for a
change in the child’s residence. The mother
opposed such orders; citing
concerns of family violence and advocating for the child’s continued
residence with her and therapeutic
final orders also imposed a 12-week moratorium in respect of the mother, during
which time the mother was to have no contact with
the child, followed by
strictly supervised visits. The orders also provided for the matter to be
re-listed before the primary judge,
after a period of approximately four months,
to determine the child’s future living arrangements.
have concluded that the delay in this case has resulted in procedural unfairness
and undermined the reliability of the primary
judge’s decision. In
particular, the delay has resulted in judgment being based on stale evidence
which failed to account for
the child’s evolving circumstances, including
her age, views, and attachment to her mother.
agree with Jarrett J that the appeal should be allowed. As such, the orders of
17 April 2025 are to be set aside, and the matter
remitted for hearing before a
judge other than the primary judge.
contextual history of the primary proceedings was extensively set out at [24]
– [48] of the primary judge’s reasons.
It records that the parties
commenced a relationship in mid-2007 and were married in mid-2011. The only
child of the relationship
was born in mid-2013. By early 2018, the parties had
separated on a final basis following a conflictual incident of family violence
witnessed by the child, then aged four, during which the mother alleges the
father attempted to punch her but struck a wall instead.
early 2019, the mother underwent surgery and was confined to a wheelchair for
approximately 12 months. Shortly thereafter, she
relocated from Town Y to the
Region B. On 3 December 2019, final parenting orders were made by consent,
providing for equal shared
parental responsibility and for the child to spend
regular time with both parents. However, shortly thereafter, an incident
at changeover which was witnessed by the child. Subsequently, the child
is reported to have expressed reluctance to spend time with
the father. Tensions
escalated in early 2020, with the mother alleging the father withheld the child
over the Christmas period. Mutual
Protection Orders were made in late 2020 and,
during this period, a psychologist, Ms E, was engaged to provide family
2020, the child changed schools due to alleged bullying. Later that year, the
parenting arrangements were varied by agreement (but
not by court order),
resulting in a reduction of the father's time with the child. In early 2021, the
child underwent a medical procedure.
Around this period, all contact between the
child and the father ceased following allegations made by the child, including
an allegation
of choking. In mid-2021, the mother sought a mental health care
plan for the child by Dr K. Subsequently, in late 2021, psychiatrist
diagnosed the child with Generalised Anxiety Disorder and Separation Anxiety
mid-2021, the mother reported that the child was engaging in self-harming
behaviour. In late 2021, the father filed the current
parenting application,
seeking orders for to the child live with him. In early 2022, the mother
unilaterally relocated with the child
to a town approximately 1000 kilometres
away, without informing the father and contrary to existing orders. In mid-2022,
left multiple voicemails for the father, making further allegations,
and shortly after contacted police who arranged an interview
with the child in
accordance with
Evidence Act 1977
(QLD) (“the
interview”). The interview was conducted some weeks later and entered into
evidence at the final hearing.
mid-2022, the mother’s solicitors lodged a complaint with the
father’s employer regarding possession of alleged child
exploitation
material. No evidence was found in relation to this allegation, with police
advising the father in late 2022 that no
charges would be pursued against him.
Family report interviews were conducted by Ms J in mid-2022 and early 2023, with
published on in early-2023. Around this time, Dr M discharged the
child from his care.
May 2023, the father pressed for a final hearing, which was conducted on
4–6 and 29 September 2023. Written submissions were
filed by the
Independent Children’s Lawyer, the mother, and the father on 10 October,
27 October, and 3 November 2023, respectively.
Judgment was delivered by the
primary judge on 17 April 2025 with orders being made for the child to commence
living with the father
from 1 May 2025 and commence supervised visits with the
mother on the weekend of 27–28 July 2025. A case management hearing
the primary judge was also scheduled for 10 September 2025.
the primary proceedings, the mother alleged physical and sexual abuse by the
father, which the father denied. Evidence from police
records and other
authorities did not lend to support these allegations, and no charges were laid
against the father. The Court found
that the mother held “deeply embedded
but unfounded” beliefs about the father posing risk to the child and that
her actions,
including her unilateral relocation and involvement of the child in
allegations against the father, were emotionally harmful to the
child (at [88]).
Ultimately, the father was not found to be an unacceptable risk to the child (at
[87]). The Court determined that
the child’s best interests required a
change of residence to the father, with a carefully managed transition and
therapeutic
support. This was notwithstanding the child’s strong
resistance and anxiety.
RELEVANT FACTUAL FINDINGS
mother alleged that the father had physically and sexually abused the child,
including claims that he choked the child, took inappropriate
photographs, and
permitted another male to abuse the child (at [83]). However, the primary judge
found that the child’s allegations,
particularly those made during the
police interview, lacked credibility and were not a truthful account. The
primary judge characterised the child’s account as
“performance” that was inconsistent in detail and unsupported by
contemporaneous evidence, such as the absence of medical
attention for the
alleged injuries (at [83]). As noted above, police investigation, no charges
were laid. Expert witnesses, including
the Family Report writer, expressed
concerns about the reliability of the child’s statements and highlighted
the risk of “systems
abuse” arising from repeated interviews (at
mother was found to hold deeply entrenched beliefs that the father posed a risk
to the child. She relocated with the child without
notice, involved the child in
making allegations, and maintained a rigid belief in the child’s
disclosures (at [51]). The primary
judge determined that the mother’s
conduct—including her fixed beliefs, unilateral relocation, and
involvement of the
child in the dispute—posed a risk of psychological and
emotional harm (at [89]) and were “entirely inappropriate”
[54]). Her actions were seen to undermine the child’s relationship with
the father and to contribute to separation anxiety.
primary judge found that the father did not present an unacceptable risk to the
child. Although his parenting style was described
as loud or angry at times,
there was no evidence of physical or sexual abuse (at [87]). The primary judge
accepted that the father’s
reactions may have frightened the child on
occasion, but concluded that these did not amount to abuse (at [85]). The
responses to incidents were found to be “exaggerated”
and to have contributed to the child’s anxiety (Family Report
dated early
2023, paragraph 149).
evidence was provided by Ms E, who had delivered long-term psychological therapy
to the child. Ms E observed persistent anxiety
and refusal by the child to see
the father, but found no evidence of coaching by the mother. Rather, she noted
that both the mother
and child exhibited heightened anxieties which likely
reinforced one another (at [64]). Dr M, psychiatrist, initially diagnosed the
child with anxiety disorders and later with post-traumatic stress disorder
(“PTSD”), though his assessment relied heavily
on the mother’s
reports (at [160]). He stated that if the mother were found to be the source of
risk, the child should be removed
from that “stressor” (at [163]).
Ms J, Family Report writer, found that the mother tended to exaggerate incidents
that the child’s anxiety, while genuine, was significantly influenced
by the mother’s attitudes (at [77]). Ms J recommended
a carefully managed
transition should a change of residence be ordered.
child consistently expressed strong views against seeing the father and wished
to remain with the mother. However, the primary
judge accepted Ms J’s
assessment that these views were shaped by the mother’s attitudes and
could not be given determinative
weight (Family Report dated early 2023,
paragraph 150) (at [79]).
primary judge was critical of the mother’s inability to support the
child’s relationship with the father and her lack
of insight into the harm
caused by her conduct (at [127]). While acknowledging that the transition would
be difficult for the child,
the primary judge found that remaining in the
mother’s care would likely result in the permanent loss of the
relationship with the father (at [2]).
primary judge concluded that the child’s best interests required a change
of residence to the father. This was notwithstanding
the anticipated
difficulties and the child’s resistance (at [99]-[101]). As the resident
parent and noting that the parents
“cannot communicate or consult about
major long- term issues”, sole parental responsibility was also granted to
(at [103]). In effect, the child was to reside with the father with
could commence some twelve weeks later. In making these orders, the primary
judge acknowledged the importance of therapeutic
support during the transition
and scheduled a case management hearing to monitor progress.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
Amended Notice of Appeal filed on 3 July 2025 the mother advances the following
grounds of appeal:
delay between the conclusion of the evidence in the final hearing on 29
September 2023 and the delivery of judgment on 17 April
2025 (the delay) can be
said to have contributed to the following errors on the part of the primary
identified that the child would benefit from a meaningful relationship with both
parents at [82], the primary judge erred in
failing to make orders which would
ensure a continuation of the meaningful relationship the child was found to have
with the mother.
primary judge erred by failing to adequately consider the matters required by
section 60CC(3)(j) and
section 60CC(3)(k)
Family Law Act 1975
failing to make findings as to disputed issues of fact critical matters
concerning family violence where:
obligation to consider those matters required more than the references to
evidence on those matters made at [26], [30] and [96]
of the Reasons;
assessment of the allegations of family violence was relevant to determining the
extent to which the child’s expressed views
and resistance to spending
time with the father were based on the previous exposure of the child to
incidents of family violence.
primary judge’s reasons (the Reasons) are inadequate, in that:
Reasons fail to adequately consider or determine the extent to which the
child’s expressed views and resistance to spending
time with the father
were based on the child’s lived experience(s) of the father, as opposed to
the mother’s influence;
Reasons fail to demonstrate an engagement with and consideration of the
mother’s case, namely that the child “
living with the father is
the worse option and... that risk arises from orders being made
finding at [87] that “
the father is not an unacceptable risk to X in
” does not deal with the question as to whether the risk of
harm to the child in forcefully transitioning to the father’s
against her wishes, was unacceptable.
it were to be inferred that the primary judge’s finding at [87] that
the father is not an unacceptable risk to X in any way
includes or reflects a finding that the risks to the child of transitioning to
the father’s care were not unacceptable,
such a finding was not open on
the evidence at trial.
primary judge failed to afford the parties procedural fairness as:
primary judge ought to have invited the parties to reopen the evidence or obtain
updated expert evidence, prior to judgment
b. the primary judge’s ability to assess:
mother’s capacity to support the child spending time with the father;
likely effect of any changes to the child’s circumstances, including the
likely effect on the child of any separation from
the mother; and
risks associated with the child transitioning to the father’s
was impaired, as a result of the delay;
it were to be inferred that the primary judge’s finding at [87] that
the father is not an unacceptable risk to X in any way
includes or reflects a finding that the risks to the child of transitioning to
the father’s care were not presently
unacceptable, such a finding was no
longer open (even if said to have been supported by evidence at trial), as a
result of the delay
and the outdated nature of that evidence including as
child’s views, maturity and mental health;
child’s physical capacity to resist spending time with the
7. His Honour erred in finding at [89] that the mother posed a
“risk” to the child without then considering what orders
may be made
to ameliorate or mitigate that risk, or alternatively, by providing inadequate
reasons for concluding (if it be inferred
that he did) that this risk may only
be ameliorated by the imposition of supervision.
RELEVANT LEGAL PRINCIPLES
making of a parenting order involves the exercise of a broad judicial
discretion. In that respect,
Family Law Act 1975
(“the Act”) provides that the Court may “make such parenting
order as it thinks proper.”
appellate court will not interfere with the exercise of that broad discretion
merely because it would have reached a different
conclusion or because the
appellant can point to some evidence supporting a different view (
& Pierce (No 2)
(2025) FLC 94-271 at [22] and [41] (Aldridge, Campton
and Christie JJ) (“
Pierce & Pierce
an appellant to succeed in an appeal from the exercise of such discretion, the
appeal must fall within one of the recognised categories
of appellate
intervention as identified by the High Court in
House v The King
where the plurality stated at 505:
It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. If
the judge acts upon a wrong principle, if he allows
extraneous or irrelevant
matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does not take
into account some material
consideration, then his determination should be
reviewed and the appellate court can exercise its own discretion in substitution
of his if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how the primary
judge has reached the result embodied in his order,
but, if upon the facts it is
unreasonably or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that in some way
there has been a failure
properly to exercise the discretion which the law
reposes in the court of first instance. In such a case, although the nature of
the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on
the ground that a substantial wrong has in fact
reasons that we will subsequently explain, the delay in this case resulted in
procedural unfairness and precluded the primary
judge from properly considering
those matters set out in
of the Act which provide guidance in the
determination of what orders are in the best interests of the child.
that respect, there are certain matters which
be taken into account
in deciding what parenting orders should be made. Most significantly,
the Act, by reference to
, provides that “in deciding whether to
make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard
interests of the child as the paramount consideration.”
the time of the Final Hearing in September 2023,
of the Act relevantly
How a court determines what is in a child’s best interests
Determining child’s best interests
(1) Subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child’s best
interests, the court must consider the matters set
out in subsections (2) and
Section 68P
also limits the effect of this section on a court making
decisions under that section about limiting, or not providing, an explanation
a child of an order or injunction that is inconsistent with a family violence
Primary considerations
(2) The primary considerations are:
(a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of
the child’s parents; and
(b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from
being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or
family violence.
Note: Making these considerations the primary ones is consistent with the
objects of this Part set out in paragraphs 60B(1)(a) and
(2A) In applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to
give greater weight to the consideration set out in
paragraph (2)(b).
Additional considerations
(3) Additional considerations are:
(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s
maturity or level of understanding) that the court
thinks are relevant to the
weight it should give to the child’s views;
(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with:
(i) each of the child’s
parents; and
(ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child);
(c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed
to take, the opportunity:
(i) to participate in making decisions about major long‑term issues in
relation to the child; and
(ii) to spend time with the child; and
(iii) to communicate with the child;
(ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or
failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to
maintain the child;
(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances,
including the likely effect on the child of any separation
(i) either of his or her parents; or
(ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other
relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living;
(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and
communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty
or expense will
substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and
direct contact with both parents
on a regular basis;
(f) the capacity of:
(i) each of the child’s
parents; and
(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual
(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture
and traditions) of the child and of either of the
child’s parents, and any
other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant;
(h) if the child is an Aboriginal child or a Torres Strait Islander child:
(i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander culture (including the right to enjoy that
culture with other people
who share that culture); and
(ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this Part will have
on that right;
(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood,
demonstrated by each of the child’s parents;
(j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s
(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a
member of the child’s family—any relevant
inferences that can be
drawn from the order, taking into account the following:
(i) the nature of the order;
(ii) the circumstances in which the order was made;
(iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order;
(iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order;
(v) any other relevant matter;
(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely
to lead to the institution of further proceedings
in relation to the child;
(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
provisions must be understood in the context of the objects of
Act. Those objects were set out in
of the Act and, at the time of the
hearing of this matter, relevantly included:
(1)(a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a
meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum
extent consistent with the
best interests of the child; and
(2)(b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and
communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and
other people
significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and
other relatives); and
(4) An additional object of this Part is to give effect to the
Convention on the
Rights of the Child
done at New York on 20 November 1989.
will subsequently expand upon the significance of the
United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child
(1989) (“the Convention”)
– in terms of the importance of giving proper consideration to the views
of the child
– later in this judgment.
Principles to Consider in Determining Whether Change of
Residence Orders Should be Made
Allegations
of family violence and child abuse often give rise to competing allegations of
alienating behaviour, levelled by the other
parent in response to such
allegations. Cases involving allegations or risk, on one hand, and allegations
of parental alienation
on the other, are among the most challenging for family
law professionals to navigate. Not infrequently, when a parent – who
perceives they are acting protectively in respect of a child – fails to
sustain allegations of risk, the Court will make orders
for a change in the
child’s primary residence; thereby placing the child into the care of the
non-resident parent in an attempt
to cultivate a meaningful relationship between
the child and both parents. However, given the significant and potentially
consequences for a child impacted by such orders, we consider it
appropriate to set out, what we understand to be, best practice
considerations
when determining whether a change of residence order should be made.
Importantly,
there is no presumption that allegations of abuse made by a
‘protective’ parent are necessarily motivated
by an intention to
frustrate or undermine the child’s relationship with the non-resident
explained by Sir Andrew McFarlane P in
Re C (‘Parental
Alienation’; Instruction of Expert)
[2023] EWHC 345 (Fam)
before a Court can conclude that a parent has engaged in alienating behaviour,
it is necessary to have regard to the behaviour of
both parents – to which
a child has been exposed – and whether those behaviours have led to
resistance or reluctance
on the part of the child in spending time with one
parent. Logically, if a child is refusing, resisting, or expresses reluctance
engage in a relationship with a parent or carer, it is necessary to
Firstly, whether
that refusal, resistance or reluctance is attributable to the conduct of the
non-resident parent
the child or the resident
parent; and
whether the resident parent has engaged in behaviours that have directly or
indirectly influenced the child, resulting in
the child’s reluctance to
engage with the other parent.
finding that a parent has made deliberately false or misguided allegations of
abuse with the intention of undermining the child’s
relationship with the
other parent, should not automatically result in the conclusion that orders for
change of residence should
be made. The Court is obliged to undertake a careful
assessment as to whether such orders would be in the best interests of the child
in the circumstances of the case. This necessarily involves “focusing upon
the immediate, medium and long-term impact of proposed
orders upon the
child’s physical, emotional and psychological safety, security and
well-being” (
Bielen v Kozma
[2022] FedCFamC1A 221
(2022) 66 Fam LR 59
”) at [30]).
trauma associated with a change in a child’s living arrangements,
particularly the manner in which such a change is effected,
must be carefully
weighed. While a change of residence is not necessarily an order of last resort,
it should not be made lightly.
As observed by the Full Court of the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (“the Full Court”) in
Simmons & Simmons
(2023) FLC 94–137 at 82,066 [52] such an
order “is likely to cause such significant emotional distress to the
with potential lifelong implications for them.”
an order may disrupt the child’s relationship with their primary
attachment figure and carries the potential for significant
emotional harm with
enduring consequences on their development and future relationships. The Court
must be satisfied that the proposed
order is both necessary and
“proportionate to the degree of risk” associated with the child
continuing to live with the
resident parent, having regard to the totality of
the child’s best interests (
Keane & Keane
[2021] FamCAFC 1
(2021) 62 Fam LR 190
– [84] quoting
In the Marriage of A
[1998] FamCA 25
Dworak & Watts
[2024] FedCFamC1F 13
The making of such orders in the case of slightly older children is particularly
complex. As has been pointed out in comparable jurisdictions,
it is important
for the court to remember that children are autonomous human beings who have
their own rights feelings and their
own perceptions. Making orders against their
wishes can be viewed as an affront to the child’s emerging sense of
autonomy which,
ordinarily, should be encouraged in young adolescents. The court
must therefore recognise the reality that older children are less
open to being
told what to do by adults including by a judicial officer:
Warwickshire
County Council v The Mother
[2023] EWHC 399 (Fam)
. There is always a
risk that in the case of older children, such as the child, that he will
“vote with his feet”,[136]
and not comply with the orders for there
to be a change in residence.
is suggested that, before orders are made changing a child’s primary place
of residence, matters that may arise for consideration,
in the particular
circumstances of each case, include:
Any harm the
child has suffered, or is at risk of suffering, if a change of residence is
The capacity of
each parent to meet the child’s needs;
child’s wishes and feelings;
child’s physical, emotional, and educational needs;
The importance
of maintaining a relationship with the non-resident parent and the implications
of ceasing contact;
The desirability
of continuity in schooling and educational arrangements, as well as involvement
in sport and other extra-curricular
activities;
Practical and
logistical arrangements for care during and after any change in residence;
impact on the child of any change in living circumstances including loss of
family, friends and even beloved
family pets;
The availability
and appropriateness of therapeutic support for the family; and
The need for any
transitional arrangements to support the child’s integration into a new
family environment.
Court should be reluctant to make an order for a change of residence if such an
order would cause emotional distress to a child
and cause significant disruption
to their lives solely on the speculative hope that a meaningful relationship
with the non-resident
parent might develop (
Cramond & Cramond
Parran v Mayfield
[2013] FamCA 992
Court should also be mindful of the capacity of the parent, with whom the child
is to reside, to put in place the emotional scaffolding
necessary to support the
child during the period of likely traumatic change:
Dworak & Watts
[2024] FedCFamC1F 13
The View of the Child
earlier noted, s 60CC(3)(a) of the Act required the primary judge to have regard
to the views of the child consistent with the
child’s level of maturity.
Artan & Shaheen
[2023] FedCFamC1A 221
the Full Court
Australia is a signatory to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child (1989), wherein a key principle is the right
of a child to have their
voice heard. The tenets of the Convention find their way into the Act, by
requiring the Court to consider
“any views expressed by the child and any
factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the Court
are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views” (s
60CC(3)(a) of the Act). Other provisions of the Act also
speak to the Court
hearing the voices of children, for example, ss 60CD, 62G, 68L(5) and
68LA(5)(b).
to this case, it is uncontentious that it can reasonably be inferred that,
between the ages of 10 and 12 years of age,
there is a significant evolution in
a child’s capacity to meaningfully and relevantly express their view on a
matter of such
fundamental importance as to where and with whom they wish to
live. For reasons which we explain, we have concluded that, by virtue
delay in delivery of judgment, the child was deprived of that opportunity in
giving children a meaningful and relevant voice, consistent with their level of
maturity, is sound practice. In
G (BJ) v G (DL)
(2010) 324 DLR (4th) 367
Territories Supreme Court), Martinson J noted at
Excluding children and adolescents may have immediate adverse effects such as:
feeling ignored, isolated and lonely; experiencing
anxiety and fear; being sad,
depressed, and withdrawn; being confused; being angry at being left out; and
having difficulty coping
with stress.
Further, longer-term adverse effects of not consulting children and adolescents
may include: loss of closeness in parent-child relationships;
resentment if living arrangements don’t meet their needs in time or
structure; less satisfaction with parenting
plans, less compliance, more
“voting with their feet”; and longing for more or less time with the
non-resident parent.
respectfully agree with and adopt that statement.
CONSIDERATION
considering the grounds of appeal, we have found it necessary to only focus on
those grounds which go to the issue of delay.
the course of the appeal, it was acknowledged that when read in isolation, and
as plainly expressed, Ground 1 is not a competent
ground of appeal (Transcript
31 July 2025, p 6 lines 6 -129). Following an exchange with members of the Full
Court, it was agreed
that the first three grounds of appeal would be read
together by notionally inserting a semi-colon at the conclusion of Ground 1
– after the words “primary judge” – and reading that
ground as a chapeaux to the following two grounds of
appeal (Transcript 31 July
2025, p 8 lines 7-45).
any event, the disposition of this appeal, in our view, turns on Ground 6. This
ground, while framed as a procedural fairness challenge,
relates also to the
adequacy and relevance of the evidence before the primary judge which enabled
proper consideration of the relevant
s 60CC best interests considerations.
Fowles & Fowles
(No 2) (2024) FLC 94–198 (per Aldridge,
Carew and Campton JJ) the Full Court stated, at [144] - [145], in the context of
proceedings:
Save in the exceptional case referred to by Gleeson CJ in
NAIS [NAIS v
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
”)], the usual approach where there has been a
delay is to look for error on the part of the primary judge applying a greater
degree of scrutiny than otherwise might be the case, in accordance with the
authorities identified earlier.
We add, as a caveat, that this may not be so in relation to parenting cases
where the best interests of the child are paramount.
There, excessive delay can
give rise to a procedural unfairness of itself – for example, the
considerations in making orders
applicable to a two-year-old are unlikely to be
appropriate to a child who is, say for example, five to seven years old at the
of delivering reasons. It is easier to see how delay could lead to a real
practical injustice in such a case or how it might lead
to the orders being
regarded as unreasonable in the light of the age of the child at the time of
delivery of judgment.
our view, this is such a case. While the focus of parenting proceedings is first
and foremost on the child, it remains the case
that the mother, as a litigant,
was entitled to procedural fairness. We find that she has been adversely
impacted by orders which
have removed the child from her primary care and
implemented a regime which will severely curtail the amount of time she will
with the child and dictate the circumstances in which that time will be
our view, there has been a denial of procedural fairness in the sense that the
delay in the delivery of judgment in this matter
has resulted in
“practical injustice” in the sense that something "has gone wrong
and which was capable of affecting
the result of the trial"
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2021) 95 ALJR 441
478 [162], see also at 462 463 [85];
390 ALR 590
at 631, see also at 610 - 611.
is because, by virtue of the excessive delay in the delivery of judgment, and
the making of orders approximately 19 months after
the final hearing concluded,
the mother was deprived of the opportunity to furnish the Court with currently
relevant evidence going
to the crucial best interests considerations to which we
will subsequently refer.
practical injustice was not cured by the theoretical opportunity for the mother
to apply to re-open her case. This is in circumstances
where the mother had no
way of knowing when judgment was likely to be delivered and, secondly, because
it was by no means guaranteed
that the mother would satisfy the requirements for
such updated fresh evidence to be presented (S
tephens & Stephens
[2009] FamCAFC 240
(2009) FLC 93-425
, referring to
Australian Securities and
Investment Commission v Rich
[2006] NSWSC 826
(2006) 235 ALR 587).
6 is, in our view, better understood as raising a failure on the part of the
primary judge to properly take into account relevant
matters including, and most
relevantly, the s 60CC best interests consideration as informed by the
child’s current circumstances.
is to be noted that the final hearing was held in September 2023, with judgment
delivered 17 April 2025—a delay of nearly
19 months. It follows that the
child of these proceedings, and the subject of such significant orders, was 10
years old at trial,
and nearly 12 years old at the date of judgment.
are satisfied that the delay in judgment delivery resulted in the Court’s
findings being based on evidence that had become
materially outdated. This is
reflected, for instance, in the currency of expert reports and assessments as
Dr M, child
psychiatrist, assessed the child in late 2021 and mid-2022. The child discharged
from his care at the start of 2023. Dr
M’s diagnosis of Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder was based on the child’s presentation and mental state as
a 9-year-old.
No further psychiatric input was obtained thereafter.
child’s treating psychologist, provided evidence based on sessions
conducted between early 2020 and mid-2022. Her
observations reflected the
child’s symptoms of anxiety and trauma during middle childhood, but did
not account for any developments
in the period between 2023 and 2025.
Ms J, family
consultant, interviewed the child in mid-2022 and again in at the start of 2023,
producing a report shortly thereafter.
This report was central to the trial
judge’s findings but was over two years old at the date of judgment
the context of that delay, the primary judge proceeded on the assumption that
the child’s circumstances had not materially
changed. That presumption was
neither tested nor verified. This presented as significant risk that the
Court’s s 60CC consideration
of the child’s best interests was based
on outdated information such that it made the decision unsafe.
Significantly,
in that respect, s 60CC(3)(a) requires the Court to consider:
any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s
maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks
are relevant to the
weight it should give to the child’s views.
this case, the child’s views were expressed when she was 9–10 years
old. Notably, in a mid-2022 police interview, the
child stated, in reference to
her father, that she “really [didn’t] want to be made to see him...
I hate him” (at
reiterated these sentiments to Ms J in late 2022 and early 2023, describing fear
and distress associated with being required to
spend time with her father.
views were given limited weight by the primary judge due to the finding that it
was likely the child’s views had been
influenced by her mother (at
[51(g)(vii)]). Nevertheless, s 60CC(3)(a) required the primary judge to have
regard to any views expressed
by the child in the context of “the
child’s maturity or level of understanding.” Relevantly, by April
child was nearly 12 years old and entering adolescence. In this
context, the child had the right to have her views given greater
weight in light
of their increased maturity and level of understanding. The Court had no
evidence of whether their views had softened,
intensified, or transformed. The
child’s capacity to reflect, reassess and articulate, past experiences and
the potential impact
of the proposed orders on her current circumstances may
have grown in consonance with their age. As a result of the operative delay,
judgment did not benefit from any such updated evidence or input of the
reflected in authorities to which we have referred, it is also well recognised
that, with a child’s evolving maturity and
sense of independence, the
corresponding risk of non-compliance with orders made by the Court so too
increases. This is particularly
so in circumstances where a child considers that
orders have been made without adequate consideration of their current views and,
most especially, where it is likely that the child has, for whatever reason, a
strong opposition to spending time with the non-resident
risk that the child might “vote with their feet” – that is, to
refuse to comply with orders requiring that she
live with an estranged
non-resident parent –must, in those circumstances, be considered real and
foreseeable. It can be reasonably
inferred that, the longer the delay, the
greater the possibility of the child’s bond with the mother becoming more
– and greater was the child’s capability to resist a
forced change of residence.
Furthermore,
the child’s evolving maturity was particularly relevant in terms of the
proper consideration of s 60CC(3)(d), which
required the Court to
the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including
the likely effect on the child of any separation from:
(i) either of his or her parents; or
(ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or
other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been
this case, the abrupt shift in residence to the father, without updated
psychological or relational assessments, risked not only
emotional harm but also
non-compliance.
accordance with the primary considerations set out in s 60CC(2)(a) of the Act,
the primary judge was also required to consider:
(a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both
of the child’s parents
in effect, the delay exacerbated the child’s estrangement from the father,
whom, as at the date of judgment, the child
had not seen since the beginning of
2021. In those circumstances, when couched in terms of s 60CC(2)(a), the delay
made the prospect
of reunification between the child and the father more
difficult to assess and, furthermore, made the prospect of the child having
meaningful relationship with the father a merely speculative possibility.
Additionally,
s 60CC(2)(b) required the primary judge to consider:
(b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from
being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or
family violence.
is significant that the primary judge concluded that the child was at risk of
psychological harm as a result of their exposure
to the mother’s
alienating conduct and not as a result of unsubstantiated allegations that the
father had engaged in acts of
abuse. However, while this this risk assessment
was a matter entirely for the primary judge, it is our view that, because of the
delay, this assessment was based on outdated information which did not account
for any changes in the child’s psychological
wellbeing during the
intervening period; including the possibility that the proposed orders would so
drastically change the child’s
life circumstances, that making such orders
would profoundly impact their sense of psychological wellbeing and sense of
and security.
Relevantly,
additional considerations in the determination of the child’s best
interests, as set out in s 60CC(3)(f), (g), (m)
of the Act, provided for the
Court to consider:
(f) the capacity of:
i. each of the child’s parents; and
other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual
g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture
and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s
parents, and any
other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant;
(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
delay in delivering judgment meant that the Court’s consideration of these
factors, which required the Court to consider
the child’s level of
maturity and developmental needs, did not reflect the child’s current
developmental stage and, as
a result, potentially compromised the efficacy and
appropriateness of the primary judge’s findings.
these reasons, it is our view that the delay in the delivery of judgment
resulted in a situation where their Honour was unable
to and, as a consequence,
did not, adequately consider the relevant and critical s 60CC best interests
considerations to which we
have referred. Therefore, we find that the failure to
do so amounts to a discretionary error (
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR
we are wrong, and it is found that we have impermissibly expanded the breadth of
Ground 6 beyond its intended reach, as Aldridge
J stated in
[2025] FedCFamC1A 141
... if I am wrong in that categorisation [of the relevant ground of appeal in
that case], the error remains and needs to be addressed
ultimately, regardless
of the form of the grounds of appeal. As the High Court said, “to
perpetuate error which has been demonstrated
would seem to us a complete denial
of the purpose of the appellate process” (
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
142 CLR 531
these reasons, Ground 6 has merit and the appeal should be upheld. In those
circumstances, there is no utility in considering
the remaining grounds of
agree with Jarrett J that, in circumstances where there has been an error of
law, the grant of costs certificates to each party,
both of the appeal and the
rehearing, pursuant to the
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
appropriate.
17 April 2025 a judge of the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 1) made parenting orders about the parties’
daughter, X (now 12
years of age). By those orders, X is to cease living with her mother, the
appellant Ms Serano, and commence living
with her father, the respondent Mr
Dever. The respondent was also vested with sole parental responsibility for X.
Although those
orders were final orders, the primary judge also made interim
orders for X to spend supervised time with the appellant but such time
commence after the passage of about 12 weeks during which there was to be no
time or communication between X and the appellant.
appellant now appeals those orders. The respondent and the Independent
Children’s Lawyer oppose the appeal. The operation
of orders under appeal
are stayed pending the outcome of this appeal.
the reasons that follow, the appeal must be allowed and the application remitted
for rehearing.
SOME BACKGROUND
give the appeal and these reasons some context, a brief recitation of some
background material, taken for the primary judge’s
uncontentious
recitation of the facts, is appropriate.
appellant is presently 52 years old. The respondent is presently 53 years
parties commenced a relationship in mid-2007 and married in mid-2011. They
separated in early 2018.
separation the parties agreed that X should spend time with the respondent 3- 4
times a fortnight, although this proved problematic.
In mid-2019 the respondent
commenced proceedings for parenting orders in respect of X.
proceedings were resolved upon the making of a consent order in December 2019
which generally provided for the parties to have
equal shared parental
responsibility for X, for her to live with the appellant and spend time with the
respondent, ultimately, from
the conclusion of school on a Wednesday until the
commencement of school on a Monday each alternate weekend, for half of the
holidays and on other special occasions.
within weeks of those orders being made, the parties’ relationship began
to deteriorate. The parties engaged therapeutic
assistance but that failed.
29 March 2021 X ceased spending any time with the respondent. I will say more
of the grounds of appeal but it
is sufficient to record at this point that it was the appellant’s case
before the primary judge
that even though X ceased spending time with the
respondent, her mental health and in some respects her physical health,
to deteriorate largely due to her anxiety about the prospect of having
to spend time with the respondent.
respondent commenced the present application for parenting orders in December
2021. The application was transferred from the Federal
Circuit and Family Court
of Australia (Division 2) to this court in March 2023.
final hearing of the application commenced on 4 September 2023 and lasted three
days. Written submissions followed and by 3 November
2023 all written
submissions had been delivered.
primary judge delivered his reasons and orders on 17 April 2025, 17 months and
14 days later. By that time, X had not spent any
time with the respondent for
nearly four years, or about the last third of her life.
THE GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant presses 7 grounds of appeal in her Amended Notice of Appeal filed on 4
Delay Alone is not a Ground of Appeal
first ground of appeal as articulated, is not a competent ground of appeal. It
asserts that “The delay between the conclusion
of the evidence in the
final hearing on 29 September 2023 and the delivery of judgment on 17 April 2025
(the delay) can be said to
have contributed to the following errors on the part
of the primary judge.” By its terms, this ground alleges no error. Nor
NAIS v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
(2005) 228 CLR 470
at [5], [44]. Indeed, having regard to the
written submissions delivered by both parties and the Independent
Children’s Lawyer,
it is uncontentious that delay in the delivery of
orders or reasons for judgment is not a ground of appeal in and of itself.
delay may lead to a failure by the primary judge to take relevant matters
into account, to engage with the parties’ cases and
with the evidence, or
to provide adequate reasons for the primary judge’s conclusions, whether
that has in fact occurred is
to be assessed in the context of a properly
articulated ground of appeal contending for appellable error in some specified
assessing such grounds in the context of a relevant delay between
hearing and judgment, the “strictest scrutiny” (
[2021] FamCAFC 61
(2021) FLC 94-015
) or “careful scrutiny and
consideration” (
Expectation Pty Ltd v PRD Reality Pty Ltd
[2004] FCAFC 189
) must be applied.
the work performed by purported Ground 1 of the Amended Notice of Appeal seems
to be to establish the context for that which
1 of the appeal is incompetent.
In the Circumstances of this Case the Primary Judge was Obliged
to Afford the Child Procedural Fairness
6 of the Amended Notice of Appeal asserts a failure by the trial judge to afford
the “parties” procedural fairness
in three related respects.
However, I consider that this complaint must be seen as a complaint that the
primary judge failed to afford
procedural fairness. The
respondent makes no such complaint and so the ground, framed as it is to suggest
procedural unfairness to
the “parties”, is somewhat misleading.
the parties recognise, this ground should be dealt with first (
Concrete Pty
Ltd v Parramatta Design
& Developments Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA 55
(2006) 229 CLR 577
at 611–612;
Royal Guardian Mortgage Management Pty Ltd v Nguyen
(2016) 332 ALR 128 at [9]–[10]).
first aspect of this ground is the appellant’s contention that in light of
the 17 month delay in delivering reasons and
judgment from the close of
submissions (19 months from the close of the evidence), the primary judge ought
to have invited the parties
to reopen the evidence or obtain updated expert
evidence, prior to judgment delivery.
the appellant argues, litigation concerning the welfare of a child is accepted
to be something more than
inter partes
litigation over private rights.
The court is concerned to make orders which best promote and protect the
interests of the child the
subject of the proceedings. So much can be taken as
uncontroversial:
(1988) 166 CLR 69
at 76. The appellant’s
submission also referred us to
RCB v The Honourable Justice Forrest
[2012] HCA 47
(2012) 247 CLR 304
, where the plurality (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan,
Kiefel and Bell JJ) also reiterated this point.
, a case concerning a return order under reg 15 of the
(Child Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986
(Cth), the issue reduced to
whether or not there had been a denial of procedural fairness
the subject of the relevant order in circumstances where an
application for their return to another country (and a subsequent application
discharge the order for return) had been decided without the appointment of an
Independent Children’s Lawyer, or permitting
the oldest child leave to
intervene in the proceedings (
procedural fairness ought to have been afforded to the children in the context
of that case, does not seem to have been doubted
at [44]). However,
the plurality held that the obligation “was, sufficiently met by the
Court's appointment of a family consultant.
As counsel for the Central
Authority pointed out, a family consultant is an officer of the Family Court and
is skilled in advising
the Court and others about questions of the kind that
have been described. A child's views can be, and in this case were, heard
assessed by the family consultant and reported to the Court and to the
the appellant did not articulate her case quite in this way, I consider that, in
addition to the parties, the primary judge
was required to afford X procedural
resolution of this ground of appeal then, comes down to an orthodox application
of the rules concerning procedural fairness namely,
to first identify the
content of the requirement for procedural fairness having regard to the
appellant’s grounds of appeal
and the facts of the case; to next identify
if that requirement was not met; and lastly, if that requirement is not met, to
whether that failure to afford procedural fairness was material to the
outcome of the case.
The Primary Judge did not Deny the Parties Procedural
the context of this ground and the submissions made by the parties, insofar as
the parties are concerned the obligation to provide
procedural fairness required
the trial judge to permit them a reasonable opportunity to present their
evidence and their cases. There
is no complaint that the trial judge did not do
that up to the close of the parties’ submissions.
appellant submits that the delay between the close of submissions and the making
of final orders “deprived the primary judge
of the ability to assess the
(a) risks associated with the child transitioning to live with her father,
including any capacity to deal with whatever orders were
in his Honour’s
contemplation vis-à-vis time between the child and her mother;
(b) likely effect on the child, of any changes to her circumstances;
(c) capacity of the mother to support the child spending time with the
(d) availability of any support network to successfully support a transition of
the child to the father; and
(e) views, maturity and mental health of the child and capacity to comply with
or resist any arrangement for time with her father;
leading to a real practical injustice in light of the circumstances of the
parties at the time of the judgment delivery.”
with the matters set out in subparagraphs 26(c) and 26(d) first, the submission
appears to assume that there would be a difference
between the evidence as it
existed at the close of submissions and the time at which the primary judge made
the final orders. The
matters dealt within subparagraphs 26(c) and 26(d) were
matters within the knowledge of one or other of the parties. Had the appellant
been of the view that circumstances had changed such that it was necessary to
bring those changes to the attention of the primary
judge, a mechanism existed
for her to do so. No application to re-open the evidence in the case or make
further submissions was made
by either party or the Independent Children’s
Lawyer. Both parties had the opportunity to make application to re-open the
in their case. Any invitation by the primary judge for them to do so
was unnecessary and beyond the obligation upon the primary judge
to afford the
parties procedural fairness generally.
the appellant does not suggest that there was any particular evidence that she
would have or wished to place before the
primary judge before he made his
orders. She did not seek to lead any evidence on this appeal to demonstrate that
there were changes
that ought to have been brought to the primary judge’s
The Primary Judge Denied X Procedural Fairness
content of the primary judge’s duty to afford X procedural fairness is
different to the content of the duty owed to the
parties. That content is
informed by the following:
(a) The matters to be taken into account having regard to
Family Law Act 1975
(b) The facts of the case as revealed by the evidence before the primary judge
including the evidence about X’s views and the
matters that impact upon
the weight to be given to those views.
[92] the primary judge recorded that, “All views expressed by a child must
be considered, but the weight to be applied must
be assessed by considering the
maturity and understanding of the child of the effect their wishes, and the
context in which they
are expressed.” The primary judge then assessed
X’s expressions of her wishes as clear statement that she wishes to remain
living with the appellant and that she feels unsafe in the respondent’s
care. However, the primary judge determined that X’s
wishes could not be
given determinative weight.
evidence about X’s views, about her living arrangements and her
relationships with the appellant and the respondent came
from a number of
sources. Notably, the primary judge had the assistance of a Family Report
prepared by an experienced family consultant
interviewed
X in mid-2022 (when X was 9) and
early-2023 (when X was 9 and a half years of age). The primary judge recorded
the salient evidence
[77] of his reasons. At [78] he recorded, amongst other things, Ms J’s
view that “A change of residence would result in a strong negative
reaction from the child who has been in the almost sole
care of the mother and
with whom the child has a strong bond.”
circumstances where:
(a) the important evidence about X’s views was garnered when she was 9
years of age and then again six months later;
(b) there was clear evidence that a change of residence would result in a strong
negative reaction X which would need to be very
carefully managed;
(c) the primary judge determined to give X’s views no determinative
weight; and
(d) the primary judge’s orders were made when X was a few months shy of
turning 12 years of age
I think that the content of the duty to give X procedural fairness required the
primary judge to do two things, namely:
(a) consider obtaining further evidence about:
(i) X’s views and anything that might impact upon the weight to be
accorded those views, including the fact that she was now
nearly 12 years of
(ii) the risks associated with X transitioning to live with the respondent
including her capacity to deal with such a transition;
(iii) the likely effect on X of any changes to her circumstances, given the
increase in her age; and
(b) to invite submissions from the parties about obtaining further evidence
approach is what I consider the Full Court was alluding to in
Fowles (No 2)
[2024] FedCFamC1A 115
where at [145] the Full Court
... excessive delay can give rise to a procedural unfairness of itself –
for example, the considerations in making orders applicable
to a two-year-old
are unlikely to be appropriate to a child who is, say for example, five to seven
years old at the time of delivering
reasons. It is easier to see how delay could
lead to a real practical injustice in such a case or how it might lead to the
being regarded as unreasonable in the light of the age of the child at
the time of delivery of judgment.
respondent argues that “there was and is no evidence before the Court
which would support a submission that the mere aging
of the child
in this case
is sufficient to ground a
finding of a denial of procedural fairness”. However, for the reasons I
have expressed, I consider
that given X’s age at the time of the
interviews for the Family Report, her age at the date of the trial and her age
subject orders were made, in this case there is sufficient reason to
consider that the primary judge has denied X procedural fairness
in the way I
have explained above. X was not an infant at any time relevant to the
proceedings or the primary judge’s determination.
At the time the orders
were made, she was on the cusp of adolescence.
The Appeal must be Allowed
failure of the primary judge to consider whether to obtain further evidence
dealing with the matters I have identified and to
invite submissions about that
from the parties was material to the outcome of the case. It was material
because on no view of the
primary judge’s reasons did his Honour turn his
mind to the effect of the passage of time upon the evidence about the matters
have identified. It cannot be said, given X’s age at all relevant times,
that evidence about the matters I have identified
might not have had a material
effect upon the outcome of the case.
that this ground of appeal has merit, it is unnecessary, and I consider
undesirable, to consider the balance of the appellant’s
grounds of appeal
Boensch v Pascoe
[2019] HCA 49
(2019) 268 CLR 593
–[8]). The inevitable
result is that the application must be remitted for rehearing.
the respondent’s Senior Counsel pointed out, no order for costs other than
the grant of relevant costs certificates was sought
by the appellant in her
Amended Notice of Appeal. In those circumstances I decline to entertain any
application other than an application
for costs certificates.
appeal has succeeded on a matter of law. The grant of costs certificates to each
party, both of the appeal and the rehearing,
is appropriate.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
twelve (112) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Chief Justice McClelland and Honourable Justices Jarrett and
Dated: 7 November 2025
RTF format (691 KB)
Signed PDF/A format