Obeid v The King; Obeid v The King; Macdonald v The King [2025] HCATrans 74 (6 November 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 074
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S88 of 2025
B e t w e e n
EDWARD MOSES OBEID
Office of the Registry
Sydney No S89 of 2025
B e t w e e n
MOSES EDWARD OBEID
Office of the Registry
Sydney No S93 of 2025
B e t w e e n
IAN MICHAEL MACDONALD
BEECH‑JONES
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON THURSDAY,
6 NOVEMBER 2025, AT 9.59 AM
MR P.D. LANGE, SC
I appear for the
appellant in S88/2025 with my learned friend
MR A. CHHABRA
. (instructed by Michael Bowe
Solicitors)
MR B.W. WALKER, SC
For the appellant in
S89/2025, I appear with my learned friends
MR M.S. KALYK
. (instructed by Murphy’s
Lawyers Inc)
MR C. PARKIN
: For the appellant in
S93/2025, I appear with my learned friend
MR J.J. LANG
(instructed by HWL Ebsworth)
MR J.T. GLEESON, SC
May it please the Court, I appear with
MS E.R. NICHOLSON,
MR C.J. TRAN
MS N.A. WOOTTON
for the respondent in each appeal.
(instructed by Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW))
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you. I take it there is an agreed order of address, and
Mr Walker goes first?
Yes, reflected by
arrangements at the Bar table, I can say the arrangements between the parties
generally involve, subject to your
Honours’ dictate otherwise, that I
will go to no later than morning tea, the appellants will, between them, finish
leaving, it is intended, half an hour for the possibility of
GAGELER CJ:
Your Honours, these appeals arise in circumstances which involve the Court
confronting, we would submit, for the first time, difficulties,
problems arising
from the harnessing of the substantive offence of misconduct in public office as
the predicate offence for a common
law conspiracy. Your Honours have seen
in the exchanges of written submissions, as well as in the consideration of
arguments in
the Court of Criminal Appeal reasons, the ways in which those
matters have been ventilated and with adverse outcome for us below.
our submission, there is a particular pressure put upon the deployment of a
conspiracy charge in the case of misconduct in public
office as a predicate
offence arising from the quality of that offence as obviously involving the
conduct – acts, omissions
– and their moral qualities, of
holders of public office. They are not offences that can be committed directly
as substantive
offences by those who are not holding public offence.
is, of course, a commonplace – not only nowadays but for as long as
the substantive offence has been recognised –
that decisions in
public office, administration of public duties, is subject to social and
political motivations of multifariously
various kinds. It is also obvious, from
one’s own understanding of the world, that there are mixtures of motives,
as to intensity of actual motives which may impel a particular
outcome – a decision to do something or not – whether
way of non‑legislated executive power or pursuant to a statutory power or
discretion.
In that context, of course, it is now familiar that conduct
in public office can be subject to civil judicial review, including for
vitiating features as irrelevant considerations; bias, in the sense of lack of
requisite impartiality; and taking into account
considerations illegitimate,
such as favouring of a particular person. But it is equally obvious and well
known that the favouring
of particular ideologies espoused by particular groups
such as business or trade unions is usually not, in itself, a disqualifying
feature in civil judicial review terms.
So, the background of the
controversy in this case in criminal law is that it is accepted that what the
Minister did in this case
were acts pursuant to statutory powers and that in
themselves, apart from, perhaps, the question of confidentiality in relation to
the last enumerated misconducts, that the acts themselves were acts that could,
in the absence of improper motivation, have been
carried out by a minister, or
the Minister.
It is for those reasons that the trite requirement in the
pleading of a conspiracy charge – that there be description,
stipulation,
of the conduct which, if committed, would make the predicate
office, is an essential part of a conspiracy charge – butts up
against some difficulties which were perceived in this case, apparently by the
Crown, in passages to which I will take you and, certainly
Court of Criminal Appeal.
By way of an example of that,
could I remind your Honours that the element of the substantive offence
which is known in the submissions
and the authorities discussed in them as the
“but for” requirement, that the conduct would not have been engaged
in the fashion that it was, “but for” for improper motive. But
that element – which the Court of Criminal Appeal
wrongly, in our
submission, described as somehow relating only to causation rather than state of
mind – that element would
be a bizarre requirement in the pleading of
a conspiracy. I will come back to that.
But one can see immediately
that there is a rather considerable departure from the requirement of pleading,
in the conspiracy, the
agreement that conduct be committed which, regardless
whether the alleged conspirators appreciated this or not, if committed, would
an offence. And that is, in our submission, an essential and a cardinal feature
of criminalising agreement.
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Walker, are
you saying that those subparagraphs, I think it is (a), (b) and (c) of the
indictment, representing, as it were, what
the Crown said was the object of the
conspiracy, do not identify or allow to be identified that “but for”
That is right.
BEECH-JONES J:
That is right, but could I just
finish one proposition, and then immediately go to that matter. So, with the
element, this case already presents, in an unprincipled
fashion, as we submit, already presents some departure from an ordinary and
surely fundamental expectation of a conspiracy charge, that it alleged the
predicate offence as the object of the agreement in terms
which enable you to
know – that is, the conduct – enable you to know whether
it would be an offence if committed.
It has already done that for
“but for” and “but for” is obviously an important
element – not in itself
sufficient, obviously – for
criminalising misconduct in public office. When I say criminalising misconduct,
that is because
one can understand the word “misconduct” in a
non-criminal sense, so, conduct which miscarries by an administrator, by
minister, will be subject to judicial review and might therefore be regarded as,
in a sense, generally, misconduct, but it certainly
will not be criminal. That
is a daily event in judicial review courts. We are not, daily, seeing the
occult finding of crime.
Mr Walker, do you
dispute what is said at paragraph 3 of the respondent’s
I am so sorry,
your Honour?
Paragraph 3 of the
respondent’s outline describes the prosecution case.
I am sorry. I am sorry,
your Honour.
Maybe just at a convenient
I am sorry, your Honour, I will
answer that when I have to hand. Your Honour has asked, do I agree with
it? In a sense, as a
paraphrase – I am going to the indictment
almost immediately – that is a fair paraphrase, in a
indictment?
Of elements in the
indictment – of important parts of the indictment.
Are you going to come to the indictment,
Almost immediately.
is one more point I want to make before I get to it. You will see in the
indictment that there is a reference to the
supposed fifth element of the
offence – that is, of the predicate offence. That is, that the
character of the misconduct,
as well as the “but for” requirement,
the character of the misconduct is that it has to be “serious”,
criminal punishment”, et cetera,
et cetera – a classic value judgment to be performed in the case
of a jury by the jury,
in the case of Bench trial, by the judge by reference to
all the generalised considerations that feed into that ultimately moral
ethical judgment. It obviously is particular to conduct. It cannot be
abstracted.
Now, we come to the indictment, which is tab 1 of the
core appeal book, at page 6. You will see that there is a use of the word
“acts” in the sixth line, that is a reference to conduct. Then you
have what in the Court of Criminal Appeal would be
described as descriptive
statements. They are not statements that specify any acts. They require, by
way of description, to have
connection with the granting of an exploration
and we immediately say, well, of course, that is one
of the responsibilities of the Minister, assisted by his Department. Now, that
does not bespeak any illegality at all. Acts “concerning the interests
of” the Obeids and family members. That, in
turn, depending upon
circumstances, may be innocuous or not.
Mr Walker, it is preceded, is it not, by the last two lines of the chapeau,
which says ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, but those are lines of recital
Well, it says that, between particular
wilfully misconduct –
In the course
The agreement is between those dates, and it ends
conspired together that Mr Macdonald would –
Yes, that he:
would . . . wilfully misconduct himself, without
reasonable cause or justification –
So, those are aspects of the elements – that is, the
description overall and one of the elements of the offence of misconduct
public office.
And then he would do
“acts” relating to (a), (b) and (c).
Acts having a description (a), acts having a
description (b) and acts having the quality (c) –
But you are not
told any of the acts at all.
because – I understand you accept that the conspiracy is complete at
the time of the agreement.
Absolutely.
This is the case which presents a difficulty arising from that doctrinal aspect,
which has been much commented on
in cases and by scholars, but it provides no
reason whatever to retreat from a requirement of stating in an indictment an
in terms which enable one to know what is said to have been unlawful and
what positive tenets of the criminal law make it so. Thus,
you find the
description in terms which is simply parroting the doctrinal elements of the
offence continuing after (a), (b) and (c),
being serious and meriting criminal punishment –
et cetera, that being the so‑called fifth element. Now, at
that point – as is, I think, common ground – the reader
simply does not know what it is that the conspirators had agreed – we
are now focusing on what the conspirators had agreed
in that period –
would amount to acts of that kind. They have to amount to acts of that kind
according to the agreement of
the conspirators. Not that the conspirators have
to know that it was wrong or criminal, but they had to have agreed to acts being
committed which would have those qualities rendering it criminal. Otherwise, of
course, it cannot be a predicate offence.
And it is for those reasons
that questions of so-called particulars come up. Could I remind
your Honours of the way in which there
were particulars supplied, that is
tab 1 of the appellants’ book of further materials, at page 5 of
that volume. In relation
to the conspiracy where our client is alleged, at
page 10 of the volume, in paragraph 9, to have become party, in a
period ending
in late May – it turns out, the way the case was run,
it had to have been before 9 May, one sees on page 5, 6 and 7 what I
the enumerated misconducts.
Ultimately, it was found that five of them,
one of them modified, were made out. The others were not made out. So, the
second were made out. The fourth was made out, but without the
“Wiles Map 1” element and without the element of
confidentiality.
The fifth was not made out. The sixth was not made out. The
ninth was not made out.
And so what we have, with respect, is
misconducts which, given that title by the Crown, might lead one to the view
that that describes
that object of the conspiracy. But no, the Crown made it
very clear these were not – they were not to be pinned to those
as the object of the conspiracy. I will show you that in a moment.
Rather, as you see in paragraph 3 of this document:
With regard to the acts comprising the wilful misconduct
that must mean in the indictment:
the Crown relies upon the following particulars, being overt acts in
furtherance of the conspiracy –
and the case was conducted and argued on the basis that from the overt
acts could be inferred the anterior agreement, being the conspiracy,
overt acts were not themselves misconduct which had been agreed by the
conspirators, let alone by all of them, including
our client.
obviously leads to the matter that the Registrar’s letter has raised and,
as your Honours have seen in our outline,
in proposition 7, to which I
will come soon, we say there is no significance, certainly, in favour of the way
in which the Court
of Criminal Appeal disposed of the matter, in the fact that
for a long time, legislated criminal procedure in New South Wales has
required the pleading of what are called the overt acts of the conspiracy. It
is not necessary to state any overt act of conspiracy.
However, it is
familiar, near universal in practice, of course, that particulars are sought and
given and inadequacy or failure to
give particulars is usually fatal. In this
case, what we had in those particulars does not supply – especially
did not supply
the description of the conduct said to have been agreed on to be
carried out by Mr Macdonald.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Walker, it did expand upon it a bit at page 13 to 14
so sorry, your Honour?
BEECH‑JONES J:
to 14 of your further materials, there is an expansion of (a), (b)
and (c), including a refinement of (b) to mean advancing
BEECH‑JONES J:
Yes. So, your submission is directed to (a), (b) and (c), including
those particulars?
BEECH‑JONES
Yes, I understand.
But what we do not have,
of course, by inserting that proposition, you do not have any identification,
any specification, any stipulation
as to acts – conduct –
to be engaged in by Mr Macdonald.
What is the
relationship between your complaint about the indictment not setting out acts
and that clause 21, which says it is not
necessary to state any overt act
of conspiracy?
None at all. Can I
Yes, please.
the Crown, with respect, appreciated, and as the Court of Criminal Appeal
appreciated, there is a distinct difference between alleging
the conduct agreed
to be conduct that will occur, which constitutes the predicate offence, and on
the other hand, the overt acts
of conspiracy. One way in which that appears is
in the Court of Criminal Appeal’s reference to the matter at page 678
core appeal book, in paragraph 29, accepting a distinction which I
had argued in that court between those matters.
differences between overt acts, so, the actual acts which took place, versus the
acts which comprised the agreement said to have
been alleged.
I understand.
They may overlap. Some overt acts may, all on their own, be an offence.
Many an overt act is no such thing, they are simply steps
in furtherance, and it
is to be appreciated that the Crown ran this case on the basis that those
so‑called particulars are
of the latter kind. Acts in furtherance, they
are, as it happens, the predicate offence being committed.
point about a conspiracy charge is no predicate offence needs ever to be
committed. That which is criminal is an anterior
agreement. It does not become
available to be the subject of criminal prosecution only if the anterior
agreement is successfully
carried out. And that is what I mean when I opened on
the difficulty presented by the, in our submission, rigid doctrinal requirement
to consider a conspiracy trial through that lens. You cannot wait and see. You
must be able to say, when the agreement is reached,
you must be able to say that
the Crown can allege that there will be conduct committed that will make out an
We submit that the defect, as you have seen in our writing, can
be boiled down to this proposition: that you cannot have, in law,
a conspiracy
that an offence be committed in those terms. Everyone would laugh that out of
court. They would say, what offence?
But we say there is a further species of
that absurdity and injustice by saying that there will be a conspiracy that
be misconduct in public office, not made better by identifying the
holder of the public office.
GAGELER CJ:
Or the statutory regime
pursuant to which that holder would be acting?
would not amount either to particulars or to narrowing. You would still not
know what it is that had been agreed. And that
is our complaint. It is not an
inability, eventually, at trial, to prove the commission of predicate offences.
That is a kind of
luxury for a prosecutor. That is the gold‑plated overt
act by which you might, in a straightforward conspiracy case, infer
existence of the anterior agreement which is the criminal conduct of the
conspirators.
But in this case we have, as the Crown would have it, the
sufficiency, apparently, of alleging descriptively, as the Court of Criminal
Appeal put it, what the Crown calls a class – genus – of
conduct as being an appropriate specification of the object
of the conspiracy.
But that is simply, with respect, a fancy way of saying: I do not have to say,
says the Crown, what the conduct
will be by the nominated intended predicate
offender, which was agreed on by the alleged conspirators. All I have to say is
they agreed that something – they did not know what, and that is
actually part of the Crown case here – something would
be done which
would have all those qualities.
Now, of course, if you will permit me an
aside concerning a matter really not within the grant of special leave, and not
an appeal, but of course, it is odd, when you are talking about
official misconduct of a kind by which things which are in themselves
done unlawfully – say, to favour a person – it is odd to
propose that people in advance agreed that it would
be done in a way that, for
example, satisfied all the elements of an offence.
Well, it may not be odd in this sense, that, given the nature of the alleged
conspiracy, it may be not known what the acts are going
to be. And the
reason ‑ ‑ ‑
Well, that is true in this case.
so, if one actually bought the guillotine down chronologically, at the last
date, being 31 January, to pick one
date, and there had been no acts done,
the conspiracy offence would still be complete and would be able to be
That is my point. But rather than meaning
that there is no problem with vagueness and uncertainty, it is a reason of
course, the
conspiracy charge is simply not available. There may be criminal
complicity in subsequent
be. It may be that the agreement is crafted in the terms it is –
forget about the facts for the moment –
in terms which say: listen,
I do not know what I am going to do, but I agree that I will do whatever I can
in public office in order
to ensure that your interests are advanced, I do not
know what those acts are going to be, but we have agreed that is what I will
to make sure that you get X.
And as soon as that
is put, one appreciates that there are still outstanding questions about
“but for”, there are certainly
questions about the fifth element,
and there may even be questions about whether there is any deviation from what
is appropriate
in any event, for example, in cases of tender, that is, open
competition for possibly profitable opportunities to be made available,
not follow that an agreement of that kind will necessarily amount to any offence
whatever if a particular tender, for example,
is that which, in the public
interest, is crying out to be accepted. Those are
matters ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
If you had an agreement at the start of a process that simply
said, look I will help you out by leaking information to you.
When your Honour says “leaking
information”, the publication of information by the Minister is not in
and no‑one has ever alleged, in itself – is
BEECH‑JONES J:
This indictment says
“breach of his duty of confidentiality”.
Which ‑ it is not within the special leave to
say anything more about
BEECH‑JONES
No, it is not.
‑ ‑ ‑ than to say
you would need to know that at the time of the conspiracy there had been an
agreement that
things would happen which would breach a duty of confidentiality
owed by the Minister.
BEECH‑JONES J:
And when I say
“confidentiality”, announcements of opportunities for coal
exploitation are not, in themselves, secret.
Indeed, to the contrary, they are
BEECH‑JONES J:
But when you look at
the particulars, the characters of the acts are, we know the officeholder, we
know the Act ‑ ‑
No, we do not know the act.
BEECH‑JONES
Sorry, we know the legislation, not
I am so sorry, the capital A “Act”, yes,
your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
capital‑A “Act”. We have a particular that refines it to
saying to further their interests and that it would
involve a breach of a
ministerial duty.
No, that is to describe
what I will call a consequence or character of something once committed. It
does not describe anything
that has been agreed upon which will have that
quality or character – nothing at all.
BEECH‑JONES
Which part of what I just said is not what was agreed upon,
but a characterisation of the breach?
Everything that your Honour said, having been said, conveys nothing about
what will be done by the Minister – nothing. It
is a quality of
something that we do not yet know, concerning steps to be taken, at
BEECH‑JONES J:
As I understand it, the
Crown was saying: we do not know the specific Act but what we can tell you is
he had agreed to do something
in his capacity as a Minister referrable to the
to advance their interests in breach of his
And so – and this is
really our proposition 3 – that, if accepted, would mean that
the conspiracy to commit the offence
of misconduct in public office can be
framed as simply that, which is really all that has happened in the indictment,
given the limited
role of the particulars.
In particular, it means that
you are not able, at the time that the charge is made as to an agreement reached
by a particular date,
you cannot posit – and the Crown frankly never
did posit, made it clear they were not positing – that by that date,
of the conspirators had any knowledge, let alone in common, let alone not
just intention but agreement, that these things would or
Because they could not know. I mean, that is
your point.
That is my point, that is my point,
So, that is the factual premise upon which we
And that is my point, and that is unlike most
conspiracies, for obvious reasons.
It is, but it
am suggesting there is no call for a special case to comprehend the, as the Hong
Kong Court, to which I will come,
going to ask you about that, because what that decision showed was that one has
to look to – that there are no –
that in cases of
conspiracy, one has to look at the agreement that is pleaded and identify
whether or not, consistent with the pleaded
agreement, to pick up the language
in this Court, the accused knows the case that they are to
Yes, quite.
‑ ‑ ‑ and can run the case in answer to
So, we asked, continuously, throughout: what is
it that we have agreed that the Minister will do? That is, before 9 May.
Crown resolutely said: we do not have to tell you any more than we have
put in the indictment, that whatever it is, it will have
these qualities. And
lo and behold, these are qualities which would make out a predicate offence if
you could say that facts met
that description. But we are never told the facts.
We are never told that he will do such and such about an invitation to tender,
such and such about publication of maps, such and such about revelation of
prospectivity, nothing – all of those things being
entirely proper to
be done in the public interest by a Minister concerning coal
In order to make that offence, you have got to know what it
is that the Minister was going to do in order that there be a predicate
alleged as being the object of a conspiracy. By definition, it is an offence
completed before the predicate offence has
been committed, by definition. And
so, it cannot possibly be a weakness in our argument that you had to wait and
see what actually
happened. That is a weakness, rather, in those who would
allege a conspiracy.
Now, the irony is that in the traditional way, the
Crown relies upon those overt acts particularised, the enumerated misconducts,
in order to infer the conspiracy and that is a routine and orthodox manner of
proceeding in conspiracy cases, not confined to conspiracy
to commit misconduct
in public office. But, in our submission, there is no avoiding the fact that
that is just an evidentiary use
of that matter.
That is all it
is – evidentiary. And as an evidentiary matter, one asks: what is
the fact in issue that that is said to prove?
The later commission of an overt
act which might be, in itself, not criminal at all, like renting a car that is
intended to be used
for a getaway in a bank robbery – overt
act – and it may very well support, inferentially, the alleged prior
that you will be the lookout, you will be the driver, et cetera,
Now, your Honours, here, what is the fact in issue
to which the alleged commission of those enumerated misconducts by Minister
– what is the fact in issue to which they can lend support,
rationally, by way of proof, so as to lead to an inferred anterior
We are not told in the indictment and were never told in the case.
we are told is there was this misconduct committed, we use its commission to
infer that there was a prior agreement that there
would be – and then
we have, simply, the generalised proposition that there would be something
happen which would answer the
description at law of the offence of misconduct in
public offence. That, in our submission, is in principle inadmissible as a mode
of framing a charge and putting a person to trial, let alone convicting them of
a conspiracy.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Walker, can I just understand
the – just going back to the indictment, you accept that an act done
by the Minister which
has the qualities of (a), (b) and (c) in
the indictment would constitute misconduct in public office?
There needs to be more than that. You have to have the “but
for” and you have to have the chose sûre as well,
yes. All they
have done is ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES
That last reference was to the evaluative aspect.
BEECH-JONES J:
Can I just ask about that – the evaluative aspects are not met by
“such misconduct being serious and meriting criminal
punishment”?
No, that is what I am referring to
in relation to first matter, is that not dealt with – the “but
for” not dealt with by “wilfully
misconduct himself, without
reasonable cause or justification”?
that those are words which, maybe redundantly, that what you have done is not
either required or permitted by law.
In other words,
but for the fact that it was ‑ ‑ ‑
It is but for the improper
motive ‑ ‑ ‑
would not have done this.
Yes. So, if you read the
indictment to read: did conspire together that he would, by doing
acts (a), (b) and (c) – then there
is no conspiracy,
but where you add in the words:
wilfully misconduct himself, without reasonable
cause or justification ‑ ‑ ‑
To say that something will be done “without reasonable cause
or justification” does not tell you anything about what
has been agreed to
be done at all. Until you know what is agreed to be done, how on earth can you
evaluate whether it was that which
– or but for which –
there would not have been a particular decision by a Minister? You do not even
know what that decision
is. You certainly cannot say that of reasonable cause
or justification for steps which, in themselves, are of no concern in terms
lawfulness with respect to taking steps towards opening up prospective land in
relation to coal.
BEECH-JONES J:
Just with that evaluative
element, they are not usually understood as something that an accessory or a
conspirator or anyone else
has to have knowledge of. They are a
characterisation of the conduct agreed upon.
sense that it does not matter whether they appreciate that or not, of course
that is correct.
BEECH‑JONES J:
course that is correct. That is a bit like dishonesty.
BEECH-JONES
Indeed, exactly like dishonesty. So, is it not the case that if you
have – the question you ask is, does an act that has
characteristics in (a), (b) and (c) as
particularised – not the misconduct, but just has those
characteristics –
is that capable of being an act which meets the
evaluative tests?
I think my answer is yes,
and – yes, and that is why we say the allegation of conspiracy
against us needed to be made in
such a way that you could tell, at the time the
agreement was made – at the time the agreement was made –
had been agreement. That is the whole gist of why conspiracy is
criminalised. It is the agreement – the plot, to use the
expression.
Now, that, in our submission, cannot be done with respect to
a predicate offence unless you know what it is that has been agreed
to be done.
All we know from this indictment is the quality of whatever it is that may
BEECH‑JONES J:
You will come to the Hong Kong
BEECH‑JONES J:
But, in that case, as you know, it was – the misconduct was being
prepared to help someone.
Can I come directly to it,
it would be
convenient ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
Then I will ask the question about that. Yes, sorry,
It would be convenient. So, that is
in the joint book, volume 3, tab 20,
have pronounced that correctly. Your Honours will recall this was what
might be called the private freelance advantage
obtained by someone who was
paid a large sum of money by
people who were not doing so out of
So, there was a
quid pro quo
which was alleged and
proven as being that he would have a favourable disposition to those people.
There was lively dispute concerning
the nature of the framing of the charge.
Could I pick it up, please, at the passage that you will find starting
Could we just go back – can we just look at the indictment at
page 709 at paragraph 24.
Count 2 of the indictment was an allegation
of the agreement reached:
without reasonable excuse or justification, would wilfully misconduct himself
in the course of or in relation to his public office,
by being or remaining
favourably disposed to –
the entity:
in return for the payment –
That is the one that
we are really concerned with, that count?
Absolutely,
yes. Could I take you, and immediately by way of pointing out the distinctions
that the court saw with respect to the
possibilities of pleading, at 726,
paragraphs 65 and following:
convenient to record first what was
asserted . . .
It was not alleged . . . and it is not contended before
this Court –
look down to (3):
that the agreement was that upon and after the assumption of office, Rafel
Hui would . . . show favour . . . if and
when that should
become necessary or desirable.
That was not how it was
to be understood. And the reasons advanced by the prosecutions to explain that,
which obviously were regarded
as sensible reasons by the court, are explained in
the following passages. I will pass over, given the time, 67 and 68,
important, but 69, the explanation given to the court:
chose not to tie its colours to the mast of a conditional conspiracy, meaning
a conspiracy to show favour if and when the occasion
presented itself. Amongst
the several considerations advanced was that such a charge would raise the
question whether the course
of conduct contemplated would necessarily result in
the commission of a criminal offence; would generate arguments about what was
meant by “necessary” or “appropriate”; and would give
rise to a danger that focus would shift from the character
of the payments to
the merits of decisions taken, thereby creating unnecessary
complexity.
And there was consideration of an objection urged against
that approach, and an explanation again, that obviously found favour with
court, as to why, at the end of paragraph 70, the Crown had, or the
prosecution had considered that appropriate.
Your Honours, when one
comes over to further explanation, pages 734 and following, one sees that
Boston’s Case
in this country was called in aid at
paragraph 96. That is a bribery case, as you recall. That was, there and
then, the predicate
offence was committed by Hui, about to become Chief
Secretary, undertaking to:
“[impair] his capacity to exercise a disinterested judgment”
And that is where you find the passage about the “golden
fetters”, as it was colourfully put, or as was described at the
page 736, he:
would be hopelessly compromised and he could not properly discharge the
That was complete, there and then, that the predicate offence was
complete by him undertaking by the agreement, which included the
goodwill, being the payment, there and then. So, there was no objection
possible on the face of that form of indictment.
The alleged conspirators were
yet to be told what it is that the new Chief Secretary would do or not do. It
was complete in that
he, there and then – it would not matter whether
he ever acted under this motivation – he there and then had
compromised
himself, had willingly taken on the golden fetters.
our submission, neatly demonstrates how – and that could not have
been done in this case, or was not done in this
case – how one needs
to be able to appreciate what it is that is alleged in the
conspiracy – I stress “in the conspiracy”
would be the conduct comprising the predicate offence. In
conduct comprising the predicate offence, said to be a continuing offence, was
having that favourable disposition, thus being
always compromised. That is not
This is a case which pinned itself to: the Minister would do
acts – not the Minister would have a favourable disposition,
‑style, but the Minister would do acts. And you are then not
told what the acts are, you are simply told some – but not
because “but for” is not there – some of the qualities of
these unknown acts, unknown also, obviously, to
the alleged
conspirators.
Now, there is a difficulty with what I call
“conditional conspiracies” in inferring from any of the evidence
dealings at the time of the alleged agreement – there are
none here that cast any light on the matter adverse to my client
reasoning backwards, in the orthodox, if odd, fashion, from overt acts not
themselves said to be predicate offences as
to the existence of the anterior
agreement. There are obvious problems if it cannot be said what would be
required by the conspirators
if considered necessary or appropriate by the
Minister as a decision‑maker. We simply do not know. And we never did
All we had ultimately was this, in our submission, entirely
illegitimate equation of the proven misconducts – the five out
nine – as supposedly supporting, by inference, the existence
previously that they would be committed – not in the
deep, not in
detail. The whole point of the prospectivity of a conspiracy charge is the
detail cannot be known, not because the
future is uncertain, all the more
important that there be an understanding as to what the object of the agreement
is concerning the
conduct in question.
I say it is absurd to propose
that anyone could be guilty of a conspiracy that an offence be committed. And
that is not merely embarrassing
– although it is intensely
embarrassing, as a forensic possibility – it is also lacking in an
allegation as to what was
the object of the agreement which would render the
agreement criminal because that object is the commission of an
not the possible commission of an offence, not the
commission of an offence if and when one of the conspirators would act in a
way according to their decision in the future not agreed upon in the
And it is for those reasons, in our submission, that
is an approach and a case – and the reasoning in
– supports completely the objection we took to the way in
which the particulars had been, in reality, refused with respect
to what was the
conduct, which was the object of the agreement, so that one could understand
whether what the parties had agreed
– whether they appreciated it is
evil or not – whether that would be, if committed, an
In our proposition 5, we have collected the reasons why
there is, for the proper working of criminal justice in such a case, the
why one needs to know at the outset what it is that the alleged conspirators
have agreed will be done by one of them as the
predicate offence which renders
their conspiracy criminal, even if the predicate offence is never committed.
You cannot have a “wait
and see” with respect to the availability,
say, of overt acts in order to infer the existence of an agreement unless you
what it is the prosecution is alleging the agreement was – you
do not have a fact in issue to which that evidence can lend
evidentiary support
Could I show you the way in which the trial judge grappled with
this problem? First of all, in the core appeal book at page 44,
dismissing complaints about the form of the indictment – and I am
just picking it up halfway through this passage, about
paragraph 104 – the paraphrase or explanation of her
understanding that the judge gives in paragraph 105, in our submission,
rather demonstrates the point that was being made against the form of the
indictment rather than rebuts it. That is because those
descriptions do not at
any point tell you what act or omission – that is, what conduct by the
Minister – was agreed should
occur that it was agreed would have that
Now, I stress – as I did in answer to
Justice Beech‑Jones – there does not have to be any
conscious understanding
of, in particular, the fifth element – that
would be, in a sense, absurd to expect of proof against
conspirators – but
there has to be an agreement that things will be
done or, perhaps, not done which the jury can see would, if they occurred, have
that requisite quality, in order that it be an agreement to carry –
that there would be the predicate offence committed.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, if you had a conspiracy that simply said: you agree that
Mr Macdonald would do something under the
to secure the
Obeids a licence ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
‑ ‑ ‑ you would say, well, that is not good
enough because that object, in those terms, could never answer the fifth
You would never know it. Or to put it
another way, as the authorities have from time to time put it, it is not a
criminal conspiracy
that people agree on something that might or might not be
illegal and could well be illegal depending upon the choices one of them
make. That is not a criminal conspiracy. And that is critical when one thinks
are evaluations that will be
highly fact‑specific and circumstantial, all of that being in the future.
You will not know in
advance whether what is done or not done is of such a
nature, will be of such a nature, is agreed to be of such a nature, that it
meet the fifth element, for example, which is absolutely critical for this
predicate offence.
Why does (c) not meet the fifth
Knowingly in breach of:
(i) his duties and obligations of impartiality...and/or
(ii) his duties and obligations of confidentiality –
That will not always meet the fifth
But it could.
that is our point, your Honour. It could – it might, depending
upon the facts. And what you do not know, and what we do
not know, as an
accused, is what it is that we have agreed the Minister will do. It will not be
a conspiracy where we have agreed
where we do not have anything in particular in
mind at all.
But you accept that the indictment does
not have to specify the means of the conspiracy?
that depends upon the particular case. Means is not a term of art, though it is
found throughout the authorities. It may well
be that in one case, in a case
that is easily imagined, unless you have agreed on means, you have not agreed on
that which would
make an act criminal.
Thus, for example, if the means
involves telling a lie, that which would otherwise be a completely
unexceptionable act of public
administration, would not be criminal but is made
criminal by the telling of a lie. So, there is, in order for there to be a
conspiracy in that kind of case, what somebody might call a means of
achieving the desired nefarious end – that would of course
What you cannot do – as the Crown resolutely pressed
in this case and we think is still doing so – what you cannot do
simply say, I am not going to tell you what they agreed he would do, I am going
to tell you, at the highest level of an abstraction
taken from the elements of
the offence – the predicate offence – I am going to tell
you, simply, that whatever it is,
eventually it will answer that description,
without ever saying what it was that was agreed would be the conduct of the
It has to be in advance, because that is the nature of an agreement.
BEECH-JONES J:
We know a bit more about, though, what it is
said to be they agreed in advance. We know, according to the Crown, that was is
to be, in advance, was: it is about an exploration licence under that Act,
that legislation, in that area, to advance the interests
of the Obeids, as
particularised, and knowingly done in breach of those duties. Could you not
say, knowing – having those
characteristics, it will necessarily be
capable of being serious enough to merit criminal
punishment?
Yes and no. Our whole point is that
you cannot allege a criminal conspiracy by simply alleging that something was
agreed to be
done – without saying what that “something”
is – which would make out the elements of that offence, by pleading
that at that high level of abstraction.
BEECH-JONES J:
describing its characteristics in that way?
characteristics are simply making out the offence of misconduct in public
BEECH-JONES J:
They are a bit more than that. They are
telling you the Act – the legislation, the
that does not tell
BEECH-JONES J:
‑ ‑ ‑ who is to advance, what duties are going
to be omitted.
It does not actually tell you
anything about the conduct of the Minister under the statute – what
conduct of the Minister
under the statute?
BEECH-JONES J:
conduct in connection with the granting of an exploration
Your Honour, obviously enough,
conduct “in connection with” could include things that could not
possibly be unlawful –
could not possibly – that is, they
are not, of their nature – that is, publication to the world of
possibilities will
not fit into that category at all, which is a deal of what
happened here.
Our complaint is that you cannot overcome the requirement
of pleading an agreement to commit a predicate offence without saying what
the conduct agreed on. That is the whole point. The sting of a conspiracy
being complete and people being criminally liable
for it without any predicate
offence being committed is that you have agreed in advance so as to render
yourself guilty notwithstanding
the thing never happens.
You cannot do
that by simply waiting and seeing what happens. You have got to be able say
what it is, in advance, was agreed to
be done or not done which would then have
the quality – which, of course, as a matter of simply ticking off the
boxes in the
elements of the offence, would be an offence. That is why a mere
alleged conspiracy that an offence be committed will never be
sufficient.
So, if you sort of drill down, where I
think you get to is, on one hand, there is no need to identify an overt
act – which you
accept. But on the other hand, the law recognises
that the practical realities are twofold. Sometimes, because one looks to the
focus of the agreement, you cannot identify what the acts are going to be, and
that is why you do not have overt acts, but you would
require overt acts to be
identified here in the sense of you want acts identified, being conduct
undertaken by the Minister which
are the subject of agreement.
I do not require overt acts to be identified in the indictment,
no. Some overt acts will be the commission of a predicate offence,
but that is
no part of our argument. Many overt acts will certainly not be the commission
of a predicate offence, they will simply
be, in the familiar phrase, steps in
furtherance of the agreement.
Because sometimes,
especially in cases of – and you see this from the Hong Kong
decision, where you have an argument about showing
favour – the
practical reality is that they do not know what the act is going to
And that is the force of what we said. They
pointed out, well, that would make that a problematic conspiracy but, rather, if
commit, in return for a pourboire, to be favourable to somebody –
just in general, it may never happen – it is not a
conspiracy of a
conditional kind to act favourably to them if and when it becomes possible;
simply, I will be favourably disposed
to you. And the elegance of that
conspiracy is that it simply observes: how dare a Chief Secretary have office
wearing those golden
fetters? That is the whole point of
But what we get from it in particular is that was obviously
a better way for the matter to be pleaded and prosecuted because of the
difficulties arising from the contingencies of a so‑called conditional
conspiracy where no‑one knows in advance
what, if anything, will be done,
let alone in what circumstances, and in particular, given the particular
predicate offence here,
whether it will have the characteristics and be
committed in circumstances that you will satisfy the “but for”
which obviously involves knowing something about what are the other
countervailing reasons for or against making the particular step,
whatever it
Mr Walker, does that mean
that if the indictment, instead of referring to the grant of an exploration
licence over a particular
area, instead of referring to being in breach of
duties of obligations of impartiality and of confidentiality, if the indictment
had merely said that there was a conspiracy whereby the Minister Macdonald would
add favourably in the interest of the Obeids, you
would not have a problem with
that indictment?
There might be a problem
with the case, because there is no golden fetters in this
No, I understand that, but the form
But in form – yes. Do we
accept that
is an answer to the problems of so‑called
“conditional conspiracies”? That is not so much a pleading problem
a problem of what can you plead in order to make out the requisite proof of
the agreement. It has to be an agreement that an offence
The problem with a conditional conspiracy is that you are not
knowing what will happen. The court is not able to say they have agreed
something which will be criminal, as opposed to agreed on something which might
be criminal or which might be deplorable behaviour
But the conditional conspiracy
does become an offence once the condition is met, provided there is still an
agreement at that point.
Your Honour
anticipates me – yes – we are not in that area at all.
That mode of dealing with conditionality obviously
requires close attention in
the evidence to the continuance of the agreement. And here, the agreement was
said to have been accomplished
before any of the enumerated misconduct had
occurred. That is a very important part of our case. There is nothing
artificial in
us insisting you therefore have to look at what is able to be
proved against our client up to and not beyond that date concerning
of an agreement.
You can use overt acts thereafter. You can use them
for the so‑called backwards inference as to the existence of an anterior
agreement, but it is to be recalled that it is not said that there was any
agreement that any of those enumerated acts would be done.
That is why, in our
submission, this case remains simply, at most, the embryonic beginnings of the
possibility of a case that would
founder either on the inability to show that
there was a
‑style golden fetters exercise or that there was a
conditional conspiracy where the agreement contemplated the fulfilment of
conditions and the commission of offences thereafter.
That, in our
submission, is why this case went off the rails, because there was this
determined refusal to say what are the acts
– not what are their
qualities in terms of what the criminal calendar assigns as the elements of an
offence, but what are the
acts which are said to make out those elements. And
it is not enough, with respect, to say that they have told us what we agreed
Minister would do by saying that he would act without reasonable justification.
That is not telling us what he would do, that
is assigning a quality to it by
measuring it against available excuses at law or in fact.
What would be an example of an act that satisfied the characteristics
or the qualities in (a), (b) and (c) that would not be misconduct
office? Would it be a trivial breach?
Your Honour, if I may say so, that is, in a sense, my point. It does
not actually – what it says is this: is a conspiracy
to do something
which will be criminal. That is not an admissible conspiracy. You have got to
say: you have agreed to do specified
things which will be
Mr Walker, do you have two points or
one? I mean, I understand the point about that this is expressed at too high a
level of generality
to properly constitute an
offence ‑ ‑ ‑
‑ ‑ ‑ but do you say that separately
from that it also expresses or it could be characterised as expressing a
conditional
offence? And if so, what is the condition?
It does, not in, terms allege a conditional offence. It perhaps records
confrontation by the Crown of Scylla and Charybdis and trying
to go down the
middle. It is only conditional in the sense that it is not ordinarily
used – it is not the usual meaning of
that expression here. It is
only conditional in the sense that it could be understood as an indictment that
posits that something
will be done which, whatever it is, will have those
qualities which are elements of the offence.
Now, I do not think that is
really a conditional conspiracy. A conditional conspiracy would be, more
likely, that as and when circumstances
permit, or if it is a full moon that
night, et cetera, et cetera, the – no, it is not really a
conditionality second point.
But grappling with the problems of conditional
conspiracies, particularly at the proper time for the completed agreement,
ascertaining
whether at that point what had been agreed upon conveyed
illegality – that is the problem with most conditional conspiracies,
you cannot say that they have agreed on doing something that will be criminal,
all you can say is they have agreed on something that
Another problem with conditional conspiracies is you cannot
say they have agreed it will happen; they have only agreed that it might
and in specified circumstances. So, we do not really have that problem, but
that familiar difficulty in this area underlies
the point that we have been
trying to make, namely, that this is a case where we were never told what it was
that the Minister would
do, by act or omission, we were merely told that
whatever it was, it would have those qualities that would answer to the
description
– leaving aside the “but for”
one – that would answer to the description that would make out
elements of
an offence. And as I say, that comes far too close to the absurd
possibility of people being guilty of a conspiracy that an offence
of some kind
will be committed.
And it is when one gets into an offence with the
particular, rather importantly inflected elements such as the fifth element and
the “but for” element in an area where public officials, as I say in
opening, do have to make decisions which will please
people differentially and
which will be subject to differential favour, that is, advantage to different
sections of the community,
it is critical that there be, for a criminal
conspiracy, agreement on those things which will make it criminal for sure if it
not make it criminal maybe, depending upon circumstances, if it
It is for those reasons that the mere recitation of matters
which are elements of the offence or self‑evident propositions
the fifth element – indeed, they just plead the fifth
element – could not possibly answer the description
of the allegation
of an agreement in advance that something be done which, in due course, will
have, if committed, that quality.
It has to be a “will have, if
committed” because the agreement is completed as a crime whether or not
the thing ever
GAGELER CJ:
Could it be an agreement
that has those qualities – (a), (b) and (c) – whether or
not the misconduct is “serious
and meriting criminal
punishment”?
I may not have
heard ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
it be sufficient to allege in the indictment acts having the qualities (a), (b)
and (c), whether or not the misconduct would
be serious and meriting criminal
punishment?
No, because they are, therefore,
not – assuming that there are acts set out and it is then alleged
they have those qualities,
but it does not have the fifth element, you would not
have alleged an agreement that a predicate offence be committed. There are
self‑evident difficulties for everyone in relation to yoking conspiracy to
the offence of misconduct in public office.
It may be that the systemic
response to that is to look to what I will call other forms of criminal
complicity than this highly peculiar
institution of an offence completed without
the predicate offence having been committed. But no, you could not possibly
is a conspiracy which is criminal regardless of whether the fifth
element exists, because that would, oddly to say, this is an offence
something be committed for which the substantive offender could not be
convicted, in the absence of the fifth element. The
same is true for “but
for”. The predicate offender could not be committed of that substantive
offence if “but
for” is not made out.
BEECH-JONES J:
Could I just ask about that? I think that comes from the decision in
BEECH-JONES J:
And the argument, I think, was all about
motivating purpose. If you had a conspiracy – which I think you, for
better phrase, would be fine with – which was a conspiracy
to commit one of the particular acts of misconduct, so, that was
object – Mr Macdonald would do something contrary to the
– in advance, how does that the “but
for” element engage? Assuming that is a correct statement of what the
is, how would that engage at a conspiracy in
It is with relative difficulty, but
that does not hurt my argument, it
rather ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
I am just wondering how it engages at all – how that element engages
with even what I would understand you to accept
as a normal or more acceptable
form of conspiracy.
So, first of all, can I just
refer to the fact that we have addressed the way the Court of Criminal Appeal
dealt with “but
for” and described it as a bizarre introduction of
causation notions, and we simply say this. On the law in New South Wales,
substantive offence could not be committed without proving “but
for”. That is not a causation thing, that has to
do with the state of
mind concerning the improper motivation of the substantive wrongdoer. It is
also causation in the true but
trivial sense that that explains why he or she
did what he or she did, but that really goes to motivation.
Is the point really that you say the indictment, after “by doing
acts”, should have contained the words: which he would
not otherwise have
Namely – that certainly should
have been, but there needed to be a description of the acts. Now, that has to
be at a level
generality ‑ ‑ ‑
but this is a separate point from the generality
point ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, it is.
absence of a “but for” test is the absence of the words: which he
would not otherwise have
Yes. And the
Court of Criminal Appeal has made it clear that there is no problem that they
did not have to prove that the conspiracy
included acts which were such that but
for the improper motivation, there would not have been the decisions
taken – that is,
the acts done, whatever they are – that
was the object of the anterior agreement.
That comes from the simple
proposition, which we say does not alter – even when there are
quiddities concerning the predicate
offence, as there plainly are in this
case – you do not depart from the general rule that in order for
something as serious
as an agreement to be criminalised, though the predicate
offence never be committed, you must be able, at the point of the agreement,
say what has been agreed, because the agreement for something wrong to be done
is the gist of the offence.
And you cannot do that in this case without
saying there is an agreement that whatever is to be done is such that,
regardless of
anything else, the decision will be in a particular way. That is
how you would plead the “but for”.
that your conditionality point – that without a requirement that
Mr Macdonald would not, otherwise, have done those acts,
the doing of those
acts by Mr Macdonald might or might not have been
Criminal, that is
Therefore, it is a pleading of a conditional
Your answer is that “knowingly in breach of” in (c) does
not answer it.
That is right.
Because it does not say anything
sufficient.
Well, knowingly in breach
would ‑ ‑ ‑
is a bit like saying, “knowingly committing an offence”,
your Honour, which is not really the point. It is not
knowingly in breach
if you realise that something which the public interest cries out for and will
be a good idea will also ‑
It may be the flipside of “would not otherwise have done
it”. If you were in breach, you would not have done it –
otherwise in breach.
What I am saying is,
your Honour, you have to know what it
That is your
first point.
Yes, because it is only then that
you can answer questions like “but for”; it is only then that you
can answer fifth
element. If Justice Gordon’s question concerns what
I might call – I hope not disrespectfully to my argument, let alone
to your Honour – a pleading point, we are saying about that that
a form of indictment cannot, by simply saying “wrongfully”
“knowingly wrongfully”, substitute for the allegation of what has
been agreed, what is the object of the agreement,
at all, otherwise the slippery
slope ends very rapidly at: you can have a conspiracy to commit an offence,
which you cannot. Your
Honours, I see the time, and there is an agreement
and, I think, an adjournment.
GAGELER CJ:
Very well, we will
take the morning adjournment, thank you.
AT 11.16 AM
SHORT ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 11.30
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, your Honour.
Lest I forget it, might I, at the outset of my submissions, address the question
which had been posed to
the parties concerning the relevance of clause 21
of the Regulations, and my answer to that is a simple one, which is it has no
on the present arguments.
There has been discussion already
need to be particularised
in an indictment. And in a sense, it is a curious
provision since, obviously, at common law, as it applies in New South Wales, no
overt act is required in order to establish the offence of conspiracy, so it
seems a rather peculiar provision to require, or not
require, rather, pleading
of overt acts in an indictment for conspiracy. But in any event, we are not
here, I submit, concerned
with overt acts. So, that is the brief answer to the
question posed by the Court.
As a segue to my submissions, can I perhaps
pick up on a question posed by your Honour Justice Steward to my
learned friend Mr Walker
response as to means, because it has to be accepted that the means in which a
criminal act is carried out need not be the subject of a pleading in a
conspiracy indictment. Now, having said that, however, one
must look at
particular offence, because that will determine the degree of specificity. And
perhaps the simplest form of conspiracy
might be a conspiracy to commit the
offence of murder, and that would simply be phrased as: A and B did conspire to
However, with different offences, the degree of
particularity changes. So, for instance, if one has an offence of false
it might be necessary to plead what the false pretences were, not
necessarily the way in which they would be communicated, whether
prospectus or the like – that is the means – but
nevertheless, the representations would be required to be
BEECH-JONES J:
Could you have a conspiracy whereby you
agree to be one of four different pretences?
Yes, you could. And the jury would not have to be unanimous in that. I think
in our materials we have referred to an article
by Ormerod – I do not
need to take your Honour to it, but that confirms the position.
I accept, yes, one could have a set of circumstances, and indeed, in the present
case, one might have been able to allege that
Mr Macdonald would misconduct
himself in fashion A – act A, perhaps using a more precise
word – act B or act C, and that
would be similar to the
false pretences case. The complaint here, of course, is that there is
no A, B or C act specified.
Now, before turning to the nub of
the argument, I come back to what your Honour Justice Gordon posed, which
is the practical reality
that in certain circumstances, one may not know what it
is which is agreed upon by the conspirators. Frequently, that will be inferred
from the nature of the overt acts. If one takes, for example, a conspiracy to
import a border controlled drug, if a border controlled
drug is imported, one
might infer, even without knowledge of communications between
co‑conspirators, that that was the object
conspiracy.
BEECH-JONES J:
You could have a conspiracy to import
a border controlled drug without specifying what particular drug, could you
You could, yes, you could, because again, the act
is the importation, it does not require the importation of a particular
or a particular quantity, putting aside some peculiarities about the
Criminal Code
in the example I have given.
BEECH-JONES J:
But all you would need to specify is that the act would be a drug that was
That is right.
BEECH-JONES J:
That would be enough.
That has that characteristic
and again, the co‑conspirators will not need to know, necessarily, that
characteristic, that is
right. Similar in a sense to element 5, which I
will come to, because that really is the focus of my submission today, in terms
of specificity.
I was coming to what your Honour
Justice Gordon posed to Mr Walker, and that is one may not simply know
what the acts were which
formed part of the conspiracy. In other words, one
knows that there was an agreement for, take this example, Mr Macdonald to
something, but one cannot say what. And if that is ultimately the position,
then my contention is that is a failure of proof –
if one cannot
prove what the agreement is, the contents of the agreements, one cannot prove
the criminal conspiracy. One can prove
an agreement, perhaps, but nothing more
Now, that is not to say that if it could be proven beyond
reasonable doubt that Mr Macdonald entered into an arrangement with, for
instance, the appellant for whom I appear to favour his interests even without
knowing what the acts are, that is not to say that
that would not be a criminal
offence, because that might well constitute the substantive offence of wilful
misconduct because the
mere entry into such an agreement could itself be wilful
misconduct.
So, although I say to your Honour Justice Gordon that
there might be a failure of proof, because one cannot prove acts, that is not
say that there are not other avenues of punishing such conduct. My learned
friend Mr Walker spoke about other offences that might
be applicable, but
even the offence itself of wilful misconduct might apply, just not in
conjunction with conspiracy.
Likewise, if that were able to be proved
beyond reasonable doubt insofar as Mr Macdonald was concerned, there are
other aspects of
criminality such as incitement that would apply to other
co‑conspirators. But that does not therefore mean that the offence
conspiracy could be proven. So, that is the point I wanted to make in answer to
what your Honour put to Mr Walker.
The argument boils down to
a very simple proposition, which is a conspiracy must be a conspiracy to commit
a crime. Put aside the
second way in which a conspiracy could
occur – that is, unlawful means – that is not relevant to
the present case. I
would ask your Honours to turn back to the
indictments, appearing at the court book, page 6, to, I hope, illustrate
the point I seek
to advance.
The indictment reads that there is an
agreement for Mr Macdonald wilfully to misconduct himself “by doing
acts”. I think
– I forget who it was – one of
your Honours asked what should appear afterwards and, I think,
Mr Walker said “comma,
namely” and that acts would be listed
thereafter, and that what appears at (a), (b) and (c) are characteristics or
characteristics of those acts. Could I then invite your Honours
to the paragraph underneath (a), (b) and (c):
such misconduct –
such misconduct, of course, must relate
to the acts, because the indictment reads:
wilfully misconduct himself . . . by doing
Then, importantly – and this has not been
addressed in great detail so far, so fortunately Mr Walker has left me
something to
talk about today – adds the words:
having regard to the . . . objects . . . and
the nature and extent of the departure from those objects.
I make it quite plain at this stage that the argument I advance does not
suggest, as some of earlier submissions might have, that
an awareness of the
seriousness of the offence is something that must have been known or of which
the co‑conspirators must
have been aware.
I do not suggest that,
but I say that it is this fifth element which imposes a requirement in terms of
pleading that is much greater
than, for instance, in dishonesty cases, fraud
cases. It is the reason why I say that, ultimately, the Court would derive
benefit from looking at other cases of conspiracy, but rather,
your Honours need to look at the terms of this offence, defined as
common law.
As a most basic proposition, if an indictment says that the
conspirators agreed to commit an offence which may or may not be criminal,
contention is that is not an offence known to law. Now, certainly, the simpler
proposition, an agreement to commit something
not unlawful cannot be a criminal
conspiracy – again, putting aside unlawful means. An agreement to
commit a criminal offence
is an offence known at law. We submit what this
indictment presents is the middle ground – that is, it is an
agreement that
requires the commission of something that may or may not be an
That brings me to a word your Honour
Justice Beech‑Jones might have picked up from the respondent’s
submissions, because
it appears twice – one is at paragraph 27
and one is at paragraph 33 – and it is the word
“capable”. Now,
I accept without hesitation that acts which have
these characteristics are capable of amounting to wilful misconduct that may
criminal punishments, to abbreviate that final fifth element.
Your Honour also used afterwards when putting an example, if they
necessarily – and I emphasise that word
“necessarily” – would amount to wilful
misconduct ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
I think the phrase I used, Mr Lange, was “necessarily capable”;
“capable” reflecting it is an evaluative
“necessarily” being all acts that conceivably fall
within (a), (b) and (c) must be capable.
BEECH-JONES J:
That is what I was imperfectly trying
to get across.
And I have imperfectly repeated, but
that is the distinction I see to draw. If those characteristics were such that
necessarily
all acts would fall within each of the elements, but specifically
element 5, then there would be no complaints, but what is said
respondent is acts are capable, which means that acts are not necessarily all
within the elements, that being the difficulty.
My learned friend
Mr Walker discussed at some length the difference between characterisation
and a class. I will not repeat what
he said, but could I come back to what
your Honour Justice Gleeson asked of, and that was an example. Might
I proffer this example
because it may help advance the debate.
might be supposed that the DPI was having an information session about the
release of an EL, to use the vernacular, but someone
– for example,
from Cascade Coal, to pick one of the entities involved in this
case – who wanted to be at the meeting
to get information was stuck
in traffic and was running 10 minutes late, as a result of which one of the
persons said to be co‑conspirators
in this case called up
Mr Macdonald and said: tell the DPI to hold off 10 minutes because
the representative from Cascade does not
want to miss out on what is being said.
Now, that example, in my submission, would satisfy each of the three
requirements of (a),
(b) and (c).
BEECH-JONES J:
That would be in breach of the duties of impartiality.
Impartiality, by requesting that there be a delay as a result of a request for
someone to whom it is suggested Mr Macdonald would
BEECH-JONES J:
Well, no, because you might want to
compare that to some other bidder who said: I am 10 minutes
late – would you not?
BEECH-JONES J:
Well, only if you would draw the
conclusion that he would never give a 10‑minute delay to another
serious bidder or party
interested, would he not?
not wish to get into issues about the “but for” element today, but
what I submit is, if it was influenced by what
is said to be an improper
purpose, it is showing partiality. It is an example, but an example which I put
forward to demonstrate
that there may well be steps which amount to satisfaction
of each of those three paragraphs – (a), (b)
and (c) – that
nevertheless are not such as to be so serious as
to warrant punishment.
Now, the importance of that is – and
this comes back to what your Honour Justice Beech‑Jones asked
Mr Walker –
does not factor in at the start, at the time the conspiracy has formed, I
but rather at the point in time when the tribunal of fact has to
evaluate whether the conspiracy is one which is criminal.
That is, once
the Crown has established what the acts are that were agreed upon by the
co‑conspirators, it then must consider
whether those acts – not
in the minds of the co‑conspirators, but those acts evaluated by the jury
at the time of verdict
– were of such seriousness as to merit
criminal punishments. If they conclude those acts were not so serious, then
not a criminal conspiracy, the Crown case fails. If they consider
that they were so serious, the Crown has proven its case, and
that is the
manner, I submit, how the fifth element comes into consideration in a conspiracy
Now, that is important because the tribunal of fact –
typically a jury, in this case a judge‑alone – must have
framework by which to assess all the various elements, and in order to assess
the various elements, in particular whether the
misconduct merits criminal
punishment, it needs to know what the acts are. I say that when one pays
particular regard to the last
line of the indictment, and one has regard to the
nature and extent of the departure from those objects. Now, that is an
which can only take place if one knows the acts and how those acts
departed from the objects, et cetera.
I do not want to take up too
much time because I know Mr Parkin has to speak as well, but I understand
the respondent seeks to rely
upon the case of
Industrial Court
(2010) 239 CLR 531. In my submission, the
case beyond paragraph 26, upon which the respondent relies, is albeit an
imperfect analogy
nevertheless a helpful one. Might I take your Honours
through the judgment only very briefly. Could I invite your Honours to
9 on page 551 of the report. The offence provision was set
out in section 15(1):
Every employer shall ensure the health, safety and welfare at work of all the
employer’s employees.”
A very broad section, one which was aided – and I use that
word “expressly” – by subsection (2), which set
examples of ways in which subsection (1) might be contravened. I say
“examples” of course because of reference to:
Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) –
Can I then take your Honours please to paragraph 11 on the next
page, where the same point is made. That is, the list of circumstances
subsection (2) was “not exhaustive” – that appears
in the third line – and then:
What measures are necessary to be taken –
I will just ask your Honours to read the rest of that sentence,
please. In the subsequent paragraphs up until 14, this Court –
if I can summarise it – briefly concluded that merely providing
reference to those examples which were provided in the statute
and combining
with a connection to the ATV – the vehicle that led to the
harm – was not a sufficient basis to plead the
case against the
defendants, because one needed to know more; one needed to know what the process
was defective. Again, speaking
That is a similar situation, in
my submission, to the present case. What was provided in that information was a
set of characteristics.
That is, a failure to have in place certain measures.
It chiefly aligns to what was contained in subsection (2) with the
of the last particular that was freely drafted, it seems. In other
words, the mere provision of those particulars as circumstances
sufficient basis to conclude that the information was adequate.
Do you accept the principles as set out in
paragraph 26?
And there it identifies distinction drawn between:
the substance of the charge –
so, they can meet it, and recognising that the particulars are of much
more detailed
identifying the necessity of it being that it is:
informing the court of the identity of the offence with which it is required
to deal and in providing the accused with the substance
of the charge which he
or she is called upon to meet.
Yes, I do. Might
I make two responses. Firstly, the mere provision of particulars may not in and
of itself be a sufficient basis
to conclude that an information or indictment is
adequate. The remedy, where inadequate particulars are provided, rests
in a stay, but that says little about the sufficiency of the
information in this case of
, or the indictment, as in the present
case. I say ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry but this case is not – your point fundamentally is not a
pleading point at all, is it? You are only looking at the indictment
reflection of what the Crown actually set out to prove.
That is right. Then, in terms of specificity, can I turn to what I have
called before the imperfect analogy, and that is what appears
paragraph 15 of the report, where the Court refers to the defence, which is
then set out at the top of page 554. Then in the
succeeding paragraphs,
but especially paragraph 17, says that one cannot advance a defence without
knowing what it is one is defending.
Now, that is affirmative defence in
that case, and therefore I say is an imperfect analogy, but it is similar here
because there
might well at some point be an evidential burden upon an accused
person to demonstrate that what may have been the subject of agreement
sufficiently serious to warrant criminal sanction, but how can one legitimately
address that concern – that fifth element
– if all other
elements are established by the
Crown, without knowing the acts and
demonstrating that the departure is not such as to warrant criminal punishments.
It is for that
reason I say that this case of
is analogous because
it demonstrates one must be provided with sufficient particulars to answer the
charge, in effect.
Now, I will not take up much more time and simply
anon this other hypothetical. Let it be assumed that the example I gave before
is still a good one that comes within the three paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), for
present purposes, and that Mr Macdonald had been
charged with the
substantive offence and all three gentlemen had been charged with the conspiracy
as pleaded in this indictment.
If the jury came to the view that the delaying
of the meeting by 10 minutes was not sufficient to warrant criminal
punishments,
Mr Macdonald would be acquitted necessarily of the substantive
But in the absence of any acts being specified by the Crown,
there is a very real risk that the jury, not knowing what those acts
nevertheless might convict both him and the Obeids of the offence of conspiracy,
even though the only overt act was the delaying
of the meeting
by 10 minutes. Now, in saying that I do not wish to confuse overt
acts from the acts specified in the agreements,
but again this comes back to
Justice Gordon’s point with which I started really, that there is
simply a lack of evidence and
the Crown case ought to fail in the absence of
particularisation of the acts.
Unless I can assist your Honours any
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Lange.
Your Honours, the Crown at trial
disavowed any suggestion that the overt acts relied upon in this case were the
object of the agreement
and indeed accepted that they could not have been. That
is to say, on the Crown case, none of those particulars evidenced the
consummation
of the conspiracy. They were not the object of the agreement.
Rather, they were said to be acts in furtherance of the agreement.
That just begs the question as to what is the agreement? In a
conspiracy, the offence which is the subject of an agreement is ordinarily
which is able to be executed by commission. Most conspiracy prosecutions
involve completed offences, but there is no suggestion
I think that the
conspiracy was consummated here. Indeed, if it had been, what would that have
actually looked like? The object
which was averred by the Crown, the class of
acts, gives no content to the offence that the Crown said was agreed to be
So, we submit that that is in truth because the Crown failed
to identify any agreed‑upon acts which could, if committed, constitute
completed offence. In truth, the Crown case was little more than eight
allegations of misconduct in public office, strung together
and used as a basis
to invite the tribunal of fact to infer that the accused together must have
conspired for Mr Macdonald to commit
the general unlawful object of
misconduct in public office.
We have two overarching points. I
endeavour not to repeat anything that has been said thus far. The first is
this. The Crown’s
class of acts approach does not permit the assessment
of the knowledge and intention of the accused and, for that reason, it cannot
right as a matter of principle. The second point is that, when viewed against
the backdrop of common law criminal liability occupied
by inchoate offences and
principles of complicity, it is clear that the offence of conspiracy ought not
be understood as stretching
to accommodate the Crown’s class of acts
approach. I will develop each of those in turn.
As to the first point,
your Honours, conspirators must know the essential facts and circumstances
that make what is agreed to be
done a crime, and they need to intend that that
agreement be carried out. There must be intention based on actual knowledge of
facts and circumstances. Mere recklessness as to those facts and
circumstances is not sufficient. This Court’s decision in
requires intention based on actual knowledge of those facts.
The correct position, in our submission, is what was stated by the
House of Lords in
Churchill v Walton
. It is extracted in our
submissions at paragraph 20. The question is: what did they agree to do?
If what they agreed to do was
on the facts known to them an unlawful act, they
are guilty of conspiracy. If on the facts known to them what they agreed to do
was lawful, they are not rendered artificially guilty by the existence of other
facts not known to them, giving a different and criminal
quality to the act
Now, where no particular act or acts are said to have been
agreed upon, that assessment is impossible. That is so for two reasons.
Firstly, it is impossible to know what the essential facts and circumstances are
if you do not know the act which is agreed upon.
Secondly, even if the
conspirator is taken to agree to all of the acts within the class, every
possible permutation of misconduct
in office which would be potentially open on
the indictment, they could only have the necessary knowledge and intention if
subjectively adverted to the particular act or acts which were
ultimately to be committed.
If they do not, there is not actual
knowledge or the requisite intention. There is not even recklessness. It is
almost like recklessness
once removed; recklessness as to what was actually to
be agreed what was actually to be done. Your Honours, the second point is
conspiracy’s position in the common law suggests an agreement to commit a
class of acts is insufficient.
Conspiracy is an inchoate offence, and it
is unique in the sense that it does not require any step towards the commission
predicate offence. Now there are good reasons for policy to keep such
offences within tight confines. It is not a principal approach
to look at the
overall activities of people and impute to them an agreement with each other and
a mutual intention to achieve the
general unlawful object which might be
suggested by the totality of their individual unlawful practices, be that the
I want to illustrate this point by reference to a couple of
different principles of common law complicity and the first, I think,
particularly telling, and that is the accessorial before the fact liability. As
the decision of this Court in
illustrates, the state of mind
required for conspiracy is the same as that as an accessory before the fact.
The position of a conspirator
and an accessory before the fact is not
substantially different. Factually, they are both considering possibilities to
the future.
But there are three clear points of difference
between conspiracy and accessorial liability. Firstly, an accessory is not
for merely intending the offence to occur. An accessory is only liable
where they provide assistance or encouragement to the principal,
intending that
the principal will then engage in the criminal conduct that they have intended
to assist. Secondly, an accessory
may withdraw or countermand their
involvement. A conspirator cannot. Once the agreement is made, that is it;
that is the end, as
far as the question of liability is
Thirdly, accessorial liability depends on proof of the actual
offence or proof of an attempt to commit the actual offence. Conspiracy
not; conspiracy is complete upon agreement. So, the sufficiency of the
Crown’s allegations to the agreed upon acts in
this case, we submit, can
be tested in this way.
Say the Crown had put a case that Moses and
Edward Obeid were accessories before the fact to Mr Macdonald committing an
act of misconduct
in public office, would it have been sufficient for Moses or
Edward to have known that Mr Macdonald would wilfully misconduct himself
a way that was not known to Moses, save that it would otherwise meet the
criteria relied upon the Crown as delineating the class
of acts? We say it
You could not as an accessory before the fact commit an
offence of the kind which is pleaded as being the subject of agreement in
case. In circumstances where the state of knowledge required for a conspirator
is the same as what is required of an accessory
before the fact, that points
strongly, in our submission, to the incorrectness of the approach advocated for
by the Crown.
Conspiracy is considerably less onerous in accessorial
liability. It attaches to offences that have not been committed, may not
ultimately be able to be committed, where no steps have been taken towards their
commission and independent of any change of mind
by the conspirator. In those
circumstances, the requirements of knowledge for conspiracy should certainly be
no less onerous or
demanding than that of the requirements of knowledge for
accessory before the fact liability. We say that the class of acts approach
contended for by the Crown is a less rigorous standard.
comparison we wish to draw is to joint criminal enterprise. Joint criminal
enterprise and conspiracy have a near complete
overlap. Both depend on proof of
an agreement to commit a criminal offence, but conspiracy is less onerous than
joint criminal enterprise
in at least the following ways.
unlike a conspirator, a co‑venturer in a joint criminal enterprise is not
liable for merely willing the offence to
occur. A co‑venturer is only
liable where they participate in the commission of the offence, either through
presence at the
scene or through some involvement prior with the state of mind
necessary to commit the predicate offence, or the foundational offence.
co‑venturer may also withdraw or countermand their involvement, a
conspirator may not.
Thirdly, joint criminal enterprise depends upon
proof of the actual offence or proof of an attempt to commit the actual offence.
Finally, a person can be liable for conspiracy even though they could not in law
commit the predicate offence, something which has
particular resonance here;
joint criminal enterprise would not have been available because Moses and Edward
Obeid were not public
So, there is no good reason to adopt a
different standard of agreement between joint criminal enterprise in conspiracy.
Any expansion
of the kinds of agreements permissible in a conspiracy will have
an inevitable flow‑on effect to joint criminal enterprise
and broaden the
scope of potential liability for secondary participation at common law. Any
expansion in the scope of a joint criminal
enterprise will inevitably expand the
range of circumstances in which extended joint criminal enterprise can be relied
Such an expansion is, in our submission, unnecessary and
unprincipled, as well as inconsistent with the imperative of ensuring that
law developed towards greater correlation between legal responsibility and moral
culpability.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Parkin, your
submission – sorry, I was a bit slow on this – is: forget
this crime, class of acts is never good for
any conspiracy.
I would not want to put it that highly, but certainly the way that
the class of acts has been indicated in this offence, particularly
breadth of possible ways in which misconduct in public office could be
committed, certainly would not be appropriate.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Well, the submissions you are making now, though, appear to be applicable to
all conspiracies.
Well, they are intended to
apply – well, your Honour, we are submitting that, at least so
far as the class of acts approach
applies to this case, it would be
inappropriate. If the class of acts is not one which permits the identification
of the particular
act relied upon, then it would not be sufficient. Of course,
I recognise there is a broad range of different offences at common
law and under
statute and the sufficiency of class of acts in any given case will very much
depend on the terms of the offence and
what is alleged to have been the acts
constituting it.
Your Honours, unless I can be of any particular
assistance, those are the submissions, and we adopt those submissions of Moses
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, thank you, Mr Parkin.
Mr Gleeson.
MR GLEESON:
Your Honours, our
first proposition relates to the Court’s question. The Director submits
and trusts this is not controversial,
that the fundamental distinction between
the indictment, the particulars and the overt acts is this, that the indictment
must identify
the essential factual ingredients of the offence so as to inform
the court of the offence. It is to deal with and provide the accused
substance of the charge he or she is called to meet. We rely upon
239 CLR 531 at paragraph 26. The facts stated in the
indictment:
need not be as extensive –
as those which may come in a statement of particulars. Conventionally
they are not, and that is appropriate under law. The role
of the particulars is
to provide the details going beyond the legal nature of the offence as to the
acts, matters or things which
are the foundation of the charge to permit the
accused to know the case that has to be met. As has been observed by a number
Justices of this Court, including Justice McHugh in
[2001] HCA 11
206 CLR 221.
At 15, his Honour said:
in the context of an adversary system of criminal justice where an accused
person is entitled to be given as high a degree of particularity
concerning a
criminal charge as the subject matter will bear.
That observation is particularly pertinent for conspiracy because if the
charge is that the agreement was reached at a level of generality,
particulars will match that level of generality. If the charge is the agreement
was to do very specifically (a), (b) and (c),
for example, in a particular
place, the particulars will match the nature of the charge.
Much of what
the appellants are putting seek to avoid the basic proposition that the
agreement which the Crown sought to prove was
expressed at a higher level of
generality than some other agreements might have been, and that depends on the
particular case. In
our written submissions, we have referred to
your Honour Justice Beech‑Jones’ decision in
Rubasha v The Queen
[2021] NSWCCA 319
as an example where
in that case it was conspiracy to rob, and the Crown case confined it further to
rob a person at a particular
street in Greenacre.
Both your Honour
presiding in the Court of Criminal Appeal and your fellow judges, including
Judge Wilson at paragraph 61, identified
that the place –
namely Karuah Street, Greenacre – was really a particular. It never
needed to be in the indictment,
but once it was put in the indictment and the
Crown ran its entire case beginning to end committed to that particular, then
the verdict
had to be assessed for unreasonableness against that particular
conspiracy.
That illustrates that in every case the degree of
particularity in the allegations of the factual elements may vary and the Crown
at the end of the case will be held to the way it has conducted it as to the
level of generality it has chosen. In
, the court said in effect
the Crown may have succeeded had they simply said it was a conspiracy to rob, or
a conspiracy to rob in
Greenacre. Those would both have been valid indictments,
and they may have reached a different result.
So, the particulars, which
are the second step, may and usually will, further flesh out the elements of the
charge. They may also
perform a further function, as they did in this
case – they did both – which is they will identify the
overt acts which
are alleged as conduct from which the criminal agreement is
going to be inferred. We agree with what the appellants have said that
clause 21(2) of Part 4 of Schedule 3 of the
Criminal Procedure
(NSW), the overt acts themselves do not need to be stated in
the indictment.
However, they will usually and should be adequately
particularised so that the accused know the basis upon which it is said that
agreement was reached by them. That provision, if your Honours have
it – clause 21 – in fact recognises three topics
related to the indictment. The first is that the overt acts do not need to be
stated. That is subclause (2). The second is under
subclause (3)(b):
Each accused . . .
(b) may be convicted on any such count on proof of having unlawfully conspired,
for the purpose alleged in the indictment, with any
one of the named persons.
Consistently with the common law, the indictment must allege the
agreement referable to the purpose or the object of the conspiracy,
Court has identified it in many cases. For example, Justice Brennan in
It is the object or the purpose of the agreement,
which itself must be either an unlawful object or an unlawful means, that is the
essence of the offence which must be specified in the indictment. The degree of
particularity that the appellants have sought today
goes beyond the requirements
of the common law or of clause 21. Clause 21(5) goes on to refer to
the role of:
Particulars . . . as the court considers
appropriate.
Mr Gleeson, do you say that the scheme
Criminal Procedure Act
is that the indictment will be expressed
in a conspiracy case understandably at a level of generality but that any
procedural unfairness
that that might generate is then cured by an express power
to give particulars under (5)?
MR GLEESON:
Yes, I see.
MR GLEESON:
and that is the scheme that, consistent with many jurisdictions, is reflected in
the Hong Kong decision that your Honour Justice
Gordon asked about in
, which is volume 3, tab 20. The indictment under
count 2 – which is paragraph 24, page 709 in the
book – was expressed
at a significant level of
generality.
I should say I think also count 5 was
in similar terms.
MR GLEESON:
Count 5 was in similar terms
and footnote 8 indicates that there were further particulars which gave
more information about exactly
who was said to be the beneficiaries of the
favourable dispositions. So, it is quite unsurprising that the present
indictment is
expressed at a level of generality. While your Honours have
that indictment ‑ ‑ ‑
Just before you go there, can I ask you, I think an earlier version of
clause 21 was introduced in around about the year 2000. Do
why? Is there ‑ ‑ ‑
We have an answer, if I can just come back to it,
your Honour.
You can address it after lunch, if
it is more convenient.
MR GLEESON:
Yes. I was going to indicate
that when you compare the count as expressed – count 2 and
count 5 – within the elements
of the offence, which is
paragraph 45 following Sir Anthony Mason’s statement in
Sin Kam Wah
, the indictment is conventionally expressed with no greater
specificity than the underlying factual elements and indeed can be expressed
even more summarily.
BEECH-JONES J:
The assumption in that case
appears to be that for the Chief Secretary to remain favourably disposed in
return for a payment, necessarily
met all those elements.
Yes, and the agreement was to place him in the position where he
would therefore be in breach of his duty by reason of that partiality
was under from that first moment. It is interesting that at paragraph 48
the Court cites this decision in
[1923] HCA 59
, which we have given your Honours as a supplementary
It is a good illustration of the level of generality at which
conspiracy has been pleaded in a context rather like the present.
You will see
from the headnote, which captures most of the indictment, that you have
effectively every element that I will come to
in the present indictment. You
first of all have an identification of the accused – that is
A, B and C – you have an
allegation of unlawful conspiracy.
The allegation is that the moneys will be given:
to A “in his official capacity –
So, there you have
the public official, the first element of the Hong Kong formulation of
Sir Anthony Mason. Then you have:
being a public officer to wit –
which might be regarded as
the particulars fleshing out what public office it is. It is an office
a member of the Legislative Assembly of New South
That is the second element. Then you have the
allegation of the wilful misconduct. The third element, that:
sums of money should be corruptly accepted by” A “in his said
official capacity as inducement to” A “in violation
of his official
duty to do or omit to do certain acts –
So, that is really the
third element to there. Then you have as further “to wit” which
might be regarded as particulars
that have been included in the indictment, but
they give the accused some further indication of what is the duty that it is
to be agreed to be violated and what is the broad nature of the
agreed‑upon violation. In every case the degree of particularity
but here it is:
to secure the inspection of, acquisition and the payment in cash for certain
As a matter of the indictment, the particular
estates are not identified. That could be as matter of particulars if needed,
evidence, for:
the inspection of, acquisition and the payment in cash –
those estates:
to be paid for out of the public funds –
There is no
identification of how much cash. That could be particulars or evidence.
to put pressure upon the Minister for Lands and other
to carry out this objective. Pressure –
what forms of pressure? Matter for particulars or evidence if needed, and then
concluding formulaic words were:
“being to the public mischief” –
You see those
words in more detail at the top of page 388:
being to the public mischief of the subjects of Our said Lord the King in the
said State and against the peace of Our Sovereign Lord
the King His Crown and
Those formulaic words are probably what is now captured
in the fifth element. Consistently with the Court of Appeal’s approach,
they are a characterisation done by the tribunal of fact by reference to the
elements that have been pleaded and proved up to that
point in the case. So,
the Director’s short point would be that the present indictment sits
comfortably within a tradition,
reflected expressly in the statute, but a
tradition reflected
the present indictment is quite a level of generality above
is a payment of cash.
MR GLEESON:
I mean, the present indictment might be the
same if it were a payment of cash being made to Mr Macdonald for the
performance of various
vague acts.
MR GLEESON:
Yes, and that is
why the level of generality matches the case the Crown seeks to meet, and the
Crown may stand or fall on that level
of generality at the stage of proof. If
the conspiracy alleged had been more particular, that one or other of the Obeids
cash to Mr Macdonald – that is not this case, but if
it had been alleged at that level of specificity then that would be the
be proved, and if you proved all the other elements of it but you did not prove
an agreement to pay cash you would fail.
So, if you allege it at a high level
of generality, the Crown’s proof will have to adjust
accordingly.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Do you accept
that – I mean, the essence of the criticism that one of them
is – you need to be satisfied that the description
of the acts
necessarily satisfies the so‑called fifth element and a related criticism
is what has been described as the “but
for” element. You may
come to them at some point, Mr Gleeson.
MR GLEESON:
are really three themes that have come out. The first theme is it was just too
general; you needed to have a more specific
identification of acts. That theme
is both a pleading point and a substantive point. That theme is saying let it
be assumed these
three gentlemen sat down and wrote in blood an agreement that
had these terms in it, that Mr Macdonald would and so on, but the law
conspiracy would say that is not touched by us.
In other words, we only
criminalise agreements when they have a greater level of specificity about the
acts to be done. Now, that
is expressed as a pleading point. It is really a
point about when the law of conspiracy bites. The Director’s answer to
is no, the law of conspiracy bites upon an agreement with this level of
generality as much as it does one with a more specific level
of generality. So,
that will be the first point I will seek to identify.
The second theme
is that there is some problem in terms of what is called the “but
for” test. There are a number of
answers to that. The first is the Court
has not granted leave, we would submit, on any “but for” question.
beyond that answer and if one is looking at a matter of pleading, it
has never been the practice to plead a “but for”
element, either in
the conspiracy or even in the underlying predicate offence.
In the case
, which was a case requiring, in that particular predicate
offence, that the Crown proved the “but for” element.
Honours have
in volume 2 tab 10. The
charge is in paragraph 1 on page 415 and over the page. It was no
element of the pleading of the direct
defence of wilful misconduct that there
would be any “but for” inquiry. “But for” was something
considered, between paragraphs 72 through to in particular 84, as a
direction which in that case ought to have been required to be
given to the
Mr Walker said to your Honour Justice Edelman, one
of his complaints is the indictment was simply bad for not pleading “but
for”. “But for” is not required even in the underlying
substantive offence. You have seen from
But if a jury are required to be directed as to “but
for”, why would it not have been required as part of the substantive?
There may be a question as to whether it is an element of the substantive
MR GLEESON:
Exactly, and it partly goes back
to my point that the role of the indictment is to set out the essential factual
elements to be
proved. We then have particulars. We have other matters,
et cetera. I have that point but I want to go further because you then
come to a different question which the Court of Criminal Appeal expressly
addressed, which is whatever be the role of “but
for” in relation to
the underlying offence, is it something you need to plead or prove in
conspiracy?
You have not been taken directly to those reasons, you have
been indirectly referred to them. Can I show you in the core appeal
volume 2, commencing at
page 675 ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
If we could get the paragraph numbers.
MR GLEESON:
Paragraph 21 ‑ ‑ ‑
MR GLEESON:
‑ ‑ ‑ identified there were six challenges that
were being made under what was common ground 1. The first
No agreement to do any particular unlawful act –
we understand the Court has granted leave on. The third challenge:
No agreement that Macdonald would not act “but for” the improper
that is the present matter I am referring to, which
we understand the Court has not granted leave on, and I observe the fifth matter
this Court has not granted leave on, although it has emerged through some
arguments that have been made.
Focusing on the third aspect, which is
the “but for”, the Court of Criminal Appeal dealt with that with
great care between
paragraphs 55 and 69. Paragraph 55, the Court
identifies the ground; 56 says that
is the only authority
for it and analyses
being a case not about conspiracy but about
the underlying offence; and at 58 turns to the key statements as to the elements
underlying offence, says that:
it will be seen that nowhere in the conventional statements of the law is
there reference to an element of the offence expressed in
the language of
Mr Walker has criticised causation. There is no
difficulty. What the Court is using by the word “causation” is to
you do not see this “but for” requirement in the conventional
statements for the underlying offence, but then says:
The adoption of that language becomes bizarre when applied to the offence of
conspiracy, where the underlying offence need not be
committed and yet the
unlawful agreement contains an inbuilt element of a causal
relationship.
Then refers to
; closely analyses
, paragraph 60:
the nature of the conduct which will constitute misconduct “defies
precise definition because of the range of conduct that it
is designed to
Paragraph 62:
It is difficult to see any scope for a “but for” test of
causation –
It is the creation of a conflict between
self‑interest –
of the Secretary:
and the public duty that constitutes the element of
misconduct.
Placing him under the fetters, agreeing to do so is what was
criminal, and so “but for” simply did not make sense. Importantly,
at 63, picks up this Court in
that I have been to, that:
where the misconduct turns on a perceived conflict between private interest
and public duty, the relevance of a causative element
has expressly been
And the extract from
, Justice Isaacs and
Rich – it should be page 397 – is reminiscent of some
themes of Mr Walker’s argument this morning,
that Mr Macdonald
might have exercised some of these powers seeking to prefer people in a way that
may not have been unlawful. Their
Honours said:
A public ministerial officer who for private gain prefers one applicant to
another is guilty of a crime, even though such preference
would be otherwise
fully justifiable. And equally, if a member of Parliament agrees for private
advantage to act contrary to law
in relation to his duty with respect to the
public acquisition of land, it is utterly immaterial that the land has not been
or that, apart from the illicit agreement, the same result might, or
even would, have followed.
So, it is clear that in this Court in
, in a context very
close to the present where we are looking at agreements which place ministerial
officers under obligations which
are contrary to their basic duty, those
agreements have the tendency which requires them to be criminalised without
having to conduct
a further “but for” inquiry.
So, is that a submission that if the “but for” question had been
the subject of special leave, you would be making a submission
that it is not
even an element at all in the predicate offence?
MR GLEESON:
is certainly not an
element ‑ ‑ ‑
one cannot defend, for example, an offence of a charge of misconduct in office
by bribery by saying: well, the money might have
been lawfully paid to me
MR GLEESON:
Yes, you cannot do that. So, we would be
making that submission. We would be making the submission a fortiori in
the conspiratorial
context. The next example the Court of Criminal Appeal gives
at 65 is particularly pertinent. It is a variation on
your Honour’s
example. If you:
release confidential information in circumstances where you know you should
not release it –
it simply cannot usefully call for an
inquiry: but what would have happened if I had had a good reason to release
that information
This goes back, does it not
really – at its kernel – to the Hong Kong decision
which relied upon Professor Finn’s
statement about that fact that the
conduct has to be incompatible with the public office proper discharge, and that
itself is sufficient.
MR GLEESON:
That is sufficient. So, if
the agreement between A and B is that B will engage in acts
incompatible with the basic public trust
that is placed in B, that is
criminalised as a conspiracy and the underlying conduct of B would be
chargeable under the predicate
offence as itself misconduct in public
That is what the Court of Criminal Appeal here
has adopted at paragraph 60, which precedes this analysis.
BEECH-JONES J:
question of motivating purpose, and which may have been the genesis of
“but for”, is really more an aspect of whether
the duty was breached
in a particular context.
MR GLEESON:
can be understood as a case where the Court was facing an argument: do you have
to prove sole illegitimate purpose in order to commit
the predicate offence?
The Court said no, because in that sort of case a “but for” purpose,
drawn perhaps from company
law, from fiduciary duty, would be necessary and
sufficient.
It really just is not applicable, as the Court of Criminal
Appeal has said here. Indeed, it is antithetical to the whole law against
misconduct in public office to be going through a: but I could have done it
anyway without the corruption that had been put in place.
So, if your Honours
deal with this question, we would say this reasoning here is impeccable
reasoning and the conclusions are impeccable
in 69. The first conclusion
is that if one examines both:
the lengthy history of the criminal liability for misconduct in public
that’s the predicate offence:
and the lengthy history of the common law offence of
conspiracy . . . first principles might have suggested that the
test was an aberration.
At least if applied as a
general requirement in every case:
did not involve a conspiracy.
So, it does not govern
Secondly . . . the role of a “but for”
causation –
is particularly not appropriate where in the
context of:
the substantive offence was one of wilful misconduct and the agreement had to
extend to the element of wilful misconduct.
The final answer, and this
really does go to why your Honours would not grant leave on the question,
is as a matter of fact in this
case, even though they did not need to, the Crown
did submit itself to an additional requirement of proving that a “but
element was established in the agreement, in the sense that:
each of the accused knew, appreciated, and intended that Mr Macdonald
would not have agreed to act in connection with the granting
of an EL at Mount
Penny favouring their private interests ‘but for’ that improper or
illegitimate purpose”.
And the reference is to her Honour at
paragraph 85. So, what in fact happened was that the Crown took a
conservative approach that
might be regarded as not only correct
but applicable to conspiracy and therefore subjected themselves to the
burden of proving that
elements (a), (b) and (c) wove together in
this fashion, that:
the accused knew, appreciated, and intended –
that is the
mental element:
that Mr Macdonald would not have agreed to act in connection
paragraph (a) – that is:
the granting of an EL at Mount
paragraph (b):
favouring their private interests ‘but
paragraph (c):
that improper or illegitimate purpose”.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, this really is a pleading point, because the Crown did run its case on that
MR GLEESON:
Yes. Can I just give you the references to
show the Crown did run such a case. Her Honour made it clear at
paragraph 85. In
the materials, the Crown submissions on the
elements – your Honours’ associates should have the final
version of that
document, which was MFI 17.
This is a later
version than the equivalent version that is in the books before you. This is
the relevant version, and the Crown
elements of offence at
footnote 2 – which is attached to
element (c)(ii) – made clear the Crown was subjecting itself
the extended
Macdonald and Maitland
approach. Then in the Crown’s
closing submissions, at appellants’ book of materials, volume 2,
page 654, paragraph 10
and footnote 11, the Crown repeated that
it imposed that burden on itself.
What is this
MR GLEESON:
This is the Crown’s closing written
submissions. It commences at 652.
MR GLEESON:
Then in the detailed argument, for example,
page 720, paragraph 258, and that is what her Honour instructed
herself on at paragraph
85 of the judgment.
GAGELER CJ:
we go to the elements of the offence document that you provided us with. Is
breaking it up in that way the way to understand the
structure of the indictment
as well? As I read this, (1) captures what appears as (a), (b) and (c) in
the indictment, and (2) captures
the fifth element of the offence, which appears
to be simply a characterisation of (1).
MR GLEESON:
that is right, and provided (1) adequately identifies the essential factual
elements of the offence fleshed out by the additional
constrictions the Crown
imposed on itself, then the tribunal of fact asked the question under (2),
serious and meriting criminal punishment having regard
to . . . the Office –
(2) now being the more
specific version of what I referred to as the formula at the end of the
indictment. So, one of the submissions you heard this morning, I
think Mr Lange, was that there was some problem with the fifth
reason of the way the earlier elements were pleaded and run.
submit simply not because it was not a hard task for the tribunal of fact to
say: well if Mr Macdonald is a public official
yes – if the agreement is that in connection with his office, he will
commit misconduct. Then we have the first element,
he will intentionally do
in connection with the granting of an exploration licence at
Mount Penny –
So, pausing there, we have quite some
specificity about the intentional acts. They are the granting of an exploration
licence, which
is a particular licence under a particular statute. It is not a
mining licence, it is not a different licence, it is an identified
licence; it
is at an identified area: Mount Penny of New South Wales. There is:
improper purpose of benefitting –
identified persons or
other persons. So, there is an improper purpose of benefit. That is the second
of the three particulars.
Then the third particular is: you do that wilfully,
knowing you are acting in breach of your:
duties and obligations of impartiality –
and/or confidentiality:
as a Minister in the Executive Government –
If you have
each of those elements, it has not sensibly been explained this morning how that
could not be wilful misconduct in public
BEECH-JONES J:
I think what was said was there is a possibility that some acts could fall
within, I think – as modified to this –
may not fall within
, and we got the delay in the public briefing
by 10 minutes example. I think that is where it got to. So, it is
MR GLEESON:
possible to think of theoretically acts which might satisfy some of these but
not all of them, where you say that could be
lawful. It is very difficult to
understand how a Minister who intentionally does things in relation to the grant
of an EL at a particular
area with a purpose of benefiting identified persons,
knowing he is breaching particular duties, knowing he is doing all of that,
is that sensibly said not to be misconduct in public office? So, if that is
what they have agreed
BEECH-JONES J:
the public briefing example would not be (d) or it would not be (e)
because ‑ ‑ ‑
MR GLEESON:
does not have the wilful knowledge that he is breaching that duty. So, if
Mr Macdonald goes into the meeting, releases information
EL – if that is all he did, that is fine, but the agreement that is
alleged is Mr Macdonald will do things that satisfy
and (c), and then without reasonable excuse of justification, which might
explain away a case where he was not told something
he should have been told.
So, the Crown submits you have not been given a sensible and realistic
explanation for how, if the agreement is to do all of these
things, that could
ever be anything but misconduct in public office, and then that is sufficient
and – in terms of the purposes
of conspiracy – perfectly
appropriate that people who agree to make this sort of agreement and put these
fetters on Mr Macdonald
– Mr Macdonald is not too far
removed from the Chief Secretary in
Hui Rafael,
he is under an agreement
at all times, from no later than 9 May, that he will do these things.
If I could just conclude your Honours, that is exactly how the
primary judge, at the very end of a comprehensive judgment, dealt
with how the
fifth element applied in the light of all of the earlier findings. At
paragraph 2039, on page 458, her Honour said:
I do not propose to focus upon the multiple ways in which Mr Macdonald
executed the agreement, that does not diminish, in any way,
the gravity of the
agreement which had as its object that Mr Macdonald would misconduct
himself as the Minister for Mineral Resources
in connection with the granting of
an EL at Mount Penny for the improper purpose of advancing, promoting or
securing the private
interests of his
co‑conspirators –
And then said:
In fact, on one view, the open-ended nature of that agreement and the breadth
of its scope, which I interpret as allowing for Mr Macdonald
to do what he
could when the opportunity presented itself as Minister for Mineral Resources in
connection with the granting of an
EL over land he knew was owned or controlled
by his co‑conspirators or those associated with them, makes what he and
Obeid and Moses Obeid agreed to do serious in the extreme.
principle, that is the correct way in which the fifth element can be applied by
the tribunal of fact. In terms of the issues
before you, it shows how the
pleading of the earlier elements perfectly enabled the tribunal to address
itself to that final question.
Well, it was only at
paragraph 2041.
MR GLEESON:
And then 2040. So, any
suggestion that ‑ ‑ ‑
And 41, I think, too.
MR GLEESON:
Yes – that the
earlier pleading did not somehow infect the analysis of the fifth step is belied
by the way in which this
actually worked. Is that a convenient time,
your Honours?
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, it is, thank you. We will
adjourn for lunch.
AT 12.46 PM LUNCHEON
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 2.14
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Gleeson.
MR GLEESON:
Thank you, your Honour.
Your Honour Justice Steward, the origin of the provision in the
schedule goes back at least as far as
Crimes Act 1900
can be seen in
[1931] HCA 23
(1931) 45 CLR 321
page 209 in volume 1, at tab 8. At page 333 of the CLR,
or 221 of the book,
section 393
is referred to. All that happened
in 1999 was it was transferred over to the
Criminal Procedure
MR GLEESON:
provenance would appear to go back to perhaps 1861. So, it has been a
standard provision for a while.
And do we have a
rationale for ‑ ‑ ‑
MR GLEESON:
Its original rationale, if it has gone back to 1861, is probably to
simplify what might otherwise have been a very technical system
of indictments
where mere technical errors could invalidate the entire procedure. It is part
of the process of moving beyond sheer
technicality. In that sense, it sits in
the same genus as
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
that you have, which excuses the
indictment from various technical deficiencies.
section 16?
MR GLEESON:
Yes, thank you.
MR GLEESON:
, consistent
with one of our themes, was the case where – on page 322 of the
CLR – the conspiracy was pleaded in fairly
summary terms.
Conspiracy:
amongst themselves with each other and with divers other persons conspire to
cheat and defraud Francis Thomas Coggan and divers other
divers large sums of money.”
That was sufficient for a valid
indictment. The difficulty in the case was the particulars that were given of
the overt acts were
expressed far too generally. They were simply everything
that had been tendered in the Police Court, and on page 333, the Court
was critical of the particulars of the overt acts at that level of extreme
generality. Our particulars of the overt acts are not
subject to any such
On your submission, could you have an
indictment that charged a conspiracy to commit the offence of misfeasance in
public office,
then with all the detail in the particulars?
The strict answer is yes, and it is the equivalent to pleading a
conspiracy to rob, conspiracy to cheat or defraud, a conspiracy
to defraud an
insurance company, which is one of the examples which was approved in
and was the very example in this Court in
reference is at volume 2 of the book in
perhaps it is volume 3 of the book, tab 20, page – I
can give your Honours the reference, it is
Court ‑ ‑ ‑
MR GLEESON:
Yes. So, in
tab 5, although the Crown ultimately failed for other reasons, which was
that they did not make good what they had pleaded,
it was a case where the
indictment was expressed in terms of an agreement to commit fraud upon insurance
companies and ‑ ‑
I think the conspiracy plea is at least summarised at the top
MR GLEESON:
conspired with a person known as Harrison and divers others to cheat and
defraud divers insurance companies –
That was sufficient in terms of the indictment. The problem in the case
was that – at least according to the majority –
particular people as parties to the conspiracy, and what they proved was a
narrower conspiracy between only some of them
and therefore the Crown failed,
but at the level of generality, it is another example of what is
permissible.
Your Honours, on the question of “but
for”, our submission is that you should not and do not need to resolve its
place in the law of conspiracy. We made that submission at
paragraph 22 of our written submissions. It does not strictly arise
this case for the reasons I have explained and, in any event, as we say, it is
not without some controversy. At footnote 34 we
cite two of the related
We have given your Honours an extract
Macdonald v R
NSWCCA 198 just at paragraph 43,
where the court said it was simply unnecessary to consider whether it was
established in New South
Wales that the “but for” test was:
necessary or sufficient to establish the element of misconduct in every
And they made the point your Honour
Justice Beech‑Jones raised, that there will be a variety of species
of misconduct and the
relevance or necessity of a “but for” test, or
a driving purpose test or any other test will be very much dependent upon
particular species of misconduct at hand. In that case, near the end of
paragraph 43, the decisions they refer to are the ones
Could I then ask the Court to go to the indictment, which is at
the beginning of the core appeal book, together with the particulars
at the beginning of the appellants’ book of further materials. In the
light of the principles in the cases I have
been to, this indictment has
everything it needed.
It first of all identifies a date range. It then
identifies the place, or places, where the agreement is said to have been made.
It alleges a conspiracy and identifies the conspirators. It then identifies
Mr Macdonald as the relevant public official. It then
identifies the
relevant public office –
Minister for Mineral Resources in the Executive Government of
New South Wales. Then,
it importantly pleads that it is an agreement
that Mr Macdonald:
wilfully misconduct himself –
which is the third element of
the test in
, and then the fourth element:
without reasonable cause or justification –
Now, there was
a suggestion this morning that the words “wilfully misconduct
himself” are mere prefatory or recited.
We say no; they are a necessary
and important element of the indictment to indicate the underlying offence which
this agreement is
targeted at. Those words “wilfully misconduct
himself” together “without reasonable cause or justification”
carry with them, to the extent it may be necessary, any questions of “but
for”, but they certainly are operative in the
indictment; they are not
mere prefatory.
Then, we have the “by doing acts”, and we
submit that (a), (b) and (c) which are necessary to be satisfied
sufficiently identify a set of acts. It is in respect to a particular
a particular place
concerning – in the sense of, benefitting – an identified
group of persons, and then critically none
of that is covered by the agreement
unless it is knowingly done in breach of one or two duties –
impartiality and confidentiality
– arising in a public office. That
is sufficient to serve all the purposes of the indictment, and then the final
words allow
the evaluative test of:
serious and meriting criminal punishment –
to be applied to
that earlier agreement, if it has been otherwise proven. The particulars at
page 5 and following of the appellants’
book serve a number of
purposes. Paragraph 3 identifies with precision the over acts from which
the agreement is to be inferred.
There is no complaint about the
precision of those overt acts, and an essential part of the task of the tribunal
of fact is to decide
first whether those acts are proven on the balance of
probabilities – unless they are
and then, if they are all proven, to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the acts as proven are referrable to,
and only to, the pleaded conspiracy which
involved elements (a), (b) and (c). If for some reasons the acts
were proven but they
could not be attributed to the pleaded agreement beyond
reasonable doubt, then the Crown failed. As well as particularising
primary judge found, you did not need all them.
MR GLEESON:
need all of them?
You did not need all of
them – the acts.
MR GLEESON:
No, but having
determined how many you had found, you then asked in respect of that subset
whether the Crown had excluded any explanation
other than that they were done
pursuant to this pleaded agreement, as opposed to other possibilities.
Her Honour carefully considered
whether there were any possibilities
consistent with innocence that could explain those acts and she rejected that
alternative conclusion.
The particulars go on and provide factual
matters relevant to the accused individually and then, importantly, as
your Honour Beech-Jones
pointed out, between paragraphs 12 and 17,
provided additional particulars of the charge. Paragraphs 12 and 14 are
important to
explain that when the words “concerning the interests
of” the Obeids were used, they were used in the sense of favour
those interests, primarily financially.
So, that provided greater
specificity about the second of the three elements. Then paragraph 17
provided, if it be necessary, greater
specificity about the fifth element and in
particular identified, for example, that the duties of impartiality and
confidentiality,
if one be in doubt, could be sourced to the Ministerial Code of
Conduct and the Ministerial Handbook. As to paragraph (c):
the nature and extent of the departure from those
was illuminated by each of the acts:
of wilful misconduct set out in paragraph 3
So, when your Honours take the indictment, you
then take the particulars – step 2. You take the elements of
the charge that
I have handed up, which was MFI 17 –
step 3. You take the Crown case in closing that I took you to –
step 4. Consistently
and without departure, the agreement was specified in
a way that was capable of being answered by the accused and, more importantly,
stated an agreement capable of amounting to a criminal
conspiracy.
BEECH-JONES J:
Just that last particular in 17(c),
it is not really the acts in paragraph 3 that you are talking about though,
is it? It is the
acts described in (a), (b)
MR GLEESON:
Your Honour is correct. This is
either an unnecessary particular or it is what the Court of Appeal referred to
as the second purpose
which the particulars were serving, and it is perhaps the
subsidiary purpose that the overt acts in terms of procedural fairness
looked at as indications of acts which could fall within the class, but that is
not to suggest that the conspiracy pleaded
was that these individuals had agreed
that those particular acts would be carried out. So, we think it does not
involve an error.
It is perhaps an unnecessary addition, but it is used in that
Your Honours, in terms of how the court has dealt with the
issue which is the precise one before you, could I just identify that
primary judge in some detail dealt with it between paragraphs 87
and 111. That is pages 40 to 46 of the first core appeal book.
That actual reasoning of the primary judge has been touched upon only most
tangentially by any of the appellants. We submit that
it is commendable for its
detail and its careful analysis.
The submissions that were made by each
of the accused, which had slight variations to them, were set out in careful
detail between
paragraphs 88 and 95. Her Honour then carefully
analysed the
. In terms of her Honour’s reasoning,
the critical paragraphs for you, with respect, are 99 where her Honour
explains exactly
why an agreement that Mr Macdonald do something which
satisfied the three categories would amount to a criminal conspiracy. As
Honour says at the end of 99:
irrespective of whether they knew of the precise steps Mr Macdonald
would ultimately take to implement the agreement, and irrespective
of whether,
at the time the agreement was forged, they agreed that he should take those
particular steps.
So, at that point, we submit, her Honour is
carefully attending to the issue your Honour Justice Edelman raised, as to
whether there
was some conditionality about the alleged agreement which in fact
deprived it of being a criminal agreement. Her Honour said no.
agreement with the particularity attached to it was formed, was a criminal
conspiracy, even though of necessity the Obeids in
particular did not know
precisely when or in what means Mr Macdonald would implement the bargain
which he had reached with them.
Her Honour is attuned to that same
question at paragraph 101, where her Honour understood the Crown’s
case to be that it is
implicit that Mr Macdonald would act in the way
alleged. That is, do acts in connection with the grant of an EL at Mount Penny
benefit the co‑conspirators:
when the opportunity presents itself for him to do so without the need for
further agreement as to what acts he would commit and when
he should commit
So, that being the type of agreement alleged: we have a binding
deal with you now, Mr Macdonald, we know what the parameters are
of what you
will do, we are agreed to you doing that and we do not need to hear back from
you in advance as to how you will implement
the agreement before we are at one
with you; we are at one with you now that you will do what it takes when the
opportunity presents
within the parameters of (a), (b), and (c). At
102, her Honour was acutely aware there could be some cases on the other
the line that:
if the matters left outstanding and reserved –
were so sufficiently substantial:
it may well be that –
no agreement had yet been formed. It was:
merely a matter of negotiation.
Now, that is where some of the
appellants’ arguments are really shading into arguments about proof. It
was the question for
her Honour as the tribunal of fact, having correctly
understood the competing contentions, to decide whether what she could infer
beyond reasonable doubt from the overt acts was no more than people who were
still negotiating because the matters left outstanding
were too substantial, or
whether these were people who beyond reasonable doubt had agreed Macdonald would
take acts within the three
categories – that is, all of
them – if and when the opportunity arose.
Paragraph 105
was briefly mentioned by Mr Walker. We submit her Honour there is
correctly reasoning that it was a valid indictment,
and her Honour
at 107 further fleshes out her reasons, where she is addressing this
question that the case as pleaded was that agreement
had now been reached, even
though as you see in the middle of 107:
At the time the agreement was reached (on the Crown case, at the latest by
9 May 2008), what remained to be determined was how the
object of that
agreement would be achieved in the transactional phase of the execution of the
conspiracy.
So, this is where the appellants’ challenge may go
beyond a pleading point to saying, as a matter of substantive law, you cannot
have a conspiracy of this character where you have agreed he will do acts
satisfying certain conditions and how he is to carry out
those acts is something
you are leaving for him in the course of execution. We submit the law of
conspiracy amply responds to that
and thus one understands why at 108
her Honour rejects the argument that the contingency is sufficient to
destroy the conspiracy,
and her Honour compares a different type of case
Importantly, at 110, her Honour comes back to the
importance of the proof question, which is that – it being perfectly
what the Crown case was at the stage of proof beyond reasonable
doubt – she would need to be satisfied that the Crown had excluded
“reasonable hypotheses consistent with innocence”, and that proof
stage is seen, to take one example in respect to Mr
Macdonald, in the
summary reasons on pages 422 to 423, paragraphs 1876
to 1881, where her Honour identifies at 1876 the pleaded case
Mr Macdonald as Minister for Mineral Resources would do what he could,
if and when the opportunity presented
in connection with
the three defined matters, to knowingly:
wilfully breach his Ministerial duties and obligations of impartiality and/or
confidentiality without reasonable cause or excuse.
So, she focuses on
the case as pleaded and particularised. At 1879 she brings to account the
five overt acts that were proven:
first, second, fourth, seventh and eighth –
She took into
account the contextual circumstance from other acts that were not proven as such
and then reached her ultimate findings
as to whether the agreement was made.
Paragraph 1881 shows her Honour correctly then instructed herself
whether there were alternative
explanations for those five overt acts in their
context consistent with innocence and said there were not, and therefore it was
agreement as pleaded with (a), (b) and (c) which was proven
beyond reasonable doubt.
Does that then sit with those
other paragraphs you took us to before lunch?
MR GLEESON:
as the paragraphs where
her Honour ‑ ‑ ‑
At 2039 to 2041.
MR GLEESON:
Paragraph 2041 then said,
that being the elements proven beyond reasonable doubt, the only conclusion
equally reached beyond reasonable
doubt is that that is an agreement of a most
serious kind – compelling misconduct of a serious kind meriting
criminal punishment
because this is effectively the corruption of an important
officer of the Crown where, from every day forward from 9 May, he is bound
as and when the opportunity arises to do the things which will implement the
In that sense, he is effectively in the same position as the
Chief Secretary in
. He has been bound by this agreement to do what
it takes to carry out the misconduct pleaded in particularly at
paragraphs (a),
(b) and (c). So, this is a case where the point
was looked at carefully and comprehensively by the primary judge.
then became – in the appeal court, at paragraphs 22 through to
39 – the first of the challenges, and it was in the
Court of Appeal’s reasons at paragraph 23. I had in mind
the reference in the last sentence to footnote 8 to
[1984] HCA 8
(1984) 153 CLR 317
at 327 per Justice Brennan, and the
Court said:
It is also common ground that a conspiracy, for example, to defraud an
insurance company, may be complete although the precise means
or method by which
the conspiracy is to be effected is not known, nor agreed upon.
Court of Appeal’s reasoning, if anything, added to the primary
judge – not inconsistently with it, but added
between 25, 26
and 27, is to give a detailed analysis of the specificity that did arise
from each of paragraphs (a), (b) and (c).
So, with respect to
paragraph (a), the Court of Appeal identified that this limited the acts
agreed upon to a power exercised under
a particular act to grant a particular
license. For that reason, at paragraphs 32 through to 39, the Court
set out in detail both
the statutory powers that were the subject of the
agreement and the process by which those powers were exercised; that is
35 and 36. So, it is difficult to quarrel with the
court’s statement at 25, that while:
There was an element of uncertainty as to the precise acts which would be
required, but they would fall within the class reflected
in the process required
to be carried out for the granting of an exploration
And then paragraph 26 examined the specificity
in element (b). The element was one:
of benefit to the Obeid family.
Then paragraph 27,
element (c) required little explanation, other than to identify that this
the mental element of the predicate offence.
So, paragraph 28 is
a good concise summary of how the three conditions taken together provided
sufficient “particularity”
as a matter of pleading and, we would
submit as a matter of substantive law, to identify an agreement which, if
proven, would there
and then be a criminal conspiracy.
Paragraph 29
is the paragraph I mentioned to your Honour Justice Beech‑Jones,
where the particulars were seen as serving the
primary function and the
ancillary function at an evidentiary level. It is the primary function that is
most important, and we give
most weight to. Paragraphs 30 and 31 speak for
themselves. So, the ultimate conclusions that are reached in paragraphs 38
we would submit, are free from error.
Your Honours, our
final submission in the outline at paragraph 6 I can perhaps do just by
referring to our written submissions.
In our written submissions, between
paragraphs 9 and 20, we have given you some of the discussion, both
from the classic authors
such as R S Wright in 1873, subsequently
Glanville Williams, and then some of the cases.
These are in
conspiracies beyond misconduct in public office, where one sees a degree of
generality in the words being permissible
and, indeed, it being appropriate to
the purpose of conspiracy that it may catch agreements which necessarily leave
the means of
the implementation to be settled upon by one or other conspirator
or potentially even all of them, but at a later stage.
But the thing
being criminalised, which is the combination or the object, can amply arise
before all details have been settled.
You see that, for example, in
paragraph 14 in the statement of Justice Bayley in
When parties have once agreed to cheat a particular person of his monies,
although they may not then have fixed on any means for that
purpose, the offence
of conspiracy is complete.
In a sense, that is exactly what the Crown
case was here, that by 9 May the three gentlemen had agreed that
Mr Macdonald would misconduct
himself in office in respect to the three
defined matters, even though they were leaving it to him to choose the means to
the criminal object as and when the opportunity
BEECH-JONES J:
So, the limits on this are –
that is, the limits on how, as it were, broad you can frame it and can run your
case is: one,
it ultimately has to be that the object of the agreement is to
commit a crime; secondly, either in the indictment or in the particulars,
has to be sufficient detail to allow the accused to meet the case fairly. Are
they the two governing restrictions, or are
they right or are they more or are
MR GLEESON:
Well, they are both right, and they
are both primary governing restrictions. I think it is implicit in what
your Honour has put
that when you present that agreement through the
indictment – plus the particulars and so on, the way you ran the
what you have to identify, for the fair consideration of the
tribunal of fact, is that there is a meeting of minds, there is a consensus.
There is not merely a negotiating phase, but there is an agreement on the doing
of things, whether they be defined individually
or by a class or by their
composite characteristics, which then satisfy what your Honour put to me
that that will be an offence.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, it has to be an
agreement – an agreement to commit a crime, and it has to be enough
to be fair.
MR GLEESON:
Yes, they are the
Does that include time, place, people?
MR GLEESON:
Yes. So, the ones that are familiar from
every crime will be time, place, people; they are all there. The particular
conspiracy adds with misconduct in public office are firstly, who is
the public official; secondly, what is the public office; thirdly,
the plea that
there is a wilful misconduct of that office; and then, whether it is particulars
or indictments, in a sense, does not
matter too much. The elements that the
bargain being reached is that public officer will, pursuant to the bargain, do
things which
constitute the predicate offence.
BEECH-JONES J:
may not even have to be time or place, though. You could have conspiracy to
murder someone.
MR GLEESON:
BEECH‑JONES
Someone in the next – you could just agree that someone will
go out and murder an unspecified person in a pretty broad place
over a pretty
broad time, would you not?
MR GLEESON:
Yes, we agree with
that, your Honour. Usually, it will be there.
But you would have to have identification of the time the agreement was made.
MR GLEESON:
Yes, that would come from the agreement, and
here that was done.
And here there is identification
of the place of the agreement being made.
MR GLEESON:
so you have place, you have time, you have persons, you have the public
official, you have the public office. You then actually
have the public duties
there in question, and then you have, in effect, the breach of those duties
which is agreed to occur, the
breach being there will be breach of the duty of
impartiality, breach of the duty of confidentiality in respect to
identified conduct – exercise of powers in
respect to the grant of a particular license for a private purpose.
element (b) tells you it is not simply you are doing something in
connection with the license. You are doing it to benefit a
private person.
Now, the step you take – the second you put that into the plea, you
have a person departing from their office,
and then you add (3), that it is
knowingly and wilfully done in breach of those duties. So, each of that more
than amply gives –
satisfies the pleading states and available
conspiracy at law
and then allows the tribunal of fact to make the findings
and then ultimately do the evaluative exercise in step 5.
please your Honours.
GAGELER CJ:
If it please your Honours.
Your Honours, when one examines the indictment, the particulars and the
elements – so, the first
tab in the book, the first tab in the
further materials and MFI 17 handed up today – there is, in our
submission, the confusion
between overt acts with relevantly an evidentiary role
concerning the agreement alleged to constitute the conspiracy and the predicate
offences or offence which is necessary to complete the criminal nature of the
agreement to become an indictable conspiracy. May
seen, both in our exchange submissions and in the addresses, that the Crown
repelled any need for any further particulars
beyond the indictment plus the
particulars of Crown case. In particular, they made it clear that the
enumerated misconducts were
not to be treated as the conduct which the
conspirators had allegedly agreed would occur, and that was said in round terms,
culminating
in the judge accepting the proposition, well, they could not. The
Crown could not do that. Those things were yet to occur.
crystal clear, in terms of the state of affairs of this criminal proceeding
prove beyond reasonable doubt to
exist subjectively an agreement between the alleged conspirators to do something
which would be,
if committed, an offence of the kind specified. That, in our
submission, means that when one looks at those documents you can see
was a confusion introduced as to the role of these enumerated misconducts which
were in truth overt acts or evidence from
which the antecedent agreement was to
be inferred, but not with the content of committing those enumerated
misconducts.
Thus, one finds in the book of further materials at
page 7 in paragraph 4 the statement concerning “but for”
of course tied to the overt act, which does not stand for what it was
agreed Mr Macdonald would do in the alleged conspiracy. In
rather says we are not going to tell you at any level of generality what are the
acts as to which you can then –
you the conspirators –
assess the Crown case which alleges that but for, relevantly, the improper
purpose Mr Macdonald would
not act as we have antecedently agreed he should
act, because unless that is part of the agreement, then it cannot be an
conspiracy.
It may be that circumstances will turn out, as
apparently the writer of these particulars said about these overt acts, that
of them was of that nature, that there would not have been that conduct but
for the improper purpose. But that, with respect, says
nothing about the
framing of the case in terms of an indictable conspiracy, all of which has to be
known and knowable at the point
the alleged agreement is said to have been
It is not a notional agreement coming into existence
backwards by inference from overt acts, some or all of which may be themselves
predicate offences. It has to be an actual agreement and there has to be a case
joined, issues between the Crown and the accused,
by which the accused knows
what it is that one of their number – in this case, the
Minister – was agreed by all of them
– has to be by all of
them – to have been committed so that it can then be evaluated
whether an agreement in those terms
would answer affirmatively all the
requirements for that to be a predicate offence.
is one example, but it is an evocative one, bearing in mind the way in which
oddly it finds itself in paragraph
4 of those particulars referring not to
the actions – conduct – which was allegedly agreed in the
conspiracy to be committed
but rather the overt acts which were designedly and
pointedly and repeatedly repelled by the Crown as being that which the
had as its object.
It is for those reasons, in our
submission, that nothing in NFI 17 – that is, the elements
offence – nothing in the judge’s
direction of herself in
accordance with that, nothing with respect to the findings by the judge
concerning “but for”
– (q) was the problem throughout the
whole of the case by the deliberate stance of the prosecution. It was not known
the entirely conclusory virtually circular propositions that whatever was
agreed to be done by Mr Macdonald would affirmatively make
highest level of generality that the elements of the offence permit –
because it is simply framed in terms of the
elements of the offence –
would constitute the offence of misconduct in public office.
the reasons that we have put in chief and written, that, in our submission, is a
failure from the outset and therefore
throughout the case to have pinned the
colours of the Crown to a statement of the actual conduct of Mr Macdonald
which the parties
had actually agreed would be carried out. In our submission,
it is not a permissible device to say: I am going to particularise
for purposes, including perhaps principally if not only, of seeking an inference
from their occurrence of the antecedent
agreement that something alleged in the
conspiracy would agree.
Not them particularly – that evident
difficulty led to them being spared the task of particularising those as the
the conspiracy; they said they could not say, because the parties
would not know what Mr Macdonald would do which, in our submission,
the parties had not agreed on anything with sufficient specificity to lend
itself to the nature of an agreement that something
not agreed because they did not know, as the Crown protested in resisting
particulars, so called, as to what he would do;
from which it means you would
not know whether it would have the requisite qualities and demerits and be
committed in circumstances
necessary to make out the other elements of the
predicate offence.
So, that is our reply to the notion that the forensic
course in some way excused this unadorned level of generality. My learned
friend talks about particulars as if that cures things. Actually, times and
places are not very important in continuing administrative
conduct or a
conspiracy that need not be alleged to have been struck at one minute past
midnight on last Wednesday. We are not concerned
exercise of times and places of when contracts were made, or the like. It does
not matter that there is an
allegation about the statutes under which the
misconduct would occur. No point is taken about that.
We simply want to
know, in practical terms – because of the actual psychological fact,
the actual states of mind requisite
to be proved as to the agreement
between these three people – whether it can be said that
Moses Obeid agreed that Mr Macdonald
would do things which there and
then could be seen by the imaginary officious lawyer in attendance to say: hold
hard, that is an
agreement for him to do something which will be a crime.
That is our complaint, which simply cannot be met by constructing
backwards from these so‑called overt acts having been committed,
particularly when it has been protested consistently by the Crown throughout
that they could never have been required to particularise
them because that
would have been impossible. It should work the same way when it turns out to
the notion that they support by inference
that there actually had been an
An agreement in what terms? It would not be an agreement in
terms that those overt acts would occur. They have already said they
that, and commonsense would suggest of course they cannot. So, what is the
agreement that is proved by inference by the
occurrence of those overt Acts when
we have not been told what conduct, act or omission – with respect to
the statutory scheme
for exploration licences – Mr Macdonald had
agreed with Messrs Obeid should occur? That is our
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Walker, are you going to say anything
We do not run a “but for” argument in terms of: does
doctrine require “but for”? The case in the Court
of Criminal
Appeal was conducted on the basis that no‑one had said that
was wrong, and therefore there was nothing inappropriate in
her Honour having proceeded as she did to determine the case accordingly.
It is not outside the grant of special leave because the grant of special leave
concerns fundamentals about alleging, as the object
of the agreement, conduct
which will amount to an offence. The way this case was run, it was common
ground that required “but
point, as I understand it, about “but for”, is that it is within the
grant of special leave because you are just
using it as an example to point out
what you say is the infirm nature of the indictment.
Yes, I am trying to put that
equally, rather than expressing it as a “but for” point, do it on
the basis of, say: how do you establish a
sole purpose or a dominant
It is exactly as Justice Edelman said.
I hoped I had made that clear in chief, but let me make that clear. It is just
it happens to be an important one if you think about the
particularities, the circumstances, whereby you will need to know what has
agreed – in the conspiracy to commit that predicate offence, you will
need to know about the circumstances before you
can sensibly say: well, is that
an agreement that it will happen only because of that malign motive? Depending
upon what has been
done, of course, there might be diametrically opposite
answers to that.
The fifth element is same kind of test, but then so
is the question of an agreement involving all three. That is, all three
on something. You need to know what is the conduct in order to be able
to evaluate factually – it is a factual question of
the inference of
an actual agreement having been reached – whether or not the material
is such as to have produced an agreement
that certain conduct be committed. It
is not, in our submission, outside the grant of special leave for us to have
made use of it
in that sense.
Your Honours, there has been reference to
. There should be no doubt about the fact – this is a case
where, particularly by reason of the Crown’s embracing the
need – see paragraph 4 of the particulars – which
made the “but for” proposition about the overt acts, it
plain that this is not a
case and her Honour did not proceed
accordingly.
This is not a case about a sweetener in return for a
standing favourable disposition of a corrupt kind. There are important
observations
, including those that I went to in chief concerning
other ways – one may imagine – of pleading it and the
difficulties
of a kind that we say have been encountered in our case had that
happened, but this is absolutely not a
case. That does not mean that
one cannot imagine a case on these facts lending itself to a
pleading, but it was not done at any point. In particular, there is no
sweetener, as your Honours appreciate.
The simplicity of a
conspiracy to cheat a person rather bespeaks the agreement factually between,
say, the two conspirators so agreeing.
The word really does not lend itself to
anything other than acts which have as their very nature – not
incidentally or descriptive,
but of their very nature – the
commission of an offence.
The same is clearly not true when one is
talking about the engaging in conduct which, depending upon circumstances, may
be misconduct in public office; an offence the complexity of which is
such that it is intensely circumstantial as to whether or not
it has been
committed and it plainly therefore does not lend itself simply to a narration of
the elements of the offence as a sufficient
statement of the object of the
agreement between the alleged conspirators.
Your Honours, I will not go
to them in detail, but if I can give you the references by way of example to the
way in which her Honour,
in accordance with the way the Crown had put it,
obviously appreciated that the particulars containing overt acts –
the enumerated
misconducts – were to be used in an evidentiary way to
support an inference of an antecedent agreement – I stress,
to them having occurred – reached
before 9 May.
Without taking you to them, you will see with
respect to, I think, three of them – the first and the second and the
using the numbering – in her Honour’s
paragraphs 816 and following; 1052; 1826 and following, which is a
conclusion;
and then the final conclusion, 1874. You will see her Honour
moving sequentially, cumulative it might be said, through the question
proof of that overt act produces what is the nub of the case, proof of the
antecedent agreement; not that the overt act would
be committed, but of the kind
At first, in those references I have given to you, you will see
that her Honour – and she did this at least twice –
well, I have found it proved, but that is not enough to find proof of the
agreement; I need to go on. Now, there is nothing wrong
with that, I am not
complaining about it. It is orthodox to consider all the evidence when you are
talking about
considering inferences, but in our submission, it illustrates
that those enumerated misconducts are ultimately simply
evidentiary.
They have to be evidentiary as something which is a
properly joined issue between the parties, and that must mean that they are
evidentiary
of an antecedent agreement, and that agreement must be such as to be
criminal, but the Crown insists in this case that the antecedent
cannot extend
to the particularity of the eventually‑committed enumerated
misconduct.
That is a puzzle, with respect, of the Crown’s making.
With respect to the Crown, it may also be a puzzle of yoking conspiracy
predicate offence in question in this case. Be that as it may, that should not
drive any weakening of the principle concerning
conspiracy and the proper
allegation of the object of the agreement that makes it criminal. There are
other ways, obviously, of
the criminal law dealing with corruption apart from
this conspiracy approach.
May it please
your Honours.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Walker.
Thank you, your Honour. Could I
hasten caution in relation to the expression “generality”. It is
one which has been
used frequently on behalf of the respondents and specifically
it was contended that the appellants have not dealt with the issue
generality. In my submission, generality cannot be viewed as a total issue, but
rather one must look to the issue of generality
specifically as it refers to the
requirements for pleading, and hence therefore proof ultimately of the offence.
Now, what I mean
by that is that time, place and manner – the
expression “manner” I will come to shortly – must be
with particularity.
BEECH-JONES J:
Time of what
though? Time of the agreement?
Time of the agreement,
but again it may well be, as your Honour says, that one does not have to
pick a particular point in time.
longer‑ranging.
BEECH-JONES J:
No, what I said was you did
not necessarily have to identify time where the object of the agreement would be
And it may well be that there
is – I will leave it there, I am sorry. The focus of the submission
will be manner, and I
will come to it in a moment, but the typical expression is
time, place and manner are those matters which must be pleaded. I think,
elicited in argument, place also frequently is not particularly relevant to the
formation of the agreement and the particulars
GAGELER CJ:
And manner, when you are talking about formation of an
Yes, so can I ask your Honour for a
slight indulgence, because I will come back to
to discuss what I
mean about manner and specificity required, so if your Honour would bear
with me for as moment. Could I firstly
come back to a question posed in
different ways by your Honour Justice Edelman after lunch and
your Honour Justice Steward before
lunch, and that is whether one can
express the indictment at a high level of generality and then provide
particulars.
I think your Honour Justice Edelman took the step
further, which was to say simply set out the elements in the indictment, as I
the question. Now, in my submission, the answer to that question is
no, one cannot in this specific scenario. That is, involving
an offence of
conspiracy to commit wilful misconduct.
In my submission, my learned
friend has not pointed to a single case where the act agreed upon has not been
particularised in the
indictments. Perhaps the most general indictment, and
pleading thereof, is in
’s case, which has already been the
subject of discussion. The Court there, of course, pointed out how general the
the acts agreed upon was pleaded.
Mr Walker has addressed
your Honours as to why that was an act. I will not repeat those
submissions; I adopt them, of course. There
is no such acts here. My learned
friends for the respondent also referred to
Boston’s Case
I take your Honours please to the headnote, as he did, since it sets out
the indictments.
Six lines from the bottom, your Honours will see
those very important words, in my submission, to wit of which my learned friend
said they might be regarded as particulars. In my submission, they are not.
They are the acts which constitute the wilful misconduct
being using his
position to secure the inspection, et cetera, and then four lines from the
bottom at the end:
and to put pressure upon the
Minister for Lands –
So, the formulation of the
indictment in that case does not lend support to the respondent’s
contention because it does, in
fact, set out two acts. As I accepted
beforehand, one might have multiple acts which could be the subject of
agreements. No issue
of duplicity arises, and I do not suggest
Far from sitting comfortably in a tradition of indictments pleaded
generally, this is in fact a very specific indictment and an example
submit the present case ought to have been pleaded to confine what ought to have
been proven by the Crown. Can I come back
to your Honour the
Chief Justice about means and ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Can I just stop you there. You earlier, I think
in your opening submission, accepted you could have a conspiracy to import
in the most general of terms.
BEECH-JONES J:
What is the guiding principle been about the
minimum degree of specificity that needs to be in an indictment?
So far as my argument is concerned, predicated as it is on
element 5, in my submission the general proposition is the accused has
know the nature of the case and how each element will be
But you can use particulars to establish
One can do that,
Mr Walker’s argument is that the particulars here do not do that,
but you are making a different pleading argument, as I understand.
That is right. So, my first point is they must be contained within
the information or indictments and, secondly, if your Honours
are against
me, then of course I adopt what Mr Walker said on that as to the
particulars in this present case.
But was there a
complaint below about the sufficiency of the particulars that were
There was. I would need to find reference
Can I ask, if there was, was it cured by
giving more particulars?
Could I take that on notice,
I am sorry.
I will wait, do not
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry, I thought the fundamental complaint
was not that in this – here, I thought the fundamental complaint was
alleged, they agreed to; did not amount to a crime.
That is right. So, I am not making a complaint now about
particulars, but I think, in answer to your Honour
Justice Steward’s
question, there was a request for particulars. My
recollection is that request was refused, and the refusal was upheld by
her Honour.
That is, that no unfairness arose that would affect the
conduct of the trial, but I will need to find references to those particular
passages, if your Honour would permit that.
GAGELER CJ:
Lange, in the Court of Appeal’s judgment, paragraph 23, last sentence
that ends with footnote 8, it is recorded that it was:
common ground that a conspiracy, for example, to defraud an insurance
company, may be complete –
without the means of fraud being agreed upon.
GAGELER CJ:
What is the difference between this
case and that case?
Because, as I hope I submitted in
chief, the act of cheating and defrauding is the act which we contend is absent
in the present indictments.
Now, it does need to specify the means by which it
is done. I have accepted that. That level of generality has been commonly
If unfairness arises, it is remedied through particulars, but
nevertheless the cheating and defrauding is the act.
Could I, in this
context, invite your Honours back to
because it also deals with
the relevance of clause 21. I will not take your Honours to a couple
of paragraphs, but might I just
note them for your Honours’
attention. It is a succession of paragraphs dealing with the sufficiency of the
information in
I will simply highlight paragraphs 25, 27
and 28, but for present purposes can I please direct
your Honours’ attention to paragraph
29 that appears at the
bottom of page 558 of the report, where this Court made reference to
Criminal Procedure Act
. In other words, the same
piece of legislation that we have been examining in respect of clause 21.
Can I just ask your Honours
to read that paragraph to the end
So, one has in
perhaps an even bolder statement
as to what need not be included in information or indictments, since on its
plain reading it would
seem only to require the words of the Act. This is, of
course, a common law offence and so there are no words of a statute, but
nevertheless this comes back to what your Honour Justice Edelman asked
before, whether one can simply plead the elements of the offence.
submission, the Court’s reasoning dealing with that particular statutory
provision answers the question posed by your
Honour. That is, that one
must – or rather one cannot dispense with the necessity of specifying
time, place and manner of
the defendant’s acts or omissions, and that is
where I ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
acts or omissions – or the relevant act here – is the
entering into the agreement, is it not?
respect, that is one of the acts, but the other acts are those which underlie
the criminal objects. The reason I say that
is because of element 5, as
acts of misconducts, may or may not amount to a criminal offense. It was said
is the matter for particulars, though.
submission, not, and can I explain it this way, and might I perhaps use an
example not to deter from this morning’s
experience. A further example
might be that there might have been an agreement between the various
conspirators for Mr Macdonald
to inform either the Obeids, or people who
had aligned interests of meetings that Mr Macdonald might be having with
persons of the
DPI. Nothing more than that, other than the fact that those
meetings were occurring.
In my submission – perhaps unlike
the example earlier this morning – that is an example which does meet
all of the elements
that are set out in the document marked for
identification 17. There was no reasonable excuse or justification to do
done wilfully in breach of an obligation of confidentiality, and it
was done with an improper purpose generally in the course of
his public duties,
going from the bottom to the top.
Now, that is an example of a situation
where arguably it might be concluded by a tribunal of fact that it is an act not
of sufficient
seriousness to merit criminal punishment. The reason why this is
important, and why in my submission this is not merely a matter
of particulars
but a matter of pleading within the indictment itself, is because, being a
criminal offence which was alleged, the
burden obvious rested with the Crown and
the standard was that of beyond reasonable doubt.
So, whilst it might be
said, looking at paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), that any act that
has those characteristics is likely to be
such as to merit criminal
punishment, or indeed is very probably likely to merit criminal punishment,
that is not sufficient to satisfy the standard of proof.
My argument about
element 5 and how that requires inclusion in the indictment itself of
sufficient particulars of the acts, fails,
I accept, if your Honours were
to conclude, contrary to my submission and some of those advanced by
Mr Walker, that those three paragraphs
necessarily mean that the acts that
have those characteristics would satisfy element 5.
That is coming
this morning, but if there is a reasonable possibility
that another act which
meets those descriptions could have been the subject of an agreement, then the
Crown case had to fail because
it could not satisfy its burden of proof. It is
for those reasons ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES
Is that another way of saying that the agreement it may have proven
beyond reasonable doubt was not an agreement to commit a crime;
agreement that could, but not necessarily did, envisage a crime being committed.
Is that right?
That is the argument.
Even if the particulars – and this is subject to the point
particulars
specified conduct that on its face could only meet the fifth
It is my submission that it is required to be
contained with the indictment, yes, failing which the issue is as to the
particulars
in the current case.
BEECH-JONES J:
Is your fallback
that the particulars did not do that; they only specified overt acts. They did
not specify ‑ ‑ ‑
That is right.
BEECH-JONES J:
Well, they added
to (a), (b) and (c) but not the eight acts of
misconduct?
Not the acts themselves, that is right.
Your Honours, unless I can be of further assistance.
Thank you. Mr Parkin.
Your Honours, I will resist the temptation of the last say. I have no
matters in reply.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Parkin. Are
you resisting temptation, Mr Gleeson?
MR GLEESON:
I answer Justice Steward’s question. Just to give you the reference,
it is in appellants’ book of further materials,
paragraph 16. The accused did not seek any further particulars of the acts
of wilful misconduct said to be the subject
of the conspiracy.
Thank you, Mr Gleeson.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you. The
Court will consider its decision in this matter and will adjourn until
10.00 am on Tuesday, 11 November.
THE MATTER WAS ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format