1318944 [2015] MRTA 774 (12 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 774
(12 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
Mr Ross Menzies Coupland
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
CLF2013/203882
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
PLACE OF DECISION:
The tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant
an Other Family (Residence) (Class BU) visa.
Statement made on 12 June 2015 at 9:58am
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
This is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the
Minister for Immigration on 9 December 2013 to refuse
to grant Mr Coupland an
Other Family (Residence) (Class BU) visa under
Migration Act 1958
Mr Coupland was born in the United Kingdom in 1985. He has various relatives
in Australia and regularly visits Australia. He last
arrived in Australia on 13
February 2013.
Mr Coupland applied for the visa on 23 August 2013 on the basis that he is a
remaining relative of his sponsor (and mother) Ms Amanda
Beeby, an Australian
The delegate refused to grant the visa on the basis that cl.835.212 and
cl.835.221 were not met because Mr Coupland has three step
siblings in the
United Kingdom. As such Mr Coupland does not meet the definition of a remaining
Mr Coupland appeared before the tribunal by video-conference from Brisbane on
11 June 2015 to give evidence and present arguments.
The tribunal also received
oral evidence from Mr Harry Beeby.
Mr Coupland was represented by his registered migration agent Mr Perich.
Before the tribunal the tribunal received a variety of material to the effect
that Mr Coupland does not meet the criteria for the
visa but that he seeks
Ministerial invention. The reasons for this request are set out in detail in
the material.
Mr Coupland told the tribunal that he is aware that he has three step siblings
in the United contact. However he has no knowledge
of their whereabouts or
Mr Beeby told the tribunal that he is Mr Coupland’s step-father and that
he has three biological children in the United Kingdom,
now aged from 34 to 30.
He last had contact with his children about three years ago.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
The visa application was made on the basis that Mr Coupland is the remaining
relative of his mother Ms Beeby.
To be granted a Subclass 835 visa the applicant must be a ‘remaining
relative’ of an ‘Australian relative’
at time of application,
and continue to be a ‘remaining relative’ at time of decision:
cl.835.212 and cl.835.221. ‘Remaining
relative’ is defined in r.1.15
of the Regulations, which is set out in the attachment to this
No near relatives: r.1.15(1)(c)
The only question at stake in this case is the requirement under r.1.15(1)(c)
that Mr Coupland applicant have no ‘near relatives’
except those
that are usually resident in Australia and are Australian citizens, permanent
residents or eligible New Zealand citizens.
‘Near relative’ for these purposes is defined in r.1.15(2) of the
Regulations and means a person who is a parent, brother,
sister, step parent
(for visa applications made prior to 1 July 2009), step-brother or step-sister
of the applicant or of their spouse
or where relevant, de facto partner. It also
includes a child, or step-child, of the applicant or their spouse or de facto
who either: has turned 18 and is not a ‘dependent child’; or
has not turned 18 and is not wholly or substantially in
the daily care and
control of the applicant or their spouse or partner.
The tribunal accepts Mr Coupland’s evidence about his family composition.
Relevantly he has three step siblings in the United
Regulation 1.15(2)
clearly provides that step siblings are included in the definition of a near
relative. There is no evidence or suggestion that those
particular relatives
are deceased. The fact that Mr Coupland has no contact with his step siblings
is not relevant as far as the
criteria for this visa is concerned. The
Regulations make no distinction as to the quality of the relationship between
relatives and only takes into account whether or not a person has near
relatives as defined in r.1.15(2). There is no requirement
in the Regulations
that the near relatives need to be in communication with each other or any
requirement that any the near relatives
have any particular type of emotional
relationship.
It follows that the tribunal cannot be satisfied there are no near relatives
other than those permitted by the regulations and therefore
r.1.15(1)(c) is not
This means that the tribunal is not satisfied that Mr Coupland is the remaining
relative of an Australian relative at the time of
application and time of
decision for the purposes of cl.835.212 and cl.835.221.
For the reasons above, Mr Coupland does not meet the criteria for a Subclass
835 visa. In respect of the other visa subclasses there
is no material which
would permit a finding that he meets prescribed criteria for the visa sought.
The Minister has powers under the
Migration Act
to substitute a decision made
by the tribunal with a decision that is more favourable to the applicant.
Generally, the Minister
will only do so if there are compelling, compassionate
or humanitarian considerations. The tribunal notes that Mr Coupland is
effectively
making such a request. The tribunal has forwarded the material
provided to it concerning Mr Coupland’s circumstances back
the department
for its consideration.
The tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant an Other Family
(Residence) (Class BU) visa.
ATTACHMENT - Extracts from the
Migration Regulations 1994
1.15 Remaining relative
(1) An applicant for a visa is a
remaining relative
person who is an Australian citizen, an Australian permanent resident or an
eligible New Zealand citizen if the applicant
satisfies the Minister that:
(a) the other person is a parent, brother, sister, step-brother or
step-sister of the applicant; and
(b) the other person is usually resident in Australia; and
(c) the applicant, and the applicant’s spouse or de facto partner (if
any), have no near relatives other than near relatives
(i) usually resident in Australia; and
(ii) Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents or eligible New
Zealand citizens; and
(d) if the applicant is a child who:
(i) has not turned 18; and
(ii) has been adopted by an Australian citizen, an Australian permanent
resident or an eligible New Zealand citizen (the
adoptive parent
while overseas:
at the time of making the application, the adoptive parent has been residing
overseas for a period of at least 12 months.
(2) In this regulation:
near relative
, in relation to an applicant, means a person who
(a) a parent, brother, sister, step-brother or step-sister of the applicant
or of the applicant’s spouse or de facto partner
(if any); or
(b) a child (including a step-child) of the applicant or of the
applicant’s spouse or de facto partner (if any), being a child
(i) has turned 18 and is not a dependent child of the applicant or of the
applicant’s spouse or de facto partner (if any); or
(ii) has not turned 18 and is not wholly or substantially in the daily care
and control of the applicant or of the applicant’s
spouse or de facto
partner (if any).
RTF format (122 KB)
Signed PDF/A format