Dansey & Dansey (No. 2) [2021] FamCA 631 (27 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Dansey & Dansey (No. 2)
[2021] FamCA
File number(s):
SYC 3614 of 2021
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– Stay of proceedings – Where the mother unilaterally relocated the
children’s residence
intrastate – Where interim orders were made
requiring the mother to return with the children and for supervised time
with the father – Where the mother has filed a Notice of Appeal
– Where the mother seeks a stay of the interim orders
Consideration of whether the mother has an arguable case – Consideration
of whether the appeal would be rendered nugatory
if a stay is not granted
– Where the mother has not established an appropriate basis for stay
– Where the ability to
prosecute the appeal will not be affected –
Where the children’s best interests are likely to be served by compliance
with the orders – Application dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Aldridge & Keaton (Stay Appeal)
FamCAFC 106
General Steel Industries Inc. v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Jackamarra v Krakouer
(1998) 195 CLR 516
[2006] FamCA 848
(2006) FLC 93-288
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr Romaniuk
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Martin Street Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Pearson Emerson Family Lawyers
SYC 3614 of 2021
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The mother’s application for stay of orders 1, 3, 4, 5(d) and 6 of
orders made 30 June 2021 is dismissed.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Dansey & Dansey
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
INTRODUCTION
1 Following a contested interim hearing on 4 June
2021, orders were made on 30 June 2021 that provided for X born in 2012 and Y
in 2013 (collectively “the children”) to live with Ms Dansey
(“the mother”) and spend time with Mr Dansey
father”) as follows:
3. That the children spend time with the father
supervised by the paternal grandparents in the week commencing 12 July 2021 as
(a) From after school or 3.00 pm for a period of four (4) hours once each week
and failing agreement each Wednesday from after school
or 3.00 pm until
7.00 pm; and
(b) For a period of eight (8) hours each weekend and failing agreement from
9.00 am until 5.00 pm each Sunday.
4. That for the purpose of the time which the children spend with the father,
the paternal grandparents shall facilitate changeover
with the mother where such
changeover does not take place to and from the children’s school.
5. That the parties be restrained and an injunction granted restraining each of
(a) Abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other
party in the presence of the children;
(b) Using physical discipline on the children or either of them;
(c) Discussing the proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in the
proceedings with or in the presence of the children;
(d) Relocating the children’s residence outside of a 10 km radius of
Suburb B Public School except in the event of written
agreement between the
6. That upon the advice of the mother that she intends to return with the
children to take up residence at F Street, Suburb B, New
South Wales, the father
shall vacate the premises within forty eight (48) hours of such notice.
7. That the father be restrained and an injunction granted restraining him from
attending or remaining in the vicinity of the mother,
her place of residence and
her place of employment save as may be necessary to give effect to these
2 The mother filed a Notice of Appeal on 8 July 2021 in respect of paragraphs
1, 3, 4, 5(d) and 6 of the orders made, relying upon
the following grounds of
1. The Primary Judge erred in the exercise of discretion
Family Law Act 1975
to consider, apply and make findings directed towards the principles discussed
(1988) 166 CLR 69
, and cases such as
allegations: unacceptable risk)
[2005] FamCA 892 (Full
Court), as regards the
existence of, and evaluation about, an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.
the findings that the Primary Judge made at [69], [58] and [51], including as
they reflect an incorrect evidential approach
which does not accord with the
task identified in
(1988) 166 CLR 69
, and cases such as
(abuse allegations: unacceptable risk)
[2005] FamCA 892 (Full
regards the existence of, and evaluation about, an unacceptable risk of sexual
2. The Primary Judge erred in respect of the obligation to state reasons.
3. The Primary Judge failed to engage in a meaningful way with the
Appellant’s case on family violence and, as such, made an
error in the
nature of a denial of procedural fairness.
3 By Application in a Case filed 7 July 2021 the mother seeks a stay of the
4 The mother relies upon the following documents:
(a) Affidavit of Ms M including the child inclusive
conference memorandum to the Court dated 28 June 2021, filed 7 July 2021;
(b) Affidavit of Ms M filed 8 July 2021;
(c) Affidavit of Ms K filed 3 August 2021;
(d) Affidavit of Ms L filed 3 August 2021; and
(e) Affidavit of Ms M filed 3 August 2021.
5 The further affidavit material relied upon by the mother is of limited
assistance, save and except as to the child inclusive conference
which is annexure “M-3” to the affidavit of Ms M filed 7 July
6 Consideration has been given to the affidavit of Ms K who is a domestic
violence case worker and Ms L who is a domestic violence
counsellor.
7 Both deponents have engaged with the mother since June 2021. Ms K has met
the children although such involvement did not extend
to therapeutic
engagement.
8 The affidavits of Ms K and Ms L are based upon the history as provided by
the mother and are of little assistance in determining
whether the orders made,
that would provide for the children to spend time with the father, should be
stayed pending the appeal.
9 In support of the application for a stay of the orders, the mother
summarises her submissions in support of a stay at paragraph
counsel’s outline of case document as follows:
The Mother says, in short, that beyond acknowledging
that the Mother’s case was the abuse of her and the children had occurred
and was a risk and the Father’s case was that such abuse was strenuously
denied, the Court did not appropriately consider,
as it was required to do, the
evidence that was before the Court so as to be in a position, on an interim
hearing, applying the cautions
of cases such as
Goode & Goode
FLC 93-286, to analyse and determine the risk, if any, to the children. The
Mother says, in short, treating the Mother’s
allegations as being equalled
or met by the Father’s strenuous denial was to treat the Mother’s
allegations as just being
allegations (which appears endorsed by the
Father in the Father’s submissions document, paragraph 7), without
considering the
nature of them to determine and analyse the existence of risk,
if any. The Father’s strenuous denial did not permit the Court
the risk as not, for practical purposes, existing.
10 The father opposes the application for stay and submits that taking the
mother’s case at its highest, there is no evidence
which elevates the
status of the mother’s allegations beyond that they are mere allegations.
The father contends that the
refusal to stay the orders would not render the
appeal nugatory in circumstances where a return to Sydney, pending the appeal of
interim orders, would do no more than return the children to a familiar
environment.
11 It is also argued that the prospects of a successful appeal are unlikely
in that the reasons for judgment did properly engage with
the mother’s
case, namely that the father presents as a risk to the children and the mother
and given that the proceedings
were interim in nature and it was not possible to
weigh up and determine the veracity of the allegations of each of the
12 It is also asserted that her application for stay should not act as an
automatic stay of the orders, in circumstances where the
mother did not return
to the Suburb B area nor pursue expedition of her appeal.
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
Aldridge & Keaton
[2009] FamCAFC 106
the following is set out:-
17. This is an appeal from a discretionary judgment.
There are well established principles on the limits on interference by an
court with such a judgment (see
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR
Gronow v Gronow
[1979] HCA 63
(1979) 144 CLR 513
(1979) FLC 90-716).
18. The principles to be applied in determining an application for a stay of
orders both in the general law and in respect of parenting
proceedings are also
well known (see
The Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia
v Myer Emporium Limited [No.1]
[1986] HCA 13
(1986) 160 CLR 220
Alexander v
Cambridge Credit Corporation
(1985) 2 NSW LR 685
Jennings Construction
Limited v Burgundy Royale Investments Pty Limited
[1986] HCA 84
(1986) 161 CLR 681
Clemett & Clemett
[1980] FamCA 90
(1981) FLC 91-013
JRN & KEN v IEG &
[1998] HCATrans 263
(1998) 72 ALJR 1329
at 1332). The authorities stress the discretionary
nature of the application which should be determined on its merits. Principles
relevant to this matter include the following:
the onus to
establish a proper basis for the stay is on the applicant for the stay. However
it is not necessary for the applicant
to demonstrate any “special”
or “exceptional” circumstances;
a person who
has obtained a judgment is entitled to the benefit of that judgment;
a person who
has obtained a judgment is entitled to presume the judgment is correct;
the mere filing
of an appeal is insufficient to grant a stay;
the bona fides
of the applicant;
a stay may be
granted on terms that are fair to all parties – this may involve a court
weighing the balance of convenience
and the competing rights of the
a weighing of
the risk that an appeal may be rendered nugatory if a stay is not granted
– this will be a substantial factor
in determining whether it will be
appropriate to grant a stay;
preliminary assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal – whether
the appellant has an arguable case;
desirability of limiting the frequency of any change in a child’s living
arrangements;
the period of
time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory
arrangements may support the granting of the
stay for a short period of time;
interests of the child the subject of the proceedings are a significant
consideration.
DOES THE APPLICANT HAVE AN ARGUABLE CASE
Jackamarra v Krakouer
(1998) 195 CLR
at [32] Gummow and Hayne JJ referred with approval to the remarks of Barwick
General Steel Industries Inc. v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
where at 129 his Honour considered the test to be applied
when considering an application for summary dismissal:
The test to be applied has been variously expressed;
“so obviously untenable that it cannot possibly succeed”;
“manifestly
groundless”; “so manifestly faulty that it does
not admit of argument”; “discloses a case which the Court
satisfied cannot succeed”; “under no possibility can there be a good
cause of action”; “be manifest that
to allow them” (the
pleadings) “to stand would involve useless expense”.
At times the test has been put as high as saying that the case must be so plain
and obvious that the court can say at once that the
statement of claim, even if
proved, cannot exceed; or “so manifest on the view of the pleadings,
merely reading through them,
that it is a case that does not admit of reasonable
argument”; “so to speak apparent at a
15 Their Honours engaged in a discussion of an “arguable” case
and the test that might be applied at [35]:
The parties submitted here that the Full Court should
have decided whether the appeal was “arguable”. It is important
understand what is meant in the context by “arguable”. If it means
no more than that counsel, acting reasonably,
can formulate an argument which
can properly be advanced in support of the appeal, the test is too loose; if it
is clear that the
argument will fail, the appeal should not proceed. To permit
it to proceed is to subject the respondent to the many cost of litigation
needlessly and is to occupy the courts when they could be occupied more
productively. ...
(Footnotes omitted.)
16 For there to be an arguable case it must be one that is capable of being
argued with some prospect of success.
17 I do not consider that the grounds of appeal as presented on behalf of the
mother are groundless or could not possibly succeed.
It is arguable in the
sense there is more substance than the mere formulation of an argument by
counsel but weight should be given
to the contention of senior counsel for the
husband that the proceedings are of an interim nature and does not readily allow
evidence to be tested. That does not mean that there should be a default
position of an order never being made in favour of a party
subject of an
assertion that they represent an unacceptable risk, but rather that the Court
should adopt a cautious and careful approach
and as required by
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), greater weight must be given for the need
to protect the child from physical or psychological harm, abuse, neglect or
WOULD THE APPEAL BE RENDERED NUGATORY IF A STAY IS NOT
18 The mother and children remain in the H Shire.
She has not returned to the Suburb B area.
19 It is not contentious that the mother’s decision to relocate the
children from Sydney was without notice and without the
consent of the
20 The children were appropriately established in Suburb B and whilst the
matter is not to be determined by placing significant weight
on an argument that
the mother’s actions have disrupted the status quo of the children, it is
at least in part a relevant consideration
as to the prejudice caused to the
mother if this stay is not granted.
21 There is merit in the argument that the mother’s current
circumstances are not a settled position and that the children’s
the Suburb B area or alternatively the near environs, does not cause prejudice
to the mother’s ability to argue the
22 The proceedings are at an interim stage and it could not be said that the
mother’s current circumstances represent the settled
position for the
children. The refusal to stay the interim orders does not prevent or prejudice
the mother’s appeal but does
interfere with the mother’s ability to
remain with the children in the H Shire. The issue for the mother is not so
the interim orders impact upon the children but rather how they impact
upon her desire to relocate the children geographically distant
23 The mother is not able to pull herself up by her own bootstraps by now
relying upon the purportedly settled circumstances of the
THE BEST INTERESTS OF THE CHILDREN
24 Whilst not a paramount consideration, the best
interests of the children may well be highly relevant.
[2006] FamCA 848
(2006) FLC 93-288
the Full Court said at 80,942:
32. The granting or refusal of a stay involves an
exercise of discretion by a trial Judge. While such discretion must be
judicially, in cases involving children, we accept that from time to
time circumstances in existence at the date of the orders, or
which occur from
the date of orders until the hearing of a stay application, may be very relevant
matters to be considered in the
exercise of discretion in determining whether or
not to grant a stay. The interests of children would not be promoted by an
requirement or presumption in every case to maintain the status quo
prior to the making of orders the subject of the stay application,
and to ignore
unsatisfactory arrangements at the time of the orders, or significant events
which have occurred after the making of
those orders.
26 The hearing of the competing interim applications took place on 4 June
2021 with judgment delivered on 30 June 2021. The parties
and children attended
upon a family consultant for a child inclusive conference on 23 June 2021 with
an extensive memorandum being
published on 28 June 2021. The Court did not have
the advantage of the child inclusive conference memorandum to which each of the
parties have referred and seek to be brought to account.
27 At the time of the conference, the mother and children were living in the
H Shire area. The parties were not able to reconcile
their differences. The
father sought that the children reside in an equal shared week about arrangement
including the children spending
half of the school holidays whereas the mother
proposed that the children neither spend time with the father nor engage in any
or electronic communication with him.
28 The mother alleged that the father had “physically, verbally,
sexually, financially and psychologically abused
and had engaged in
coercive and controlling conduct throughout the marriage. In addition, she
maintained that both she and the children
at times were
“terrified”
29 The memorandum records the father’s trenchant denials of the
mother’s allegation and his claim that the allegations
were false and
should be considered as part of an overall strategy to enable the mother to
relocate the children to the H Shire where
her brother resides.
30 The mother also expanded her concern in respect of the potential
perpetrators of family violence to include the paternal grandfather,
an allegation that X had expressed her concern that the paternal grandmother may
be at risk from the paternal grandfather.
31 In interview with the family consultant, X impressed as an engaging and
articulate child who had settled in to her new school.
The family consultant
did record that X misses her friends at her old school in Suburb B and in
relation to her relationship with
the significant adults in her life, the
following paragraphs summarise her position:
41. X identified the most important people in her life
as “my Mum, my Dad, my brother, Z [paternal grandparent’s
and W. She said that she and Y get on good, that his “hair is
adorable” and that when she is upset he tries to cheer
her up by acting
like a dog, as she loves dogs. She said that she does not like it when Y takes
her favourite toys and refuses to
give them back. X described that her
‘Nanna’ and ‘Grandad’ as “really nice” and
that they allow
her to have lots of lollies and watch TV before dinner and bed.
She said that once, when Y hurt her, her ‘Grandad’ threatened
hurt Y and this made her sad.
42. X said that her mother is “really nice” but that at the moment
“she has a lot of work to do and doesn’t
want to speak to us about
it ... sometimes she takes her anger out on us ... by raising her voice and
saying no more lollies.”...
32 By way of further explanation, X expanded on the effect of being separated
from her father and paternal grandparents as follows:
45. X said that she does not like that she cannot see
her Dad, ‘Nanna’, ‘Grandad’ and ‘Z. X said that
she did not know that she, her mother and Y were leaving and explained that her
mother had told her that they would leave after she
finished year six. X said
that her mother told her that they had to leave, as their father was being
“really rude and the
counsellor said it is not safe to be with Dad
anymore”. X said that her father was “rude” when he was
kind or shouting” but that he was “nice when he is not
rude” such as letting her and Y watch TV and giving good
cuddles. X said
it would be nice to see her Dad, ‘Nanna’ and ‘Grandad’
but “I would worry that they
will be shouty at me and say, where have you
been”. She said that maybe she would like to spend time with her father
school holidays in the future.
33 In interview, Y also expressed that whilst he was happy at his new school
he missed his old school and his friends.
34 The following appears at paragraph 48:
Y said that the most important people to him are
“Mum, Dad, Mr N [paternal uncle’s partner], Mr P [paternal uncle],
Grandad, Z and X.” ...
35 Whilst Y expressed to the family consultant that he wanted the parties to
engage in less argument and that they stop shouting at
each other, “he
never felt unsafe with either parent but that he would like both of them to stop
“shouting and yelling
He said that
he misses his dad and Z and would like to speak to his father on the computer.
The family consultant considered that
there was no conclusive outcome in respect
of the mother’s allegations of child sexual abuse and that if they were
not ultimately
substantiated, the children would not be able to maintain an
appropriate and meaningful relationship with the father if they remained
geographically distant from him.
36 The following evaluation by the family consultant is of relevance:
56. ... Therefore, it may be important for the Court to
give consideration to [the mother] and the children to returning to within
reasonable distance of the family home, previous school, friends and activities,
with necessary safety conditions in place, while
assessments and investigations
are ongoing. The parental separation and the move to the H Shire has been very
recent and while another
move will likely be disruptive for the children, it
will not be as disruptive as them settling into the H Shire and possibly having
to move back at a later stage in the proceedings.
37 And then at paragraph 57:
If [the mother’s] proposal was implemented and the
children remain in the H Shire with no communication or time of any form
[the father] and it was found that her allegations were false, this will likely
have serious implications for X and Y’s
long-term relationship with [the
father], the extended paternal family and their emotional and social
development. If this was the
case, it could lead to significant mental health
difficulties for the children in the long-term. If [the father’s] account
is correct and [the mother] has made false allegations without any foundation,
this is concerning and may suggest that [the mother]
has some underlying mental
health difficulty that impacts her ability to support the children’s
relationship with [the father]
and the children’s long term mental
38 The concern of the family consultant is that the potential for the
children’s relationship with the father to be fundamentally
disrupted by
them remaining in the H Shire outweighs the impact of the disruption of the
children moving back to the Suburb B area.
39 The evaluation by the family consultant as set out in the detailed
memorandum lends support to the interim orders which are the
subject of the
40 The onus is on the mother to establish an appropriate basis for a stay. I
do not consider that she has done so, acknowledging
that she is not required to
demonstrate a special or exceptional circumstance.
41 The father is entitled to the benefit of the judgment. The delay of the
mother in complying with the interim orders which necessitate
the children being
returned to the Suburb B area is a cause for a further disruption to the
children rather than a basis to claim
that a stay will preserve the status
42 The mother’s ability to prosecute her appeal is not affected if a
stay is not granted and it is an important consideration
that the interests of
the children are likely to be best served by the compliance with the interim
43 For these reasons, I propose to dismiss the mother’s application for
44 I make the order as appears at the commencement of these reasons.
I certify that the preceding forty-four (44)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 27 August 2021
Child Inclusive Conference
Memorandum to Court dated 28 June 2021, paragraph 7.
Ibid, paragraph 51.
RTF format (377 KB)
Signed PDF/A format