URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1973/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Southern Portland Cement Ltd v Cooper [1973] UKPCHCA 1; (1973) 129 CLR 295 (19 November 1973)
PRIVY COUNCIL
SOUTHERN PORTLAND CEMENT LTD. v. COOPER.
[1973] UKPCHCA 1
(1973) 129 CLR 295
Privy Council
Lord Reid(1), Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest(1), Lord Wilberforce(1), Lord Simon
of Glaisdale(1) and Lord Salmon.(1)
Negligence - Dangerous premises - Injury to entrant - Liability to occupier
- Duty of care - Trespassers - Licences - Children -
Allurement - Whether
gives right of action to child - Duty to trespasser based on considerations of
humanity - Whether general duty
1973, July, 17-19, 23-26; November 19. 19:11:1973
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
November 19.
LORD REID delivered the judgment of their Lordships as follows:-
This is an appeal from a decision of the High Court of Australia in an
plaintiff and the present appellants are defendants. The
action was tried in
the Supreme Court of New South Wales by Collins J. and a jury. The jury found
for the plaintiff and awarded
$56,880 as damages. In the Court of Appeal this
verdict was set aside but on appeal to the High Court the jury's verdict was
[1972] HCA 28
(1972) 128 CLR 427
2. There is little or no dispute about the facts. The plaintiff sustained
very severe injuries while a trespasser on land occupied
by the defendants by
coming in contact with a 33,000 volt electric cable. He was then thirteen
years of age. The defendants carried
on a business of quarrying limestone at
South Marulan in a rather remote area. There was a township of over forty
dwelling houses,
most being occupied by the defendants' employees, with a
school and other buildings situated immediately east of the working area
limestone was quarried, crushed and loaded into railway wagons. Over forty
children attended the school. The quarry was in
the southern part of the
working area. Limestone was crushed near the quarry and then conveyed in a
north-westerly direction to "bins"
adjacent to and over a railway line so that
wagons could be loaded there. This line ran north and south and was joined to
line some distance away to the north. South of the bins there was a
part of the line referred to as the backshunt with a slight
gradient so that
when a wagon was loaded at the bins it was run down the backshunt to buffers.
When a sufficient number of wagons
had been loaded a locomotive took them
northwards to the main line. (at p296)
3. A high tension electric cable belonging to the county council brought
power for the defendants' operation. It was carried by
poles some twenty feet
above the ground and it ran to the west of and nearly parallel with the
railway line. Some months before the
accident it was decided to extend the
backshunt southwards to give room for more and larger wagons. To make this
extension it was
necessary to raise the ground level considerably. So waste
material from the crushing operations referred to as "fines" or coarse
had to be dumped there in large quantities. It spread outwards and created a
slope of some 60 degrees and in the course of spreading
it partially buried
some of the poles which carried the electric cable. It was decided that the
cable should be moved but for some
reason this operation was postponed. (at
4. Some two months before the accident to the plaintiff the distance between
the sloping surface of the dumped fines and the cable
was only about 12 ft at
one point and the defendants' superintendent gave orders that no more material
should be dumped there. But
these orders were disobeyed. (at p297)
5. When the place was inspected on 27th July 1967 it was found that the gap
between the sloping surface and the cable had become
much smaller and as a
matter of urgency the defendants arranged with the county council that the
cable should be moved on the following
Monday, July 31st. But nothing was
done to protect the place meanwhile and it would seem that more material may
have been put on
the slope, narrowing the gap still further, between 27th July
and Sunday, 30th July, when the accident happened. (at p297)
6. The school children were in the habit of playing at various places not far
from the working area. They were informed that this
area was out of bounds
and there does not seem to have been much trespassing on this area at least
during working hours. Fines had
previously been dumped so as to form a slope
on the east side of the working area. Children found this "sandhill" alluring
objection was taken to their playing there. There were two other areas
to the west of the working area to which children went to
play. These areas
were not on the defendants' land but they were only a few hundred yards from
the backshunt and the growth of another
"sandhill" there was plainly visible
from these areas. (at p297)
7. On the afternoon of Sunday, 30th July, the plaintiff and a companion had
been playing in one of the areas to the west of the
defendants' land. When
returning home by crossing the railway line to the north of the bins they met
three other children and they
all decided to walk southwards along the railway
line past the bins to the backshunt sandhill. There they began to play.
plaintiff was on the slope his arm came in contact with the electric
cable with disastrous results. It was within his reach and
it would seem that
he must have grabbed it either when stumbling or for some other reason. (at
8. The issues for trial contained five counts. At the end of the trial the
learned judge directed the jury to return a verdict
for the defendants on
counts 1, 2, 4 and 5 but left the third count to the jury. It was as
"And for a third count the plaintiff sues the defendant as
aforesaid for that at all relevant times the defendant was the
occupier of certain premises and there was on the said
premises a certain pile of rubble which was alluring to
children and such as was likely to induce the presence on
the said premises of children and the plaintiff was a child who
was on the said premises and was allured by the said heap of
rubble and thereupon the defendant by itself its servants and
agents was so careless negligent and unskilful in and about
allowing the said pile of rubble to be in close proximity to a
high tension electricity line that the plaintiff sustained the
injuries and suffered the damage more particularly set out in
the first count hereof." (at p298)
9. It is argued for the defendants that the trial judge misdirected the jury
in several respects. In particular two passages are
said to contain serious
misdirections in law. They are as follows:
"The occupier of premises is bound by a duty to take
reasonable care to protect children from risk to which they
are exposed by a dangerous condition of part of the premises
if that part of the premises constitutes an allurement to
children to enter on to the premises and approach that
dangerous part. The part must be dangerous in the sense
that it is a concealed danger or a trap. Its existence and
dangerous quality must be known to this occupier of the premises
and unknown and not obvious to the children. Further, it
should be known to the occupier that there is a likelihood
that there will be in or near the premises children who will
be subject to the allurement and who will in fact be allured
by it. The word 'allurement' is a traditional word. What
is a thing that is alluring to children? - something that is
attractive to children, something that attracts them to
approach it and perhaps play about it or approach it in any
other way."
"Then, as I told you, it must be known or at least be foreseeable
and foreseen by the occupier that there was a likelihood
that there would be in or near the premises children
who would be subject to the allurement that existed on the
premises. Again, it is idle to give illustrations of other
situations. You bear the situation in mind here of the village,
its locality: its proximity to the works and all the other
evidence about how children had conducted themselves in and
before the accident. And also, as I told you, it must be foreseeable
by the occupier that this part would be an allurement
to children." (at p299)
10. The appellants base their argument primarily on the decision of the Board
in Commissioner for Railways v. Quinlan
. They maintain that,
if the principles there set out are applied to the facts of this case, the
above quotations contain fundamental
misdirections and that it is impossible
to find any breach of any duty owed by them to the plaintiff. Their Lordships
will therefore
first consider that case in some detail. (at p299)
11. The facts are so well known that it is unnecessary to do more than recall
that a trespasser driving a truck over a private level
crossing at 5.20 a.m.
was struck by a train coming round a bend in the line which failed to give
timely warning of its approach.
The main argument for him was that, as he was
"reasonably to be anticipated ... to be present", there was "a new fact which
a relationship between the occupier of proximity with the
intruder". Then it was said that the occupier's duty fell to be "determined
upon the nature of that proximity and not upon the duty as provided in the
category cases". The argument was that the duty was to
use reasonable care
(1964) AC, at p 1061 . (at p299)
12. Their Lordships think it important to have in mind that the judgment of
the Board was primarily directed to combatting that
argument. Lord Radcliffe
"... the jury must have received the definite impression
that the law that they were to apply to the facts was that,
once they thought that there was a 'likelihood' of people
coming to the crossing and that the appellant was aware of
such a likelihood, the appellant owed a general duty to the
respondent as 'a member of the public' to take reasonable
precautions to secure his safety, and that this duty was not
affected by the fact that the respondent was a trespasser. In
their Lordships' opinion this direction was not in accordance
with law." (1964) AC, at p 1069 (at p299)
13. Then, having mentioned Donoghue v. Stevenson [1931] UKHL 3;
(1932) AC 562
Radcliffe said (1964) AC, at p 1070 :
"They cannot see that there is any general principle to be
deduced from that decision which throws any particular light
upon the legal rights and duties that arise when a trespasser
is injured on a railway level crossing where he has no right
to be: more particularly, they consider that it is not correct
in principle to suppose that the mere fact that there was a
likelihood, apparent to the occupier, of a trespasser being
present on the crossing at some time or another is sufficient
to impose upon the occupier any general duty of care towards
such a trespasser. The consequences of such a supposition
would be far-reaching indeed." (at p300)
14. As to that their Lordships are in full agreement with the Board in
Quinlan's Case
(1964) AC 1054
but that passage is only dealing
argument that there can be a general duty of care independent of or different
ordinary duty which an occupier owes
to a trespasser. It does not
deal with the more difficult question of the nature and extent
occupier's ordinary duty to a
trespasser in various circumstances. (at p300)
15. The Board in Quinlan's Case give a compelling reason for that view. Lord
Radcliffe said (1964) AC, at p 1085 :
"Suppose, however, the case in which the occupier, having
no definite knowledge of anyone being on his land but having
notice that the presence of someone at some point of time is
possible or likely; can that circumstance by any process of
reasoning give such a trespasser a higher measure of protection,
the right to claim a general duty of care, which would
not be owed to him if he were actually present before the
eyes of the occupier?" (at p300)
16. Their Lordships agree. But again that throws no light on the nature and
extent of the occupier's ordinary duty to trespassers.
And it in no way
contradicts the view that the extent of that ordinary duty may vary according
to the degree of likelihood of the
coming of trespassers, and other factors.
17. Having rejected the argument based on a general duty of care the Board
had to consider the nature and extent of the ordinary
duty owed by an occupier
to trespassers. Any consideration of that matter must start - and the Board
did start - with an examination
of the decision of the House of Lords in
Robert Addie & Sons (Collieries) Ltd. v. Dumbreck
[1929] UKHL 3
(1929) AC 358
a haulage system, which was worked intermittently, on the
Company's land. The Company had tried unsuccessfully
to prevent trespassing
near it. On one occasion when the mechanism was put in motion a young child
was playing with it. When it
started he was caught in
it and killed. It was
held that "there was no legal duty cast upon the appellants to afford
against the danger which
they must have known use of the land by
the children almost necessarily involved." (per Lord Buckmaster
(1929) AC, at
p 380 .) (at
18. The law was set out in two well-known passages:
"Towards the trespasser the occupier has no duty to take
reasonable care for his protection or even to protect him from
concealed danger. The trespasser comes on to the premises
at his own risk. An occupier is in such a case liable only where
the injury is due to some wilful act involving something more
than the absence of reasonable care. There must be some
act done with the deliberate intention of doing harm to the
trespasser, or at least some act done with reckless disregard
of the presence of the trespasser."
((1929) AC, at p 365 per Lord Hailsham L.C.)
"In the present case, had the child been a licensee I would
have held the defenders liable; secus if the complainer had
been an adult. But if the person is a trespasser, then the
only duty the proprietor has towards him is not maliciously
to injure him: he may not shoot him: he may not set a
spring gun, for that is just to arrange to shoot him without
personally firing the shot. Other illustrations of what he may
not do might be found, but they all come under the same
head - injury either directly malicious or an acting so reckless
as to be tantamount to malicious acting." (per Viscount
Dunedin (1929) AC, at pp 376-377 .) (at p301)
19. So apart from an obligation not to do anything on his land maliciously
directed against a future trespasser, the occupier was
held to have no duty
towards a trespasser until he knew that the trespasser had arrived on his
land. There was no argument and no
indication that ordinary humanity might in
some circumstances require some protective action to be taken before the
trespasser arrived.
20. The Board in Quinlan's Case
(1964) AC 1054
did not rigidly adhere to the
law laid down in Addie's Case
[1929] UKHL 3
(1929) AC 358
first extension which they
recognised is, in their Lordships' view, wholly consistent with the Addie
"It is true however that an occupier can be treated as
having knowledge of a trespasser's presence even though the
latter is not visibly before his eyes at the time when the act
that causes injury is done. He can be in a position in which
he 'as good as' knows that the other is there."
(1964) AC, at p 1076 (at p301)
21. In many branches of the law, civil and criminal, it is now well
established that a man who deliberately shuts his eyes to the
truth will not
be heard to say that he did not know it. Then the Board refer to the case of
Excelsior Wire Rope Co. Ltd. v. Callan
(1930) AC 404
and appear to have
adopted what is probably the best explanation of that difficult case: it was
known by the company's
to be "extremely likely" (per Lord Buckmaster)
that the children were there when they started the mechanism and therefore
good as knew" that the children were there. (at p302)
22. But then the Board went a great deal further without giving any reasons
for doing so. What is said (1964) AC, at p 1077 shews
that the Board were
prepared to hold not merely that a duty would arise as soon as the occupier
knew facts which made it extremely
likely that a trespasser had already
arrived, but also that a duty would arise before the arrival of the trespasser
as soon as it
became extremely likely that he would come in future. That puts
a very much greater burden on the occupier. (at p302)
23. The essence of the Addie principle is that an occupier need neither give
any consideration to a trespasser's safety nor do anything
for his protection
until he knows or as good as knows that the trespasser is already on his land.
It will then generally be too late
to remove or protect dangerous things on
his land. So all that he can do at that stage is to refrain from or modify
further operations
on the land which would endanger the trespasser. But if
the occupier's duty to trespassers arises as soon as he knows or as good
knows that it is extremely likely that a trespasser will come he may have
sufficient time and therefore an obligation to remove
or protect dangerous
things on the land as well as being bound to modify any dangerous operation
which he is carrying out before
the trespasser arrives. (at p302)
24. That in their Lordships' view amounts not merely to an extension but to a
transformation of the Addie principle. It introduces
a new element - that the
occupier is bound to exercise foresight with regard to trespassers, and to
consider in advance of the arrival
of a trespasser whether or not it is
extremely likely that he will come. That an occupier has to exercise some
foresight is recognized
by the Board. Lord Radcliffe said (1964) AC, at p
"The truth seems to be that, when the relationship of
occupier and trespasser comes in question, that relationship
is expressive of certain incidents such as the unpredictability
of the trespasser's presence, movements and purposes, which
themselves condition the amount of foresight that the law
will require of the occupier in determining what kind of duty
he owes to a trespasser."
Again it is said (1964) AC, at p 1087 :
"Alternatively, could a jury, properly directed, find on the
evidence that the respondent's presence on the crossing was,
to the appellant's knowledge, a very probable event?"
That must mean that if Quinlan's presence on the crossing at the time of the
accident had been very probable he could have been entitled
to succeed because
the Commissioner would then have had a duty of care towards him as soon as his
servants knew that it was probable
that Quinlan would come at that time. (at
25. In their Lordships' view it is one thing to say that an occupier must act
with due regard to the trespasser's safety from the
time when he knows or as
good as knows that the trespasser is there - but it is quite a different thing
to say that the occupier
may have to regulate his activities at a much earlier
time as soon as he knows that the arrival of the trespasser at some future
time is very probable. And the matter does not stop there. If the occupier
knows facts from which he ought to infer that the coming
of the trespasser is
very likely, he will not be heard to say that he shut his eyes to those facts
or did not realise this probability.
He as good as knew it. (at p303)
26. So long as the inquiry is limited to the question whether the occupier
knew or as good as knew that a trespasser had arrived
on his land the
criterion of extreme likelihood must be right. If the degree of likelihood
known to the occupier is less than that
it could not be said that he as good
as knew that a trespasser was on his land. It could only be said that he had
more or less strong
reasons for suspecting that a trespasser might be there.
And under the Addie principle that would not be sufficient to impose any
on the occupier. (at p303)
27. But when one passes from knowledge of something that has already happened
to foresight of what may happen in future, the justification
for limiting the
imposition of a duty to cases of extreme likelihood disappears. In their
Lordships' judgment there is neither logical
nor practical justification for
holding that an occupier comes under a duty to potential trespassers if he
estimates or ought to
estimate that the arrival of one or more trespassers on
his land is extremely likely, but that he has no duty to them if he merely
estimates or ought to estimate that the chance probability or likelihood of
their arrival on his land is somewhat less than extremely
high. Chance
probability or likelihood is always a matter of degree. It is rarely capable
of precise assessment. Many different
expressions are in common use. It can
be said that the occurrence of a future event is very likely, rather likely,
more probable
than not, not unlikely, quite likely, not improbable, more than
a mere possibility, etc. It is neither practicable nor reasonable
line at extreme probability. (at p303)
28. It is perhaps not very surprising that the Board in Quinlan's Case
proceeded with caution. The law generally
develops by degrees. It
is plain that the Board wished to keep as near as they could
to the Addie
principle, and perhaps they did
not realise how far they were departing from
it. But in their Lordships' judgment it
is now necessary to re-examine this
their opinion and abandon the limitation of extreme likelihood. But
their Lordships
will complete their examination of Quinlan's
before dealing further with this matter. (at p304)
29. Quinlan's Case
(1964) AC 1054
was not directly concerned with child
trespassers, but the Board took occasion to deal with the
matter when
considering (1964) AC,
at p 1083 the case of Commissioner for Railways
(N.S.W.) v. Cardy
[1960] HCA 45
. The facts
were set out shortly:
"A boy of fourteen sustained grievous injuries by burning
from sinking his feet through the crust of an ash-tip, which
contained a mass of red hot material. A pathway that was
freely used by pedestrians ran along one side of this tip, and
people, particularly children, frequently visited the tip despite
'casual and intermittent warnings' by railway servants."
Lord Radcliffe then said:
"The circumstances seemed to place the case squarely
among those 'children's cases' in which an occupier who had
placed a dangerous 'allurement' on his land is liable for
injury caused by it to a straying child ... Children's cases
in this context do unavoidably introduce considerations
that do not apply where the sufferer of injury is an adult.
What is allurement to a child and, being so, imposes by itself
a measure of responsibility, is not an allurement to an adult:
and those conceptions of licence or permission, which may be
highly relevant for the determination of the adult's rights,
are virtually without meaning, at any rate as applied to
small children."
The latter part of this quotation appears to echo a passage in the judgment of
Dixon C.J. (1960) 104 CLR, at pp 282, 285 :
"One may venture to think that no person who came to
the case familiar with general juristic concepts but unindoctrinated
with the notion that to be a trespasser is to be
caput lupinum would expect to find a system of law which
denied altogether the existence in the Commissioner of any
duty of any sort in reference to the likelihood of persons
coming to the site and suffering grievous injury. He would
find that our law has not denied the duty but has placed it
upon the supposal of a licence so that there will be no trespass.
But is it necessary that we should go on ever constructing the
liability out of the materials that can be found for inferring,
implying or imputing a licence, fictional though it must
inevitably seem?"
"But it is at least clear that in England to impute a licence
is now to place upon the occupier a duty of care measured by
a much higher standard. Whatever may be the outcome it
involves a distinct point of departure from the law obtaining
in Australia. Why should we here continue to explain the
liability which that law appears to impose in terms which can
no longer command an intellectual assent and refuse to refer
it directly to basal principle?" (at p305)
30. If the conception of licence is "virtually without meaning" as applied to
children, if placing an allurement on his land "imposes
by itself a measure of
responsibility" on the occupier, then the Board must in their Lordships'
judgment have gone a long way beyond
the Addie principle at least with regard
to allurement cases, because this necessarily involves the proposition that if
an occupier
places a dangerous allurement on his land he thereby undertakes a
duty towards children who may later be allured by it. For the
moment their
Lordships are not concerned with the extent of that duty. They are only
concerned to shew that the Board recognized
that such an occupier comes under
a duty long before the allured children arrive on his land. And it is not
said that that duty
is limited to cases in which it is extremely probable that
children will be allured. (at p305)
31. It is true that on the following page it is said (1964) AC, at p 1084 :
"Their Lordships take it that in such a situation it is to be
presumed that the occupier's conduct is so callous as to be
capable of constituting wanton or intentional harm, and, no
doubt, in such circumstances it could be so regarded."
But their Lordships have sought in vain for any indication in the long report
of Cardy's Case
[1960] HCA 45
(1960) 104 CLR 274
that any conduct
of any of the numerous
responsible railway servants concerned was or could be regarded as callous or
to harm trespassers.
Their Lordships must therefore
conclude that this was an attempt to reconcile the Board's view of the
the Addie principle
by means of a legal fiction. (at p305)
32. Then it is said (1964) AC, at p 1084 :
"If on the evidence a plaintiff is a trespasser, a person present
without right or licence, the occupier's duty to him is determined
by the general formula as laid down in Addie's Case
[1929] UKHL 3
(1929) AC 358
That formula may embrace an extensive and, it may be, an
expanding interpretation of what is wanton or reckless conduct
towards a trespasser in any given situation, and, in the case
of children, it will not preclude full weight being given to any
reckless lack of care involved in allowing things naturally
dangerous to them to be accessible in their vicinity." (at p306)
33. Their Lordships agree with the Board's view that an occupier who allows
things naturally dangerous to be accessible to children
may come under some
duty towards them but they do not think that this can be said only to arise if
there is "reckless lack of care".
They are of the opinion that recklessness
differs in kind from lack of care. They agree with the view of Lord Pearson
with regard
to the "Addie formula" expressed in Herrington v. British Railways
Board (1972) AC, at p 928 :
"I think the word 'reckless' in the context does not mean
grossly negligent but means that there must be a conscious
disregard of the consequences - in effect deciding not to
bother about the consequences. Thus a subjective mental
element, a sort of mens rea is required as a condition of
liability."
Their Lordships are the more inclined to take that view because the common law
has always refused to recognize degrees of civil negligence:
reckless lack of
care is no more than negligence with a vituperative epithet. So again the
Board appear to be placing a strained
interpretation on the Addie formulation
in order to reconcile it with what they hold to be the law. (at p306)
34. Their Lordships recognize that it is possible to give more than one
interpretation to the judgment of the Board in Quinlan's
(1964) AC 1054
But they prefer the interpretation which they have put upon it because it
gives more weight to views expressed
on specific matters
than to more general
statements expressing approval of the Addie doctrine. (at p306)
35. On this interpretation it is not necessary to alter any specific finding
of the Board except that relating to extreme probability
and their Lordships
have already given their reasons for holding that to be necessary. (at p306)
36. But in view of the wide variety of views which have been expressed in
numerous cases they think it necessary to re-examine and
re-state the basis of
the law relating to the duty of an occupier to a trespasser. They do not
propose to refer to many of these
cases. They have in mind the words of
Viscount Dunedin in Addie's Case:
"Judgments on this class of case are so numerous that it
is impossible to review them all and a mere citation of a string
of authorities is inimical to clear decision ..."
(1929) AC, at p 372 . (at p306)
37. The fundamental difference between the relationship of occupier and
trespasser and other relationships which give rise to a
duty of care is that
the occupier's relationship with a trespasser is forced on him against his
will, whereas other relationships
are generally undertaken voluntarily. So it
cannot be said in this case that a man ought not to enter into a relationship
with others
unless he has the ability and resources necessary for the proper
performance of the duties which that relationship entails. (at p307)
38. Their Lordships are breaking no new ground in holding that the nature and
extent of an occupier's duty to a trespasser must
be based on considerations
of humanity. As long ago as 1820 in Ilott v. Wilkes
(1820) 3 B & Ald 304
a case dealing
with injury to a trespasser by a spring gun, Best J.
said (1820) 3 B & Ald, at p 319 (106 ER, at p 680) : "The
law of England
not sanction what is inconsistent with humanity". In Grand Trunk Railway of
Canada v. Barnett
(1911) AC 361
, at p 370 the judgment
of the Board refers to:
"wilful or reckless disregard of ordinary humanity rather than mere absence of
care". (at p307)
39. In their Lordships' judgment the Addie formulation of the occupier's duty
is so narrow that it will not cover many cases where
humane considerations
would clearly impel an occupier to do something to avoid or lessen danger to
trespassers. It is not enough
to say that he must not act recklessly or
maliciously. His duty must be formulated in broader terms. (at p307)
40. It was urged in argument that an occupier's duty to a trespasser cannot
be extended so as to make it exceed his duty to a licensee.
Their Lordships
agree. The passage in the Board's judgment in Quinlan's Case (1964) AC, at p
1083 to which their Lordships have
already referred appears to warrant
affording to trespassing children, at least in some cases, rights
substantially equivalent to
those of a child licensee. It was there stated
that the Board were at one with Dixon C.J. in finding it unnecessary to resort
the categorization of licensee in order to give to children the legal
remedy that is felt to be their due. (at p307)
41. The occupier's duty to an adult licensee was limited to giving warning.
Their Lordships observe that Fullagar J. in Cardy's
Case said (1960) 104 CLR,
at p 294 : "The rules for which we refer primarily to Indermaur v. Dames
(1867) LR 2 CP 311
and Gautret
(1867) LR 2 CP 371
(rightly I think) regarded as part of the general law relating to negligence."
Whether that
means that these rules are now
more flexible than were formerly
supposed, their Lordships do not stop to consider. The finding in
the plaintiff in the
present case was based on allurement. Most if not all of
the allurement cases were based on the injured
child having been impliedly
licensee. But so far as their Lordships are aware no difficulty was ever felt
in holding that, in
a case where any warning would
have been ineffective, the
occupier was bound to do a good deal more than merely give warning. So
limitation does not prevent
a broad formulation of the occupier's duty to a
child trespasser. (at p308)
42. Next, their Lordships have in mind the classic passage from Lord Atkin's
speech in Donoghye v. Stevenson [1931] UKHL 3;
"You must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions
which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure
your neighbour. Who then in law is my neighbour? The
answer seems to be persons who are so closely and directly
affected by my act that I ought reasonably to have them in
contemplation as being so affected when I am directing my
mind to the acts or omissions which are called in question." (at p308)
43. But in applying that passage to trespassers it must be remembered that
the neighbourhood relationship has been forced on the
occupier by the
trespasser and it would therefore be unjust to subject him to the full
obligations resulting from it in the ordinary
way. (at p308)
44. The rights and interests of the occupier must have full consideration. No
unreasonable burden must be put on him. With regard
to dangers which have
arisen on his land without his knowledge he can have no obligation to make
inquiries or inspection. With regard
to dangers of which he has knowledge but
which he did not create he cannot be required to incur what for him would be
large expense.
45. If the occupier creates the danger when he knows that there is a chance
that trespassers will come that way and will not see
or realise the danger he
may have to do more. There may be difficult cases where the occupier will be
hampered in the conduct of
his own affairs if he has to take elaborate
precautions. But in the present case it would have been easy to prevent the
development
of the dangerous situation which caused the plaintiff's injuries.
The more serious the danger the greater is the obligation to avoid
the dangerous thing or something near it is an allurement to children that may
greatly increase the chance that children
will come there. (at p308)
46. Next comes the question to whom does the occupier owe a duty? Their
Lordships have already rejected the view that no duty is
owed unless the
advent of a trespasser is extremely probable. It was argued that the duty
could be limited to cases where the coming
of trespassers is more probable
than not. Their Lordships can find neither principle nor authority nor any
practical reason to justify
such a limitation. The only rational or practical
answer would seem to be that the occupier is entitled to neglect a bare
possibility
that trespassers may come to a particular place on his land but is
bound at least to give consideration to the matter when he knows
facts which
show a substantial chance that they may come there. (at p309)
47. Such consideration should be all-embracing. On the one hand the occupier
is entitled to put in the scales every kind of disadvantage
to him if he takes
or refrains from action for the benefit of trespassers. On the other hand he
must consider the degree of likelihood
of trespassers coming and the degree of
hidden or unexpected danger to which they may be exposed if they come. He may
have to give
more weight to these factors if the potential trespassers are
children because generally mere warning is of little value to protect
children. (at p309)
48. It is easy to be wise after an accident has occurred. In considering
whether the occupier did all that he ought to have done
before the accident
the Court or jury must endeavour to put itself back in the situation which
confronted the occupier before the
trespassers arrived. It is not enough to
consider the point where the accident occurred if there are other danger
points where occupier
would also have had to protect. (at p309)
49. The problem then is to determine what would have been the decision of a
humane man with the financial and other limitations
of the occupier. Would he
have done something which would or might have prevented the accident, or would
he, regretfully it may
be, have decided that he could not reasonably be
expected to do anything? Their Lordships adopt the statement of Lord Uthwatt
Read v. J. Lyons & Co. Ltd.
[1946] UKHL 2
(1947) AC 156
, at p 185 :
"there is demanded of him a standard of conduct no higher
than what a reasonably minded occupier of land, with due
regard to his own interests, might well agree to be fair and no
lower than a trespasser ... might in a civilised community
reasonably expect." (at p309)
50. Australian courts have tended to proceed on somewhat different lines,
perhaps in order to avoid restrictions flowing from the
decisions in Addie's
[1929] UKHL 3
(1929) AC 358
and Quinlan's Cases
(1964) AC 1054
. This has led to some
intricate and possibly confusing arguments
as to whether, in a given state of
facts, there are two duties,
existing side by side, falling upon an occupier
towards trespassers
or potential trespassers. These complications become
unnecessary
if it is right, as their Lordships think it is, to state the
duty towards trespassers in wider terms than appear in Addie's
[1929] UKHL 3
(1929) AC 358
, or in some passages in Quinlan's Case
it is accepted that the nature of this duty cannot be determined without
reference to such all-embracing considerations
their Lordships have
mentioned, the need for the imposition of two separate parallel duties
disappears. Their Lordships believe
that the above reformulation of the law
would achieve results not substantially different from those achieved by
recent decisions
of the High Court. They believe moreover that it is
substantially in line with the development in English law as expressed by the
House of Lords in Herrington v. British Railways Board
[1972] UKHL 1
(1972) AC 877
51. Their Lordships have already set out the manner in which the trial judge
in this case directed the jury as to the law. His
directions differ to some
extent from the law as their Lordships have now stated it. The High Court
have had to consider such a
situation in several cases. In Cardy's Case
[1960] HCA 45
(1960) 104 CLR 274
, at p 287 Dixon C.J. said:
"One difficulty may be suggested. The trial went upon the
conventional or traditional theory of liability. Neither judge
nor jury dealt with application to the facts of the principle of
liability as it is here formulated. It is difficulty which has
caused me to hesitate as to the necessity of a new trial. But
after consideration I have concluded that a new trial ought
not to be directed. After all a new trial is not granted where
justice does not require it and independently of all discretion
the facts implicit in the findings which upon the summing up
the jury must be considered to have made really cover the
the ground and, as I see the matter, both upon those findings
and upon the evidence, the liability of the defendant Commissioner
is satisfactorily made out." (at p310)
52. The whole matter was summarized by Barwick C.J. at the end of his
judgment in this case (1972) 128 CLR, at p 450 .
"After verdict, bearing in mind the summing up, it must
be taken that the jury found that the respondent had created
a situation of danger on its land. That situation was the
proximity of the surface of the batter of the platform to the
uninsulated high voltage transmission line. That situation
of danger could only be regarded as highly dangerous to
human life and safety. Then, the jury must be taken to have
found that the respondent knew of the existence and dangerous
quality of what they must have concluded as a concealed trap
as far as children were concerned. Further, because the
place of the danger was attractive to children seeking their
amusement in the remote area where they lived, and having
regard to the terms of the summing up, the jury must have
concluded that the respondent must have known that it was
likely that children would be attracted to the place of danger.
In my opinion, that finding in the circumstances of the case
is the equivalent of a finding that the presence of the children
in the area was to be expected by the respondent. Upon the
possible view of the facts, which I have already indicated,
there was, in my opinion, sufficient evidence to support such
findings. They are sufficient, in my opinion, to support a
verdict against the respondent on the footing that, having
created a situation highly dangerous to human life, the
proximate presence of children was to be expected by it, with
the consequence that the respondent owed the appellant a
duty to take reasonable steps to prevent the appellant suffering
injury by that highly dangerous situation. If there was any
duty, there can be no question that the respondent failed to
perform it.
Therefore, because of the findings inherent in it, and upon
the basis I have indicated, I would not disturb the verdict of
the jury. A comparable course taken in Cardy's Case
[1960] HCA 45
(1960) 104 CLR 274
does not seem to have excited criticism in the Privy Council
in Quinlan's Case
(1964) AC 1054
. In my opinion, the appeal should be
allowed and the verdict of the jury restored." (at p311)
53. Their Lordships agree and they will therefore humbly advise Her Majesty
that this appeal should be dismissed. The appellants
must pay the
respondent's costs. (at p311)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter