R v Craig Barton (A Pseudonym) [2025] HCATrans 63 (11 September 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 063
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Melbourne No M38 of 2025
B e t w e e n
CRAIG BARTON (A PSEUDONYM)
Application for special leave to appeal
GORDON A‑CJ
BEECH‑JONES
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA AND BY VIDEO
ON THURSDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2025, AT 9.29
In accordance with the protocol for remote hearings, I will
announce the appearances for the parties.
MS E.H. RUDDLE,
appears with
MR L.C.A. McAULIFFE
applicant. (instructed by Office of Public Prosecutions
MS R.B. SHANN, SC
appears with
MR J.R. MUPRHY
for the respondent. (instructed by
Doogue + George Defence Lawyers)
GORDON A‑CJ:
We would be grateful if you could direct your submissions to
Yes, your Honours. Do
your Honours wish to hear in regard to any of the other grounds, or
primarily just in regard to ground 4?
GORDON A‑CJ:
Primarily in relation to ground 4. If there are particular things that you
really wish to say in relation to grounds 1, 2 and
3 then we, of
course, will not stop you, but our primary interest for the moment is
Thank you, your Honour. In our
respectful submission, ground 4 is not, we accept, the sort of matter that
we would ordinarily
bring on its own before this honourable Court. It forms
part of a problematic set of decisions which form and inform the more
substantive
grounds of grounds 1, 2 and 3 which we rely
The difficulty that we submit this case presents to sentencing
courts in Victoria is the issue of the assessment of intimate partner
and its importance. Not just by reason of the numbers provided but by reason
of, essentially, what conclusions have to
be drawn from those decisions. That
is, we would submit, that intimate partner violence does not deserve condign
punishment. It
is not able to hold the kind of sentences that are the subject
of this appeal.
Now, no invitation was made to the applicant to address
the additional grounds of rape that were the subject of the additional
by the court. In our
submission ‑ ‑ ‑
Am I right that they fall into two categories? There are
those which were, as I understand it, dealt with by the Court of Appeal
grounds that they were excessive and not the subject of submission by
Yes, your Honour.
And then there is another one which is reduced, and that is
your Honour.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Without the Court of Appeal
identifying that it was excessive itself.
your Honour. In our submission, there was a wholesale failure by the Court
of Appeal to assess the objective gravity of each
of the charges that was the
subject of the appeal. Without trying to belabour the points in grounds 1
through 3, we would submit
that charge 17 is a good example of that
So, charge 17 was an incident three weeks
post‑birth, wherein the victim CM was in a situation where she was
breastfeeding;
she had a cesarean section some three weeks earlier. It was held
by the Court of Appeal that 12 years for that offending, which,
submission, is a serious example of that offence.
It is not, in our
submission, an issue of, say, consensual sex gone too far or sex gone wrong.
This was not sex; this was power
and violence, and the violent insertion of his
fist into her vagina whilst she was tied up in those vulnerable situations are,
our submission – it was not open to the court to find that 12
years was too much in that circumstance.
That was entirely outside the
range, but it is from that error that the court has felt, in our submission,
compelled to start dropping
or reducing other sentences that the respondent in
this matter had not complained about, had not provided any reason for their
other than the reference at paragraph 87 to the inability to
reconcile some of the charges.
In our submission, if you look at each of
the sentences that were reduced, they each have various features that rendered
them serious
examples. The applicant in this case was prevented – or
was not given the opportunity of highlighting to the Court of Appeal
sentencing judge was right, or why it was open to her Honour to make the
findings that she did.
For example, charges 8 and 9 occurred
on a day where the complainant LV had undergone a colonoscopy and a gastroscopy.
She had had
a general anaesthetic and she was feeling unwell. She was clearly,
on the evidence, in a fragile state, and the offending in that
case took place
by both penile‑anal and vaginal penetrations. They were forceable actions
to satisfy himself sexually, despite
his victim saying “no”, crying
and being upset. She was clearly, in our submission, in a vulnerable position.
in those ‑ ‑ ‑
Ms Ruddle, count 9 was the subject of complaint in the
Court of Appeal, but as I understand your argument on ground 4,
8, 11, 14, 23 and 26, being the ones which were
the subject of reduction – you were not put on notice in relation to
Yes, your Honour, and no argument
was put, by the respondent in the court below, as to why those charges should be
am indicating to your Honour that there were reasons that we
could have put forward in relation to charge 8 – that they are
tied up with 8 and 9, because they form part of the same
incident – but those are examples of the charge of rape because of
the vulnerability of the complainant at that point.
The only rationale
that could possibly be given by the court is that if these offences were not as
serious as the court below considered
them to be. That is why I started with
charge 17, notwithstanding that that is not the subject of complaint in
ground 4, because
it is clear that that is where the problems start. That
is where the misthinking of the Court of Appeal – in relation to the
objective seriousness of offending – starts, and then the court has
essentially tied itself into a position, therefore deciding
to reduce sentences
that were not ever in the subject of appeal.
GORDON A‑CJ:
So, your proposition is: charge 17 was an error, and that infected the way
in which the Court of Appeal subsequently dealt with
the remainder of the
charges. Of those, some of them you were on notice of in terms of a challenge
by the ground of manifestly excessive
before the Court of Appeal, and the others
you were not.
Yes, your Honour. Each of those
offences has its own features that – had the issue of these charges
been raised –
we could have brought to the court’s attention.
For instance, charge 11 involves the penile‑vaginal rape of the
complainant
despite her protestations and her crying. He also used a piece of
wood to threaten the victim during the offending, which we would
submit is an
aggravating feature.
Charge 26 involved the respondent engaging in
penile‑vaginal penetration without lubrication, causing pain, despite what
described as significant protestations. So, in our submission, there were
matters that the court should have taken into account.
That is why, in our
submission, it is difficult to untangle the problems that arise from
ground 4 from the more substantive problems
that arise in
grounds 1, 2 and 3, which relate
Ms Ruddle. Accepting that to be so – that ground 4, in a
sense, depends on the other grounds, which I do not debate
that the significance of the reasoning
in this case really does not extend into
future cases?
We would accept that, of course, with
the introduction of the standard sentencing scheme in relation to the charge of
these sentences – in fact, the figures given by the Court
of Appeal – cannot form part of current sentencing practice
forward. However, the issue is not that numbers themselves but the principles
that underlie them.
So, whilst in this decision, the court has not said
in terms that intimate partner violence is not serious, it has essentially done
so by way of conclusion. The most obvious example of that is in fact not the
rape charges – which are of course serious, and
we submit ought not
have been reduced – but the two indecent assault charges, which
your Honours have obviously read in the
written case, are incredibly
serious examples of that charge. We would
submit ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES J:
I mean, you really sound like you are inviting this Court to step in and issue a
sort of broad edict about the seriousness, undoubtedly,
of these types of
charges, when is that not what Parliament does and has in fact done since
Parliament has made a statement in relation to
the seriousness of rape, not rape in a domestic context, and certainly not
to kill or assaults in a domestic violence context. In our submission,
the error that arises – as I say – is not the
Appeal saying in terms: this is not serious. It says so in result by reducing
the sentences, particularly two indecent
assaults from six years and five and a
half years, on the basis that they are higher than other counts.
to sentencing courts: this offending is just not that serious and it is not
serious enough to, after a trial, whilst being
sentenced as a serious sex
offender, warrant a sentence of 60 per cent of the maximum penalty. In
actual – sorry, to interrupt you.
your Honour. No, of course.
The actual reductions
or the charges you are referring to – which I assume are 18 and
your Honour.
I mean, there is a
reduction – well, it is basically by one year for
your Honour, but as we have set out in the written case, in our submission
that essentially creates a new de facto maximum
penalty. It is not about the
reduction, it is about saying to sentencing courts below that offending at this
extremely high end
is, in our submission – the assault in that
context, the pain that is caused to a complainant – or any in a
painful and
vulnerable situation – is, in our submission, at the high
To say that is cannot hold six years but it can hold five,
essentially says to sentencing courts below: here is your new maximum.
the practical effect – accepting, of course, that sentences are not
precedents, but the practical effect is that a
sentencing court will look at
this sentence and the guidance given by the Court of Appeal on this
charge – and, of course,
the charge is now phrased as a sexual
assault rather than indecent assault, but we submit they are
analogous – the Court of
Appeal has said to us: that sentence, after
a trial, where is it being sentenced as a serious sexual offender? That is
excessive. It cannot hold a sentence of six
BEECH‑JONES J:
What you appear to be putting, if I
might say so, is a cogent argument about why it was not manifest success, but
that does not
appear to be raising, in and of itself, a question of legal
principle as opposed to overall sentencing approach.
In my submission, it is not apparent where the court went wrong, but it must be
one of two considerations. That is, they have
considered themselves bound by
previous authorities, which essentially falls into a
‑style error while saying that they are complying
to do something this Court should consider and
interfere with and explain to courts again, or they have come to the conclusion
it is just not that serious.
In my submission, it was not open to
the court to find that this offending – particularly charges 18
and 19, but I will get
to the threats together in a moment – was
just not that serious. It could only do so essentially by ignoring the
nature of domestic violence and somehow considering that because they
had been in a relationship, or were in a sexual relationship,
and had used
restraints and devices consensually in the past, that that somehow mitigated
what, in our submission, amounts to sexual
Crown appeals against sentence are rare and exceptional. One
of the reasons why Justice Beech‑Jones asked you it is about
identification of principle that would warrant consideration of it.
Yes, your Honour.
GORDON A‑CJ:
my part – sorry, I will let you answer.
acknowledge that this Court will generally not interfere in sentencing matters
unless they are very exceptional, and that is
particularly so when they come
from the Crown. In our submission, this case is exceptional, because in making
the findings that
they have made, the court below has completely disregarded the
seriousness of intimate partner violence.
Instead of using appropriate
methodology, it has essentially either relied on the previous sentencing or
decided that intimate partner
violence is not that serious. We submit that
either of those are deeply problematic matters to leave to stand in this
The impact of this decision as a guidepost for sentencing courts,
in my submission, cannot be understated. It is for that reason
that the Crown
brings this decision to the Court.
This case sets very real parameters
around sentences for serious intimate partner violence. It undermines the
numerous statements
of the Court of Appeal in other cases that intimate partner
violence should be taken seriously and subject to condign punishment.
that their reports have said that in the past, but such statements are robbed of
their force by decisions such as this
It is a decision that says
to sentencing courts, not in words but by conclusion, that intimate partner
violence does not warrant
significant penalties. That, in our submission, is a
matter of legal principle that this Court needs to consider. The scourge of
intimate partner violence is known throughout our community, it has been
declared a national emergency by the Prime Minister, it
has been the subject of
a royal commission in this State.
Yet three experienced judges of the
Court of Appeal have essentially dismissed what we submit are entirely
appropriate and in some
cases, particularly those indecent assaults, merciful
sentences. For that reason, this Court should consider, not just on
4 but on grounds 1 through 3, what has gone wrong in the
sentencing matrix.
Perhaps if I just go quickly to the matters in
relation to the threats to kill. Again, we would submit that there is a
that has arisen in the treatment of the features of these crimes
which fails to reflect the seriousness of intimate partner violence
and creates
a problematic precedent of guidance for the courts going forwards. Specifically
at paragraph 88 of the Court of Appeal’s
judgment, and noting
there was an absence of other aggravating features such as planning, the use
of weapons –
or it being:
in‑company –
or the fact that it was not in:
commission of the offence to further other criminal objectives.
But the use of traditional features of aggravation, which apply in
circumstances other than intimate partner violence, again fails
to engage with
the specific seriousness of intimate partner violence.
A weapon is
considered aggravating because it makes it more likely that the victim believes
the threat would be carried out. In
this case, CM thought that she was going to
die. The fact that she thought she was going to die by way of strangulation
rather than
by way of a weapon, in our submission, does not undermine the
objective seriousness. These are matters of principle which need,
submission, to be considered by this Court.
Likewise, threats to kill,
in the context of intimate partner violence, are particularly insidious and
should be considered serious,
notwithstanding the traditional features of
aggravation that attach to non‑intimate partner threats. Threats form
the control a perpetrator has against his victim. Of course, such fear
is well founded, given that the most dangerous time for a
victim of domestic
violence is when they choose to leave that relationship.
The issue that
arises from ground 4 is that the court did not engage with the objective
features of each of the offences. It has
not given the Crown an opportunity to
highlight why each of those sentences was within range, by pointing to the
aggravating features
of those incidents. It is particularly in the case when
one looks at the way the judgment is written, in which the summary of each
the offences – whilst we accept are accurate, they are lacking in
significant detail.
So, the Crown had been denied a meaningful
opportunity to respond on a number of changes which, had we been given the
opportunity
to respond, may have impacted the court’s determination not
only on those additional charges but on the other rape charges
that were the
subject of express appeal. May it please the Court.
Thank you, Ms Ruddle. Ms Shann.
Thank you. The resolution of each of the grounds here would
require considerations highly particular to this case, including requiring
Court to in effect pick apart the words of the Court of Appeal in its reasons,
and they are not points of general application.
I will come to the grounds in a
moment, but there is this theme which runs underlying a lot of what the Crown is
arguing here, which
is whether current sentencing practices in Victoria for
intimate partner violence reflect community expectations.
Even if that
may be a question of general importance, this case is an entirely inappropriate
vehicle for this Court to consider it,
for a number of reasons. First, the
standard sentence regime for rape means that, in relation to those charges, this
question would
be of academic interest only. As the Act now mandates, no court
is to have regard to a comparable sentence which predates that
Second, turning to the indecent assault and threat to kill
sentences, the reality is that the Crown did not argue in the Court of
that current sentencing practises for those offences were inadequate, that they
did not reflect community expectations. Nor
did the Crown actually put any
comparable sentences before the Court of Appeal.
They now put before
this Court, but only in reply, statistics which are said to create some sense of
general importance of looking
at this particular issue. They did not submit it
to the trial judge who was sentencing that these were worst‑case
They did not make that submission, in writing, to the Court of
Appeal. It was said orally, and then rebuffed by senior counsel
Mr Barton below, who noted that it had never been put to the sentencing
So, what this Court had before it was completely different to the
circumstances in a case like
DPP v Dalgleish
[2017] HCA 41
262 CLR 428.
In that case, at the Court of Appeal stage, there was
material that was put on to establish a foundation for a complaint that there
were sentencing practices that were out of step with community
expectations.
There was a broad analysis, including from material from
the Sentencing Advisory Council, and the Court of Appeal was able
in its proper function as experienced sentencing judges dealing
with manifest excess, manifest inadequacy cases on a weekly, perhaps,
basis – contemplate all of that. When that matter came to this
Court, the High Court had a proper foundation for analysing
Here, the High Court would be doing that for the first time.
None of that analysis was done by the intermediate appellate court.
has said, on earlier occasions, the High Court is not a sentencing court. That
includes in
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357, that
the High Court is not well placed to wade through a raft of County Court
sentences to discern current sentencing
practice and determine whether there is
The late attempt here to use sentencing statistics as some
kind of foundation, we cannot even see from them what other offences were
charged alongside the indecent assaults or make threat to kill, whether or not
and to what proportion we are in the context of intimate
partner violence,
whether they are reflective of any idiosyncrasies in charging practices, what
the matters in litigation were or
Even with those particular
charges, it is of note that this broad idea of intimate partner violence could
attach to far more charges
than just those ones which are brought before this
Court. So, to the extent that there is some need for consideration, at an
intermediate
court level, of sentencing practices for offences which may fall
under that rubric, this again only provides a slice, and not one
which provides
this Court with any proper foundation.
There are now new offences. So,
indecent assault does not exist. There is a new offence of sexual assault which
has the same actus
reus but a different mens rea. There is now a new charge of
non‑fatal strangulation. So, some of the conduct which sat in
behind the threat to kill charge is now covered by a different
Again, the utility of this Court on inadequate material and
with no real attention given to these matters at the Court of Appeal
this Court to now take this and try to consider how these sentences sit against
current sentencing practices and community
expectations, it is just not the
right vehicle.
Further, any guidance by looking at these particular
sentences, and the focus really – perhaps after we, in our response,
the implications of the standard sentence regime on rape, focus has
really become on indecent assault and threat to kill, but it
is really difficult
to generalise in circumstances where individual charges are bound up in other
One can see that particularly with the indecent assault
charges, where they were part of five charges which occurred within a single
event, and one other of the charges – the false
imprisonment – occurred concurrently with those charges. Again, they
are bound up, and this is not a vehicle for trying to disaggregate just those
charges to make some particular comment on them.
We pointed in writing
to the authoritative statements that already exist about intimate partner
violence in the Court of Appeal.
There is no requirement for this Court to
itself restate or to state principles which are accepted. In effect, the
applicant is
accepting that whilst those principles existed, that
this – they say – a departure from
BEECH‑JONES J:
Ms Shann, when you come to
the – I gather you are going to come to the procedural fairness
Yes, would you – why do I not do
BEECH‑JONES J:
There is a particular question I
would just like to raise perhaps at the outset.
BEECH‑JONES J:
If you look at
paragraphs 98 to 99 of the Court of Appeal’s judgment, which
appears to be the conclusions about manifest
BEECH‑JONES J:
Now, two of the sentences that were
interfered with that were not the subject of challenge were, I believe,
counts 11 and 14.
Yes, albeit we do not
necessarily accept they were not the subject of challenge. They certainly were
not particularised under
BEECH‑JONES J:
Well, maybe I have not read closely enough, but I cannot find a finding as to
manifest excess for the individual sentences on 11
and 14. There are
findings about some sentences that were not the subject of challenge in those
two paragraphs.
I think that is 8, 15, 26 and 23,
but before you even get to that – I may be wrong, but I do not even
see a finding that 11
and 14 were manifestly excess. In fact, if you
look at 87, I thought it was the other way around. I thought what was said
cannot reconcile some of these sentences with 11
Can I answer that in two
BEECH‑JONES J:
Yes, certainly.
Firstly, 87 is a summary of some of the applicant’s
submission, rather than findings by the court. Paragraph 101 is a
which identifies that:
synthesising for myself all relevant features — the circumstances of
the offences and those of the offender –
each of which have been articulated earlier:
together with the circumstances . . . I would
resentence –
and then there is a table. That is the conclusion of manifest
GORDON A‑CJ:
This is the point that I put to
Ms Ruddle, that there are in effect two grounds of complaint, I understand,
in ground 4. One is
there is this reduction in respect of charges that
were not the subject of particularisation by you, but then there is a second
where – as Justice Beech‑Jones just identified, and
I thought it was just 14 but it might be 11 and 14, but
at least 14 – there is no finding of manifest
We would say that the finding is at 101.
It has been articulated by this Court, in cases such as
Disdale v The
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
, that frequently conclusion of manifest
does not admit of amplification –
Indeed, in that case,
there was no articulated conclusion, and the Court found, at paragraph 9,
did not require, or even admit of, expansive elaboration of a process of
reasoning which leads to its acceptance or rejection.
That was in relation to manifest inadequacy, but the same point
BEECH‑JONES J:
I am sorry, you are drawing that
conclusion from a table that says this is the new sentence, but how do even know
that the basis
for interfering with it was manifest excess?
That was the – so, at paragraph 97, the court
Paying due regard to the governing principles –
and above that has just talked about manifest excess in a quote from
, which itself cites
, and then goes on to
articulate what has occurred. Can I say this about ground 4 and then come
This raises a narrow and discrete complaint,
and the difference on these grounds between what the sentencing judge did and
the Court of Appeal did is a reduction . . . . .
of one year and two months, in a sentence which overall is in excess of two
Three of the six impugned charges, there was no change in the
orders for cumulation. So, what the Court of Appeal did made no difference
the overall sentence. On a remitter, Mr Barton could seek to amend his
notice of appeal. That would be a very long process to
change what is in effect
approximately five per cent of the total effective sentence for someone serving
two decades.
These are proceedings which have already been very
protracted. In any event, this complaint really, we say, elevates form over
because the complaint is in effect in two parts, that the Crown was
not given an opportunity to address on reductions to those specific
and the Crown was not given an opportunity to address on changes for orders of
cumulation.
It is convenient to start with the second, and I have
already said something about the first. Ground 2 of the notice of appeal
all orders for cumulation. It did not specify individual charges in
the way that ground 1 did. Grounds 2 and 3 were argued together,
making it plain that Mr Barton was complaining of all orders resulting in
the total effective sentence.
So, his written arguments on
grounds 2 and 3 expressly challenged the total sentence in terms
plainly concerned with totality and
the overall effects of cumulation. Whilst
he did then go on to make particular complaints, he did not express himself as
that broader complaint, so that the
Crown ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES J:
Sorry, is not that broader complaint – if it is suggested that the
broader complaint encompasses complaints about individual
sentences, is that not
inconsistent with
says exactly the
opposite: you have to identify proper sentences for each charge and then look
at questions of totality, and they
are clearly not the same.
There is a relationship, particularly in circumstances where there
are instances of offending which occurs in a single event, because
some of the
features which may attach to one particular charge, and otherwise aggravate, may
in effect end up being double‑counted.
There is a preferred way to
account for totality, which is to deal with individual sentences and then to
consider orders for cumulation.
There is another way which it can be
given effect to, which is to consider and at times compress an individual
sentence, but the
issue here in relation to procedural fairness was that all of
these were matters which were the subject of argument in circumstances
ultimate adjustment by the Court of Appeal to these particular charges made very
little difference to the overall effect.
That is, along with the
procedural delay, which would be occasioned by this matter being relooked
at – for example, because
the Court of Appeal on a remitter would
consider: we may not then adjust anything to do with individual sentences, but
for cumulation which we did give some effect to and which were part
of grounds 2 and 3, that type of delay is in effect a
Can I finish by just briefly dealing with some of the other
points. We detailed them in writing, but we say that part of what the
arguing – which is that one can conclude, from the conclusion of the
Crown, of the Court of Appeal that they had fallen
is just not right. Very experienced criminal judges looked at matters in
mitigation which included that this is a person sentenced
to in excess of two
decades of custody whose time was going to more onerous than an ordinary
prisoner, that he had had charges hanging
over his head for six years as a form
of punishment.
This decision itself has very limited utility for any
future report, because the majority of sentences are pre‑standard sentence
regime. Those that were not are bound up with them. There is no erroneous
statement of principle in the Court of Appeal reasons,
and comparable sentences
have limited utility in any event.
If this decision was treated by any
future sentencing judge as creating some kind of ceiling, they would fall into
an error and the
Crown could appeal them. On the orders of the Court of Appeal,
the respondent in this case has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment
finishes in 2043. That is on the Court of Appeal. That is a sentence of
over 20 years and quite obviously, we would submit,
reflects that serious
offending has been denounced, messages of deterrent sent and the community
Three of the most experienced criminal lawyers and judges in
Victoria had plenty before them to weight those matters, including those
in mitigation, against the sentence, against the gravity. It is, quite frankly,
an insult to those judges for the Crown
to suggest – and I think this
was put – mitigated this offending because it was intimate partner
That is an outrageous submission to make in circumstances
where no such thing was said and where, obviously, two decades in prison
matter which operates and is of concern to experienced judges considering
onerous prison conditions of an individual who was
a first‑time
GORDON A‑CJ:
Thank you, Ms Shann.
Ms Ruddle, anything in reply?
your Honour. In relation to ground 4, it is our position that no
finding whatsoever was made in relation to charges 11 and
14. We make
that point at paragraph 31 of our original submissions. No finding was
made, and the findings in relation to the other
charges that were reduced, but
not the subject of argument, is scant at best.
Particularly when one
looks at, for instance, charge 23, which is one of the threats to kill. In
our submission, this is a serious
example of that offence in circumstances where
the offender threatened to kill CM if she left. It is a submission I would have
to the court below that that is an insidious type of threat, it is a
serious kind of threat.
Absence of the aggravating features that are
mentioned at paragraph 88, in our submission, is something that I would
and should have been taken into account by the court. The
fact that there are descriptions in the table, in 101 – in our
– are not findings. They are just conclusions on
The reason – and this is not an attempt to insult the
learned appellate judges below – that the Crown says to this Court
the only way the court below could have come to the conclusions that they have
is by either disregarding the maximum penalty for
the offences or considering
intimate partner violence less serious, because there is no other explanation
for why the individual
sentences were reduced.
I accept the force of
Ms Shann’s submission about 20 years in jail is a lengthy period of
time. The orders for cumulation
are not significant. What is significant in
this case, and what is of import to sentencing courts below, is the individual
that were challenged and the subject of reduction. In this case, there
was six individual sentences challenged. The wording of
the application
was the individual sentences on
charges 9, 17, 18, 19, 25 and 27 were manifestly
excessive. Otherwise, the challenge
was only to total effective sentence
and the orders for cumulation.
In our submission, that does not open a
legitimate challenge to the other six sentences. As I have submitted, it is our
that the errors are all bound up in each other, which is why I took
the Court through grounds 1 through 3, notwithstanding its interest
ground 4, but ground 4 is demonstrative of the way that the court has
mis‑considered the nature of the offending in this case.
waved a wand over a number of sentences that were not the subject of challenge
below and said, well, they were obviously all
insufficiently serious to hold
the sentences that were given. As I said, the only reason this could possibly
be is because of the
nature of the relationship between the parties.
learned friend says, well, the Court ought not come and consider the sentences
in this case, because the Crown did not submit
that sentencing was out of step
with community expectations. That is not the submission I make here; it was not
the submission that
the Crown made below. Indeed, below, the Crown accepted
that the indecent assault charge was higher than other charge handed down
State of Victoria, and we argued strongly – as we argue
here – that there were very good reasons for that.
the force of Ms Shann’s submission that if sentencing courts were to
expressly say six years is a ceiling, then of
course that would fall into a
error, but the issue and the problem and why this Court needs
to intervene is because the practical reality is, having received guidance
from – as my learned friend says – three very senior
criminal judges, that torturing your intimate partner by attaching
electrodes to
their nipples post‑c‑section when you are a serious offender cannot
carry of sentence of six years, a court
below is going to struggle to reconcile
that with any sentence above six years.
In our submission, it does bring
up a significant point of principle the way this case has been handled and the
findings by the Court
of Appeal, notwithstanding the introduction of the
standard sentencing scheme. These are – this Court needs to make
to sentencing courts below that this type of offending does warrant
condign punishment, and that the Court of Appeal must give everybody
opportunity to highlight what the important features of these sentences are. In
our submission . . . . . May it please the
GORDON A‑CJ:
Thank you, Ms Ruddle. The Court
will adjourn for a short time to consider the course it will
AT 10.16 AM SHORT
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 10.20
GORDON A‑CJ:
The applicant, the Crown,
seeks special leave to appeal from part of the judgment of the Court of Appeal
of the Supreme Court of
Victoria – comprising Justices of
Appeal Priest, Boyce and Kaye, given on 11 April
2025 – in which the Court of Appeal
allowed the respondent’s
appeal against the sentences ordered by the County Court of Victoria
on 27 November 2023 and then
resentenced the respondent. One of the
grounds of the application contends that the Court of Appeal erred in not
affording the applicant
procedural fairness before interfering in individual
sentences not the subject of appeal.
The Court of Appeal found several individual sentences were manifestly
excessive in circumstances where those individual sentences
had not been
challenged by the respondent and where the Crown was given no opportunity to
make submissions about those individual
sentences. Such an approach should not
be adopted by an appellate court. The Crown is entitled to natural justice like
While Crown appeals to this Court against sentence
should only be brought in rare and exceptional circumstances – see,
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
300 – a denial of procedural fairness to the Crown involves a
different kind of error when compared to an alleged
inadequacy of a sentence.
That said, if a denial of procedural fairness is established, the necessary
order would be remittal of
the proceedings to the Court of Appeal, in which
event the respondent would have the opportunity to challenge the additional
We are not persuaded that the Court of Appeal failed
to recognise the objective seriousness of the intimate partner violence offences
or that its reasons set a precedent in sentencing for such offenses in another
case, particularly given that the legislative landscape
has materially changed
subsequently.
In circumstances where the other proposed grounds of
appeal have insufficient prospects of success to warrant the grant of special
leave to appeal and do not raise any question of law of general application or
public importance, and no conduct of the respondent
caused or contributed to the
alleged denial of procedural fairness, it is not in the interests of the
administration of justice for
special leave to be granted. Special leave to
appeal is refused.
Adjourn the Court until 10.00 am on Tuesday, 7
AT 10.23 AM THE MATTER WAS CONCLUDED
RTF format (1.33 MB)
Signed PDF/A format