Enduroco Pty Ltd v Bus IP Holdings Pty Ltd [2025] APO 29 (10 September 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT
Enduroco Pty Ltd v Bus IP Holdings Pty Ltd
Patent Application: 2018231941
Title: Modification of a two-wheel drive vehicle for improved ground
clearance and/or traction
Patent Applicant: Bus IP Holdings Pty Ltd
Opponent: Enduroco Pty Ltd
Delegate: Greg Powell
Decision Date: 10 September 2025
Hearing Date: Written submissions filed on 11 June 2025
Catchwords:
– section 59 – final determination
– the amendment has not overcome the ground of opposition of lack of
– no possible amendment could overcome the ground –
application refused – no award of costs
Representation: Patent attorney for the applicant: Andy Mukherji and Paul
Jones of MBIP
Patent attorney for the opponent: Davies Collison Cave Pty Ltd
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Patent Application: 2018231941
Title: Modification of a two-wheel drive vehicle for improved ground
clearance and/or traction
Patent Applicant: Bus IP Holdings Pty Ltd
Date of Decision: 10 September 2025
The amendments do not overcome the deficiency identified
Enduroco Pty Ltd v Bus IP Holdings Pty Ltd
[2022] APO 74.
The amended
claims lack support. This deficiency cannot be overcome by amendment.
refuse the application.
I make no award of costs.
REASONS FOR DECISION
application 2018231941 in the name of Bus IP Holdings Pty Ltd (the
) was advertised as accepted on 10 October 2019. Enduroco Pty
) opposed the grant of the patent. The matter was heard
on 29 July 2022. On 9 September 2022, I exercised my power under subsection
60(3) of the
Patents Act 1990
) to take into
account grounds of opposition not relied upon by the opponent in their statement
of grounds and particulars. I invited
the parties to provide comments in regard
to non-compliance with section 40. I noted that, in my opinion, the claims
lacked support
for multiple reasons. Further submissions were filed on
19 September 2022, 30 September 2022, and 13 October 2022. On 23 November
2022 my decision issued finding that the opposition succeeded since the claims
lacked support because:
(i) there was no disclosure of a sub-frame for mounting and supporting the
independent suspension assembly and/or the front axle
assembly; and
(ii) some claims omitted the feature of a transfer case.
That decision was
Enduroco Pty Ltd v Bus IP Holdings Pty
the s59 decision I stated:
“While not certain, it is possible that there is subject matter
disclosed in the specification which could be used as the basis
to amend the
claims to overcome my
applicant was allowed a period of time in which to propose amendments to the
claims. The applicant availed themselves of
this opportunity, but it proved
difficult to arrive at an amended specification that was allowable under s102 of
. Statements of proposed amendments were filed on 23 January
2023, 12 July 2023 and 12 September 2023 seeking to achieve allowability.
also observe that, during this process, the examiner issued 3 reports disputing
allowability of the amendment, and the opponent
provided 4 lots of observations
as to why, in their opinion, the amendments were not allowable and/or did not
overcome the findings
of the s59 decision.
Notwithstanding
the opponent’s observations, leave to amend was granted on 1 November 2023
and the amendment was advertised
on 16 November 2023. The opponent then opposed
the allowance of the amendment. On 10 February 2025 the Deputy Commissioner
Enduroco Pty Ltd v Bus IP Holdings Pty
s104 decision
allowing the amendment. The Deputy Commissioner then referred the matter to me
to consider final determination of this matter.
This decision relates to the
specification as amended.
is well established that a decision of a delegate in opposition proceedings is
final and determines all the issues arising on the
notice of opposition so far
as they are capable of determination at the time. The Deputy Commissioner in
Novozymes A/S v DSM IP Assets
considered the law on
final determinations, and concluded that:
“... I cannot revisit any findings that were part of the original
decision, but issues that were not considered in the original
decision can be
decided (for the first time) in a final determination. However, the decision in
the final determination should be
consistent with any relevant findings in the
original decision.”
a final determination of an opposition the only issues to be considered are
whether the amendments overcome the deficiencies identified
in the earlier
decisions, and whether the amendments introduce any new deficiencies.
The amendment
1 that was before me for the s59 decision was as follows:
A conversion system for modifying a two-wheel drive vehicle, the vehicle
having at least two spaced apart rear wheels driven by a
rear axle assembly
coupled to a transmission output of the vehicle and two front wheels, each front
wheel supported by a steerable
independent suspension assembly, said front
wheels not being coupled to the transmission output of the vehicle, the system
comprising:
a front axle assembly comprising spaced apart stub axle assemblies for
supporting each of the front wheels of the vehicle wherein
each stub axle
assembly is adapted to be coupled to the steerable independent suspension
assembly for supporting a corresponding
front wheel of the vehicle;
a front differential assembly to be coupled to the spaced apart stub axle
assemblies adapted for driving said front wheels; and
a sub-frame for attachment to a chassis of the vehicle for mounting and
supporting the independent suspension assembly and the front
s104 decision allowed the amendments, resulting in the following version of
claim 1 (added features underlined):
A conversion system for modifying a two-wheel drive vehicle, the vehicle
having: at least two spaced apart rear wheels driven by a
rear axle assembly
coupled to a transmission output of the vehicle and two front wheels, each front
wheel supported by a steerable
independent suspension assembly, said front
wheels not being coupled to the transmission output of the vehicle,
wherein each of the steerable independent suspension assembly comprises a
pair of upper arms, each upper arm having a first end and
a second end, wherein
the second end of the upper arm is pivotally mounted with respect to the
chassis; and
wherein the steerable independent suspension assembly further comprises a
pair of lower arms, each lower arm having a first end and
a second end
the system comprising:
a front axle assembly comprising spaced apart stub axle assemblies for
supporting each of the front wheels of the vehicle wherein
each stub axle
assembly is adapted to be coupled to the steerable independent suspension
through the upper and lower arms
for supporting a corresponding
front wheel of the vehicle;
a front differential assembly to be coupled to the spaced apart stub axle
assemblies adapted for driving said front wheels; and
a transfer case assembly coupled to the front axle assembly and the rear
axle assembly for simultaneously transferring torque from
the transmission
output to the front and rear wheels respectively;
wherein a first end of the upper arm is coupled to an upper portion of the
stub axle assembly;
a mounting arrangement such that a lower portion of the mounting
arrangement is coupled to the first end of each lower arm
a sub-frame for attachment to a chassis of the vehicle for mounting and
supporting the independent suspension assembly and the front
axle assembly
wherein the sub-frame is adapted to be coupled to the second end of the lower
Submissions sought
receiving the matter back from the Deputy Commissioner, I wrote to both parties
on 15 May 2025. I stated that, in the s59 decision,
I had concluded that
the claims before me, which defined that the sub-frame was for mounting
supporting the independent suspension assembly and the front axle
“require(d) that the sub-frame is configured to mount and support both
the independent suspension assembly and the front axle
assembly, where the front
axle assembly comprises the spaced apart stub axle assemblies. That is, the
sub-frame is suitable to have
both the independent suspension assembly and the
front axle assembly each be mounted to, and supported by, the
sub-frame.”
further noted that in the s59 decision I had stated that:
“the description does not anywhere describe that the stub axle
assemblies, or any other part of the front axle assembly, are
mounted directly
to the sub-frame”,
and that I had then concluded in the s59 decision that:
“Claims 1 and 16 as drafted are limited to (among other limitations) a
sub-frame for mounting and supporting the front axle
assembly and the compete
[independent front suspension] IFS. Consequently, claims 1–17 and 20, and
claims 18 and 19 insofar
as they relate to the independent suspension assembly,
lack support. They are inconsistent with the invention
disclosed.”
noted that amended claim 1 now stated that the sub-frame is:
“for mounting and supporting the independent suspension assembly and
the front axle assembly wherein the sub-frame is adapted
to be coupled to the
second end of the lower arm”.
Kit claim 13 and method claim 14
include essentially the same requirement.
observed that, while the sub-frame had been limited to requiring an adaptation
to allow it to be attached to the second end of the
lower arm, this simply
provided a limitation to the form of the sub-frame. The limitation had not
altered my finding in the s59
decision that the sub-frame had both the
independent suspension assembly and the front axle assembly directly mounted to,
and supported
by, it. I noted that, in the s104 decision, the Deputy
Commissioner had stated:
“In the present matter I accept the construction arrived at by the
delegate in the s59 decision. Claim 1 is clear prior to
amendment and is
limited to (among other limitations) a sub-frame for mounting and supporting the
front axle assembly and the compete
IFS. In other words,
it is limited to
direct mounting and support. After amendment the relevant feature remains in
being a sub-frame for attachment to a chassis of the vehicle for
mounting and supporting the independent suspension assembly and
the front axle
assembly. The claim is further limited by amendment to include the feature
wherein the sub-frame is also adapted
to be coupled to the second end of the
lower arm. I do not see this additional feature as modifying the scope of the
term present
in the original claim.
Therefore, I do not consider the amendment falls outside the scope of the
claims before amendment regarding mounting and supporting
sub-frame.”
concluded that, in my opinion, the claims remained deficient after amendment.
They lacked support. I referred to this paragraph
“Both parties agreed that direct mounting/attachment of the front axle
assembly to the sub-frame would render the suspension
inoperable. The applicant
argued that, since such a result is a foolish result, the claim should be
construed differently, and advances
the correct construction as facilitating the
means for the components to be mounted and supported. However, I do not
how it can be said that a sub-frame suitable for mounting the front
axle assembly does not require some means of mounting the sub-frame
to the front
axle. A purposive construction cannot resolve an inherently inconsistent claim.
Claims 1 and 16 as drafted are limited
to (among other limitations) a sub-frame
for mounting and supporting the front axle assembly and the compete IFS.
Consequently,
claims 1–17 and 20, and claims 18 and 19 insofar as they
relate to the independent suspension assembly, lack support. They
inconsistent with the invention
disclosed.”
then stated that, in my opinion, this deficiency could not be overcome by
amendment. I observed that, prior to amendment, the claims
required both the
suspension and the front axle assembly to be directly mounted to the sub-frame.
This was inconsistent with the
description. However, to remove the
inconsistency, the claims – after amendment – would need to define
something other
than the direct mounting of both the suspension and the front
axle assembly to the sub-frame. This could only be achieved by removing
feature of direct mounting. However, such an amendment would result in the
amended claims falling outside the scope of the claims
stated that I intended to refuse the application and sought submissions from the
Submissions
the applicant provided submissions on 11 June 2025. They maintained that the
lack of support could be overcome by an amendment.
To this end, they proposed
amending claim 1 (and, in a similar manner, claims 13 and 14) as follows
(proposed addition is underlined):
“A conversion system for modifying a two-wheel drive vehicle, the
vehicle having:
a sub-frame for attachment to a chassis of the vehicle for mounting and
supporting the independent suspension assembly and
axle assembly wherein the sub-frame is adapted to be coupled to the second end
of the lower arm.”
applicant made submissions on two alternate points:
(i) the proposed amendment narrowed mounting to indirect only; and
(ii) the proposed amendment would correct an obvious mistake.
Indirect mounting
applicant submitted that, as a matter of plain English, the subframe supported
the front axle assembly either directly or indirectly.
No other arrangement was
possible. The applicant stated that, as “direct” was not present in
the claims, the manner
of support was unqualified. While I had found that
direct mounting was not described, the applicant submitted that the proposed
amendment removed this option, narrowing the claim and avoiding the lack of
applicant submitted that:
“[c]ommon sense dictates that, when read as a whole, the specification
requires that the sub-frame indirectly supports the front
axle assembly. That
is direct support of the front axle assembly is nonsensical and inoperable. The
purpose of the proposed amendment
is to restrict the language of the claim such
that it excludes the nonsensical construction.”
The applicant then
“Accordingly, we request the Delegate to favourably reconsider his
Obvious mistake
the alternative, the applicant submitted that the proposed amendment constituted
the correction of an obvious mistake because it
would be apparent to the person
skilled the art that the unqualified language in the claims was obviously a
mistake. The applicant
referred to the following evidence given by Edbert Ta
for the opposition to the amendments:
“In this regard, the function of the sub-frame 300 can be understood by
visualising a scenario where the sub-frame 300 was not
included in the
conversion system 300 [sic – 100]. If we look at Figure 6 of the
‘941 Application, the first end of
the lower control arm 164 is coupled to
the mounting bracket 167 and the second end of the control arm 164 is coupled to
the sub-frame
300. If the sub-frame 300 was removed, the lower control arm 164,
particularly the second end of the lower control arm 164 would
be unsupported
and simply hang in the air. Therefore, the conversion system of the '941
Application provides for mounting and supporting
of the OEM IFS and in
particular the OEM lower control arm 164 of the OEM IFS 160. If subframe 300
were to be removed, lower control
arm has no pivot point.
The stub axles 150 (which are also a part of the front axle assembly 140) are
also supported by the subframe 300. Paragraph [061]
states: ‘The
independent front suspension assembly 160 is coupled to the stub axle assemblies
150 provided at either end of
the front axle assembly 140. The stub axle
assembly 150 engages the independent suspension assembly 160 through the upper
shaped upper control arms 162 and lower control arms
Consequently, the stub axle assemblies 150 are mounted to, and supported, by
the ends of the upper and lower control arms 162 and
164 of the independent
suspension assembly 160. Since the lower control arms are mounted to the
sub-frame 300, it follows that the
stub axle assemblies 150 are supported by the
sub-frame 300 via the mounting of the lower control arms 164.
Indirect mounting and supporting of the stub axles 150 on the sub-frame 300
is achieved via the lower control arms
applicant submitted:
“It is readily apparent to the skilled addressee, as exemplified by
Mister Ed Ta, who submitted a Declaration on behalf of the
applicant, that the
unqualified language in the claims: ‘...a sub-frame for attachment to a
chassis of the vehicle for mounting
and supporting the independent suspension
assembly and the front axle assembly...’ is obviously a mistake as it
leads to an
absurd result where the front axle assembly is left swinging in the
applicant also pointed to
ToolGen Incorporated v Fisher (No
, in which Nicholas J
quoted with approval the following from
Holtite Ltd v Jost (Great Britain)
“In the context of correcting it, the natural meaning of the expression
‘obvious mistake’ is that: what must be
obvious is not simply that
there has been some mistake but also what the mistake is and what is the
correction needed. But the correction
needed does not fail to be obvious merely
because, as a matter of drafting, there is more than one way of expressing it
without affecting
its meaning. Furthermore, having regard to the function of
the specification as a warning to the public of the limits of the monopoly
claimed, the mistake must be apparent on the face of the specification itself to
an instructed reader versed in the particular art
to which the invention
applicant submitted that the claim covering the direct mounting of the front
axle assembly to the sub-frame, which was plainly
inoperable, was the mistake
that was obvious to the person skilled in the art. In relation to the
correction being readily apparent
to anyone, more particularly the person
skilled in the art, the applicant submitted:
“In relation to the correction needed, there are only two ways one
apparatus can be mounted and supported on another. That
is the consequence of
both logic and the plain meaning of the words of the claims, as well as the
language of the specification as
a whole. That is one apparatus must be mounted
either directly or indirectly on the other. As mounting the first apparatus
front axle) directly on the second apparatus (the sub-frame) renders the
system inoperable, the correction necessary immediately
presents itself: the
mounting is indirect.”
Consideration
Indirect mounting
their submissions I believe that the applicant has misunderstood the nature of a
final determination.
a final determination, any findings made in the original decision cannot be
revisited (see, for example,
– referring to
Ex parte Mole Engineering Pty
Iluka Midwest Ltd v
Technological Resources Pty
Iluka Midwest
Ltd v Technological Resources Pty
Merck Sharpe
& Dohme (Australia) Pty Ltd v Genentech
). My finding that the
claims only encompass direct mounting and supporting stands, and the final
determination proceeds in a manner
consistent with this finding. That is, I
cannot, as requested by the applicant, “reconsider my position”. My
can only be overturned by appeal.
my s59 decision I found that the language of the claims limited the sub-frame to
be configured for
mounting and supporting of both the independent
suspension assembly and the front axle assembly. That is, contrary to the
applicant’s
submissions, and notwithstanding the absence of
“direct” in the claims, my finding was that the claims did
direct and indirect mounting within their scope.
included direct mounting. The amendment proposed by the
applicant proceeds on a mistaken assumption. Moreover, changing the mounting
arrangement in the claims from the direct mounting arrangement that I found to
exist to an arrangement which is not direct would
clearly place the scope of the
claims outside the scope that exists now. Such an amendment would not be
Obvious mistake
relation to this ground, I do not consider that Mr Ta’s evidence, as
highlighted by the applicant, supports the interpretation
the applicant has
attributed to it. In my view, Mr Ta’s evidence stands for the
unremarkable proposition that, if the sub-frame
was missing, the lower control
arm would be unsupported. However, the claims do not contemplate a missing
sub-frame and, as such,
the front axle assembly is not “left swinging in
the breeze”. Mr Ta states that the front axle assembly is indirectly
supported by the sub-frame, as indicated in the final sentence of the quoted
passage above. Be that as it may, this evidence does
not reveal any error in
the claims. Indeed, Mr Ta’s interpretation might even raise the question:
“By what is the front
axle assembly indirectly supported by the
sub-frame?”. Regardless, the claims remain clear and bear the
construction I adopted
in the s 59 decision. To my mind the applicant’s
argument seems somewhat academic. Moreover, the obvious correction proposed
the applicant finds no support in the evidence it relies on. I cannot identify
the evidence that supports this conclusion.
the nature of the alleged obvious mistake nor the proposed correction is, in my
view, sufficiently clear or self-evident to
meet the criteria set out in
. I note that the paragraph in
from which the
applicant drew its quoted passage also includes the following:
“An amendment, if allowed, is retrospective to the date of filing the
complete specification. So, with one exception, an amendment
which enlarged the
limits of the scope of the invention claimed would make actionable, ex post
facto, what at the time when it was
done the doer had no reason to suppose
amounted to an infringement of the patentee’s rights. An amendment that
this effect is what is forbidden by the section. The one exception
is where the amendment is for the purpose of correcting an ‘obvious
mistake’; but this exception is not in conflict with the policy disclosed
by the remainder of the section, since if the mistake
was obvious,
have misled
an obvious mistake cannot mislead the reader, as the reader would recognise both
the existence of the error and what was intended
instead. I found the claims to
be clear and to convey a definite meaning. The fact that this meaning differs
from what is described
in the remainder of the specification does not, in and of
itself, indicate the presence of an error. It simply means the claims
support. To suggest otherwise equates a lack of support with an obvious
from another perspective, this alternative submission by the applicant is
essentially saying that no one reading the claims
would conclude that direct
mounting was intended, but would naturally arrive at the applicant’s
interpretation. But I
conclude that direct mounting was intended.
Indeed, I reached this conclusion having considered whether indirect mounting
. This means
that I did not recognise the existence of any error, or its correction; in the
, I was misled. Accordingly, even if there errors in the
claim, those errors do not meet the criteria as set out in
Outcome of consideration
amendment that would limit the claims to something other than direct mounting
would necessarily fall outside the scope of the
original claims and, therefore,
be non-allowable. However, as established by the s59 decision, the
claims’ lack of support
could only be addressed by removing the
requirement for direct mounting – an amendment that is impermissible under
patent law.
the amendment to remove direct mounting could not be seen as correcting an
obvious mistake. Whatever errors there may be
in the claims, they are not
“obvious” ones.
therefore agree with the Deputy Commissioner’s observation at [99] of the
s104 decision:
“I do not see how the applicant may amend the specification to overcome
this finding of the delegate and comply with s102(2)(a)”.
communicated these findings to the parties on 7 August 2025 and, once again,
indicated that I intended to refuse the application.
I invited the parties to
request to be heard. The applicant responded to my letter on 22 August 2025
“We advise that the Applicant does not wish to be heard in relation
Accordingly, we request that you issue your decision in this
I received no response or request from the opponent.
Final determination
amendments filed after the s59 decision have not removed the ground of lack of
support. Moreover, there is no allowable amendment
which could remove this
the circumstances, I will refuse the application.
party made any submission as to costs. No evidence has been filed, and no
hearing has been held. As such, there is no action
which could attract an award
of costs. Therefore, I make no award of costs.
Greg Powell
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
s59 decision at
[2018] APO 2
decision at [173]
s104 decision at
s59 decision
Section 11.3 of
declaration by Edbert Ta dated 16 July 2024 filed for the s104
[2024] FCA 539
[1979] RPC 81
[1981] HCA 25
s59 decision at [175],
RTF format (261 KB)
Signed PDF/A format