He v Secretary, Department of Social Services [2021] FCCA 2035 (27 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
He v Secretary, Department of Social
[2021] FCCA 2035
File number(s):
BRG 558 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE JARRETT
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
– Social Security
– Appeal from decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal –
decision of Administrative Appeals
Tribunal affirmed decision of Social Services
and Child Support Division of the Tribunal – Social Services and Child
Division affirmed decision of Department of Human Services.
Legislation:
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit Court Rules 2001
(Cth), Sch. 1
Marriage Act 1961
(Cth) 50(1)(a), 50(1)(b), 50(4)(a)(i)
Cases cited:
Birdseye v Australian Securities and
Investments Commission
(2003) 76 ALD 321
Haritos v Commissioner of Taxation
[2015] FCAFC 92
(2015) 233 FCR 315
He and Secretary, Department of Social Services (Social services second
[2020] AATA 1491
Sharma v LGSS Pty Ltd
[2018] FCA 167
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
The Applicant appeared in person
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Mills Oakley
The Second Respondent appeared in person
BRG 558 of 2020
SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL
First Respondent
JUDGE JARRETT
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The amended notice of appeal filed on 9 October, 2020 is dismissed.
2. The applicant pay the first respondent’s costs of and incidental to
the amended notice of appeal fixed in the sum of $7,200.
REASONS FOR
JUDGE JARRETT:
1 In this application, Jian He challenges a decision of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal made on 27 May, 2020:
He and Secretary, Department of Social
Services (Social services second review)
[2020] AATA 1491.
The decision
concerned the percentage of care of a child born to the applicant and the second
respondent as between them for family
tax benefit purposes.
2 A chronology is helpful and an accurate chronology
is set out in the written submissions filed on behalf the first respondent.
3 The applicant and second respondent are the separated parents of Alex who
was born 27 June, 2013. On 24 May, 2016 the applicant
and second respondent
separated. At all relevant times, up to 24 May, 2016 the applicant was in
receipt of family tax benefit in
relation to Alex.
4 On 27 May, 2016, the first respondent (via his delegate) made a
determination about the percentage of care for family tax benefit
purposes in
respect of Alex and found that the applicant had 0% care of Alex with effect
from the date of the parties’ separation.
5 On 12 July, 2016 the Federal Circuit Court made interim orders for the
parties to have equal shared parental responsibility for
Alex, that he live with
the second respondent and that he spend time with the applicant, his father.
6 On 1 August, 2016 the first respondent (by his delegate) made a
determination about the percentage of care for Alex for family tax
purposes in accordance with the parenting orders made on 12 July. The
determination was that the applicant had 14% care
of Alex with effect from 12
July, 2016, which was the date of the parenting orders.
7 On 24 July, 2017 the first respondent made another determination about the
percentage of care for Alex for family tax benefit purposes
and found the
applicant had 42% care of Alex with effect from 1 July, 2017. Although no
further parenting orders have been made
in the Federal Circuit Court of
Australia, Alex’s parents reached agreements about his care, changing the
existing interim
orders. Those changes were taken into account when
re-determining the care percentages.
8 On 15 August, 2018 the first respondent made another determination about
the percentage of care for Alex for family tax benefit
purposes and found that
the applicant had 50% care of Alex with effect from 23 April, 2018.
9 On 6 May, 2019 the applicant sought internal review of the first three
decisions made on 27 May, 2016, 1 August, 2016 and 24 July,
10 On 9 May, 2019, an authorised review officer decided that:
(a) the decision made on 27 May, 2016 be affirmed;
(b) the decision made on 1 August, 2016 be varied and the applicant found to
have 28% care of Alex from 12 July, 2016; and
(c) the decision made on 24 July, 2017 be varied and the applicant found to have
42% care of Alex with effect from 1 April, 2017.
11 Dissatisfied with that result, the applicant lodged an application for
first review of that decision by the Social Services and
Child Support Division
of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
12 On 1 August, 2019 the Tribunal affirmed the decision. However, still
dissatisfied, on 15 August, 2019 the applicant lodged an
application for a
second review in the General Division of the Administrative Appeals
13 On 27 May, 2020 the Tribunal delivered its reasons and orders on that
review. It varied the decision under review such that:
(a) the decision made on 27 May, 2016 was affirmed;
(b) the decision made on 1 August, 2016 was varied and the applicant was found
(i) 14% care of Alex with effect from 12
July, 2016; and
(ii) 28% care of Alex with effect from 21 October, 2016;
(c) the decision made on 24 July, 2017 was varied and
the applicant found to have:
(i) 42% care of Alex with effect from 1
April, 2017; and
(ii) 50% care of Alex with effect from 22 January,
14 On 2 July, 2020 the applicant filed this appeal in the Federal Court of
Australia. An amended notice of appeal was filed on 9
October, 2020. On 14
October, 2020 the appeal was transferred to this Court for hearing and
determination.
THE CONTEXT OF THE PRESENT APPLICATION
15 By this the applicant appeals pursuant to
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth), from a second
review decision of the Tribunal. An appeal made pursuant to
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
is on a question of law. It is an exercise
of the Court’s original jurisdiction rather than an appeal proper. In the
of s.44(1) of the AAT Act, it is the question of law that is the subject
matter of the appeal:
Haritos v Commissioner of Taxation
[2015] FCAFC 92
(2015) 233 FCR
that case the Full Court of the Federal
Court of Australia (Allsop CJ, Kenny, Besanko, Robertson and Mortimer JJ)
62. We now turn to consider the more general questions
raised by the appeal in relation to s 44 of the AAT Act. In summary, our
conclusions
are as follows:
(1) The subject-matter of the Court’s jurisdiction under s 44 of
the AAT Act is confined to a question or questions
of law. The ambit of the
appeal is confined to a question or questions of law.
(2) The statement of the question of law with sufficient precision is a
matter of great importance to the efficient and
effective hearing and
determination of appeals from the Tribunal.
(3) The Court has jurisdiction to decide whether or not an appeal from
the Tribunal is on a question of law. It also has
power to grant a party leave
to amend a notice of appeal from the Tribunal under s 44.
(4) Any requirements of drafting precision concerning the form of the
question of law do not go to the existence of the
Court by s 44(3) to hear and determine appeals instituted in the Court in
accordance with s 44(1),
but to the exercise of that jurisdiction.
(5) In certain circumstances it may be preferable, as a matter of
practice and procedure, to determine whether or not the
appeal is on a question
of law as part of the hearing of the appeal.
(6) Whether or not the appeal is on a question of law is to be
approached as a matter of substance rather than form.
(7) A question of law within s 44 is not confined to jurisdictional
error but extends to a non-jurisdictional question of
(8) The expression “may appeal to the Federal Court of Australia,
on a question of law, from any decision of the Tribunal”
in s 44 should
not be read as if the words “pure” or “only” qualified
“question of law”. Not
all so-called “mixed questions of fact
and law” stand outside an appeal on a question of law.
(9) In certain circumstances, a new question of law may be raised on
appeal to a Full Court. The exercise of the Court’s
discretion will be
affected not only by
Coulton v Holcombe
[1986] HCA 33
considerations, but also by considerations specific to the limited nature of the
appeal from the Tribunal on a question of law, for
example the consideration
referred to by Gummow J in
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Raptis
[1989] FCA 557
; 89 ATC 4994 that there is difficulty in finding an “error
of law” in the failure in the Tribunal to make a finding first
this Court.
(10) Earlier decisions of this Court to the extent to which they hold
contrary to these conclusions, especially to conclusions
(3), (4), (6) and (8),
should not be followed to that extent and are overruled. Those cases include
Birdseye v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
; 76 ALD 321,
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Saxby
Bridge Financial Planning Pty Ltd
[2003] FCAFC 244
133 FCR 290
Etheridge, HBF Health Funds and Hussain v Minister for Foreign Affairs
[2008] FCAFC 128
169 FCR 241.
94. In our opinion, the issue must be approached as one of substance. In cases
of doubt, the Court should consider the notice of
appeal, the alleged question
or questions of law, the grounds raised, the statutory context, and the
Tribunal’s reasons for
its decision, and having considered all those
matters, satisfy itself that there is in fact a question of
16 The Federal Court authorities have been decided in the context of the
rules of that court which provide for a particular form to
be utilised in such
an appeal. Presently that is Form 75. It requires the specification of the
question or questions of law that
are the subject of the appeal. It provides
thereafter for specification of the grounds relied on in the application. These
two different matters and their relationship was addressed by Branson and
Stone JJ in
Birdseye v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
(2003) 76 ALD 321 where, speaking of the former Federal Court Rules, they
observed at [18] (my emphasis):
In our view, O 53 r 3(2) discloses an intention that a
question of law to be raised on an appeal from the Tribunal should be stated
with precision as a pure question of law.
It is in the specification of the
grounds relied upon in support of the orders sought that, in our view, one
should expect to find
the links between the question of law, the circumstances
of the particular case and the orders sought on the
17 Although
was overruled in
(as I have set
out above), the ratio in
says nothing about the emphasised
sentence in the passage from
above. It continues to be applied.
Sharma v LGSS Pty Ltd
[2018] FCA 167
, Gleeson J observed at [30]:
The questions of law are to be stated separately from
the grounds relied upon in support of the orders sought in the notice of appeal:
P v Child Support Registrar
[2013] FCA 1312
In P at [51], Wigney J said:
The specification of the grounds relied upon
in support of the orders sought should expose the links between the question of
the circumstances of the particular case and the orders sought on the
[2003] FCAFC 232
. It is not legitimate to
call in aid the grounds specified in the notice to read down the questions of
law stated in the notice
to what are truly questions of law. If the order
sought is that the decision of the Tribunal be set aside, the grounds in support
of that order should assume the resolution of the specified question of law in
favour of the applicant and indicate, in a summary
way, why that resolution
requires the decision of the Tribunal to be set aside:
Grounds drawn up in that way could not elucidate a question of
18 Thus, the subject matter of the review is the question or questions of law
identified by the applicant for review and which emerges
from the processes and
reasons of the administrative decision maker. The review is confined to the
questions of law so identified.
The question or questions identified in the
review application need not be “pure” questions of law, but might be
as mixed questions of law and fact. But a question of law must be
involved. The statement of the question of law is important,
but a failure to
so state the questions in the application for review is not fatal. It is the
substance of the application which
is important. Observance of these matters
ensures that the merits of a case are dealt with, not by the Court, but by the
THE FAMILY TAX BENEFIT SCHEME
A New Tax System (Family Assistance)
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration)
(Cth) set up the family tax benefit scheme. Eligibility for family
tax benefit requires that a person has at least one
their rate of family tax benefit as worked out under the Family Assistance Act
is greater than nil.
20 Section 22 of the Family Assistance Act provides for when a child is an
of another individual
22 When an individual is an FTB child of another
1. An individual is an
of another individual (the adult) in any
of the cases set out in this section.
Individual aged under 16
2. An individual is an
of the adult if:
(a) the individual is aged under 16; and
(b) the individual is in the adult’s care; and
(c) the individual is an Australian resident, is a special category visa holder
residing in Australia or is living with the adult;
(d) the circumstances surrounding legal responsibility for the care of the
individual are those mentioned in paragraph (5)(a), (b)
Legal responsibility for the individual
5. The circumstances surrounding legal responsibility for the care of the
individual are:
(a) the adult is legally responsible (whether alone or jointly with someone
else) for the day‑to‑day care, welfare and
development of the
individual; or
(b) under a family law order, registered parenting plan or parenting plan in
force in relation to the individual, the adult is someone
with whom the
individual is supposed to live or spend time; or
(c) the individual is not in the care of anyone with the legal responsibility
for the day to day care, welfare and development of
the individual.
Percentage of care at least 35%
7. If an individual’s percentage of care for a child during a care period
is at least 35%, the child is taken to be an
of that individual
for the purposes of this section on each day in that period, whether or not the
child was in that individual’s
care on that day.
21 The term
percentage of care
is defined in s.3 of the Family
Assistance Act:
percentage of care,
in relation to an individual
who cares for a child, means the individual’s percentage of care for the
child that is determined
by the Secretary under Subdivision D of Division 1 of
22 Section 23 of the Family Assistance Act outlines the effect of an FTB
child ceasing to be in a person’s care without their
consent and provides
for an interim period to be put in place whereby that person continues to
receive the family tax benefit even
though they do not have care of the FTB
child during that period. Such an interim period however only applies to those
cases where
care arrangement
in relation to the FTB child has been put
23 The term
care arrangement
is defined in s.3 of the Family
Assistance Act:
care arrangement
in relation to a child
(a) a written agreement between the parents of the child, or between a parent of
the child and another person who cares for the child,
that relates to the care
of the child; or
(b) a parenting plan for the child; or
(c) any of the following orders relating to the child:
(i) a family violence order within the meaning of
(ii) a parenting order within the meaning of
section 64B
of that Act;
(iii) a State child order registered in accordance with
section 70D
(iv) an overseas child order registered in accordance with
section 70G
24 If a person’s percentage of care for a child during a care period is
less than 35%, the child is taken not to be an
of that person
for any part of the period: s.25 of the Family Assistance Act.
25 Section 26 of the Family Assistance Act provides that where 2 people who
are members of a couple would otherwise be eligible at
the same time for family
tax benefit in respect of one or more FTB children only one person is eligible.
In relation to which person
receives the family tax benefit consideration is
given to whether 1 member of the couple is the primary carer of the child and
they have made a written agreement nominating one of them as the member
who can make a claim for payment of family tax benefit in
respect of the person:
s.17 of the Family Assistance Act.
26 A determination of an individual’s percentage of care for a child is
made under ss.35A (Determination of percentage of care—child
is not in the
adult’s care) or 35B (Determination of percentage of care—child is
in the adult’s care) of the Family
Assistance Act. Section 35A(1) has
particular relevance in this case and so I will set out:
35A Determination of percentage of care—child
is not in the adult’s care
Initial determination
(a) the Secretary is satisfied that an individual (the adult) has no care of a
child but that:
(i) the child is an FTB child of the adult under section 23; or
(ii) the child would, under subsection 22(2), (3) or (4), be an FTB child of
the adult if there had been, or were to be, a pattern
of care for the child over
a period (the care period) under a care arrangement relating to the child;
(b) the adult, or the partner of the adult, makes or has made a claim under
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
payment of family tax benefit in respect of the child for some or all of the
days in the care period; and
(c) the adult is not a partner of at least one other individual who has a
pattern of care for the child such that the child was
or will be, under
subsection 22(2)
, (3) or (4), an FTB child of the other individual or
individuals; and
section 35C
or 35G applies in relation to the adult;
the Secretary must determine the adult’s percentage of care for the child
during the care period in accordance with that
Section 35C
applies to a parent where:
(a) there is a care arrangement in place in relation to
a child; and
(b) the first respondent is satisfied that the actual care of the child that the
parent has had or will have during a care period
does not comply with the extent
of care of the child that the parent should have had or is to have under the
care arrangement during
the care period; and
(c) the parent who has reduced care of the child is taking reasonable action to
ensure that the care arrangement is complied with.
applies, the first respondent must determine for the purposes
two percentages of care in relation to the adult.
29 Section 35J provides that the actual care of a child that an individual
has had, or will have or the extent of care of a child
that an individual should
have had, or is to have, under a care arrangement during a care period may be
worked out according to the
number of nights that the child was, will be, ought
to have been or is to be in the care of that individual.
30 Complications arise where parents of a child are separated. Section 59 of
the Family Assistance Act provides:
59 Shared care percentages where individual is FTB
child of more than one person who are not members of the same couple
1. An individual has a shared care percentage under this section for an FTB
child of the individual if:
(a) the Secretary has determined the individual’s percentage of care for
the child during a care period; and
(b) that percentage is at least 35% and not more than 65%.
2. The individual’s shared care percentage for the FTB child is the
relevant percentage specified in column 2 of the table.
Shared care percentages
Individual’s percentage of
Shared care percentage
35% to less than 48%
25% plus 2% for each percentage point over
more than 52% to 65%
51% plus 2% for each percentage point over
3. If the shared care percentages, specified in the table, of all of the
individuals of whom the child is an FTB child add to less
than 100%, then the
Secretary may determine a different whole percentage for one or more of those
individuals for the FTB child.
Despite subsection (2), the individual’s
shared care percentage for the child is the percentage so determined for that
individual.
THE DECISION THE SUBJECT OF THIS APPEAL
31 In its reasons for decision dated 27 May, 2020
the Tribunal set out the statutory framework that I have just traversed as well
as some other provisions of the Family Assistance Act. The Tribunal recorded
that in working out the actual care and extent of care
of a child for the
purposes of the Act, reference could be had to a publication called
Social Policy Law – Family Assistance Guide
which is used by
Centrelink officers (as they were then known) to assist them in interpreting and
applying the Family Assistance Act.
The Tribunal noted that while it was not
bound by policy, to aid consistency, it will usually be taken into account and
unless there
cogent reasons not to do so.
32 The Tribunal then set out the relevant sections of the Guide concerning
pattern of care
. That was relevant to the determination of
the percentage of care under ss. 35A or 35B of the Act.
33 The Tribunal recorded that the issue before it was the correct shared care
percentages in relation to Alex during the period between
24 May, 2016 and 22
April, 2018.
34 The Tribunal set out, at length, the oral and documentary evidence and
submissions of the parties. It found that Alex was an FTB
child for the
purposes of s.22 of the Family Assistance Act at all material times. It
recorded that prior to the parties’
separation only one parent was
entitled to receive family tax benefit and that the applicant had been receiving
that benefit.
35 After recording that there was no dispute that during the period 24 May,
2016 to 12 July, 2016 Alex ceased to be in the applicant’s
Tribunal considered the applicant’s argument that Alex was removed from
his care without his consent and as such
he believed that he should have
remained eligible for family tax benefit during this period pursuant to the
interim period provisions
of the Family Assistance Act. However, the Tribunal
determined that against him. In essence, the applicant’s argument to
Tribunal was that s.23 of the Family Assistance Act applied. For that to be so,
the following matters needed to be established:
(a) Alex was an FTB child of the applicant under s.22(2)
(b) the circumstances surrounding legal responsibility for the care of Alex were
those mentioned in s.22(5)(a) or (b); and
(c) an event occurs in relation to Alex without the applicant’s consent
that prevented Alex being in the applicant’s
(d) the applicant took reasonable steps to have Alex again in his
36 Each of these elements were established. Alex was an FTB child of the
applicant for the purposes of s.22(2). The applicant was
legally responsible,
together with the second respondent, for the day-to-day care, welfare and
development of Alex because he had
parental responsibility for Alex by reason of
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). An event occurred in relation to
Alex without the applicant’s consent that prevented Alex from being in the
applicant’s
care. That event was the separation of Alex’s parents
and the refusal by the second respondent to permit Alex to spend any
the applicant. The applicant took reasonable steps to have Alex again in his
care by commencing proceedings in the Federal
Circuit Court of Australia. Thus,
s.23 of the Family Assistance Act was engaged. That meant that Alex was an FTB
child of the applicant
for the period between the parties separation and the
making of the order in the Federal Circuit Court of Australia and, by operation
of s.22(4) of the Family Assistance Act, Alex could not be an FTB child of any
other individual.
37 The percentage of care to be worked out for the interim period between the
date of separation and 12 July, 2016 was to be determined
according to s.35A of
the Family Assistance Act if that section applied. It did not apply because
although s.35A(1)(a)(i), (b) and
(c) might have been satisfied by the applicant,
s.35A(1)(d) was not satisfied. Neither of ss.35C or 35G applied to him.
35C did not apply to the applicant because there was no
arrangement
that applied to Alex. The Tribunal concluded that for this
period the applicant’s percentage of care was 0%.
38 It is the Tribunal’s determination that there was no care
arrangement that applied to Alex for this period that forms the
focus of part of
the applicant’s appeal.
39 As to the next period (covered by the decision dated 1 August, 2016) the
Tribunal noted that the care arrangements for Alex were
formalised by the
applicant and the second respondent in writing in the form of interim consent
parenting orders made by the Federal
Circuit Court on 12 July, 2016. The
parties reached a further agreement about parenting orders for Alex in October,
2016 and the
applicant and the second respondent signed written terms to that
effect on 21 October, 2016. Those terms were never formally reduced
consent order made by the Court. The Tribunal considered that the evidence
before it established that largely the arrangements
set out in the initial
orders and the parties subsequent agreement were followed.
40 It recorded the applicant’s argument that the actual care of Alex
rendered by the parties should be calculated by considering
the hours of care
provided rather than counting the nights in care. The applicant contended
before the Tribunal that the time Alex
spent at day care during the period
between 12 July, 2016 until when he commenced school should be attributed to
Alex actually being
in his care because he was responsible for paying the child
41 After reiterating that the general proposition as set out in s.35J of the
Family Assistance Act, the Guide and established case
law was that actual care
is calculated taking into consideration nights in care unless there is good
reason to depart from this approach
and considering the actual care hours
provided to Alex, the Tribunal determined this argument against the applicant.
In doing so
it considered that there was no evidence before it that indicated
that the general proposition should not be followed or that there
material injustice or unfairness should the applicant’s care be calculated
using the nights in care approach.
42 The Tribunal went on to find that the pattern of care for Alex during the
period 12 July, 2016 to 22 April, 2018 had been generally
agreed by the
applicant and second respondent and was consistent with the actual care
arrangements in place between them for Alex.
43 The Tribunal was satisfied that from the time Alex commenced school, his
care arrangements provided that he would spend alternating
weeks with the
applicant and second respondent. The Tribunal considered that there was no
reason to deviate from this arrangement
being considered to reflect the actual
level of care provided by the applicant and second respondent from 22 January,
2018. Thus,
the Tribunal determined that pursuant to ss.35P and 35B of the
Family Assistance Act, the applicant and second respondent each provided
care of Alex from 22 January, 2018.
44 Accordingly, the Tribunal varied the decision under review in accordance
with that finding.
45 As the first respondent submits, the
applicant’s case is somewhat difficult to discern. He has represented
himself in these
proceedings and English is not his first language. That has
presented some difficulty in understanding the written grounds of the
the written submissions belatedly delivered by him. His oral submissions
wished to make.
Care arrangement
46 Both the applicant and the respondent group what
are described in the amended notice of appeal as questions of law 1, 2, 3 and
together. That seems appropriate because they concern the phrase
arrangement
as defined in the Family Assistance Act. The applicant contends
that the Tribunal was in error when it concluded that for the period
between the
applicant and the second respondent’s separation on 26 May, 2016 and 12
July, 2016 when an interim parenting order
was made, the applicant’s care
percentage was 0%. He contends that there was a
care arrangement
place and his percentage of care should have been assessed at 50%. He says that
care arrangement
was constituted by one or all of three separate
matters namely:
(a) the parties’ Certificate of Marriage
(described by the applicant as Marriage Certificate of Queensland);
(b) the signed “Centrelink CCB/CCR application form” as
“Details of your child’s care arrangement”;
(c) the incidence of
parental responsibility
cast on the applicant and
the second respondent by the
Family Law Act 1975
47 However, none of these arguments can be accepted.
48 There is no Marriage Certificate of Queensland as contended for by the
applicant. Certificates of a marriage must be prepared
as directed by
ss.50(1)(a)
(1)(b) of the
Marriage Act 1961
(Cth) where an
authorised marriage celebrant solemnises a marriage. One of the official
certificates prepared as directed by
of the Act must be sent to the
appropriate registering authority of a State or Territory ascertained in
accordance with the regulations:
s.50(4)(a)(i)
Marriage Act
. The state
registration body might issue an extract of the information contained a register
of marriages, certified by the Registrar
of Births, Deaths and Marriages to be a
correct extract. None of these documents, however, meets the description of a
care arrangement
for the purposes of s.3 of the Family Assistance Act.
It is not a written agreement between the parties, but rather a certificate
the solemnisation of their marriage. Nor does it relate to the care of a child.
It is not an order. Nor is it a
parenting plan
for the purposes of
Family Law Act
. The definition of parenting plan in the
Family Law Act
is incorporated by reason of the definition of that term in s.3 of the Family
Assistance Act.
49 The second document to which the applicant refers is not a written
agreement, parenting plan or an order for the purposes of the
definition of
care arrangement
in the Family Assistance Act. To the extent that such a
document was before the Tribunal, the Tribunal was correct not to treat
care agreement
. The applicant argues that the CCB/CCR payments needed to
be claimed using a form that was signed by both parties. He argues that
payment had been granted to him since 15 March, 2016 and it was granted to him
on the basis that he was either the primary carer
for Alex or there was a
written agreement between the parties nominating one of them is the person who
could make a claim for family
tax benefit. However, that form (and to the
extent there was more than one of them those forms) predated the parties’
separation.
It is uncontroversial that the care arrangements for Alex changed
upon separation such that he lived full-time in the second respondent’s
care and spent no time in the physical care of the applicant. Whatever the case
might have been before the parties separated, their
separation introduced a new
factual substratum which necessarily affected any arrangements, including
arrangements for family tax
benefit, that had gone before. There is nothing to
suggest that any agreement that might be constituted by the signing of the
forms was intended by either party to govern their arrangements and the
arrangements for the payment fringe tax benefit upon the
separation. But in my
view, the signing of such forms does not constitute a written agreement for the
purposes of the definition
care arrangement
in any event.
50 The incidence of parental responsibility of children is dealt with in
Family Law Act
which provides that each of the parents of a child
who is not 18 has parental responsibility for the child.
Section 61B
defines the phrase
parental responsibility
in relation to a child as
meaning all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law,
parents have in relation
to children. Further, as the applicant points out, the
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
provides that the
principal object of that Act is to ensure the children receive a proper level of
financial support from their parents.
51 However reference to these sections does not assist the applicant’s
argument. Neither of those legislative provisions are
a written agreement
between Alex’s parents. Nor do they constitute a
parenting plan
that term is defined in the
Family Law Act
. They are simply not an order of the
Family Assistance
52 The Tribunal was correct to conclude that for the period between the
parties separation on 12 July, 2016 there was no care arrangement
in place for
the purposes of the Family Assistance Act. The consequence of that conclusion
was expressed at [54] of the Tribunal’s
reasons as follows:
54. It is not disputed that during the period 24 May
2016 to 12 July 2016 the Child ceased to be in the care of the Father. While
Tribunal notes the Father’s contentions that the Child was removed from
his care without his consent and as such he believes
that he should have
remained eligible for FTB during this period pursuant to the interim period
provisions of the FA Act, in the
absence of a care arrangement these provisions
do not apply to the Father’s circumstances. Verbal agreements or what was
family norms do not constitute care arrangements for the purpose of
the FA Act.
53 This conclusion was entirely correct and demonstrates no error, legal or
otherwise. The matters described in questions 1, 2, 3
and four of the
applicant’s amended notice of appeal filed on 9 October, 2020 do not
reveal error by the Tribunal.
Equal shared parental responsibility
54 The orders made in the Federal Circuit Court of
Australia on 12 July, 2016 provided:
1, That the mother and the father shall have equal
shared parental responsibility in relation to all major long term issues in
of the child ALEX HE born 27 June 2013 ("the
55 The orders went on to provide:
2. That each parent have responsibility for the daily
decisions about the day to day care, welfare and development of the child while
in his or her care.
3. That the child live with the mother.
4. That the child spend time and communicate with the father at all times as can
be agreed and failing agreement as follows:
(a) Each Tuesday and Thursday from after day-care at 5.00pm to 8.00pm; and
(b) Each Friday from after day-care at 5.00pm to 8.00pm
56 The parties’ subsequent agreement reached in October, 2016 also
provided for them to have equal shared parental responsibility
for Alex. The
time spending arrangements between Alex and each of his parents, however, were
changed but the details of those changes
are not relevant for present
Family Law Act
draws a distinction between decision-making for
children (referred to in the Act as
parental responsibility
physical arrangements for the care of children such as with whom they should
live and with whom they should communicate
and spend their time. The definition
parenting order
makes that plain.
parental responsibility
conferred by order 1 was
shared parental responsibility
in relation to all major long-term issues for
Alex. The phrase
equal shared parental responsibility
is not defined in
Family Law Act
in terms. No definition of that phrase is to be found in
of the Act. It is defined by its consequences. Such an order imposes
consequences upon the parties and also upon the Court that
made the order for
equal shared parental responsibility.
59 The consequences that it imposes upon the Court if such an order is made
are to be found in
ss.65DAA(1)
Family Law Act
subsections require the Court to consider making particular types of orders
a parenting order provides that a
child’s parents are to have
equal shared parental responsibility
Notably, the phrase
equal shared parental responsibility
only appears in
Family Law Act
. It appears nowhere else in that Act.
60 The consequences for parents of the Court making an order that they are to
share parental responsibility
(and an order for equal shared parental
responsibility is such an order) are set out in
Family Law Act
It will be observed from the text of that section that it is concerned with
decision-making for children rather than the arrangements
for their physical
care and with whom it is that they might spend the time and communicate.
61 In a broad sense, an order for parental responsibility (whether that be
equal shared parental responsibility or some other arrangements
for the exercise
of parental responsibility) concerns the care arrangements for children. That
is so because in a general sense
decision-making for children and in particular
decision-making about
major long-term issues
as that phrase is defined in
Family Law Act
is about caring for them.
62 But the focus of the provisions in the Family Assistance Act dealing with
care arrangements has a much narrower focus and is concerned
with the physical
care arrangements for children. So much is apparent from the text of ss.35A,
35B and 35J by way of example. Indeed,
the Act itself draws a distinction
between legal responsibility for a child and the actual care rendered to that
child. For example
the distinction is drawn in ss.22(2)(d), 22(5)(a) and
22(5)(b) of the Act where parental responsibility is distinguished from the
the child is supposed to live or spend with an adult under a family law order,
registered parenting plan or parenting plan.
63 An order for equal shared parental responsibility is a parenting order for
the purposes of the
Family Law Act
. It is therefore a
care arrangement
for the purposes of part (c)(ii) of the definition of that phrase in the Family
Assistance Act. However, it is not an order that
deals with the care
arrangements for children in the sense in which the care of children is relevant
under the Family Assistance
Act. An order for equal shared parental
responsibility does not deal with the time with which children should live with
their parents or otherwise spend with them. It is an order that deals
with decision-making only.
64 In working out the applicant’s percentage of care, parental
responsibility is of no relevance and actual physical care of
the child which
may be calculated by reference to the number of nights a child is in the care of
a particular parent, is critical.
In circumstances where there is a parenting
order in place which deals with where a child is to live or how much time a
to spend with a parent, those terms of that order will be critical to
working out a parent’s care percentage. An order for
equal shared
parental responsibility will be irrelevant to that task.
65 That is what the decisions that were being reviewed by the Tribunal
recognised here. Having regard to the orders that were made
by the Federal
Circuit Court of Australia on 12 July, 2016 and then the parties’
subsequent agreements the applicant’s
percentage of care was worked out
according to the actual time that Alex spent with him by reference to the number
of nights per
week. That was an entirely appropriate way to work out his
percentage of care. The Tribunal considered his argument that it ought
worked out on a different basis by reference to the amount of child care that
Alex attended and for which the applicant paid
but the Tribunal rejected that
argument. In my view it was correct to reject that argument.
66 The fundamental misunderstanding that underpins the applicant’s
argument is that an order for equal shared parental responsibility
for the purposes of the Family Assistance Act Alex is being cared for by each of
his parents equally. That understanding
is for the reasons I have given above,
67 Ground five of the amended application does not reveal an error of law by
the Tribunal.
Other grounds
68 The other grounds identified by the applicant in
his amended application concern the determinations made by the Tribunal about
pattern of care
care percentage
care period
respect of the care of Alex. However, the applicant’s arguments about
each of those matters depends upon his interpretation
of the phrase equal shared
parental responsibility as it appears in the order is made on 12 July, 2016 and
the subsequent parenting
plans. His arguments proceed on the mistaken
understanding that an order for equal shared parental responsibility equates
care for each parent for the purposes of the Family Assistance Act.
For the reasons I have expressed above, that understanding is
69 None of the grounds raised by the applicant in questions 6 – 11
demonstrate any error on the part of the Tribunal in the
decision under
70 In his written submissions, the applicant suggests that the
attributed to him was wrongly calculated because the first
respondent ought to have taken into account the actual hours that Alex
his care. The applicant calculates those actual hours by reference to the time
provided for in the orders for Alex to be
in his care (from after daycare at
5:00pm to 8:00pm each Tuesday and Thursday and then from after daycare on Friday
at 5:00pm to
8:00pm on a Saturday). But it would have been wrong of the
Tribunal to take into account the hours that Alex spent at daycare as
the applicant’s percentage of care because Alex was not in his care
notwithstanding that the applicant was responsible
for payment of the childcare
fees. That is because the court orders only permitted Alex to be in the
father’s care from after
daycare at 5:00pm.
71 Further, to the extent that the applicant complains that the Tribunal was
wrong to affirm the first respondent’s use of the
number of nights Alex
was in the applicant’s care rather than the actual hours alleged by the
applicant that Alex was in his
care (including his hours at daycare) the
argument is one which seeks impermissible merits review. I accept the first
respondent’s
argument that it was a matter for the Tribunal to determine
the relevant care periods, whether it was appropriate to determine the
applicant’s percentage of care based on the number of nights in accordance
with s.35J of the Family Assistance Act and from
there, the applicant’s
percentage of care.
72 In his written submissions, the applicant suggests that the first
respondent’s Department and the Tribunal were biased against
reasons of the Tribunal reveal no bias or any appearance of bias. Rather, the
reasons of the Tribunal reveal a careful
recitation of the relevant statutory
provisions bearing upon the matters before the Tribunal, a discussion of the
relevant evidence
before the Tribunal and the resulting outcome from an
application of those facts to the statutory provisions. It is difficult to
how the Tribunal could have arrived at any other decision than that which it
73 The amended notice of appeal filed on 9 October,
2020 does not demonstrate any error on the part of the Tribunal and must be
74 The first respondent seeks his costs of the application. Costs should
follow the event. There are no circumstances brought to
my attention that would
suggest that such an order is not appropriate. The amount sought by the first
respondent is $7200 in accordance
with Schedule 1 to the
Federal Circuit
Court Rules 2001
(Cth). That amount is, in my view appropriate and
consistent with the schedule of costs contained within the Rules. I have taken
into account that this matter was heard at the same time as the
applicant’s other application in BRG559/2020. But the two
applications
dealt with different decisions of the first respondent and different decisions
of the Tribunal that required separate
consideration and separate
preparation.
75 There will be orders accordingly.
I certify that the preceding seventy-five (75)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge Jarrett
on 27 August, 2021.
Dated: 27 August 2021
RTF format (475 KB)
Signed PDF/A format