Patty v Commonwealth Bank [2002] IRCA 1 (19 February 2002)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
Patty v Commonwealth Bank
[2002] IRCA 1
PATTY -v- COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA (ACN 123 123 124)
19 FEBRUARY
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
VICTORIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
VI 2542 of 1996
COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA (ACN 123 123 124)
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
THE COURT ORDERS:
the proceedings instituted in the Federal Court of Australia
on 12 March 1998 be treated for all purposes as having been instituted
all of the evidence adduced and submissions made in the
proceedings referred to in paragraph 1 of this Order be treated as having
adduced and made in this Court.
it be declared that the respondent has contravened
s 170DE(1) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
by terminating the
employment of the applicant without a valid reason or valid reasons for doing
the respondent within 21 days of this Order reinstate the
applicant in a position equating as closely as practicable to that classified
GC3 which he occupied on 27 August 1996.
subject to the applicant’s accounting for payments in
respect thereof received after 27 August 1996, the respondent treat the
continuity of the applicant’s employment as having been maintained for the
purpose of preserving any accrued entitlements to
long service leave and
superannuation.
liberty be reserved to either party to apply on not less than
48 hours notice in writing to the other party.
Note: Settlement and
entry of orders is dealt with in Order 36 of the Industrial Relations Court
IN THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
VICTORIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
VI 2542 of 1996
COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA (ACN 123 123
SUPPLEMENTARY REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
1 On 4 August 2000, I published reasons for judgment in the Federal Court of
Australia (“the earlier reasons”) indicating
why, if that Court had
February 1998 an order should
be made in that Court setting aside the order of
the learned Judicial Registrar. The present reasons for judgment should be read
in conjunction with the earlier reasons and an expression or acronym used herein
will have the same meaning as in the earlier reasons.
For the reasons explained
under the heading “Jurisdiction” in the earlier reasons, I concluded
that the Federal Court
had no jurisdiction to entertain the motion which, had it
been instituted in IRCA, would have been judiciable by that Court. In
part of the earlier reasons I indicated a course which I consider to be open to
me as a Judge of IRCA as well as of the
Federal Court. Consistently with that
indication, the concluding paragraph [99] of the earlier reasons recited;
“I shall adjourn the proceedings in this Court to a date to be fixed to
enable the parties and their legal advisers to consider
these reasons. On the
adjourned date, subject to any further submissions which may be made by Counsel
for either party, I shall,
for the reasons explained in para 12 above, make
an order as a Judge of IRCA that the proceedings instituted in the Federal Court
on 12 March 1998 be treated for all purposes as having been instituted in IRCA.
In the same capacity, I shall order that all of
the evidence adduced and
submissions made in those proceedings be treated as having been adduced and made
in IRCA. For the reasons
given above in discussing the merits of the
application for review, the order of the Judicial Registrar of 19 February 1998
be set aside and in lieu thereof there will be a declaration in IRCA that
the Bank has contravened s 170DE(1) of the Act by terminating
employment of the applicant without a valid reason, or valid reasons for doing
so. I shall then forthwith receive such submissions
and evidence (if any) as
the parties consider appropriate on the question of whether any, and if so
which, of the consequential orders
contemplated by s 170EE of the Act
should be made. The application to the Federal Court will, if the course just
outlined is followed,
be formally dismissed on the date to which this matter is
adjourned.”
2 The adjourned hearing occurred on 1 February 2001 when Mr Dennis of Counsel
for the Bank contended that the application for review
of the Judicial
Registrar’s decision should have been made to IRCA. Because it was not so
made but was mistakenly made to
the Federal Court, there were no extant
proceedings in IRCA, Mr Dennis contended, in which substantive orders could be
made. Accordingly,
he submitted,
Workplace Relations Act
did not empower IRCA to treat evidence adduced, and rulings and
interlocutory orders made, in the Federal Court as having been adduced
in IRCA. Reference was made in support of this submission to the joint judgment
of Wilson and Dawson JJ in
Jackson v Sterling Industries Ltd
[1987] HCA 23
, where it was observed, at 619;
“However, the declaration of the Federal Court as a superior court is
to be given effect as far as it can be and, as Aickin
J remarked in
Morris Inc v Adam P Brown Male Fashions Pty Ltd
[(1981) 148 CLR, at p 535],
the vesting of judicial power in the specific matters permitted by the
Constitution (see ss 75, 76, 77)
carries with it such implied power as is
necessarily inherent in the nature of the judicial power itself. Having regard
to the declaration
of the Federal Court as a superior court and a court of law
and equity, the implied power should be construed as being no less in
to the jurisdiction vested in it than the inherent power of a court of
unlimited, or general, jurisdiction.
Be that as it may, it cannot be suggested that either the power to grant
relief under s 23 or an implied power to prevent an abuse
extends to the creation and enforcement of rights in addition to those for the
protection or enforcement of which the
The power given by s 23 is expressly limited to the making of orders in
relation to matters
in which the Court has jurisdiction and it does not extend
the jurisdiction of the Federal Court. Nor could that Court’s implied
power be employed to create and enforce new rights. Whilst the implied power
carries with it all that is necessary for the proper
functioning of that Court,
it does not extend its jurisdiction beyond that which is vested in
3 IRCA was, and is, within the limits imposed by statute on it its
s 361(2) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
). Like those of the
Federal Court, its powers to make orders are exercisable in relation to any
matter within its jurisdiction.
However, the existence of the matter does not
depend on an initiating party’s having filed an appropriate document in
Registry of the Court. A “matter” in the relevant sense is
“a judiciable controversy, identifiable independently
of the proceedings
which are brought for its determination;”
Fencott v Muller
152 CLR 570
at 603, applying
In re Judiciary and Navigation Acts
[1921] HCA 20
Felton v Mulligan
[1971] HCA 39
(1971) 124 CLR 367
Philip Morris Inc
v Adam P Brown Male Fashions Pty Ltd
(1981) 148 CLR 457.
In the present
case, I consider that such a controversy arose, at the latest, when the
applicant indicated dissatisfaction with
the Judicial Registrar’s order
and the Bank expressly or impliedly evinced an intention to retain the benefit
of that order.
The coming into existence of the controversy in that way may
have coincided with the filing in the Federal Court of an application
of the Judicial Registrar’s order but it was independent of the mistaken
initiation of that proceeding.
4 Accordingly, I have not been persuaded to resile from the conclusion
reached at [12] of the earlier reasons, where I observed;
“The High Court in
has indicated the limits of powers
conferred on the Federal Court in terms similar to those conferred on IRCA by
s 419. Those limits
do not, I consider, preclude IRCA in the circumstances
of the present case, from directing that evidence adduced and submissions
mistakenly, as it now appears, in the Federal Court, be treated as having been
adduced and made in IRCA. I do not think it
is an impermissible exercise of the
powers reposed in IRCA by ss 419 and 481 to make such an order to rectify
the mistake to which
I have just referred, and to ensure that the right or
matter arising on the institution of proceedings for review of the decision
the Judicial Registrar is determined by the Court having jurisdiction to
entertain it.”
5 I therefore affirm my view that orders should be made in IRCA setting aside
the order of the Judicial Registrar of 19 February 1998
and declaring that the
Bank has contravened s 170DE(1) of the Act by terminating the employment of
the applicant without a valid
reason for doing so. It remains to consider the
remedy (if any) which the applicant should be accorded in consequence of that
declaration.
Is reinstatement practicable and appropriate?
6 Sub-sections 170EE(1) and (2) of the Act provided;
“(1) In respect of a contravention of a provision of this Division
(other than section 170DB or 170DD) constituted by the termination
of employment
of an employee, the Court may, if the Court considers it appropriate in all the
circumstances of the case, make the
(a) an order requiring the employer to reinstate the employee by:
(i) reappointing the employee to the position in which the employee was
employed immediately before the termination; or
(ii) appointing the employee to another position on terms and conditions no
less favourable than those on which the employee was employed
immediately before
the termination; and
(b) if the Court makes an order under paragraph (a):
(i) any order that it thinks necessary to maintain the continuity of the
employee’s employment; and
(ii) an order requiring the employer to pay to the employee the remuneration
lost by the employee because of the termination.
(2) If the Court thinks, in respect of a contravention of a provision of this
Division (other than section 170DB or 170DD) constituted
by the termination of
employment of an employee, that the reinstatement of the employee is
impracticable, the Court may, if the Court
considers it appropriate in all the
circumstances of the case, make an order requiring the employer to pay to the
employee compensation
of such amount as the Court thinks
appropriate.”
7 There is a considerable body of judicial exegesis in respect of the words
“impracticable” and “appropriate”
in those sub-sections.
Patterson v Newcrest Mining Ltd
(1996) 68 IR 419
, Wilcox CJ said, at
“The word “impracticable” has caused difficulty in relation
to unlawful termination claims. It appears in subs
(2) and has led judges of
the Court, including myself, to describe the scheme of s 1709EE as one
providing a primary remedy of reinstatement
and a secondary remedy of
compensation where reinstatement is impracticable. These comments must be read
in the light of the amendments,
where they apply, requiring the Court to reach a
determination that it is “appropriate in all the circumstances of the
to order reinstatement. Contrary to the submission put by counsel
for the appellant, it is my opinion that the matter of appropriateness,
that concept applies, is not restricted to the form of a reinstatement but
applies to the initial question whether reinstatement
shall be ordered or
... ... ...
I am content to adhere to what I said in
Nicolson v Heaven and Earth
Gallery Pty Ltd
(1994) 57 IR 50
at 60. I do not think that what I there said
is inconsistent with what Keely J and I said in
Liddell v Lembke
at 465. The requirement to consider the impracticability of
reinstatement necessarily requires the Court to have regard to all the
circumstances of the case relating to the employer and the employee; as I said
, to evaluate the practicability of a reinstatement order in a
commonsense way.”
Liddell v Lembke
(1994) 56 IR 447
, Wilcox CJ and Keely J
observed, at 465;
“It is true that s.170EE uses the word "may", not "shall", and that
"may" connotes the conferral of a discretion, not a duty:
Interpretation Act
. However, as the
Industrial Relations Act
does not specify any criteria for the exercise
of that discretion, they are those emerging from "the subject matter and the
and purpose" of the legislation: see
The Queen v Australian
Broadcasting Tribunal; Ex parte 2HD Pty Limited
[1979] HCA 62
(1979) 144 CLR 45
subject matter of this legislation is unlawful termination of employment. Its
scope and purpose is the provision of
legally enforceable remedies for people
whose employment is terminated in breach of the internationally-accepted
standards introduced
by the Act into Australian domestic law. Because of these
considerations, and the fact that the Commonwealth Act makes a termination
violation of the requirements of s.170DC unlawful in itself, whatever the
employee's merits or lack of them, it would not be right
to withhold a remedy
for a breach of s.170DC because of considerations listed in s.170DE(1). They
are factors that permit an employer
acting fairly
to terminate an
employee's employment. Still less would it be correct for the Court to exercise
its discretion adversely to an applicant
because of factors extraneous to the
Industrial Relations Act
, such as a respondent's financial position or
personal likes or dislikes.”
9 In opposition to an order for reinstatement, evidence was adduced on behalf
of the Bank from its Senior Manager, Human Resources,
for Victoria and Tasmania,
Mr Wade. He testified to the self-obvious fact that banking requires of those
who participate in it very
high standards of integrity and honesty. He
indicated that the Bank had lost confidence in the applicant’s ability to
and adhere to those standards. As explained in the earlier reasons, I
have found that the allegations of implication in the theft
from the ATM which
could be regarded as the primary foundation for the Bank’s loss of
confidence in the applicant, have not
been made out. However, Mr Wade pointed
to the applicant’s allegedly untruthful contention that he had provided Ms
Mr Forkgen with Ms Blencowe’s pay envelopes from Franklins and
to his refusal to furnish a response to the Bank’s request
of 24 June 1996
as separately founding the Bank’s loss of confidence in the applicant.
10 Mr Wade also testified that the applicant’s previous position no
longer exists and that the duties and responsibilities of
positions broadly
equivalent to it have changed dramatically in the period since the
applicant’s dismissal. He acknowledged
that there are recurring vacancies
in those equivalent positions and conceded that, with some bridging training,
the applicant could
fill one of those vacancies. However, he reiterated that
the scope for appointing the applicant to any such vacancy was severely
restricted by the Bank’s reluctance to allow the applicant access to cash
or clients’ accounts. Continuous direct supervision
of the applicant, he
pointed out, was not practicable.
11 In my view, the circumstances of this case attract the application of the
principles enunciated by a Full Court of IRCA in
Perkins v Grace Worldwide
(Aust) Pty Ltd
(1997) 72 IR 186
, where it was observed, at 191;
“Trust and confidence is a necessary ingredient in any employment
relationship. That is why the law imports into employment
contracts an implied
promise by the employer not to damage or destroy the relationship of trust and
confidence between the parties,
without reasonable cause: see
Blacktown City Guardian Pty Limited
(Wilcox CJ, von Doussa and Marshall JJ,
[1996] IRCA 371
142 ALR 144].
The implication is not confined to employers, it extends
to employees: see for example
Blyth Chemicals Ltd v Bushell
[1933] HCA 8
at 81-2 and
North v Television Corporation Ltd
(1976) 11 ALR 599
at 609. So we accept that the question whether there has been a loss of trust
and confidence is a relevant consideration in determining
whether reinstatement
is impracticable, provided that such loss of trust and confidence is soundly and
rationally based.
At the same time, it must be recognised that, where an employer, or a senior
officer of an employer, accuses an employee of wrongdoing
justifying the summary
termination of the employee's employment, the accuser will often be reluctant to
shift from the view that
such wrongdoing has occurred, irrespective of the
Court's finding on that question in the resolution of an application under
of the Act.
If the Court were to adopt a general attitude that such a reluctance
destroyed the relationship of trust and confidence between employer
employee, and so made reinstatement impracticable, an employee who was
terminated after an accusation of wrongdoing but later
succeeded in an
application under the Division would be denied access to the primary remedy
provided by the legislation. Compensation,
which is subject to a statutory
limit, would be the only available remedy. Consequently, it is important that
the Court carefully
scrutinise any claim by an employer that reinstatement is
impracticable because of a loss of confidence in the
Each case must be decided on its own merits. There may be cases where any
ripple on the surface of the employment relationship will
destroy its viability.
For example the life of the employer, or some other person or persons, might
depend on the reliability of
the terminated employee, and the employer has a
reasonable doubt about that reliability. There may be a case where there is a
confidential information. But those are relatively uncommon
situations. In
most cases, the employment relationship is capable of withstanding some friction
and doubts. Trust and confidence
are concepts of degree. It is rare for any
human being to have total trust in another. What is important in the employment
relationship
is that there be sufficient trust to make the relationship viable
and productive. Whether that standard is reached in any particular
depend upon the circumstances of the particular case. And in assessing that
question, it is appropriate to consider the
rationality of any attitude taken by
It may be difficult or embarrassing for an employer to be required to
re-employ a person the employer believed to have been guilty
of wrongdoing. The
requirement may cause inconvenience to the employer. But if there is such a
requirement, it will be because
the employee's employment was earlier terminated
without a valid reason or without extending procedural fairness to the employee.
The problems will be of the employer’s own making. If the employer is of
even average fair-mindedness, they are likely to
prove short-lived. Problems
such as this do not necessarily indicate such a loss of confidence as to make
the restoration of the
employment relationship
impracticable.”
12 In respect of the Bank’s reliance on the applicant’s allegedly
untruthful assertions that he had furnished Ms Blencowe’s
pay envelopes to
Ms Clare and Mr Forkgen on 13 June 1996, it is to be remembered that in [81] of
the previous reasons, I indicated
an inability to resolve that issue one way or
the other. As well, it was implied that, even if its version were accepted, it
still have been incumbent on the Bank to have made its own investigations
into whether the suggestion that Ms Blencowe’s wages
had been the source
of the payment of $250 into the applicant’s account on 29 April.
13 Insofar as the Bank relied, as destructive of the requisite relation of
trust and confidence, on the applicant’s refusal
to respond to its request
of 24 June 1996 for information to resolve its concerns about his possible
implication in the theft, I
refer to what I said at [97] of the previous
reasons. I there observed;
“The reasonableness of that refusal has to be assessed in the light of
the level of co-operation which the applicant had previously
extended to the
Bank’s investigators, the readiness with which he had responded to those
earlier requests for information and
the terms in which the request of 24 June
was cast. In my view, it is understandable, in all the circumstances, that the
acted on the advice, which I infer he received from his then
solicitors, to answer no further questions. The Bank’s letter
applicant of 24 June was prefaced with an intimation that a decision had been
made to conclude the Bank’s own investigation,
finalise the
investigator’s findings and recommendations, and return the file to
investigating police at the Fitzroy CIB.
When those prefatory remarks are read
in conjunction with the accusatory tone of many of the subsequent paragraphs
which imply that
the applicant’s earlier responses had been inconsistent
or unsatisfactory, the questions as a whole in the letter of 24 June
regarded as reasonable or fair. Some propositions which were said to indicate
specific inconsistencies like that to the
effect that no call had been made to
Mr Patty’s home by the VRU or help desk on the morning of 11 February
were, I have found,
almost certainly wrong. Other specific parts of the request
taxed the applicant with having made responses the “relevance
of which was
doubted by the Bank”. Understandably therefore, Counsel for the Bank
conceded on the hearing of the review (transcript
p 670) that “a
number of these questions could have been formulated in a better fashion”.
It was therefore not unreasonable
for the applicant to decline to take the risk
by another response of creating further inconsistency which the police might
as sustaining criminal charges. The interpretation was also open that
the applicant was no longer being asked to provide information
to assist the
Bank’s investigators in continuing inquiries, but rather was being given a
last opportunity to rebut their provisional
inculpatory
conclusions.”
14 That reasoning entails that, if reviewed with the average, fair-mindedness
imputed to a reasonable employer by the Full Court in
the last paragraph of the
extract from
Perkins v Grace Worldwide
quoted above, Mr Patty’s
refusal to respond to the letter of 24 June 1996, either alone or in combination
with the claim about
Ms Blencowe’s pay envelopes, if that was, in fact
mistaken or untruthful, would not be regarded as destructive of the requisite
trust and confidence.
15 It follows from the conclusions reached in the earlier reasons that I
cannot regard the Bank’s loss of trust and confidence
in the applicant as
soundly and rationally based insofar as it is founded on the suspicion that Mr
Patty had been implicated in the
theft from the ATM. This is a case, I
consider, where the Bank has been reluctant to shift from the view that the
wrongdoing which
it imputed to the applicant has occurred, notwithstanding the
finding on that question expressed in the earlier reasons. Accordingly,
to regard that reluctance as destructive of the requisite trust and confidence,
the applicant would, as the Full Court pointed
out in the passage just quoted
Perkins v Grace Worldwide
, be denied access to the primary remedy
provided by the legislation. I am not persuaded, having regard to the
circumstances as a
whole, that it is impracticable for the Bank to re-employ Mr
Patty in a position broadly equivalent to that which he occupied immediately
before he was dismissed.
16 Notwithstanding the opinion just indicated that
the reinstatement of the applicant is not impracticable, the question is left
by s 170EE of the Act whether the Court considers it appropriate, in
all the circumstances of the case, to make an order requiring
the Bank to
reinstate the applicant. That question turns, as indicated in
(supra), on the exercise of a general discretion circumscribed only
by the subject matter and scope and purpose of the legislation.
consideration pointed to by Counsel for the Bank, in addition to the matters
said to have destroyed the relation of trust
and confidence, is the
applicant’s delay at various stages in prosecuting his claim for the
remedy of reinstatement. It is
true that a great deal of time has been wasted
in the taking of interlocutory steps before and after the Judicial
Registrar’s
decision and in attempts, which for reasons explained below
have proved unavailing, to invoke the Court’s accrued or associated
workforce, its conceded ability to re-employ the applicant
after the lapse of
time which has occurred and the absence of any identifiable present or
prospective other employee who would be
prejudiced by the reinstatement, that
part of the delay attributable to the applicant or his advisors does not
preclude the grant
of the primary remedy. As explained below, that is not to
say that delay may not be a factor in conjunction with others, to be taken
account in moulding the consequential relief contemplated by s 170EE(1)(b).
Should the applicant be accorded a notional promotion?
17 Mr Kenyon of Counsel for the applicant contended that, as well as ordering
the reinstatement of the applicant in his employment,
the Court should make
orders which put the applicant in the position in the Bank’s service in
which he would have been had
his employment been uninterrupted and had he been
given the promotions which he could reasonably have expected to have achieved
the intervening period. It was suggested that a guide to the appropriate
notional promotions would be those achieved, in fact, by
Mr Centofanti.
18 A fundamental difficulty in the way of this suggestion is that the primary
remedy stipulated by s 170EE(1)(a)(i) is reappointment
to the position in
which the employee was employed immediately before the termination. In my view,
resort to the alternative stipulated
in s 170EE(1)(a)(ii) of appointment to
another position on terms and condition no less favourable than those on which
the employee
was employed immediately before the termination is only available
where the position in which the employee was employed immediately
termination has been abolished or is occupied by some other person so that
reappointment to it is not practicable. It
does not authorise the Court to
require the appointment of the applicant to some other
more favourable
position to which it thinks he or she might, or would, have progressed.
19 The case would be otherwise if there were evidence that the position in
which the applicant was employed immediately before the
termination was at a
point below the highest on a scale through which the employee, but for the
termination, would automatically
have progressed. In that case, the discretions
conferred by s 170EE(1)(b) would be available to ensure the notional
maintenance
of the continuity of employment and the receipt of any increments in
remuneration which that continuity would have entailed. However,
the evidence
does not suggest that Mr Patty had any contractual entitlement to incremental
progression through a salary scale attached
to the classification GC3 or to
promotion to any higher classification.
20 The evidence in respect of the machinery by
which Bank Officers are selected for promotion was scanty and inconclusive. The
which I draw from the evidence, including that of Mr Wade, is that
promotion depends on the assessment by supervisors of a candidate’s
and likely capacity to fill a particular promotional vacancy. There is no
longer any system of appeals against proposed promotions.
Mr Centofanti, to
whom I was invited to assimilate Mr Patty, was an Assistant Branch Manager at
the time of the applicant’s
dismissal and has moved only one promotional
level since then. In the light of these matters, and the express language of
s 170EE(1)(a),
I am persuaded to order only that the Bank reinstate the
applicant by appointing him to a position equating as closely as practicable
with that of an officer in classification GC3 as at 27 August 1996.
21 However, an order should also be made
maintaining the applicant’s continuity of employment for purposes of long
service leave
and superannuation, subject to his bringing to account any moneys
received in respect of those matters upon termination. It will
be recalled that
the Bank’s letter of 27 August 1996 ended;
“We will be writing to you separately regarding release of your final
salary payment and your superannuation
entitlements.”
In case any difficulty arises about
the adjustments necessary to restore the applicant’s accrued entitlements
to long service
leave and superannuation, I shall reserve liberty to apply.
Should orders be made for maintenance of continuity of the
applicant’s employment or payment of lost remuneration?
22 The powers conferred by s 170EE(1)(b)(i) and (ii) of the Act, as
indicated by the words which preface the sub-section as a whole,
discretionary. As indicated in [
reasons, a considerable part of the delay in achieving a final resolution of his
claim has been attributable to delay on
the part of the applicant at various
interlocutory stages at the hearing before the learned Judicial Registrar and on
the application
for review. Some of that delay has resulted from the pursuit of
alternative remedies invoking the Court’s accrued or associated
after the publication of the earlier reasons has been
attributable to
“without prejudice” negotiations between the applicant and the Bank
which did not bear fruit. It is,
of course, not possible to assign
responsibility for the breakdown of those negotiations but I do not regard the
fact that they have
occurred as justifying an order that Mr Patty be remunerated
as if he had been employed by the Bank while those negotiations were
proceeding.
23 Another difficulty in the way of my exercising the Court’s
discretion in favour of making an order for payment of lost remuneration
absence of evidence of what the applicant has been able to earn in alternative
employment since the dismissal. I have been
told by Counsel for the applicant
that he lost a short-term position with Crown Casino upon the handing down of
the Judicial Registrar’s
decision which the Casino apparently considered
reflected adversely on the applicant’s reputation for honesty. There is
evidence that any attempt was made to regain that employment after
publication of the earlier reasons which might have been thought
vindicated the applicant. Mr Kenyon also referred to the fact that the
applicant had been “in employment on lower
wages at Strathfield Car
Radios” but there is no evidence of the remuneration derived from that
employment or the period for
which it subsisted. Nor is there evidence of
amounts (if any) received as social security payments during intervals of
unemployment,
as to which see
Wood v District Council Crystal Book - Redhill
(1992) 45 IR 342.
Mullany v Active Concrete
(1995) 62 IR 237
which I was referred in this context by Counsel for the applicant, was concerned
with the calculation of compensation under s
170EE(3), not payment of lost
remuneration under sub-s (1)(b)(ii)). In these circumstances, I am not
prepared to order the Bank
to pay remuneration lost between 27 August 1996 and
the coming into effect of the order for reinstatement.
Other relief
24 As already indicated, the applicant has invoked the accrued or associated
at common law
founded on the principles enunciated by the House of Lords in
Malik v Bank of
Credit and Commerce International S.A.
[1997] UKHL 23
[1998] AC 20.
In that case, the
applicants were employees of a bank (BCCI) whose employment had been terminated
on the grounds of redundancy.
After the termination it was revealed that
regulatory authorities had found that BCCI had, for many years, carried on
business fraudulently.
Thereafter, each applicant had, he claimed, been unable
to obtain employment in the financial services industry because of the stigma
attaching to him as a former employee of BCCI, notwithstanding his innocence of
any wrongdoing. It was held on appeal that BCCI
had been guilty of a breach of
the implied term that it would not conduct itself in a manner likely to destroy
or seriously damage
the relationship of trust and confidence between employer
and employee. Damages were held to be recoverable for that breach despite
fact that it had only come to light after the termination of the employment
relationship.
25 It will be seen that the present case stands in marked contrast to
because, as a result of the proposed order for reinstatement, the
relationship of employment between the applicant and the Bank will
not be at an
end. Even more significant is the fact that, in my opinion, Div 3 of
of the Act constituted a code exclusively regulating the unlawful
termination of the employment of employees who chose to invoke
consequence is that an election had to be made between, on the one hand, the
remedies available under that Division, including
compensation subject to the
limit prescribed by s 170EE(3), and on the other, remedies, principally
damages, at common law or otherwise
where the damages were at large subject to
ordinary principles of assessment. In the present case, the applicant has
elected for,
and obtained, the primary remedy of reinstatement afforded by
s 170EE(1) and his claims for other relief must be dismissed.
26 As foreshadowed in the earlier reasons, the proceedings in the Federal
Court must be dismissed. Also consistently with the earlier
reasons I shall
make procedural directions in IRCA treating the proceedings instituted in the
Federal Court as having been instituted
in IRCA and all of the evidence adduced
and submissions made in those proceedings as having been adduced and made in
IRCA. In addition,
it will be declared that the Bank has contravened
s 170DE(1) of the Act by terminating the employment of the applicant
valid reason or valid reasons for doing so. There will be an order
for reinstatement conforming with that indicated in [
] of these reasons and it will be ordered that,
subject to the applicant’s accounting for payments received after 27
1996 in respect of long service leave and superannuation, the continuity
of the applicant’s employment be treated as having
been maintained for the
purpose of preserving any accrued entitlements to those benefits. Finally, as
indicated in [
] above, I shall reserve liberty to
I certify that the preceding twenty-six (26) numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment herein of the Honourable
Justice Ryan.
Dated: 19 February 2002
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr N Kenyon
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Ryan Carlisle Thomas
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr B Dennis
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Ian F Purbrick
Date of Hearing:
Date of Judgment:
RTF format (93.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format