The Australian Workers' Union v Alcoa of Australia Ltd trading as Alcoa World Alumina Australia - re Dispute regarding Clause 19 - Supplementary Labour and/or Contractors [2009] AIRC 940; (4 December 2009)
[2009] AIRC 940
Download Word Document
The attached document replaces the document previously issued 4 December 2009.
The previous document in the appearances section referred to “Mark Cox of Chapmans Lawyers for The Australian Workers Union”.
This is incorrect and has been replaced with “Mark Cox of Counsel instructed by Chapmans Lawyers for The Australian Workers
The remainder of the document remains unchanged.
Jessica-Mary Aslan
Associate to Commissioner Williams
[2009] AIRC 940
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
s.170LW - pre-reform Act - Application for settlement of dispute (certified agreement)
The Australian Workers' Union
Alcoa of Australia Ltd trading as Alcoa World Alumina Australia
(C2008/2031)
Aluminium industry
COMMISSIONER WILLIAMS
PERTH, 4 DECEMBER 2009
Dispute regarding Clause 19 - Supplementary Labour and/or Contractors.
This matter is an application made by the Australian Workers Union - Western Australia Branch Limited (“AWU”), to have
a dispute resolution process conducted based on the dispute settling procedure of a pre-reform certified agreement, the
Alcoa World Alumina Australia Pinjarra Refinery Agreement 2005
( “the Agreement”). The respondent is Alcoa World Alumina Australia (“Alcoa”)
Introduction
The issue was considered at conciliation conferences in June and July 2008 however it was not resolved between the parties and the
AWU has sought arbitration over the issue. Hearings where listed for April and then July 2009 however ultimately for a number of
reasons the matter did not proceed to hearing until August 2009.
The AWU was represented by Mr Cox on instructions from Chapman’s Barristers and Solicitors and Alcoa was represented by Mr
Heelan of Heelan and Co.
The AWU have at the request of the Commission framed the matters in dispute in the form of two questions as below:
“(a) Whether the Certified Agreement and clause 19 thereof in particular obliges the Respondent to use members of the Applicant
in its employ as supplementary labour to carry out flat bottomed tank inspections; or
(b) Whether clause 19 and or the respondent’s obligations under the Certified Agreement not to erode the job security, earning
and conditions of employees covered by the Agreement obliges recourse to the applicant’s members in the first instance before
having recourse to contractors to inspect flat-bottomed tanks for the purpose of satisfying EPA approval requirements, or for any
other production, maintenance and breakdown purpose in relation to flat bottomed tanks ?”
Before the Commission can consider the matters in dispute it must be satisfied that it has jurisdiction under the
Workplace Relations Act
(“the Act”) to proceed to determine the dispute by arbitration as sought by the applicant.
The pre-reform Act allowed parties when negotiating a certified agreement to include procedures for preventing and settling disputes.
Section 170LW of the pre-reform Act limited the scope of such provisions to the settlement of disputes over the application of the
agreement. The jurisdiction conferred on the Commission is that agreed to by the parties in their agreement but must be within the
It is clear from the authorities that the Commission is empowered only to deal with “disputes over the application of the agreement”.
The correct approach was summarised by Senior Deputy President Lacy in
Maritime Union of Australia v Australian Plant Services Pty Ltd
where he stated:
“…Parliament has authorised the Commission to exercise powers under an agreement “to settle disputes over the application
of the agreement” and, accordingly, its powers are limited to disputes of that kind. Therefore it is necessary for the Commission,
in each case where it is asked to deal with a matter arising under the dispute settling procedure in an agreement, to ascertain the
character of the dispute that is before it in order determine whether the matter is a dispute over the application of the agreement.
And, importantly, the character of the dispute is distinguishable from the orders that may be made in settlement of the dispute.”
[footnotes omitted]
The first step for the Commission is to characterise the dispute. Here the AWU has characterised the dispute as the two questions
The respondent challenges whether the dispute as set out in the questions is over the application of the Agreement. The respondent
argues that:
To be characterised as a dispute about the application of the Agreement, it must be demonstrated that the Agreement applies to the
work in dispute.
In determining whether the Agreement covers particular work, more is required than an assessment as to whether employees are performing
duties which they are capable of performing whilst covered by the Agreement. An examination needs to be made of the nature of the
work, the circumstances in which it is performed and the intended scope of the Certified Agreement with a view to ascertaining whether
the work falls into a category for which the job description was created and for which the employees were principally and purposefully
The answer to this line of objection is found within the evidence of Alcoa’s own witnesses.
The evidence of Mr Jackaman
is that Alcoa employees, including employees covered by this Agreement, do this work and the evidence of Mr Russell is that Alcoa
employees to date have done approximately 62% of the work involved in the Flat Bottomed Tank project, see Exhibit A 4
. The evidence of Mr Bloome was that Alcoa employees have always done some of this work
Mr Palandri also recognised this was the case
Reviewing the terms of the Agreement and the nature of the work as explained by the witnesses and accepting the evidence of how the
work has been and is now being done I have no doubt that the work in dispute falls within the scope of the Agreement and within the
job description of some of the classifications of employees covered by this Agreement. This objection of the respondent is rejected.
In a separate objection to jurisdiction the respondent argues that:
The decision sought by the Applicant (e.g. to provide work to
of the Applicant over other employees covered by the Agreement, who are not members of the AWU) would result in Alcoa being required
to behave in a manner contrary to the Freedom of Association provisions of the Act?
The Respondent submits that it would be unfair for the Commission to entertain the arbitration of a varied or amended question or
issue other than that ultimately requested to be arbitrated by the Applicant to remedy this.
I have considered the history of this matter and the argument of the respondent and do accept the first point of the submission is
valid. The questions as posed are framed in terms of “..members of the applicant..” and the “..the applicants members..”.
The inappropriateness of this was raised in earlier proceedings by Mr Heelan. Regrettably the AWU’s representatives did not
heed the concern and persisted with this element of the wording in the final versions of the questions to be arbitrated.
The representatives of the AWU responsible for framing the question have been foolhardy to ignore this issue previously drawn to
their attention. The respondent now argues the Commission should not allow the question to be amended or varied.
The framing of disputes in the form of questions to be decided is a device used at times by the Commission so that the matters in
dispute are crystallised and put in a form that is able to be arbitrated. Having dealt with this matter in two conferences I am aware
that it has never been the position of the AWU that this issue involved a dispute about work for their members verses other employees
who are not members of the union. The dispute is about whether employees of Alcoa should under the terms of the Agreement be offered
the work in question on supplementary shifts before it can be contracted out. The deficient phrasing of the questions does not in
my view accurately reflect the true nature of the matter in dispute.
If, as the respondent submits I should, I decline to deal with this matter because of the objectionable reference to union members
the real issue in dispute will remain unresolved.
In addition to accept the respondents argument in this instance would be to endorse a highly technical approach that is not appropriate
on this occasion and without merit. Accordingly I will amend the questions to remove the objectionable wording and proceed to determine
the newly worded questions. I am satisfied that this in no way prejudices the respondent in terms of the arguments or evidence it
has put on this matter.
The new questions are:
“(a) Whether the Certified Agreement and clause 19 thereof in particular obliges the Respondent to use employees covered by
the Certified Agreement as supplementary labour to carry out flat bottomed tank inspections; or
(b) Whether clause 19 and or the respondent’s obligations under the Certified Agreement not to erode the job security, earnings
and conditions of employees covered by the Agreement obliges recourse to the respondents employees in the first instance before having
recourse to contractors to inspect flat-bottomed tanks for the purpose of satisfying EPA approval requirements, or for any other
production, maintenance and breakdown purpose in relation to flat bottomed tanks?”
Returning to consider the central jurisdictional objection, the Agreement includes a disputes settling procedures as follows:
“18. INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS PROCEDURES
The parties recognise the importance of uninterrupted production and supply to customers and agree that conciliation is the most satisfactory
means to resolve matters. Accordingly, the parties agree to discuss issues exhaustively with the outcome being determined on the
facts, logic and merit involved.
(a) Grievance Procedure
(i) The parties agree to process any grievance or other matter in dispute in accordance with this procedure. The status quo will be
observed while the issue is being progressed. For the avoidance of doubt, if the dispute relates to management's decision to utilize
contractors pursuant to Clause 19 - Supplementary Labour and/or Contractors of this Agreement, it is expressly agreed that the status
quo requirements of this sub clause shall not prevent or delay the performance of such work by contractors.
The parties are committed to the satisfactory and timely resolution of issues, by those most directly involved, as appropriate.
Consistent with the intent of paragraphs (i) and (ii) hereof, the procedure to be followed is:
(1) The employee with the grievance will raise the problem with the immediate supervision. Every effort will be made to resolve the
issue within two working days or any agreed extension. The relevant Shop Steward may, at the request of the employee, become involved
during this period;
(2) If not settled, the issue will be submitted to the next level of Company authority and the relevant Site Union Convenor. Every
effort will be made to resolve the issue within a further two working days or any agreed extension;
(3) If not settled, the issue will be progressed to include other appropriate Company representatives, relevant Site Union representatives
and Union Officials. Discussions will continue for as long as is necessary, but every effort will be made to resolve the issue within
seven days; and
(4) If the issue cannot be resolved through this mechanism it will then be referred to the Australian Industrial Relations Commission
for prevention and settlement of the dispute.
Until the matter is determined in accordance with the above procedure, work will continue normally.”
The above clause empowers the Commission to arbitrate where a matter about the application of the agreement cannot be resolved by
conciliation, as is the case in this instance. Having considered the characterisation of the dispute and the terms of the Agreement
I am satisfied that this is a dispute about the application of the Agreement and therefore the Commission has the power to determine
the dispute.
Alcoa has approximately 300 flat bottom tanks ( FBT’s) spread across its Pinjarra refinery.
In late 2006 early 2007 it became apparent that Alcoa would be required to commence inspections of most of its FBT’s as a result
of new government regulations. The effect of the new regulations meant that Alcoa was going to be required to undertake inspections
and potentially repairs to about 194 of the FBT’s.
An agreement was reached with the government regulator to allow Alcoa a 4 year “catch up phase” to become compliant with
the new regulations without being found in breach. The agreement included commitments by Alcoa to inspect a certain number of tanks
in each year.
The consequences of being in breach of the regulations include prosecution, penalties and potential shut down of non-compliant tanks
which could lead to either closure or substantial restrictions on the operation of the refinery. After this catch up phase, Alcoa
will be required to conduct approximately 25 to 30 flat bottom tank inspections (FBTI’s) each year to maintain compliance with
the regulations.
There are a number of steps involved in the FBTI process.
As explained by Mr Jackaman
one of Alcoa’s witnesses, performing a FBTI involves a number of steps, most of which are unrelated to the actual inspection
or work required as a result of the inspection. Most of the steps are related to taking the tank out of circuit, preparing it for
the inspection and / or repair work and then putting the tank back into circuit. The steps involved and whom typically does that
work are as follows:
1. The tank is taken out of circuit. This is an Alcoa operator role.
2. The tank is washed. This is an Alcoa operator role.
3. The tank is isolated mechanically. This involves the Alcoa operator and mostly Alcoa maintenance crews.
4. The tank is descaled. This is done by a specialist Alcoa crew.
5. The tank undergoes a final clean, including sand blasting. This is done by contractors.
6. The tank is visually inspected for physical defects and is also tested using Non-destructive testing methods. This involves specialist
contractors, although for the purpose of the current project, Alcoa has engaged a full time inspector and contract engineers as part
of the Alcoa Hatch Engineering Alliance (AHEA).
7. Confined space watch for the inspection and testing is provided by the AHEA.
8. The tank is repaired, which can involve replacement of corroded sections of the tank, replacement of entire strakes or occasionally
building an entirely new tank. This work is done by Alcoa employees, mostly but not only those covered by the Alcoa AMWU agreement
and also done by contractors.
9. The tank undergoes a re-inspection and testing regimes. This involves the same specialist contractors from the initial testing.
10. The tank then has a mechanical service. This work is done by an Alcoa maintenance crew.
11. The tank is then resealed. This involves an Alcoa maintenance crew.
12. The tank is then brought back into circuit. This involves Alcoa operators and maintenance crew.
This explanation of the steps involved in FBTI is largely accepted by the AWU. The AWU’s sole witness Mr Herrick agrees with
this list but would also include scaffolding, craneage and safety work as well
It was recognised from the outset by Alcoa that it did not have sufficient resources to undertake this inspection and repair project
in the required time frame to meet its compliance obligations. The FBTI work was also viewed by Alcoa as a project which required
separate management. A significant portion of the time for FBTI’s involves the inspection of the tank to assess wall and floor
thickness, weld condition and overall tank integrity and finally determine the scope of work for the necessary repairs to the tank.
The scope of repair or reconstruction work required depends on the results from the inspection.
By far the majority of the work associated with the repair and / or reconstruction of a tank is metal trades work. This work is
traditionally carried out by AMWU members at the refinery.
Because of this Alcoa entered into discussions with the AMWU at Pinjarra Refinery to arrange for the recruitment of a temporary Alcoa
labour-force which would be dedicated to work on the bulk of the FBTI project (the Precipitation tanks) whilst the work on the refinery
stock tanks would be contracted out.
The FBTI temporary Alcoa labour force, known as the Precipitator Turnaround Crew, is comprised of two thirds metal tradespersons
(AMWU agreement employees) and one third trades assistants (AWU Agreement employees).
Despite the arrangement with the AMWU, Alcoa initially proceeded to use where possible Alcoa workers to perform the work and as a
result contracted out relatively few FBTI’s in 2007.
In the first 12 months, Alcoa had agreed with the government regulator to perform 58 inspections. However, by the end of 2007 Alcoa
had only completed 53 inspections and were non-compliant.
Following this Alcoa decided that the management of the FBTI project was to be centralised under Mr Smithdale, the Capital Program
In 2008, the bulk of the project was performed by the Alcoa Precipitator Turnaround Crew but with an increase in the number of tanks
done by contractors.
At the end of 2008 Alcoa had completed the 55 tanks as agreed with the government regulator.
Alcoa employees continue to perform the bulk of the work associated with the overall FBTI project.
The arrangement reached between Alcoa and the AMWU did not involve discussion with the AWU representatives at the refinery nor any
employees covered by the Agreement. The AWU on behalf of its members covered by the Agreement advised Alcoa that they objected to
their arrangement with the AMWU because it in part involved the contracting out of FBTI work that was covered by the Agreement. The
AWU argued that under the terms of the Agreement in particular Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS Alcoa is obliged
to offer Alcoa employees supplementary shifts to do part of this FBTI work before it can be contracted out.
Alcoa argues in reply that contractors are only utilised to carry out specialist tasks which Alcoa is not capable of performing and
the repair or reconstruction work where Alcoa has anticipated that this work is likely to be of a large scale or involve greater
complexity.
For a number of reasons explained by the various Alcoa witnesses the company believes it is therefore neither a requirement under
Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS for them to offer Alcoa employees supplementary shifts to do any of this FBTI
work nor is it efficient to do so.
Preliminary points
Is there a case to answer?
The respondent’s representatives have raised a further preliminary argument that it is appropriate to address at this point.
The questions posed by the AWU it is argued by the respondent refer to flat bottom tank
and that Alcoa should offer supplementary shifts before having recourse to contractors to
flat bottom tanks.
The respondent then points out that in the AWU's submissions there is a statement acknowledging that there are specific aspects of
FBTI's that do require specialist knowledge and tools and that this includes the final clean,
and testing of the tanks.
The respondent argues that the words
have clear and well-known everyday meanings and further that the AWU has conceded that the employees covered by the Agreement do
not perform
of tanks. Consequently the respondents submits there is no dispute and no question requiring determination by the Commission.
Reviewing the evidence it is clear that respondents own witnesses use the phrase “flat bottomed tank
inspections”
to cover a broad scope of work and do not in their evidence limit their use of the phrase solely to the
component of that work.
To quote the evidence of Mr Jackaman for Alcoa for example “… performing a flat bottomed tank inspection involves a number
of steps, most of which are unrelated to the actual inspection or work required as a result of the inspection.”
The witnesses and the representatives throughout the proceedings used the phrase “flat bottomed tank inspections” as
having a very broad meaning incorporating the whole body of work that is being carried out by Alcoa to examine each of the nearly
200 tanks and carry out any necessary repairs, over a number of years.
The concession in the AWU's submission that the respondent has seized upon is limited to recognising that there is specialised work
within the 10 steps Alcoa's witnesses say make up a flat bottomed tank inspection that is not work that employees covered by the
Agreement do. Specifically for example employees covered by the Agreement do not do non-destructive testing.
There is no real basis to accept the narrow interpretation of the words inspect and inspection that the respondent urges the Commission
to adopt. Nobody through the hearing of this matter has adopted this approach and consequently I reject the submission that on this
ground there is no dispute here to be determined.
Obligations and erosion – the wording of Clause 19
Alcoa’s representatives also made arguments as a threshold point that the reference to the words obligation and separately
erosion in the questions to be determined and in Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS of the Agreement should lead
the Commission to conclude that the questions for determination are ill-conceived on both points and for that reason the application
should be dismissed. It is said the clause in fact imposes no “obligation” on Alcoa and is only aspirational and in any
event there has been no “erosion” of job security earnings or conditions of employees covered by the Agreement.
This submission is without real substance. The approach is quite at odds with how the parties themselves have dealt with this matter.
I do not agree that a reading of the questions to be determined in this way is correct and also reject this submission by the respondent.
The AWU’s submissions
The AWU submits that this matter involves the determination of whether FBTI’s include work that is usually done by employees
covered by the Agreement.
Specifically this requires a determination by the Commission as to whether FBTI’s involved “ planned maintenance activities”
within the meaning of Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS of the Agreement or alternatively it is “ breakdown
/ unplanned maintenance activity” within the meaning of this clause. If either is the case the AWU says Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY
LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS obliges Alcoa to offer supplementary work to Alcoa employees in the first instance.
The AWU does not assert that Alcoa cannot use contractors at all for the purposes of completing the work of FBTI’s. Rather
the AWU says Alcoa should follow the practice that it has done in the past of having recourse to Alcoa employees covered by the Agreement
in the first instance, at least in relation to those task within their competencies and then only to the extent doing this cannot
meet the requirements associated with particular FBTI’s should work be given to outside contractors.
The AWU acknowledges that there are specific aspects of FBTI that do require specialist knowledge and tools that employees covered
by the Agreement typically do not perform. Historically, it is asserted by the AWU, that employees covered by the Agreement have
been involved in all other aspects of FBTI including taking the tank out of circuit, washing the tank out, isolating it, descaling
it, completing some repair work in conjunction with AMWU employees, mechanical servicing, resealing the tank and finally bring it
back into circuit.
Other work also done by the employees covered by the Agreement associated with FBTI’s includes fire watch and safety monitoring,
craneage, scaffolding and acting as trades assistants to grinders and the descalers.
The AWU accepts the historical approach whereby representatives of the employees covered by the Agreement would have discussions
with Alcoa's managers about each FBT to assess the scope of repair work involved following the inspection. The parties would assess
the capacity of Alcoa employees to complete the necessary work. Historically where it was agreed between both parties that the work
was beyond the capacity of Alcoa employees, commonly due to other work demands, Alcoa would then with the agreement of the AWU employees
covered by the Agreement contract out that FBTI work.
The AWU argue that Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS of the Agreement provides that the completion of production
and maintenance work might require at times the use of contractors, but this is subject to the provisions of clause 19 including
the preservation of employees job security, earnings and conditions.
The AWU submit that Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS should be interpreted in the context of the other provisions
of the Agreement such as Clause 4. AIMS OF THE AGREEMENT which provides that the parties agree to accept the use of contractors for
peak workloads consistent with the SELL ( Safe Efficient Logical Legal) principal and the philosophy of consultation and participation.
The AWU say there is no discretion for Alcoa to use contractors as a matter of course in preference to employees engaged under the
The AWU submits that this is reiterated in Clause 5. PRINCIPLES OF AGREEMENT which includes again the reference to the use of contractors
to “ to minimise turnaround time in the event of major breakdowns and peak workloads.”
The AWU point to Clause 18. INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS PROCEDURE which at (d) Utilisation of Contractors limits the circumstances in which
contractors may be used by Alcoa to where they perform specialised work or services, install modify and maintain facilities, plant
and/or equipment; or are to supplement Alcoa's workforce to meet variable workloads or short- term shortages of labour. The first
of these two circumstances are expressly stated to only exist where there is a need for skills, equipment and services that are not
available from the permanent workforce covered by the Agreement. The AWU argue that this is not the case here in relation to all
aspects of the FBTI’s.
It is submitted that the Agreement taken as a whole makes it clear that recourse to contractors in the first instance is not the
norm or standard practice. This however is what Alcoa intends to do and has been doing with FBTI. It is argued that recourse to contractors
is intended by the terms of the Agreement to be the exception, to be ad hoc and temporary.
It is submitted that under the Agreement the clear intent is that practice of the respondent should be to offer supplementary shifts
to cover FBTI’s to Alcoa employees in the first instance and only then to have recourse to contractors where there is insufficient
Alcoa labour to complete the work on schedule.
The AWU submit that of all the steps of FBTI’s identified by Alcoa's own witnesses the only areas where Alcoa employees covered
by the Agreement are not involved are visual inspections, confined space watch for the inspection, non destructive testing by the
AHEA and re-inspection and final testing.
It is submitted that Alcoa's approach to have recourse principally and critically in the first instance to contractors for FBTI’s
will remove a condition of employment, reduced income and threaten job security for Alcoa employees covered by the Agreement.
The AWU estimates that contracting out all aspects of FBTI’s would result in the loss to each employee covered by the Agreement
of between 10 and 20 supplementary shifts per year each of which is paid at the rate of $700 under the Agreement.
The AWU object to the arrangement entered into between Alcoa and the AMWU which allows all major stock tank inspections, with a few
exceptions, to be directly outsourced to contractors. The AWU was not a party to this arrangement and had no involvement in its formulation.
The AWU say that this arrangement has no applications to the employees covered by this Agreement.
In summary the AWU say the FBTI’s are routine maintenance work. Many of the steps involved in FBTI’s is work that can
be performed by employees covered by the Agreement. It would be a breach of the Agreement for Alcoa to wholly outsource all aspects
of FBTI’s to contractors rather than providing work where possible to Alcoa employees on the basis of supplementary shifts
pursuant to Clause 19 SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS of the Agreement. Outsourcing work usually done by employees covered
by the Agreement in this way would have the effect of reducing their income and job security.
Consequently the AWU submits that the Commission should decide that the answer to both questions posed for arbitration is yes.
Alcoa’s submissions
Alcoa submit that undertaking all the FBTI’s and repair work on the basis of supplementary shifts or on the basis of a supposed
requirement to offer all such work to employees covered by the Agreement before Alcoa can exercise the right to contract out such
work would be inefficient, involve unreliable work practices and cause Alcoa to incur additional costs through being required to
source the labour from other value adding activities at the refinery, having to provide supervision including on night shifts and
on weekends and having to provide the tooling and other requirements.
Alcoa’s position is that the inspection of flat-bottom tanks requires the use of a specialist contractor, using specialised
equipment and specialised skills. Therefore it is said the that it is not work which is covered by the Agreement.
It is also submitted that the repair work arising from FBTI’s is ‘project’ work, as opposed to usual ‘maintenance’
Alcoa agree that in undertaking FBTI’s the work involved in shutting down and isolating a flat bottom tank, the pumping of
a Flat Bottom Tank and tank descaling and mechanical servicing are all performed by members of the Alcoa workforce covered by the
Alco submit that the balance of the work of FBTI’s being the cleaning of flat bottom tanks the inspection for physical integrity
and wall and floor thickness testing is specialist work and as such is properly carried out by specialist contractors.
With respect to the repair work Alcoa submit that:
“Repair – A small number of large and/or complex flat bottom tanks are repaired by specialist contractors per the Respondent’s
agreement with the AMWU on the basis that the Respondent’s workforce is not available to perform the required work. The whole
of the job is contracted out in these circumstances in accordance with established custom and practice.
The vast majority are repaired by members of the Respondent’s workforce of the Pinjarra Refinery including involvement of employees
covered by the Certified Agreement.”
The current approach by Alcoa they say recognises that under the new regulations the FBTI’s are a significant net addition
to the workload of the Refinery. The work is administered as a project, with a separate budget (which required special approval from
the Pittsburgh Head Office of Alcoa’s global operations) and involves a cost of approximately $50 million for the Pinjarra
Refinery. This project involves the inspection of flat-bottom tanks being contracted to a specialist contractor (previously Metlab,
now Pearl Street) and involves a substantial increase in the amount of repair work required compared to the historical approach pre
If the Applicant claims that the Agreement should be construed as requiring Alcoa to offer
FBTI work to employees covered by the Agreement, whether on the basis of supplementary shifts or otherwise, before having any ability
to engage any contractor(s), such a claim would, if granted, result in a practice which would intolerably interfere with Alcoa’s
right to engage contractors. Alcoa is concerned that, if the Agreement were to be construed in this way, the potential outcome is
that the Agreement should never have been certified by the Commission and may be void. This it says would not be in the interests
of the Applicant, the Respondent or the employees covered by the Certified Agreement.
Alcoa submits it has a right to engage contractors and the Agreement does not prevent Alcoa from engaging contractors. Clause 18(d)(ii)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS PROCEDURES expressly provides for Alcoa to engage contractors. Further, clause 18 (d)(iii)(1) and (2) also provide
for Alcoa to engage contractors. Subclause 18(d) it is submitted also covers work of a different nature than clause 19.
Specifically Alcoa submits that the work within the FBTI project involves the installation, modification and maintenance of facilities
or plant and that some of the tasks associated with the FBTI project require skills (specifically inspection/testing) which are outside
of those available from members of the Alcoa workforce covered by the Agreement.
The only way in which all of the FBTI and repair work can be undertaken effectively is on the basis currently adopted by Alcoa. The
Agreement does not prevent Alcoa from contracting out work as it does.
The questions for determination should result in a decision that Alcoa has the right to outsource FBTI and repair work as it is doing
and has done for a considerable period of time, without any requirement to offer any such work to employees represented by the Applicant
who are covered by the Agreement.
The Agreement
The following clauses of the Agreement are relevant in this matter.
“4. AIMS OF AGREEMENT
(a) The parties recognise the need to build workplace arrangements that contribute toward the long-term viability of the enterprise
in a highly competitive international market place.
(b) The aims of the Agreement are to:
Maximise the efficiency and prosperity of the Operation for the benefit of employees, customers, shareholders and the community;
Produce alumina of the highest quality that fully meets customer requirements and specifications; and
Develop and maintain the most productive, co-operative and harmonious working relationships possible.
(c) The parties recognise that to fully achieve these objectives it is necessary to work jointly towards creating a working environment
that fosters a commitment to and common identity with the business and its performance. In this environment, emphasis will be placed
on team and personal development as well as commitment to the Company's quality policy and programs.
Within the context of team structures, employees must be motivated, empowered and have the skills, knowledge and competence to achieve
optimum control of the process and produce outputs of world class quality with appropriate support and encouragement from within
and outside the team.
(d) To this end the parties agree on the need:
(i) To organise work in a fully flexible manner within the site Operation. Employees will undertake any jobs or duties subject only
to the level of their skill, knowledge and competence as well as licensing requirements. There will be no demarcation of work between
the employees covered by the A.W.U. and other Alcoa work groups. It is the Parties' intention to jointly determine work arrangements
based only on what is safe, efficient, logical and legal (the S.E.L.L. principle). It is recognised that there are barriers between
Unions which must be addressed on a consultative basis, involving all relevant parties, prior to the introduction of any change;
(ii) To accept that manning levels are determined solely on the S.E.L.L. Principle and must be flexible and tailored to optimise process
and cost efficiencies. Using this principle, it is the parties intention to jointly determine maiming levels and to review those
levels as required;
To accept the use of contractors for peak work loads consistent with the S.E.L.L. Principle and the philosophy of consultation and
participation. Where contractors are regularly utilised to perform work normally carried out by Alcoa employees, a joint review of
the relevant manning levels will occur as soon as practicable;
That consistent with the philosophy of teamwork and consultation, to accept and co-operate with the introduction of new plant and
equipment as an essential requirement for the long term viability of the Operation and the achievement of the objectives outlined
in sub-clause (b) hereof. This will include acceptance of maiming adjustments and relocation within the Site Operation which may
occur as a result of the introduction of new plant and equipment;
(v) To remove all other restrictive work practices to ensure:
Total flexibility in the movement of employees across the Site Operation;
Flexibility in the number of people doing particular jobs and in the arrangement of work between employees in a particular work team
or operating area;
That subject to the limits of their skill and competence, employees undertake their whole job (as defined in Appendix A) even where
this requires working beyond or outside normal rostered hours. The intent is to work towards a reduction of additional hours such
that, in general, employees would work a standard 36 hour week. However, there will continue to be instances of unexpected process
disruptions and peaks in workload requiring additional hours and / or supplementary shifts. The Company undertakes to work with the
teams and employees to reduce the sources of these disruptions and to ensure an equitable distribution of additional hours and/or
supplementary shifts across the workforce; and
For all employees to constantly seek improvements in efficiency, quality, safety, housekeeping and the work environment in line with
best practice principles;
To use supplementary labour resources, as prescribed by clause 19 - Supplementary Labour and/or Contractors of this Agreement, including
use of contractors, to minimise turnaround time (e.g. in the event of major breakdowns and peak workloads).
(e) Consistent with this Clause, the parties agree that a high priority must be placed on the need to train, retrain and develop employees
so as to broaden and advance their skills, grow their potential and meet the needs of changing technology and customer requirements.
5. PRINCIPLES OF AGREEMENT
The following principles will govern the relationship between the parties in their joint management of the aims of this Agreement.
Alcoa World Alumina Australia, its employees and the Australian Workers' Union representing those employees (the parties), accept
and acknowledge the structures, responsibilities and accountabilities of each other.
The parties commit to creating a safer work place and a more viable and competitive enterprise.
It is the duty of all parties to promote the development of trust, understanding and motivation within the enterprise.
Honesty, mutual respect and a business like attitude and behaviour will prevail at all times.
Every employee will be treated fairly and equitably in an environment that fosters communication, involvement and teamwork.
A free exchange of relevant information and ideas will prevail at all times.
There will be opportunity for involvement by employees, through the appropriate structures, in all matters that affect them.
(h) Consistent with the objectives of this agreement, the parties agree that a strong focus on improvement is a key to the success
of the business and the job security of its employees. Key opportunities for improvement can be summarised as follows.
(i) Reducing downtime of process-critical equipment by jointly developing flexible
working arrangements that recognise the 24-hour nature of the Operation.
Jointly redesigning work to eliminate waste in how work is done on a day to day basis and making structural change to support the
new designs.
Use of supplementary labour resources, (as prescribed by clause 19 - Supplementary Labour and/or Contractors of this Agreement), including
use of contractors to minimise turnaround time in the event of major breakdowns and peak workloads.”
18. INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS PROCEDURES
(d) Utilisation of Contractors
(i) It is not the Company's intention to erode the job security, earnings or conditions of the employees covered by this Agreement
through the use of contract labour.
(ii) Contractors may be used to carry out work at Pinjarra Refinery as required.
(iii) Contractors may be used to:
Perform specialised work or services;
Install, modify and maintain facilities, plant and/or equipment;
Supplement the Company workforce to meet variable workloads or short-term shortages of labour.
(iv) The use of contractors pursuant to sub paragraphs (iii) (1) and (2) hereof will be conditional on the needs for skills, equipment
and services that are not available from the permanent workforce covered by this agreement.
(v) The Company acknowledges that contracts for work at the Pinjarra Refinery will contain a clause binding the Contractors to pay
the rates and observe the conditions of the relevant Award(s).
(vi) At the request of the Union, the Company will supply a list of Contractors carrying out work at the Pinjarra Refinery and other
relevant details as soon as is reasonably practicable.”
19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS
It is a principle goal of the parties to this Agreement to work together co-operatively to ensure that production and maintenance
work is completed on schedule. It is accepted and acknowledged that the achievement of this goal may require the timely and reasonable
utilisation of contractors, subject to the provisions as set out in this clause. However, it is not the Company's intention to erode
the job security, earnings or conditions of the employees covered by this Agreement through the use of contract labour.
Accordingly, the parties have agreed to the following as the fairest and most efficient means of meeting the objectives outlined in
sub clause (a) above.
(i) Planned Production and/or Maintenance Activities
(1) At first instance, where labour is required above existing manning levels for planned production and/or maintenance activities,
the Company shall use Alcoa employees as supplementary labour.
(2) The offering of such supplementary work is to be on the basis of a roster system. Employees will be given the option of nominating
themselves as being available to complete supplementary shifts on specific rostered days off.
(3) Employees who have nominated themselves as being available to complete supplementary shifts during the relevant period will be
given not less than 10 days notice of the availability of such work. A lesser period may be agreed between the parties, or between
an individual employee and the Company. On being contacted by the Company, an employee may decline the offer of such work without
giving any reason.
(4) Where the Alcoa supplementary production (in the case of production activities) or maintenance (in the case of maintenance activities)
labour cannot meet the work requirements set by the production and/or maintenance plan in relation to a planned production and/or
maintenance activity as outlined in subclause (3) above, a third party (contractor) will be engaged immediately to complete the balance
of the outstanding work. As such, employees who have accepted an offer of supplementary work in accordance with this clause may be
required to work in the same vicinity as contractors, though in such circumstances Alcoa employees will be subject to Alcoa supervision
and direction.
To assist in the smooth implementation of this approach the Company and the Union agree to undertake work sampling to ensure that
timeframes set for the completion of planned maintenance work are reasonable
(5) An employee who accepts supplementary work on notice as set out in this sub clause, but who is unavailable for any reason to
attend for such supplementary work should give notice to their supervisor as soon as possible.
In the circumstances described above and where other Alcoa production or mechanical maintenance employees have made themselves available
for supplementary work and can meet the required response times the Company will contact those employees in the circumstances referred
in this sub-clause.
Where Alcoa supplementary labour is unavailable they may be replaced without further consultation/notification.”
Consideration of the issues
I have in the earlier part of this decision dealing with jurisdiction already decided that much, but not all, of the work of FBTI’s
does fall within the job positions referred to in the Agreement. Separately it is self evident that the Agreement in a number of
areas recognizes that contractors can be used in various circumstances at the Pinjarra Refinery. For example Clause 4. AIMS OF AGREEMENT
mentions that there may be circumstances where contractors are regularly used to perform work normally carried out by Alcoa employees
and refers to Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS.
Clause 5. PRINCIPLES OF AGREEMENT at (h)(iii) also refers to Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS and deals with the
use of contractors to “..minimise turnaround time in the event of major breakdowns and peak workloads”.
The Agreement also sets out in Clause 18. INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS PROCEDURES sub-clause (d) - Utilisation of Contractors, the circumstances
in which contractors may be used to carry out work at the Pinjarra Refinery.
Alcoa have argued that the provisions of Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS are not applicable to the work of FBTI’s.
It is said that the work is project work and not planned production or maintenance. It is also said that it is capital works and
again therefore is not planned production or maintenance. In my view these submissions have no basis in the context of the Commission
considering the terms of the Agreement as I am currently required to do.
The Agreement does not define or identify any categories of work as “capital works” or “project work”. In
reality it seems from the evidence these phrases are merely labels that have been given to the FBTI work by Alcoa for management
purposes or for accounting purposes. Both are appropriate approaches from a management point of view but do not change the nature
of work to be done for the purposes of my considerations in this matter.
The fact that Alcoa has chosen to aggregate a large number of individual tank inspections does not change the nature of the work
to be done in any of those individual tank inspections. If part of the work to be done for a FBTI is work covered by a job position
in the Agreement then that part of the FBTI work is covered by the Agreement. Choosing to call this work a project or capital works
does not change the nature of the work the employees involved will be called upon to do and does not therefore affect whether the
Agreement applies to that work or not.
The AWU in this matter argue that the supplementary shift provisions which are contained in Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOR AND/OR
CONTRACTORS provide the answers to the questions in this application. This clause distinguishes between Planned Production and/or
Maintenance Activities and Breakdowns/Unplanned Production or Maintenance Activities. Having considered the evidence of all witnesses
I am of the view that the work of FBTI’s, to the extent that it is covered by the Agreement, clearly is not Breakdowns/Unplanned
Production or Maintenance Activities but rather falls within the category of work identified in this clause as Planned Production
and/or Maintenance Activities.
In making this finding I am conscious that the FBTI’s are not currently included in Alcoa’s Production and/or Maintenance
Plan. That fact of itself cannot in my view change the nature of the work to be done and somehow remove the work from the scope
of the Agreement and the requirements of this clause.
It is useful to analyse this clause carefully. The relevant parts of Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS are
(a) and (b)(i). The key elements of these provisions can be summarised as follows:
1. To ensure production and maintenance work is completed on schedule the reasonable utilisation of contractors is allowable.
2. At first instance, where labour is required above existing manning levels the company shall use Alcoa employees as supplementary
3. Where the Alcoa supplementary labour cannot meet the requirements of the production and/or maintenance plan a contractor will be
engaged immediately to complete the balance of the work.
4. Employees who have accepted an offer of supplementary work may be required to work in the same vicinity as contractors, though
they will be subject to Alcoa supervision and direction.
In the context of this dispute about that part of the work of FBTI’s that is covered by the Agreement it is clear that Clause
19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS does allow for the reasonable utilisation of contractors.
It is also clear that the work of FBTI’s requires labour above existing manning levels.
That being the case in the first instance Clause 19 requires that Alcoa shall use Alcoa employees as supplementary labour. But under
this clause there are further considerations.
Alcoa can make a Production and/or Maintenance Plan that includes that work involved in FBTI’s that is covered by the Agreement.
It is clear from the evidence that commonly Alcoa supplementary labour will not be sufficient to meet the requirements of a Production
and/or Maintenance Plan with FBTI work included. When this is the case Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS allows
Alcoa to immediately engage a contractor to complete the balance of the work.
The conclusions above are also made in the context of having found, as the AWU concede, that other parts of the FBTI’s fall
within the category of work identified in Clause 18. INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS PROCEDURES (d)(iii) as specialised work or services such
as installing, modifying and maintaining facilities, plant and/or equipment for which contractors may be used.
The application of Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS as required by the Agreement in this way is consistent with
Clause 4. AIMS OF THE AGREEMENT (d)(iii) which commits the parties:
“To accept the use of contractors for peak work loads consistent with the S.E.L.L. Principle and the philosophy of consultation
and participation.”
The proper application of the Agreement in this way does, incidentally, address the some of the S.E.L.L. objections to this application
raised by Alcoa.
It is appropriate at this point to comment on the arrangement entered into by Alcoa with the AMWU. This arrangement was made prior
to the inspection of any of the tanks that were covered by this arrangement. Obviously both Alcoa and the AMWU had each assessed
that the FBTI work that would need to be done on these tanks was beyond the capacity of the available AMWU labour. That assessment
may have, or may not have, been correct. Regardless I do agree with the concerns raised by the AWU that this arrangement, for that
part of the FBTI work that is covered by a job descriptions in this Agreement, effectively bypassed the terms of this Agreement in
particular the supplementary shift provisions set out in Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS.
Whilst it may be that following the inspections of the tanks in question it would have become clear that the Production and/or Maintenance
Plan for the repair of the tanks would be such that Alcoa supplementary labour would not be sufficient to meet the requirements of
that plan and so, quite properly, contractors could have been engaged to do the work in compliance with Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY
LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS. It was not correct however for Alcoa and the AMWU to prejudge this as occurred by making an arrangement
to contract all of this work out before those inspections.
In conclusion the questions to be determined are:
“(a) Whether the Certified Agreement and clause 19 thereof in particular obliges the Respondent to use employees covered by
the Certified Agreement as supplementary labour to carry out flat bottomed tank inspections; or
This question assumes an unconditional right of Alcoa employees to do the FBTI work. In doing so this question fails to recognise
that there is some work involved in FBTI’s that Alcoa employees do not have the skills to perform and therefore under the Agreement
this work will always be carried out by contractors. This question also does not recognise that sometimes the completion dates of
work in a Production and/or Maintenance Plan which incorporates FBTI work covered by the Agreement, will mean that using Alcoa employees
as supplementary labour will not meet the plans requirements. In both of these situations Alcoa under Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR
AND/OR CONTRACTORS is not obliged to use Alcoa employees to carry out the FBTI work. Consequently the answer to this question is
(b) Whether clause 19 and or the respondent’s obligations under the Certified Agreement not to erode the job security, earnings
and conditions of employees covered by the Agreement obliges recourse to the respondents employees in the first instance before having
recourse to contractors to inspect flat-bottomed tanks for the purpose of satisfying EPA approval requirements, or for any other
production, maintenance and breakdown purpose in relation to flat bottomed tanks?”
Clause 19. SUPPLEMENTARY LABOUR AND/OR CONTRACTORS of the agreement does oblige Alcoa to have recourse to Alcoa employees in the first
instance for FBTI work but this general obligation is subject to and conditional upon the specific exceptions within the clause as
I have explained above in the answer to question (a). On this basis the answer to this question is - Yes.
BY THE COMMISSION:
COMMISSIONER
Appearances
of Heelan & Co for Alcoa World Alumina Australia.
of Counsel instructed by Chapmans Lawyers for The Australian Workers' Union.
Hearing details:
Perth: August 11, 12, 13, 14
CFMEU v AIRC
(Private Arbitration Case)
[2001] HCA 16
(2001) 203 CLR 645
, 3 September 2001 at paragraph [57]
Witness Statement para 7 to 14, 29 to 32
PN 2142, 2152
Witness Statement Bloome Para 3 and Transcript Pn 2588 2589
Witness Statement Para 14 19
Witness Statement Jackaman para 6
Witness Statement Herrick para 10
Witness Statement Jackaman. paragraph 5 witness statement Pascoe paragraph 17
Respondents Outline of Submissions at 4.2.3
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code A, PR991288>
No downloadable files available