Finance Sector Union of Australia - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Banking, Finance, Insurance Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 987 (24 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
Finance Sector Union of Australia
(AM2009/21)
BANKING, FINANCE, INSURANCE AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT LAWLER
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 24 DECEMBER 2009
This decision concerns an application by the Finance Sector Union of Australia (FSU) to vary the
Banking, Finance and Insurance Award 2010
(the modern award) by removing cl.22.2–Overtime and penalty rates–Call Centres. Call centres are a feature of the banking,
finance and insurance industries and have assumed growing significance over the years. In some cases a banking, finance or insurance
business operates the call centre itself. In some cases it contracts out that function to a specialist service provider.
In our decision of 3 April 2009 we said the following in relation to the provisions sought to be now removed:
Special provisions have been included dealing with hours of work and penalties for employees in call centres. These provisions mirror
the provisions in the
Contract Call Centres Award 2010
(CCC Modern Award). We accept the need for flexibilities in this type of work whether work is performed under this award or the CCC
Modern Award.
By inserting such provisions we had sought to create a level playing field for call centre work. As the contract call centre award
had been recently developed specifically to suit the needs of call centres we considered that they were an appropriate safety net
for all call centres whether operated by a business or contracted out to a specialist service provider.
The application is expressly made as a result of a variation made to the consolidated request on 26 August 2009. The variation included
the following provision:
“Hours of work and penalty provisions – work that involves receiving calls, using call centre technology and entering
and retrieving data
52. Where a modern award applies to employees primarily performing the work of receiving calls, using call centre technology and entering
and retrieving data, the Commission should establish working hours and penalty rates arrangements that are substantially based upon
those that presently apply to those employees within the industry in which they work.”
The FSU submits that call centre specific provisions were not a feature of pre-reform awards and Notional Agreements Preserving State
Awards (NAPSAs) in the banking, finance and insurance industry and that the provisions contained in the modern award were imported
Contract Call Centres Award 2010
(CCC Modern Award) The FSU submits therefore that the provisions are inconsistent with the amended request.
Submissions opposing the application were filed by QBE and in a joint decision by ANZ Banking Group Limited, Commonwealth Bank of
Australia, Bank of Western Australia Limited, National Australia Bank Limited and Westpac Banking Corporation Limited (the Banks).
A brief submission was also filed by the AiGroup.
QBE supported the retention of the provision. It said:
“In carrying out the Award Modernisation process, the Full Bench has created an Award for the financial services industry that
is economically sustainable, promotes flexible work practices and the efficient and productive performance of work, as required by
the Objects of the Request. QBE’s need to meet changing customer expectations has seen greater focus on extended hours and
the current Award greatly assists in meeting such expectations.
AiGroup’s submission focused on contract call centres and opposed the deletion of the exclusion of those covered for the CCC
Modern Award in cl.4.3(c) of the modern award. No such variation was sought by the FSU.
The Banks submitted that if the FSU application was granted, further variations would be required to provide clarification in respect
of the interaction between shiftwork and hours of work provisions. The FSU opposed a number of the variations proposed by the banks,
however did not oppose the inclusion of the words “… on Monday to Friday and on Saturday between 8.00 am and 12 noon”
at the end of cl.21.8(b).
In our view the amendment to the consolidated request has a clear intent and reflects a different approach to that adopted by the
Commission in making the relevant provisions. The variation sought by the FSU is consistent with the amended request. We have therefore
decided to grant the application. We do not believe that a case has been made out for changes
to shift work provisions. We will however make the proposed variation agreed between the Banks and the FSU. An order will be issued
accordingly.
BY THE COMMISSION:
[2009] AIRCFB 345
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code A, PR992143>
No downloadable files available