1401053 [2015] MRTA 776 (17 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 776
(17 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
DD Tasty Pty Ltd
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
BCC2013/415779
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Miriam Holmes
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to approve the
nomination.
Statement made on 17 June 2015 at 11:09am
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration on 8 January 2014 to refuse to
approve the applicant’s
nomination under
Migration Act 1958
(the Act) and r.2.72
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations).
applicant, DD Tasty Pty Ltd, applied for approval on 14 March 2013 for the
nominated occupation of Café or Restaurant Manager
(ANSCO 141111). A
nomination of an occupation for a Subclass 457 visa is made under s.140GB of the
Act and r.2.73 of the Regulations.
Regulations 2.72(3)
to (12) prescribe the
criteria that must be satisfied for the Minister to approve a nomination by a
person. These criteria are extracted
in the attachment to this decision. For
visa applications made from 23 November 2013, additional criteria are specified
in s.140GBA.
delegate decided not to approve the nomination on the basis that the applicant
did not satisfy r.2.72(10)(aa) because the delegate
was not satisfied that the
nominated position was a nominated occupation specified by the Minister in the
relevant instrument. The
delegate reached the conclusion that the nominated
position was a Café or Restaurant Manager but was for an excluded
occupation,
being a position in Fast Food or Takeaway food service.
He Ling Jiang, a director of the applicant, appeared before the Tribunal on 27
November 2014 to give evidence and present arguments.
The Tribunal also
received oral evidence from Miss Nguyen. The Tribunal had available to it the
department’s nomination application
file and the review applicant’s
Tribunal file containing information provided by the applicant during the review
process, including
the delegates decision record and information received from
the applicant after the hearing.
applicant was represented in relation to the review by its registered migration
the following reasons, the Tribunal has decided to affirm the decision under
review to refuse the nomination.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
issue in the present case is whether the applicant meets the criteria for
approval of the nomination. The Tribunal must approve
the nomination if the
applicable requirements in r.2.72 and, for nomination applications made from 23
November 2013, s.140GBA have
been met: s.140GB(2).
The nomination must comply with the prescribed process
requires that the applicant has made the nomination in accordance with
the process set out in r.2.73.
Tribunal finds based on the email dated 24 April 2013 from the
Department’s and the department’s electronic databases
April 2013 the applicant was approved as a standard business sponsor and this
approval is valid until 24 April 2016.
In the nomination application form the
applicant nominated the occupation of Café or Restaurant Manager (ANZSCO
141111) which
it proposed to fill with a named nominee. The Tribunal is
therefore satisfied that the applicant has nominated an occupation under
s.140GB(10(b), as set out in r.2.73(1A)(a).
Tribunal finds based on the nomination application form the applicant identified
the proposed nominee, being Miss Huyhn My Hang
Nguyen, who will work in the
nominated position. The Tribunal finds that r.2.73(1A)(b) is met.
Tribunal is further satisfied that the application was made on the approved form
and that the prescribed fee that was applicable
at the time was paid, as
evidenced by the form and ISCE records.
Subregulation
2.73(4A) requires that, if the nomination was made after 1 July 2010 by a
standard business sponsor, the applicant must
provide, as part of the
nomination, the information mentioned in subregulations 2.72(5) and (8A), and
the certification mentioned
in r.2.72(10)(e). Subregulation 2.72(5) requires
the applicant to have identified in the nomination the proposed applicant for a
subclass 457 visa who will work in the nominated occupation, while r.2.72(8A)
requires that the applicant provided in the nomination
a six digit ANZSCO code
for the nominated occupation and the location at which it is to be carried out.
Subregulation r.2.72(10)(e)
requires standard business sponsors to have
certified as part of the nomination that the tasks of the position include a
significant
majority of the tasks of the nominated occupation listed in ANZSCO,
that the nominated occupation is a position with a business or
associated entity
of the applicant, and that the qualifications and experience of the proposed
applicant for the visa, identified
in relation to the nominated occupation, are
commensurate with the qualifications and experience specified for the occupation
applicants lodged their application after 1 July 2010 and thus must meet the
above. As noted above, the Tribunal finds that the
applicant nominated Miss
Nguyen for the nominated position of Café or Restaurant Manager in its
nomination, and that occupation
has an ANZSCO code of 141111. The applicant
stated that the nominated position would be located in Taylors Lakes, Victoria
in Australia.
The Tribunal further finds that the applicant certified in the
nomination that the duties of the nominated position included a significant
majority of the tasks of the nominated occupation as listed in the ANZSCO
dictionary, and that the qualifications and experience
of the identified nominee
were commensurate with the qualifications and experience specified for the
occupation in the ASCO dictionary.
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the
applicant meets r.2.72(4A).
the above reasons, the Tribunal finds that the requirements of r.2.72(3) are
Nominator is a standard business sponsor or party to a work agreement
requires that the person making a nomination is either a standard
business sponsor or a party to a work agreement other than a Minister.
Tribunal finds based on the email dated 24 April 2013 from the
Department’s and the department’s electronic databases
April 2013 the applicants were approved as a standard business sponsor and this
approval is valid until 24 April 2016.
For these reasons the requirements of
r.2.72(4) are met.
Identification of the nominee
requires that the applicant identify in the nomination the visa holder,
or the applicant or proposed applicant for the visa, who
will work in the
nominated occupation.
the reasons set out above the Tribunal is satisfied this criterion is met.
these reasons the requirements of r.2.72(5) are met.
Requirements for existing Subclass 457 visa holders
criteria for approval of a nomination contain several requirements if a Subclass
457 visa holder is identified as the person to
work in the nominated position.
In these cases:
the applicant
must list on the nomination each person granted a Subclass 457 visa as a family
member of the nominee, unless it is
reasonable in the circumstances not to do
so: r.2.72(6)(a) and r.2.72(7);
the Subclass 457
visa holder must demonstrate that he or she has the skills necessary to perform
the occupation in the manner specified
if required to do so:
r.2.72(6)(b);
the applicant
must provide a written undertaking if the existing Subclass 457 visa was granted
after the sponsor provided an undertaking
relating to certain health
requirements: r.2.72(7A); and
if the Subclass
457 visa holder met cl.457.223(6), he or she must either: continue to meet
cl.457.223(6); or be an exempt applicant
under cl.457.223(4); or have achieved
in a single attempt a test score specified in the relevant instrument in the
specified time;
or, in certain cases, have proficiency of at least the standard
required in order to hold a mandatory licence, registration or membership
perform the nominated occupation: r.2.72(10)(g).
the nominee is not the holder of a Subclass 457 visa, the requirements of
r.2.72(6), (7A) and (10)(g) do not apply.
these reasons the requirements of r.2.72(10)(g) are met.
Information about the nominated occupation
requires the applicant to provide the following information as part of
the nomination:
the name of the
occupation and the corresponding 6-digit ANZSCO code if there is one;
if there is no
such code, and the applicant is a standard business sponsor, the name of the
occupation and the corresponding 6-digit
code as specified in the relevant
instrument; or if the applicant is a party to a work agreement the name of the
occupation and
the corresponding 6-digit code (if any) as specified in the work
agreement; and
the location(s)
at which the nominated occupation is to be carried out.
the reasons set out above the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicants provided
this information as part of the nomination and
is therefore satisfied that the
requirements in r.2.72(8A) are met.
For these reasons the requirements of r.2.72(8A) are met.
No adverse information known to Immigration
requires that either: there is no adverse information known to
Immigration about the applicant or a person associated with the applicant;
is reasonable to disregard such information. For these purposes, ‘adverse
information’ and ‘associated with’
have the meaning given in
r.2.57(2) and (3).
reviewed the Department’s databases, the Tribunal is satisfied there is no
evidence of adverse information of the type
described in r.2.75(3) known to the
Department about either the applicant or an ‘associated person’.
Based on the evidence
before it the Tribunal is satisfied that the requirements
of r.2.72(9) are met.
Specified occupation
2.72(10)(aa) as it applies in this case, requires that the nominated occupation
and its 6-digit code correspond to an occupation
and 6-digit code specified in
instrument IMMI
. In certain
circumstances this instrument may also require the nomination of an occupation
to be supported in writing to the Minister,
by a specified organisation before
the nomination can be approved: r.2.72(10)(b).
central issue in dispute in this case is whether the nominated occupation
corresponds to an occupation in the relevant instrument
14/048. In the
nomination application the nominated occupation was Restaurant Manager, ANZSCO
141111 Café or Restaurant Manager.
In the relevant Instrument in Schedule
2 Café or Restaurant Manager*** (ANZSCO 141111) is listed. However at the
instrument 14/048 there is a notation as follows;
indicates that for a nomination or visa application for a Subclass 457 visa or a
Subclass 186 visa, the occupation excludes
positions in Fast Food or Takeaway
Food Service
.” In this case the delegate formed the view that the
nominated position in The Coffee Club was an occupation in a business
under the category of Fast Food or Fast Casual Dining Service and was therefore
excluded from the category of Café
or Restaurant Manager as a position
specifically excluded under the relevant instrument.
The delegate had regard to the Departmental policy set out in PAM 3. The
Tribunal observes that whilst it may be guided by policy
it is not bound to
have held that the PAM3 guidelines constitute no more than an administrative
advisory guide to decision makers in relation
to the application of the Act and
Regulations and that they are incapable of being elevated into legally necessary
or relevant considerations.
The Tribunal notes there is judicial authority to
the effect that the policy guidelines in PAM3 cannot go beyond the wording of
legislation, even where they are favourable to an
PAM 3 states as follows:
Additionally, the occupations of:
Restaurant Manager (ANZSCO 141111)
Chef (ANZSCO
Cook (ANZSCO
in the legislative instrument specifically exclude
positions nominated in fast food or takeaway food service businesses for the
of the 457 program. Therefore, officers must consider whether
nominations in the occupations of Café or Restaurant Manager,
Cook have been made by a sponsor who provides fast food or takeaway food
31.4 Fast food or takeaway food service
If the sponsoring business predominantly provides
takeaway or fast food services in a small retail establishment, food court or
casual dining outlet,
regulation 2.72(10)(aa)
cannot be satisfied.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) distinguishes between
'Cafes and restaurants' and 'Takeaway food services (fast food)' under
Australian and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification (ANZSIC).
Cafes and restaurants
Cafes and restaurants are mainly engaged in
providing food and beverage serving services for consumption on the premises.
generally order and are served while seated (that is, waiter/waitress
service) and pay after eating.
Takeaway food service outlets, fast food outlets and fast casual dining
Takeaway food service outlets mainly engage in
providing food services ready to be taken away for immediate consumption.
order or select items and pay before eating. Items are usually
provided in takeaway containers or packaging. Food is either consumed
premises in limited seating facilities or taken away by the customer or
delivered. The ABS also includes businesses mainly
engaged in supplying food
services in food halls and food courts within this category.
Fast food outlets have relatively low cost, fixed menus with an emphasis
on speedy service. Table service is not provided and customers
consume their
meals directly from the disposable containers it was served in.
Fast casual dining outlets are similar to fast food outlets except the
quality and prices of the menu and premises may be somewhat
higher. Table
service before and during consumption of the meal is not usually a feature, and
customers typically place their food
orders at a counter. For the purposes of
the 457 program, fast casual dining outlets are considered to be fast food
businesses.
Typically, these outlets:
operate in chains or as franchises
are heavily
offer limited
offer speed,
convenience, and familiarity to diners who may eat in the outlet or take their
generally employ qualified chefs
prepare food
according to a standardised format for distribution from a central
serve food in
a packaged form (although some outlets may provide cutlery and crockery for
customers dining in the establishment)
customers to pay before eating and
do not offer
table service before or during consumption of the meal.
applicant submits that The Coffee Club is not a Fast Food or Takeaway Food
Service and the nominated position is not an occupation
in a Fast Food or
Takeaway Food Service. Therefore the applicant submits that the position is
within the list of nominated occupations
in the relevant instrument.
applicant is owned and operated by Mr Jiang and his wife. The applicant company
entered a franchise agreement with the The Coffee
Club in 2011and entered
another Franchise agreement in 2014 and has operated as a The Coffee Club
franchise since May 2011. The applicant
was registered as a company and for GST
in May 2011. The applicant recently entered a new franchise agreement with the
for a 2 year period. The hearing was adjourned for Mr Jiang to
provide a copy of the latest franchise agreement and the operational
guidelines.
The applicant operates the franchise outlet at the Watergardens shopping centre
in the western suburbs of Melbourne.
The applicant has a 2 year lease at the
shopping centre. The outlet operates between 7am and 6pm Monday to Wednesday and
and Sunday and between 7am and 9pm on Thursdays and Fridays.
Jiang gave evidence as follows. There are 20 staff employed by the applicant at
the Watergardens site. He stated that there are
3 cooks and a duty manager, 2
supervisors and the rest are serving staff.
the franchise agreement there are three menus – a café menu, a
before 5pm restaurant menu and after 5pm restaurant
menu. These menus are
available on The Coffee Club website. Initially Mr Jiang gave evidence that at
the Watergardens outlet they
use the café menu only set by head office
and that they did not offer the restaurant menus ( the before 5pm menu and the
5pm menu) but later in evidence he stated that they offered all 3 menus.
He stated that they offer the night menu on Thursday and
Fridays and then said
they also offer it after 5pm on other days. After considering Mr Jiang’s
evidence and the way it unfolded,
the Tribunal is not satisfied that The Coffee
Club at Watergardens serves all three menus but is satisfied that it offers
the café menu (as determined by the Franchisor). The Tribunal
makes this finding taking into account Mr Jiang’s initial
evidence that
only the café menu was used at the premises and that the only menu
provided to the Department during the nomination
application process was the
café menu. The Tribunal notes that the only menu provided by Mr Jiang
during the nomination application
process was the café menu – no
other menu or other information regarding the chef’s choices were
provided. This
café menu had a limited range of products – with
mostly breakfast items, “All day favourites” – 7
including nachos and potatoes wedges as 2 items and sandwich and salad options,
with a limited rage of sweet products.
The Watergardens franchise outlet also offers food items described as
“chef’s choices” – approximately 10
items are on this
additional list of food items available to customers. The “chef’s
choices” are discussed between
Mr Jiang, Miss Nguyen and the chef and then
agreed upon and then Mr Jiang obtains the approval of the head office of the
to the proposed ‘chef’s choices’ and the proposed
purchase price for the food items. The discussion for the chef’s
includes feedback from customers about preferred products they wish to consume.
The prices for all the standard menu items
are set out by head office. Mr Jiang
stated that they must use The Coffee Club menu but they have chef’s
choices on Thursday
and Fridays. After the hearing the applicant provided on 24
April 2015 the latest Chef’s choice menu – although the document
attached was headed “Café Dinner Menu” and the Tribunal notes
that the outlet is only open after 6 pm on 2 evenings
a week. There were 8 food
options on this additional menu, 4 of which were main meals.
the advertising for the Coffee Club outlets is managed by the head office.
Jiang stated that the food is not prepared offsite but is prepared onsite by the
chefs. Mr Jiang stated that 40% of the food and
beverage items are supplied by
head office from a centralised supply service. The food and beverage items
provided by the head office
include coffee beans, milk, meat, fish chips and
breads. He stated the remaining 60%, being the vegetables, fruit and snacks Mr
Jiang sourced and purchased.
site of the coffee club is located at one of the entrances to the shopping
centre and is not located in the centralised food court
area which is located in
another part of the Watergardens shopping centre. The store is in the vicinity
of other food stores, such
as Lenard’s chicken, Baker’s Delight, a
cake shop, 2 large supermarkets and 2 take away coffee stores. The 2 take away
coffee sites are located inside the shopping centre and in the large internal
space in front of one of the large supermarkets.
Jiang gave evidence that the customers at his Coffee Club in Watergardens are
generally given a menu and he escorts them to a table
and then gives them an
opportunity to review the menu and then he will take water to the table and
offer to take their order. If
a customer takes a long time, then Mr Jiang may
offer a suggestion for food. Mr Jiang takes the order in writing and then enters
it into the computer. When customers finish their meal they come to the counter
to pay. Sometimes the staff will take a mobile eftpos
machine to the table for
the customer to pay or take money from the customer at the table. Mr Jiang
stated that only a little bit
of business is where the customer orders at the
counter and pays and then sits at a table. The Tribunal noted that Mr
evidence was different to the information set out in the written
submission lodged with the department wherein it states that
Customers at the Coffee Club Watergardens do order and pay at a front
counter initially and this is the purely a standard process
of the Coffee Club
Franchise. At this café, after an order is taken and customers take seat,
food is prepared and then served
to customers at their tables. Once consumption
commences they are asked if they are happy with their meals & if they would
anything further and this continues (table services) until customers have
consumed all that they wish to whilst in the café
and then final bills
are supplied to the customer
.” The Tribunal asked Mr Jiang to comment
on the written submission which was different to his oral evidence. Mr Jiang
that if it is a regular customer then the customer will go to the
counter but if it is a new customer then I will take them to a
table and provide
very good service. Mr Jiang suggested the Tribunal contact head office who will
report that Mr Jiang’s outlet
gives the best service. He stated that he
would then make suggestions to the customer and take the food order to the table
do provide table service. Mr Jiang stated that he does take customers
to tables because he is the owner and on the 3 -4 days a week
he is off then the
nominee undertakes this role. Mr Jiang confirmed that the Coffee Club operated
within the franchises national
operational guidelines and the guidelines state
that person should order and pay at the counter and then taken to a table. But
Jiang stated that the Watergardens shop was big and was run at the standard
of a restaurant and they take customers to sit down at
a table and then order.
The Tribunal notes that after the hearing in a letter to the Tribunal Mr Jiang
notes that the customers at
The Coffee Club Watergardens do order and pay at the
front counter initially because this is purely a standard process of The Coffee
Club franchise, although he notes orders are also taken at tables if customers
need menu advice and then final bills are supplied
at the end ( presumably for
any additional items). After the orders have been placed the food and beverages
are prepared and taken
to the customers at the tables.
Jiang stated that 10% of the business at the Watergardens outlet is for take
away coffees and that between 1- 5% of the business
is for take away food. He
stated that the takeaway proportion of the business was between11% and 15%. In
relation to take away
orders, the customer comes in and places an order whether
it be for coffee or food and then the food or coffee is prepared and given
the customer - there is no food already prepared for takeaway.
Tribunal finds that, in accordance with the Franchise’s operating
standards customers initially order their food or beverage
orders at a counter,
this includes both takeaway customers and dine in customers. The Tribunal also
that the ordered food and beverages
are then delivered to the customer –
either near the front counter it if is a takeaway order or to a table (if it is
in customer). The Tribunal finds that the staff clear tables and may give
advice regarding menu options to customers seated at tables.
Jiang stated that there are 3 chefs and there is usually one on duty at anytime,
save for weekends when there are 2 chefs on duty
together. He stated that the
food supplies from the centralised franchise system were raw food and the chefs
prepared and cooked
the meals, there were no meals already prepared and/or
cooked. The food is served on China plates with cutlery and glassware.
Jiang stated that were no Coffee Club franchise guidelines regarding the
timeliness of service and that when “mystery shoppers”
came to the
store for the purpose of quality assurance by the franchisor they did not report
on the timeliness of the delivery of
food products or service. He stated that
the feedback he received from the head office (based on the reports from the
mystery shoppers)
was about the quality and presentation of food, the quality of
coffee and the quality of service, including how quickly they take
table, whether they ask if customers would like anything else, greeting
customers etc.
the hearing the applicant provided to the Tribunal a copy of the
“Disclosure Document” and the undated Franchise
Agreement (2014)
between the applicant and the Coffee Club Franchising Company Pty Ltd. The
Tribunal reviewed the documents and noted
some of the key features of the
arrangements, amongst others, between the franchisor and franchisee are as
The franchisee
is obliged to supply all food and beverages required by the franchisor from the
current food and beverage menu approved
by the franchisor for the
franchisee’s business;
The franchisee
is obliged to adopt, introduce and serve any new food or beverages the
franchisor may require as soon as possible after
the franchisor introduces any
new food or beverage item to be served as part of any current food and beverage
The franchisee
is obliged to sell only food and beverages the franchisor has approved;
The franchisee
is obliged to make sure all chef’s choices of food or beverages are
appropriate and meet with the franchisor’s
The franchisee
is obliged to, except for pre-prepared or pre-cooked food or beverages, make and
prepare fresh any food or beverages
that form part of the approved food and
beverage menus that the franchisor requires to be prepared in the store for sale
business and make sure that food and beverages are generally as fresh
as possible;
The franchisee
is obliged to follow the food and beverage recipes and menus the franchisors
reasonably states;
The franchisee
is obliged to allow for inspections of the business by the franchisor and
mystery shoppers and comply with any requisitions
and recommendations issued by
the franchisor arising out of inspections;
The franchisee
must not (without the consent of the franchisor) supply food or goods that are
not approved in the manuals, do not
meet the system or standards, or make
materials changes to the inside and outside of the store, its décor or
get up or sell,
or distribute any marketing materials that have not been
The franchisee
and employees must comply with the mandated standards in the franchisor’s
manuals including - The Coffee Club
Operations Manual, The Coffee Club Good Food
Manual, The Coffee Club People Manual (amongst others).These manuals form part
Franchise agreement. The Tribunal notes that applicant did not provide
the Tribunal with a copy of these manuals which form part
of the Agreement.
The employees
are required to wear the uniforms and clothing approved by the franchisor;
The site of the
store must be approved by the franchisor and strict rules regarding the fitout
and who undertakes any store fitout
form part of the Franchise Agreement.
The franchisee
must provide dine in, take away and counter service in line with the systems
standards or as reasonably required the
franchisor. The franchisee must use all
ingredients, flavourings, garnishments, doughs, spices, food or beverages,
cooking materials,
containers, packaging materials, paper and plastic goods,
equipment, menus, forms, cleaning and sanitation materials and other supplies
that are approved by the franchisor or that comply with the systems standards
(see clause 20). The standards include – specifications,
instruction
rules, policies and guidelines for – quality, taste, portion controls in
the preparation, making, cooking, packaging
and sale of either food or
beverages, ingredients supplies and materials used to prepare, make, cook, pack,
merchandise and seel
either or both food or beverages, the supply of coffee
shop, café or restaurant services including dine in, counter service,
table service or takeaway services, the opening hours, the getting, taking
preparing and delivering orders for either food or beverages,
approved menus, the supply of approved food or beverages, training, marketing,
uniforms etc. (see definition of standards
in the franchise agreement);
franchise term the franchise must, if asked in writing, buy exclusively from the
franchisor certain goods or services to
be used in or sold from the business.
Although the franchisee need not buy common food or beverage ingredients, items
that do not
relate to the system, image or trade marks and are readily
available. During the agreement the franchisor will tell the franchisee
suppliers of food, beverages, good or services they recommend or have approved.
restrictions regarding the advertising and marketing and use of the various
trademarks for the business as set out in the
franchise agreement.
Tribunal considered the matters above. Firstly the Tribunal notes that the
relevant instrument refers to excluding positions in
“fast Food or
Takeaway Food Service”. The policy then sets out various matters to
describe what features are indicative
of a Fast Food or Takeaway Food
Service”. Secondly, the policy also states that for the purposes of the
457 program
fast casual dining outlets are considered to be fast food
businesses.
The features of a casual dining outlet are also described in the
policy. As noted above the Tribunal is not bound by policy but
will take this
into account in assessing the merits of a particular case.
this case the Tribunal concluded that the nominated position was a position in
the “Fast Food or Takeaway Food Service.”
There are a number of
features that indicate that the Watergardens outlet is a fast food outlet. The
business is part of a large
franchise operation with strict franchise rules
covering the operation of the business, a notable proportion of the food
come from the centralised franchise system and the business must buy
exclusively from the franchisor if required by the Franchisor,
the pricing of
standard items is approved by the franchisor, the marketing is controlled by the
franchisor, the menu is limited and
the menus are determined by the franchisor
with only a small proportion being the subject of local input which in any event
be approved by the franchisor, a proportion of the business involves take
away sales and the operating standards state that the
sales of food and
beverage items occurs at a front counter. The nature of the food as set out in
the café menu is mostly food
that can be served relatively quickly, such
as omelettes, bircher muesli, burgers, pancakes, sandwiches and salads. Some of
is pre-packaged and pre-cooked – as noted in the Franchise
Agreement. The outlet is based in a shopping centre and has limited
hours. The franchise agreement gives the franchisee limited scope to make any
decisions regarding the operation with strict
approval specifications forming
part of the agreement as set out in the various manuals.
Tribunal did consider – that a proportion of the food and beverage service
is not take away but involves customers eating
and drinking on the premises;
whilst there are restricted menus the applicant does offer 8 -10 alternative
“chef’s choices”,
however this is only a small proportion of
the menu; the outlet is not operated in or near the food court but in a
separate section
of the shopping centre with seating for 100 customers in the
outlet and has external access – however it operates during shopping
centre trading hours; there is table service for a proportion of the customers
in taking additional food and beverage orders –
delivering food and
beverages and removing used plates and cutlery- although the Tribunal has
reservations that the table service
is to the extent described by Mr Jiang and
without the relevant Franchisor manuals it is not clear whether the proportion
service stated by Mr Jiang is in accordance with the Franchisor
specifications; there are chefs on duty and the food items are prepared
by chefs; a significant proportion of the food is sourced by Mr Jiang and not
from the centralised franchise system.
on balance, after reviewing the franchise agreement and the high level of
control by the franchisor imposed on the business
regarding the day to day
operations, and the take away aspect of the business, the limited menus, the
nature of the food available
and the limited opening hours, the marketing
arrangements, the supplier arrangements and the location of the business in a
centre, the Tribunal concluded that the Coffee Club Watergardens is a
fast food business. The Tribunal finds that that the nominated
position in The
Coffee Club is an occupation in a business that falls under the category of Fast
Food or Fast Casual Dining Service
and was therefore excluded from the category
of Café or Restaurant Manager under the relevant instrument.
Tribunal is not satisfied that the nominated occupation and its corresponding
6-digit code correspond to an occupation to an occupation
and its corresponding
6-digit code specified by the Minister in an instrument in writing for this
paragraph. For the reasons above
the Tribunal is not satisfied that the
requirements of r.2.72(10)(aa) are met.
Tribunal finds that r.2.72(10)(a) is not applicable as the application was
lodged after 1 July 2010.
Tribunal finds that the instrument does not require that the nomination be
supported in writing by a specified organisation. For
these reasons the
requirements of r.2.72(10)(b) are met.
Position must be genuine
2.72(10)(f)
requires that the position associated with the nominated occupation
is genuine.
Jiang confirmed that the position description provided to the Tribunal on 19
November 2014 is the position description for the
nominated Café or
Restaurant Manager role at the Watergardens outlet. He stated that the position
description is a document
prepared by the Coffee Club Head office and is a
national document. Mr Jiang stated that the position description provided on 19
November accurately describes the role of and duties of the nominated position
and he did not identify any further duties. The Tribunal
reviewed the position
description and notes that it is headed “”Shift Supervisor/Duty
Manager”, that the applicable
Award is the Restaurant Industry Award 2010
although the Award classification that is described at the top of the document
& Beverage Attendant Grade 4” and that the person
reports to the Store Manager/Duty Manager and “franchisee name
Restaurant Industry Award states that the food and beverage attendant grade 4
(tradesperson) and describes the duties in Schedule
and beverage attendant grade 4 (tradesperson)
means an employee who has the
appropriate level of training and who carries out specialised skilled duties in
a fine dining room or
restaurant.”
Tribunal notes that the Award also has another classification being a Food and
Beverage Supervisor and it duties are described
as follows -
B.2.5 Food and
beverage supervisor
means an employee who has the appropriate level of
training including a supervisory course and who has the responsibility for
supervision,
training and co-ordination of food and beverage staff, or stock
control for a bar or series of bars.
Tribunal also had the contract of employment for the nominee. Mr Jiang stated
that the employment contract is also a standard
document prepared by the
franchisor head office. The Tribunal notes however that in the contract of
employment the position is described
as a Level 6 position under the Award. The
Award at clause 20 only lists a Cook Grade 5 (tradesperson) as a Level 6. In
B the classification is described as
“B.3.8 Cook grade 5 (tradesperson)
chef de partie or equivalent who has completed an apprenticeship or has passed
the appropriate trade test or who has the appropriate
level of training in
cooking, butchering or pastry cooking and who performs any of the following:
general and specialised duties including supervision or training
of other kitchen staff;
ordering and stock control; and
solely responsible for other cooks and other kitchen employees in
a single kitchen establishment.”
ABS sets out job descriptions for various occupations. In relation to
Café or Restaurant Manager it starts by noting that
and Restaurant Managers organise and control the operations of cafes,
restaurants and related establishments to
provide dining and catering
services.” The ABS then lists a range of tasks. In relation to retail
supervisor the ABS introduction
states that the retails supervisors
“supervise and coordinate the activities of retail sales”. It also
lists a range
of tasks, including ensuring that customers receive prompt service
and quality goods and services, responding to inquiries and complaints
goods and services, inventory, ensuring safety and security procedures are
position description provided by the applicant refers to running the roster and
assisting in the training and supervising of staff,
record sales and banking
assisting in ordering stock and assisting the store manager in controlling
expenditures and maintaining
stock control, supervision and training of staff,
perform administrative duties, on call for emergencies and incidental/additional
cleaning and duties of a lower food and beverage classification. The position
description does not refer to planning menus, planning
and organising events,
the pricing of goods, ensuring the compliance with health regulations as set out
in the duties description
by the ABS for a café and restaurant manager.
The Tribunal is mindful that as a franchise outlet there are operational
issued by the franchisor as set out in the various Manuals described
above which must be adhered to and these manuals set out in
detail various
aspects regarding the management and operation of the outlet.
Nguyen stated in evidence that her responsibilities were to organise the store
when Mr Jiang was not there at the store and to
make sure things go smoothly.
Miss Nguyen stated that she is required to:
Oversee the food
and beverage service, including food quality and ensure that the customers are
satisfied with the service;
The staff do a
sufficient stock from day to day to run the business
She is the first
person staff must contact if there is a problem or emergency
Tribunal asked if there were any other core duties and she stated no.
Nguyen stated that she works 5 days a week and Mr Jiang works 3- 4 days –
not every day. She stated that the 2 days she
is not present then Mr Jiang is
present at the outlet. Miss Nguyen stated that she is in charge when Mr Jiang is
not present.
Tribunal raised with Mr Jiang whether the position of café or restaurant
manager was a genuine position. The Tribunal noted
that the role as described in
the position description may be better described as a retail supervisor
position. The Tribunal asked
what made the position a Café or restaurant
manager position. Mr Jiang stated that it is a job in hospitality not general
retail and there is food and table service, in contrast to a retail environment
where person selects a product and goes to the counter
and pay. The Tribunal
noted that looking at the ABS job description for a Café and restaurant
manager it refers to a person
planning menus in consultation with the chef and
arranging the purchasing and pricing of goods according to budget – yet in
the nominated position the menu is centralised and determined by head office and
a significant portion of the purchasing is from
a central supplier. Mr Jiang
replied that the duty manager is in involved in planning the menu, and
participates in the discussion
with the chef and the owner and they discuss the
customer feedback in planning the chef’s specials. Mr Jiang is always
in these discussions and gives guidance and he seeks head office
Tribunal asked Mr Jiang what days of the week he worked, to which he replied
that he was flexible and he is not sure because he
is really busy. The Tribunal
asked when did Miss Nguyen work and he replied that she worked Monday, Tuesday,
Thursday, Saturday and
Sunday but it was flexible. The Tribunal asked did this
mean he worked on Wednesday and Friday when Miss Nguyen did not work and
replied maybe Wednesday and Friday but the supervisor might cover those days. Mr
Jiang also stated that Miss Nguyen assists with
preparing the roster and the
roster can change.
Tribunal asked what was the difference between the role of the Duty Managers and
the 2 supervisors on staff. He stated that the
duty manager is authorised to
count the money, to go to the bank to obtain the change for coins, to handle any
emergency situation
and can authorise various activities in response to customer
complaints such as give a discount, refund money and give vouchers.
manager is different to the supervisor because the duty manager has flexible
hours and can work every day to cover shifts
if there are staff issues and they
can also open and close the shop. He stated that a supervisor can make coffee
and has special
training for the Coffee Club, they can also help in the kitchen
and also keep things running.
relation to whether the position is a restaurant manager rather than a duty
manager the representative submitted that Mr Jiang
and Miss Nguyen only work on
the same day once a week. He submitted that Miss Nguyen oversees and organises
15 staff per day with
10-15 staff per shift – depending on the level of
customers. She oversees the food service and has role in the stock management
ensure food is available and they do not run out.
Tribunal notes that the applicant provided another Tribunal decision in MRT
1205948 which considered whether under cl.457.223(4)(da)
whether the applicant
had the skills, qualifications and employment background necessary to perform
that tasks of the nominated occupation,
being a Café or restaurant
Manager in a Coffee Club outlet in South Australia. The Tribunal is not bound by
decisions made
by other members of the Tribunal and the Tribunal notes that in
MRT 1205984 the issue under consideration was a different issue.
the hearing, the Tribunal received a further contract of employment dated 27
July 2013 which was almost identical to the earlier
contract that was provided,
save for the remuneration being increased to $53,900 and the date of the
signatures. The Tribunal also
received the Franchise Agreement that listed Mr
Jiang as the manager of the franchise outlet (see schedule 2 item 31).
considering the oral evidence, the position description and classification, the
contracts of employment and the ABS and Award,
the Tribunal was not satisfied
that the nominated position was a genuine position of Restaurant or Café
Manager. The Tribunal
considered that the role was primarily a supervisory role,
like as described in the Award and the ABS job description for retail
supervisor. There were few features of Miss Nguyen’s responsibilities that
indicated that she was “organising and in
control of the operations of the
café”. The Tribunal considered that Mr Jiang actively managed his
restaurants and worked
closely with the head office in the delivery of food and
beverages – by having a prescribed menu for most items, prescribed
for most items, using a centralised food source and that Mr Jiang himself
obtained the remaining stock. Whilst Miss Nguyen
was part of the discussion
regarding the “chef’s choices” this was only for a few items
and Mr Jiang was involved
in these discussions and seeking the approval of head
office. Mr Jiang adheres to the franchise’s operations guidelines and
was reported on by the “mystery shoppers” to head office. Miss
Nuguyen’s own description of her role did not
indicate that she made many
management decisions regarding the operation of the business and similarly the
position description duties
did not indicate that the role was of a manager
position, particularly noting it referred to assisting the store
manager/franchisee
in relation various items – and the store manager in
this case on the Tribunal’s understanding of the evidence -–she
assisting Mr Jiang. Mr Jiang stated that the position description accurately set
out in the nominated role, as well as opening
and closing the outlet. The
Tribunal was not satisfied on the evidence presented that the position
associated with the nominated
occupation is genuine, in the sense that it was
for the occupation of “Café or Restaurant Manager”. For these
reasons the Tribunal is not satisfied that the requirements of r.2.72(10)(f) are
the reasons given above, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicant meets
the all applicable criteria for the nomination
to be approved. Accordingly, the
decision under review must be affirmed.
Tribunal affirms the decision not to approve the nomination.
Miriam Holmes
Senior Member
ATTACHMENT - EXTRACTS FROM THE
MIGRATION REGULATIONS 1994
2.72 Criteria for approval of nomination — Subclass 457...
(1) This regulation applies
to a person who is:
(a) a standard business sponsor; or
(b) a party to a work agreement (other than a Minister);
who, under paragraph 140GB (1) (b) of the Act, has nominated an
occupation in relation to a holder of, or an applicant or a proposed
for, a [Subclass 457 visa].
(2) For subsection 140GB (2) of the Act, the criteria that must be
satisfied for the Minister to approve a nomination by a person
are set out in
subregulations (3) to (12).
(3) The Minister is satisfied that the person has made the nomination in
accordance with the process set out in
regulation 2.73.
(4) The Minister is satisfied that the person is:
(a) a standard business sponsor; or
(b) a party to a work agreement (other than a Minister).
(5) The Minister is satisfied that the person has identified in the
nomination the visa holder, or the applicant or proposed applicant
for the visa,
who will work in the nominated occupation.
(6) If the person identifies a holder of a [Subclass 457 visa] (the
visa holder
) for subregulation (5), the Minister is satisfied
that the person:
(a) has listed on the nomination each other holder of a visa of that kind who
was granted the visa on the basis of having the necessary
relationship with the
visa holder as mentioned in clause 457.321 of Schedule 2; and
(b) if the Minister requires the visa holder to demonstrate that he or she
has the skills necessary to perform the occupation —
the visa holder
demonstrates that he or she has those skills in the manner specified by the
(7) For paragraph (6) (a), the Minister may disregard the fact that
1 or more persons required to be listed on the nomination are
not listed,
if the Minister is satisfied it is reasonable in the circumstances to do so.
(7A) In addition to subregulation (6):
(i) the person identifies a holder of a [Subclass 457 visa] (the
) for subregulation (5); and
(ii) the [Subclass 457 visa] was granted after the Minister had waived the
requirements of paragraph 4006A (1) (c) of Schedule 4 on
the basis of a written
undertaking made by the current sponsor of the visa holder (as set out in
subclause 4006A (2) of that Schedule);
the Minister is satisfied that the person has provided, in writing, an
undertaking that is equivalent to the undertaking made by the
current sponsor of
the visa holder; and
(i) the person identifies a holder of a [Subclass 457 visa] (the
) for subregulation (5); and
(ii) the person has listed on the nomination a person described in paragraph
(6) (a); and
(iii) the [Subclass 457 visa] was granted to the person described in
paragraph (6) (a) after the Minister had waived the requirements
paragraph 4006A (1) (c) of Schedule 4 on the basis of a written
undertaking made by the current sponsor of the visa holder (as
subclause 4006A (2) of that Schedule);
the Minister is satisfied that the person has provided, in writing, an
undertaking that is equivalent to the undertaking made by the
current sponsor of
the visa holder.
(8) If the nomination was made before 1 July 2010 — the Minister is
satisfied that the person has provided the following information
as part of the
nomination:
(a) if there is a 6-digit ASCO code for the nominated occupation —
the 6-digit ASCO code;
(b) if there is no 6-digit ASCO code for the occupation, and the person is a
standard business sponsor — the name of the occupation
as it appears in
the instrument in writing made for the purposes of paragraph (10) (a);
(c) if there is no 6-digit ASCO code for the occupation and the person is a
party to a work agreement — the name of the occupation
as it appears
in the work agreement;
(d) the location or locations at which the nominated occupation is to be
carried out.
(8A) If the nomination is made on or after 1 July 2010 – the Minister
is satisfied that the person has provided the following
information as part of
the nomination:
(a) if there is a 6-digit ANZSCO code for the nominated occupation - the name
of the occupation and the corresponding 6-digit ANZSCO
(i) there is no 6-digit ANZSCO code for the nominated occupation; and
(ii) the person is a standard business sponsor;
the name of the occupation and the corresponding 6-digit code as they are
specified in the instrument in writing made for paragraph
(i) there is no 6-digit ANZSCO code for the nominated occupation; and
(ii) the person is a party to a work agreement;
the name of the occupation and the corresponding 6-digit code (if any) as
they are specified in the work agreement;
(d) the location or locations at which the nominated occupation is to be
carried out.
(9) The Minister is satisfied that either:
(a) there is no adverse information known to Immigration about the person or
a person associated with the person; or
(b) it is reasonable to disregard any adverse information known to
Immigration about the person or a person associated with the person.
The meanings of
information
associated with
are explained in
subregulations 2.57 (2) and (3).
(10) If the person is a standard business sponsor — the Minister
is satisfied that:
(a) if the nomination was made before 1 July 2010 - the nominated occupation
corresponds to an occupation specified by the Minister
in an instrument in
writing for this paragraph; and
(aa) if the nomination is made on or after 1 July 2010 – the nominated
occupation and its corresponding 6-digit code correspond
to an occupation and
its corresponding 6-digit code specified by the Minister in an instrument in
writing for this paragraph; and
(b) if required by the instrument mentioned in paragraph (a) or
(aa) — the nomination of an occupation mentioned in the instrument
supported, in writing to the Minister, by an organisation specified by the
Minister in an instrument in writing for this paragraph;
(c) the terms and conditions of employment of the person identified in the
nomination will be no less favourable than the terms and
conditions that:
(i) are provided; or
(ii) would be provided;
to an Australian citizen or an Australian permanent resident for performing
equivalent work at the same location; and
(cc) the base rate of pay, under the terms and conditions of employment
mentioned in paragraph (c), that:
(i) are provided; or
(ii) would be provided;
to an Australian citizen or an Australian permanent resident, will be greater
than the temporary skilled migration income threshold
specified by the Minister
in an instrument in writing for this paragraph; and
(d) if the nomination was made before 1 July 2010 - the person has certified
as part of the nomination, in writing, that:
(i) the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the tasks
(A) the nominated occupation listed in the ASCO; or
(B) the nominated occupation specified in an instrument in writing for
paragraph (a); and
(ii) if the person is lawfully operating a business outside Australia but
does not lawfully operate a business in Australia:
(A) the nominated occupation is a position in the business of the standard
business sponsor; or
(B) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this sub-paragraph; and
(iii) if the person lawfully operates a business in Australia:
(A) the nominated occupation is a position with a business, or an associated
entity, of the person; or
(B) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this sub-paragraph; and
(iv) the qualifications and experience of the visa holder, or the applicant
or proposed applicant for the visa, identified in relation
to the nominated
occupation are commensurate with the qualifications and experience
(A) for the occupation in the ASCO; or
(B) if there is no ASCO code for the nominated occupation — for
the occupation in the instrument in writing made for the purpose
of paragraph
(e) if the nomination is made on or after 1 July 2010 – the person has
certified as part of the nomination, in writing, that:
(i) the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the tasks
(A) the nominated occupation listed in the ANZSCO; or
(B) the nominated occupation specified in an instrument in writing for
paragraph (aa); and
(ii) if the person is lawfully operating a business outside Australia but
does not lawfully operate a business in Australia:
(A) the nominated occupation is a position in the business of the standard
business sponsor; or
(B) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this sub-subparagraph; and
(iii) if the person lawfully operates a business in Australia:
(A) the nominated occupation is a position with a business, or an associated
entity, of the person; or
(B) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this sub-subparagraph; and
(iv) the qualifications and experience of the visa holder, or the applicant
or proposed applicant for the visa, identified in relation
to the nominated
occupation are commensurate with the qualifications and experience
(A) for the occupation in the ANZSCO; or
(B) if there is no ANZSCO code for the nominated occupation - for the
occupation in the instrument in writing made for paragraph (aa).
(f) the position associated with the nominated occupation is genuine; and
(g) if the person has identified in the nomination the holder of a Subclass
457 (Temporary Work (Skilled)) visa in relation to whom
the requirements in
subclause 457.223(6) of Schedule 2 were met—one of the following
(i) the requirements in subclause 457.223(6) of Schedule 2 continue to be
(A) the holder would be required to hold a licence, registration or
membership that is mandatory to perform the occupation nominated
in relation to
the holder; and
(B) in order to obtain the licence, registration or membership, the holder
would need to demonstrate that the holder has undertaken
a language test
specified by the Minister under subparagraph 457.223(4)(eb)(iv) of Schedule 2
and achieved a score that is better
than the score specified for the test by the
Minister under subparagraph 457.223(4)(eb)(v) of Schedule 2;
the holder demonstrates that he or she has proficiency in English of at least
the standard required for the grant (however described)
of the licence,
registration or membership;
(iii) the holder is an exempt applicant within the meaning of subclause
457.223(4) of Schedule 2;
(iv) unless subparagraph (ii) applies—the holder:
(A) has undertaken a language test specified by the Minister under
subparagraph 457.223(4)(eb)(iv) of Schedule 2; and
(B) achieved within the period specified by the Minister in a legislative
instrument for this subparagraph, in a single attempt at
the test, the score
specified by the Minister under subparagraph 457.223(4)(eb)(v) of Schedule 2;
(h) either:
(i) the person will:
(A) engage the visa holder, the applicant for a visa or the proposed
applicant for a Subclass 457(Temporary Work (Skilled)) visa
only as an employee
under a written contract of employment; and
(B) give a copy of that contract to the Minister; or
(ii) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in
an instrument in writing for sub-subparagraph (e)(iii)(B).
(10AA) For paragraphs (10) (c) and (cc), if no Australian citizen or
Australian permanent resident performs equivalent work in the
workplace at the same location, the person must determine, using the method
specified by the Minister in an instrument
in writing for this
subregulation:
(a) the terms and conditions of employment; and
(b) the base rate of pay, under the terms and conditions of employment;
that would be provided to an Australian citizen or an Australian permanent
resident to perform equivalent work in the person’s
workplace at the same
(10AB) Paragraphs (10) (c) and (cc) do not apply if the annual earnings
of the person identified in the nomination are equal to or
greater than the
amount specified by the Minister in an instrument in writing for this
subregulation.
(10A) The Minister may disregard the criterion in paragraph (10) (cc)
for the purpose of subregulation (2) if:
(a) the base rate of pay will not be greater than the temporary skilled
migration income threshold specified for that paragraph; and
(b) the annual earnings are equal to or greater than the temporary skilled
migration income threshold; and
(c) the Minister considers it reasonable to do so.
(11) If the person is a party to a work agreement (other than a Minister)
— the Minister is satisfied that:
(a) the nominated occupation is specified in the work agreement as an
occupation that the person may nominate; and
(b) if the nomination was made before 1 July 2010 - the person has certified
as part of the nomination, in writing, that:
(i) the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the tasks
(A) if the nomination is made using an ASCO code - the nominated occupation
listed in the ASCO; or
(B) if the nomination is not made using an ASCO code -the nominated
occupation specified in the work agreement; and
(ii) the qualifications and experience of the visa holder, or the applicant
or proposed applicant for the visa, identified in relation
to the nominated
occupation are commensurate with the qualifications and experience specified for
the occupation in the work agreement;
(c) if the nomination is made on or after 1 July 2010 - the person has
certified as part of the nomination, in writing, that:
(i) the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the tasks
(A) if the nomination is made using an ANZSCO code - the nominated occupation
listed in the ANZSCO; or
(B) if the nomination is not made using an ANZSCO code -the nominated
occupation specified in the work agreement; and
(ii) the qualifications and experience of the visa holder, or the applicant
or proposed applicant for the visa, identified in relation
to the nominated
occupation are commensurate with the qualifications and experience specified for
the occupation in the work agreement.
(12) If the person is a party to a work agreement and the work agreement
specifies requirements that must be met by the party to the
agreement — the Minister is satisfied that the requirements of the
work agreement have been met.
The current
instrument that revoked IMMI
Brennan, J. in
Re Drake (No. 2)
[1979] AATA 179
(1978-1980) 2 ALD 634
Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs
Lobo v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural &
Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCAFC 168
Visnumolakala v Minister for
Immigration
[2006] FMCA 1209
Alimi v Minister for Immigration & Anor
[2007] FMCA 1520
Durzi v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
2006] FCA 1767
Moller v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2007] FMCA 168
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2007] FMCA 1492
RTF format (269 KB)
Signed PDF/A format