National Disability Insurance Agency v Lampard [2025] FCAFC 139 (10 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
National Disability Insurance Agency v
[2025] FCAFC 139
Appeal from:
Lampard and National Disability Insurance Agency
[2024] AATA
File number:
TAD 28 of 2024
Judgment of:
BROMWICH, NESKOVCIN AND VANDONGEN
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
– disability
requirements under
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
) – whether Administrative Appeals
identified impairment attributable to respondent’s disability as required
of the Act – whether there was any evidence to support the
finding that impairments were permanent under
of the Act and r 5.4 of
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant) Rules
(Cth) – whether Tribunal correctly construed and applied the
words “functional capacity to undertake” in s 24(1)(c)
– HELD: appeal allowed; Tribunal decision set aside and review remitted
Legislation:
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant) Rules
Applying to the NDIS Operational Guidelines
Revised Explanatory Memorandum,
National Disability Insurance Scheme
Cases cited:
Burrows and CEO, National Disability Insurance
Agency (NDIS)
[2025] ARTA 607
Kelly v National Disability Insurance Agency
[2024] FCA 1462
Madelaine and National Disability Insurance Agency
[2020] AATA
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs v Viane
[2021] HCA 41
; 274 CLR 398
Mulligan v National Disability Insurance Agency
[2015] FCA 544
Foster and National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS)
[2025] ARTA
National Disability Insurance Agency v Davis
[2022] FCA 1002
National Disability Insurance Agency v Foster
[2023] FCAFC 11
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
General Division
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Ms G Costello KC and Mr P Nolan
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Maddocks Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms M Norton SC and Mr V Murray
TAD 28 of 2024
NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE
CAROL LAMPARD
BROMWICH, NESKOVCIN AND VANDONGEN JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal be allowed.
decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal be set aside.
respondent’s application for merits review of a decision of a delegate of
the Chief Executive Officer of the National Disability
Insurance Agency to
refuse her application for access to the National Disability Insurance Scheme be
remitted to the Administrative
Review Tribunal to be reheard according to
2 and order 3 be stayed until the time for making an application in accordance
with order 5 has elapsed, or if such an application
is made until it is
determined.
respondent be granted leave to seek a different order than order 2 and/or order
3 above by, within 14 days:
(a) filing written submissions of no more than 5 pages in length and any
supporting affidavit evidence; and
(b) at the time of lodging the submissions and any evidence for filing, serving
a copy by emailing it to the solicitors and counsel
for the appellant and the
associates to each of the three judges on the appeal.
submissions and any supporting evidence are filed and served by the respondent
in accordance with order 5 above, the appellant
within 14 days of
(a) file any submissions of no more than 5 pages in length and any supporting
affidavit evidence in response;
(b) at the time of lodging the submission and any evidence for filing, serving a
copy by emailing it to the solicitors and counsel
for the respondent and the
associates to each of the three judges on the appeal.
application made in accordance with order 5 above be dealt with on the papers
unless the Court wishes to hear from the parties.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
applicant, the National Disability Insurance
, appeals from a
decision made on 4 September 2024 by a Deputy President of the former
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (
). An internal review decision of a
delegate of the chief executive officer of the Agency (
) had upheld
the refusal by a prior delegate of an application by the respondent, Ms Carol
Lampard, for access to the National Disability
Insurance Scheme (
(a) set aside the decision of the internal review delegate; and
(b) decided in substitution that Ms Lampard met the access criteria in
dispute, being the disability requirements in
Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
All statutory provisions referred to in these reasons are those in the
NDIS Act unless the contrary is stated.
Agency seeks orders setting aside the decision of the AAT and for the matter to
be remitted to its replacement, the Administrative
Review Tribunal (
for reconsideration according to law. The Agency also seeks an order that the
ART be differently constituted, but it appears that
such an order is not
required as the Deputy President of the AAT who heard and determined the merits
review application is apparently
not a member of the ART. If that is not
correct, and the remittal relief sought by the Agency is ultimately granted, it
a matter for the President of the ART or his delegate to decide its
composition on remittal, paying due regard to these reasons and
the criticisms
made of the AAT’s reasons and approach.
the reasons that follow, the appeal must be allowed. The decision of the AAT
should be set aside and the matter remitted to the
ART to hear
Ms Lampard’s application for merits review according to law. As
Ms Lampard sought to be heard on the discretion
to grant that relief, she
will be given a short time to seek any different orders, by furnishing short
submissions and any supporting
evidence as to why the usual relief ordinarily
flowing from the overturning of an administrative decision should not be
If such different orders are sought, the Agency will have a
corresponding right to oppose that course.
Background facts and procedural history
Lampard, now aged 69, has a longstanding history of ill health and has been
diagnosed with a series of chronic and inter-related
medical conditions,
including anorexia nervosa, major depressive disorder, anxiety, compulsive
adjustment disorder, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disorder, osteoporosis,
degenerative disc disease, disc bulge and stenosis, human papilloma virus
) and irritable bowel syndrome (
). In this appeal, the
alleged errors of law primarily concern the AAT’s conclusions as to the
existence, permanence and functional
impact of the impairments caused by Ms
Lampard’s HPV and IBS.
16 September 2021, Ms Lampard lodged her application to access the NDIS.
On 28 October 2021, a delegate of the CEO found that
she did not meet the
access requirements contained in ss 24 or 25 of the NDIS Act because she did not
satisfy s 24(1)(b) or s 25(1)(a).
The issues in this appeal only concern
20 January 2022, Ms Lampard sought internal review of the delegate’s
decision pursuant to s 100. On 23 March 2022, another
delegate of the CEO
affirmed the earlier decision. In relation to Ms Lampard’s HPV and IBS,
the review delegate was not satisfied
that they resulted in an impairment
resulting in a reduction or loss of an ability to perform any of the relevant
activities. As
such, the review delegate was not satisfied that the impairment
criterion in s 24(1)(a) was met, which requires a person to have
disability that is attributable to one or more intellectual, cognitive,
neurological, sensory or physical impairments or one or
more impairments to
which a psychosocial disability is attributable.
28 April 2022, Ms Lampard applied to the AAT for a review of the internal review
delegate’s decision. A hearing took place
on 14 and 15 December 2023. On
4 September 2024, the AAT set aside the decision under review, finding that
Ms Lampard had met the
disability requirements for access to the NDIS as
set out in s 24(1).
The questions of law
aspect of the AAT’s decision that is challenged on appeal concerns the
interpretation and application of s 24(1) leading
to the conclusion that
Ms Lampard met the disability requirements for accessing the NDIS.
Pursuant to
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
(Cth), preserved by transitional provisions for decisions made
prior to the abolition of the AAT and its replacement by the ART,
appeals on three questions of law, with the corresponding grounds set out later
in these reasons:
the Tribunal identified the intellectual, cognitive, neurological or physical
impairment or impairments that were attributable
to irritable bowel syndrome, as
required under section 24 of the NDIS Act.
there was any evidence to logically support the finding that there was no known,
available and appropriate evidence-based
clinical, medical or other treatments
that would likely remedy the impairment attributable to the irritable bowel
syndrome, under
rule 5.4 of the
National Disability Insurance Scheme
(Becoming a Participant) Rules 2016
(Cth) [...].
the Tribunal correctly construed and applied the words ‘functional
capacity to undertake’ and ‘social interaction’
24(1)(c) of the NDIS Act.
resolution of this appeal turns upon the proper construction and application of
s 24(1), in conjunction with:
(a) Part 5 of the
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Becoming a
Participant) Rules 2016
Access Rules
(b) the part of the
Applying to the NDIS Operational
) dated 28 September 2023 that
addresses the question of whether an impairment relied upon to become a
participant in the NDIS substantially
reduces functional capacity.
Legislative scheme of the NDIS Act
3, Pt 1 of the NDIS Act is titled “Becoming a participant”. In
particular:
(a) under s 18, a person may make a request to the Agency to become a
participant in the NDIS by way of an access request made in
accordance with
(b) under s 20(1)(a), once a request is made, the CEO must decide whether
the prospective participant meets the
access criteria
set out in s
(c) pursuant to s 21(1), a person meets the access criteria if the CEO is
satisfied that the person meets the following cumulative
requirements:
(i) the age requirements contained in s 22;
(ii) the residence requirements contained in s 23; and
disability requirements
contained in s 24(1) (the alternative
of early intervention requirements in s 25 not being in issue in this
the disability requirements in s 24(1) for the access criteria in
s 21(1) were in issue before the AAT. Section 24(1) provides:
A person meets the disability requirements if:
(a) the person has a disability that is attributable to one or more
intellectual, cognitive, neurological, sensory or physical impairments
or more impairments attributable to a psychosocial disability; and
(b) the impairment or impairments are, or are likely to be, permanent; and
(c) the impairment or impairments result in substantially reduced functional
capacity to undertake, or psychosocial functioning in
undertaking, one or more
of the following activities:
(i) communication;
(ii) social interaction;
(iii) learning;
(iv) mobility;
(v) self-care;
(vi) self-management; and
(d) the impairment or impairments affect the person’s capacity for social
or economic participation; and
(e) the person is likely to require support under the National Disability
Insurance Scheme for the person’s lifetime.
is convenient to interrupt this legislative narrative to outline how the AAT
addressed the third cumulative requirement in s 24(1),
being the six
activities set out in s 24(1)(c), because it narrows the scope of the
aspects requiring consideration in this appeal.
The AAT considered each of the
six types of activities listed in s 24(1)(c), finding that only one,
“(ii) social interaction”,
was established. The AAT was not
satisfied that any impairment relied upon by Ms Lampard resulted in her
having “substantially
reduced functional capacity” to undertake (or
psychosocial functioning in undertaking) any of the other five activities listed
in s 24(1)(c) of communication, learning, mobility, self-care or
self-management. The findings that those other five types of activities
not established are not challenged by Ms Lampard, so do not need to be
considered further. Other aspects of the disability
requirements that are
contested are confined to the social interaction activity.
209(1) gives the Minister the power to make rules, which, by s 27, may
prescribe the methods or criteria to be applied, or
the circumstances in which
the disability requirements in s 24(1) may be satisfied. The
are one of several NDIS rules prescribed under s 209, with the
current compilation having been in effect since 27 February 2018.
They contain
further details about becoming a participant in the NDIS and in particular
address the access criteria set out in s
21. Part 5 of the
Access Rules
titled “When does a person meet the disability requirements?”
addresses all the requirements of s 24 generally, but
only some of those
requirements in detail, as follows.
The five disability requirements in s 24(1) summarised
and addressed by rr 5.1 to 5.3
Access Rules
summarises the five disability requirements in
s 24(1), and r 5.2 explains an aspect of how the concept of permanence
in r 24(1)(b)
may be interpreted and thereby met, as further addressed in
rules 5.4 to 5.7 reproduced below:
5.1 The Act sets out when a person
meets the disability
requirements
. The requirements are met if:
(a) the person has a disability that is attributable to one or more
intellectual, cognitive, neurological, sensory or physical impairments,
one or more impairments attributable to a psychiatric condition; and
(b) the person’s impairment or impairments are, or are likely to be,
permanent (see paragraphs 5.4 to 5.7); and
(c) the impairment or impairments result in substantially reduced functional
capacity to undertake, or psychosocial functioning in
undertaking, one or more
of the following activities: communication, social interaction, learning,
mobility, self- care, self-management
(see paragraph 5.8); and
(d) the impairment or impairments affect the person’s capacity for social
and economic participation; and
(e) the person is likely to require support under the NDIS for the
person’s lifetime.
5.2 In relation to the above, an impairment that varies in intensity (for
example because the impairment is of a chronic episodic
nature) may be
permanent, and the person is likely to require support under the NDIS for the
person's lifetime, despite the variation.
notes the non-exhaustive nature of the rest of Pt 5, because this aspect of
Access Rules
is confined to a more detailed consideration of the
requirements in s 24(1)(b) and (c), and thus does not address the
requirements
in s 24(1)(d) or (e), which must still be satisfied.
Permanent impairment: s 24(1)(b) as addressed by
rr 5.4 to 5.7
to 5.7 of the
Access Rules
deal with the “permanent” aspect
of the disability requirements in s 24(1)(b):
When is an impairment permanent or likely to be permanent for the disability
requirements?
5.4 An impairment is, or is likely to be, permanent (see paragraph 5.1(b)) only
if there are no known, available and appropriate
evidence-based clinical,
medical or other treatments that would be likely to remedy the impairment.
5.5 An impairment may be permanent notwithstanding that the severity of its
impact on the functional capacity of the person may fluctuate
or there are
prospects that the severity of the impact of the impairment on the person's
functional capacity, including their psychosocial
functioning, may improve.
5.6 An impairment may require medical treatment and review before a
determination can be made about whether the impairment is permanent
or likely to
be permanent. The impairment is, or is likely to be, permanent only if the
impairment does not require further medical
treatment or review in order for its
permanency or likely permanency to be demonstrated (even though the impairment
may continue
to be treated and reviewed after this has been demonstrated).
5.7 If an impairment is of a degenerative nature, the impairment is, or is
likely to be, permanent if medical or other treatment
would not, or would be
unlikely to, improve the condition.
Reduced functional capacity: s 24(1)(c) as addressed by
Access Rules
deals with the “reduced functional
capacity” aspect of the disability requirements, contained in
s 24(1)(c) and in this
appeal confined to social interaction activities in
When does an impairment result in substantially reduced functional capacity
to undertake relevant activities?
5.8 An impairment results in substantially reduced functional capacity of a
person to undertake one or more of the relevant activities—communication,
social interaction, learning, mobility, self-care, self-management (see
paragraph 5.1(c))—if its result is that:
(a) the person is unable to participate effectively or completely in the
activity, or to perform tasks or actions required to undertake
or participate
effectively or completely in the activity, without assistive technology,
equipment (other than commonly used items
such as glasses) or home
modifications; or
(b) the person usually requires assistance (including physical assistance,
guidance, supervision or prompting) from other people
to participate in the
activity or to perform tasks or actions required to undertake or participate in
the activity; or
(c) the person is unable to participate in the activity or to perform tasks or
actions required to undertake or participate in the
activity, even with
assistive technology, equipment, home modifications or assistance from another
The Guidelines in relation to s 24(1)(c)(ii) –
impairment resulting in substantially reduced functional capacity to undertake
social interaction
aspect of the Guidelines that is directed to the question of whether any
impairment substantially reduces a person’s functional
capacity to
undertake social interaction activities for the purposes of s 24(1)(c)(ii),
being the only one of the six activities
found to be applicable by the AAT, is
as follows (at page 9 of 55, emphasis in original):
Does your impairment substantially reduce your functional capacity?
Your permanent impairment needs
to substantially reduce your functional
capacity or ability
to undertake activities in one of the following
Socialising – how you make and keep
friends, or interact with the community, or how a young child plays with other
We also look at your behaviour, and how you cope with feelings and
emotions in social situations.
Principles to emerge from key cases
Impairment rather than disability:
access criteria in Ch 3 are a key component of the NDIS as they impose a series
of thresholds on obtaining access to the NDIS
in the first place. This appeal
focuses on the disability requirements set out in s 24(1), which begins in
s 24(1)(a) by requiring
the prospective participant to have a
that is attributable to one or more intellectual, cognitive, neurological,
sensory or physical
impairments
, or that they have one or more
impairments to which a psychosocial disability is attributable. That enables
such an impairment or
impairments to be assessed for eligibility to access the
v National Disability Insurance Agency
233 FCR 201
, Mortimer J (as her Honour then was) emphasised the
important and indeed fundamental distinction between a disability and an
... The term “disability” is used in the Act, and in s 24, as a
descriptive concept for the overall effect of a person’s
impairments on
that person’s abilities to participate in all aspects of personal and
community life. Threshold provisions such
as s 24 operate not on the concept of
disability, but on the concept of an impairment, which, as the Tribunal
correctly observed
at [19] of its reasons, is generally understood as involving
the loss of or damage to a physical, sensory or mental function.
focus of s 24(1)(b) to (d) is thus upon the permanency and severity of a
prospective participant’s impairments, not their
disability. In
, Mortimer J explained the reason for such a focus by
reference to the revised Explanatory Memorandum to the
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Bill 2013
[53] At p 14 of the revised Explanatory Memorandum, the purpose of what became s
24 is described:
sets out the
disability requirements a person must satisfy in order to become a participant
in the NDIS launch. The disability requirements
are designed to assess whether a
prospective participant has a current need for support under the scheme, based
on one or more permanent
impairments that have consequences for the
person’s daily living and social and economic participation on an ongoing
This clause also implements recommendation 3.2 of the Productivity
Commission report.
[55] Using the concept of impairment enables assessment of the severity and
permanency of a person’s condition, and of the
effects of that condition
through not only the evidence of an applicant, but also medical and clinical
evidence. The legislative
scheme contemplates a relatively high degree of
precision by decision-makers (see, for example, the six activities in s
in assessing what a person can or cannot do. The assessment to be
undertaken is avowedly functional, and multi-faceted.
[56] That being the case, no arbitrary limits are placed on access to the NDIS.
No decision-maker need be satisfied a person’s
impairment is
“serious”, or more serious than another person’s. No
qualitative judgments in that sense are called
for. Rather, the legislative
scheme is based on a functional, practical assessment of what a person can and
cannot do. Critically,
the scheme makes detailed provision for that assessment,
and it is sufficient for a person to have substantially reduced functional
capacity in relation to one activity. That, in my opinion, recognises the
spectrum of impairments which can be experienced by persons
with disabilities,
and accommodates different abilities within one person in terms of her or his
daily activities. That is why a
detailed functional assessment is so important.
in mind Mortimer J’s remarks above, it is convenient at this point to
address how the terms “impairment”,
“disability” and
“condition” were used by the AAT in its reasons and by the parties
in their written and
oral submissions.
the most specific descriptor, an “impairment” generally involves the
loss of, or damage to, a physical, sensory or
mental function. In the context
of the NDIS, the term “disability” is used as a broader descriptor
for the effect of
a person’s impairments on that person’s ability to
participate in aspects of their personal and community life. In that
person’s disability arises due to the impairments they experience, with
this causal relationship being reflected in
the Guidelines (at page 7 of 55):
Is your disability caused by an impairment?
When we consider your disability, we think about whether any reduction or loss
in your ability to do things, across all life domains,
is because of an
impairment.
An impairment is a loss or significant change in at least one of:
your body’s functions
your body structure
how you think and learn.
To meet the disability requirements, we must have evidence your disability is
caused by at least one of the impairments below:
intellectual – such as how you speak and
listen, read and write, solve problems, and process and remember information
cognitive – such as how you think, learn new things, use judgment to
make decisions, and pay attention
neurological – such as how your body functions
sensory – such as how you see or hear
physical – such as the ability to move parts of your
It doesn’t matter what caused your impairment, for example if you’ve
had it from birth, or acquired it from an injury,
accident or health condition.
term “condition” is not used in the statutory language of s 24, but
was used by the AAT throughout its reasons and
in particular, in its conclusion
that s 24(1)(a) was satisfied “in relation to all of the Applicant’s
claimed conditions”.
Agency contends that the AAT used the term “condition” to refer to a
concept more akin to “disability”,
such that it failed to appreciate
the specific nature of the task required by s 24(1)(a), while Ms Lampard
contends that the term
“condition” was used somewhat interchangeably
with “impairment”, noting that medical experts and indeed the
itself had conflated those two concepts at various points during the AAT
close reading of the AAT’s reasons supports the Agency’s position in
that the AAT used the term “condition”
as a kind of label or
diagnosis to refer to the conditions of IBS and HPV. Used in that way, a
condition may involve an impairment,
which may then result in a disability, but
not necessarily in all cases. Compared to a more specific concept like
“impairment”,
“condition” is a looser term which
undesirably leads to greater uncertainty in the context of the NDIS. For
while health conditions commonly involve impairments, that will not
always be the case, as recognised in the Guidelines extracted
relationship between impairments and conditions is also not linear, in that two
people living with the same condition
may experience very different impairments,
or the same impairment but at differing levels. A person may also experience an
that is caused by more than one condition.
follows that maintaining a conceptual distinction between a disability or a
condition on the one hand, and an impairment on the
other, is crucial to enable
a higher degree of specificity to be achieved in assessing a person’s
level of function. While
those terms may be used somewhat interchangeably to
refer to the same thing in colloquial and everyday settings, care must be taken
in this context to conduct a “detailed functional assessment” with
“a relatively high degree of precision”:
[55]-[56]. That assessment is only possible if the decision-maker directs their
attention to a specific impairment, rather than
a broader health condition or a
person’s disability more generally. Assessing the access criteria by
reference to anything
other than an impairment carries a real risk of error as
it diverges from the approach required by the statute.
identification of one or more intellectual, cognitive,
neurological, sensory or
physical impairments experienced by the prospective participant. With that
identification in hand, the
requirements in s 24(1)(b)-(d) require an evaluation
(a) the permanency, or likely permanency, of any identified impairment(s):
paragraph (b);
(b) whether any identified impairment(s) results in substantially reduced
functional capacity to undertake one or more of the six
paragraph (c); and
(c) whether any identified impairment(s) affects the capacity for social and
economic participation: paragraph (d).
follows that a failure to maintain a proper distinction between a disability or
a condition and an impairment for the purposes
of s 24(1)(a) can easily have
adverse flow on effects on the assessment process required by each of
s 24(1)(b)-(d) by misdirecting
the decision-maker’s attention away
from the statutory task.
Permanence: s 24(1)(b)
an impairment has been identified, the decision-maker is required to determine
whether that impairment is, or is likely to be,
permanent, pursuant to s
24(1)(b). As extracted above, r 5.4 provides that an impairment:
is, or is likely to be, permanent ... only if there are no known, available and
appropriate evidence-based clinical, medical or other
treatments that would be
likely to remedy the impairment.
Agency raises a question in its written submissions as to whether r 5.4
imposes an onus on a prospective participant to demonstrate
the existence of a
negative, being that there are no known, available and appropriate treatments.
The correct position is more conventional
than that and appears to be accurately
addressed in
Foster and National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS)
[2025] ARTA 718 (
Foster and NDIA
), a remittal decision following
the Full Court decision in
National Disability Insurance Agency v
[2023] FCAFC 11
295 FCR 521 (Katzmann
, Perry and Sarah C
Derrington JJ). In
Foster and NDIA
, Senior Member P French (
) observed at [21]:
Section 21(1) provides that a prospective participant will meet the access
criteria for the NDIS if the CEO is ‘satisfied’
that each of the
access criteria is met. In this independent review, the Tribunal must also be so
satisfied. This is a state of positive
satisfaction or relative certainty which
must be attained in relation to each criterion specifically. Therefore, while
neither the
Applicant nor the Agency bear any formal onus of proof, the
Applicant does bear the practical onus of placing before the Tribunal,
pointing to material before the Tribunal, that can persuade it that each of the
access criteria are met.
of this kind has long been an important part of administrative law,
appropriately departing from conceptualising the process
as involving an onus to
be discharged.
relationship between s 24(1)(b) and rr 5.4 and 5.6 of the
was aptly described by Mortimer J (as her Honour then was) in
National Disability Insurance Agency v
[2022] FCA 1002
... r 5.4 and r 5.6 prescribe circumstances where, if the repository of the
power is satisfied on the evidence of the applicability
of either of those
rules, a person’s impairment will be excluded from meeting s 24(1)(b).
Relevantly, r 5.4 directs attention
to a negative state of fact.
also considered the meaning of the word “remedy”
in r 5.4 and the concept of “permanent impairment” drawn
statutory phrase “the impairment or impairments are, or are likely to be,
permanent” in s 24(1)(b) (at [136]):
The chosen descriptors must also be construed consistently with the other
language used in this section of the rules, and in r 5.4
in particular,
including the requirement that the treatment “would be likely to remedy
the impairment”.
In this context, “remedy” should be
understood to mean more than just relieve or improve.
That is because r 5.5
recognises that an impairment may be permanent notwithstanding the severity of
its impact on a person may fluctuate,
or there are prospects for improvement.
These changes in the impacts of an impairment may occur because of, amongst
other matters,
Therefore, in r 5.4 the word “remedy”
should be understood to mean something approaching a removal or cure of the
impairment.
That is consistent with the meaning I consider should be given
to the statutory phrase “permanent impairment”, as an impairment
which is enduring and, while its impacts on a person from time to time might
fluctuate, is not an impairment which is likely to be
removed or cured.
(Emphasis added.)
operation of r 5.4 was also considered by McEvoy J in
National Disability Insurance Agency
[2024] FCA 1462
In my assessment the NDIA is correct to contend that r 5.4 is a rule which
prescribes circumstances in which
[the] criteria to be applied in
assessing whether one or more impairments are, or are likely to be, permanent
for the purposes of
para 24(1)(b) of the Act. This is consistent with the power
granted to the Minister by s 27(a) of the Act (see also s 209(1) of the
Rule 5.4 provides that an impairment is, or will likely be, permanent only if
there are no available and appropriate evidence-based
clinical, medical or other
treatments that would be likely to provide a remedy. So expressed I consider
that the rule is properly
to be regarded as neutral — it is neither
exclusionary nor inclusionary.
its written submissions, the Agency contends that rr 5.4 to 5.8 of the
have been held to be deeming provisions, citing
[77], which is discussed in further detail below at [
]. However, that paragraph only
characterises r 5.8 as a deeming provision, which is undoubtedly correct having
regard to its terms.
In oral submissions, the Agency instead submits that
rr 5.4 to 5.7 are not deeming provisions, but rather impose additional
requirements
to be met before permanency can be established. Ms Lampard
submits that if r 5.4 is satisfied, then, by definition, the statutory
requirement is met.
creates a dimension of permanency which requires the decision-maker to be
positively satisfied, as expressly stated, that
there is “no known,
available and appropriate evidence-based clinical, medical or other treatments
that would be likely to
remedy the impairment”, referring to any
impairment identified and relied upon for access to the NDIS. That is, even if
5.4 is satisfied, the AAT still needs to make a finding as to the permanence
of the relevant impairment(s). The commonly invoked
language of the “no
evidence” ground of review or appeal in relation to administrative
decision-making can therefore
be seen to be clumsy and to that extent not
especially helpful in its application to the AAT’s finding under r 5.4
were “no ...treatments”, in that it amounts to a
contention that there was no evidence that something did not exist.
above in the extract from
at [131] reproduced at [
] above, Mortimer J described r 5.4 as
directing attention to “a negative state of fact”
Reduced functional capacity: s 24(1)(c)
to the substantially reduced functional capacity requirement in s 24(1)(c), the
crux of the Agency’s argument is that
this provision and the accompanying
rules and guidelines require an examination of Ms Lampard’s capacity,
relevantly, to socially
interact, rather than her willingness to do so. As
noted above, r 5.8, which deals with the reduced functional capacity
requirement,
has been held to be a deeming provision. It has “the effect
of mandatorily including some people in the category of persons
substantially reduced functional capacity if the criteria in r 5.8(a), (b) or
(c) are met”:
at [77] (Mortimer J).
assessing whether a person has a substantially reduced functional capacity to
undertake in one of the activities listed in s 24(1)(c),
“a decision-maker
is required to make a functional, practical assessment of what a person can and
cannot do” and assess
“the degree to which the person can
participate in the activity”:
at [64] and [88] (S C
Derrington J, Katzmann and Perry JJ agreeing at [1] and [2] respectively). As
mentioned above, the assessment
to be undertaken is also “avowedly
functional, and multi-faceted”:
at [55] (Mortimer J).
Guidelines, of which a small part is extracted at [
] above, exist to provide some
assistance as to the content of each of the activities listed in s 24(1)(c). In
this regard, the Full
Court stated in
(at [62]) that:
... the Guidelines are merely administrative “tools”. They do not
provide a legislative definition of the relevant activities.
They do not control
the meaning of the phrase “substantially reduced functional
capacity”. Nor do they alter the threshold
criteria for when a person
meets the disability requirements as specified in s 24(1) of the NDIS Act. They
are not the equivalent
of a statutory provision and are not to be construed in
like manner:
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority v TMeffect Pty
[[2018] FCA 508;
158 ALD 473]
at [59] per Perry J. Rather, they provide
non-exclusive content to the range of “tasks and actions” (as
referred to in
r 5.8) that comprise the “activities” the NDIA is
required to consider, consistent with the legislative history, context,
Recognising
the limited nature of the Guidelines, the Agency nevertheless submitted that
each of the activities listed in s 24(1)(c)
should have determinate meaning,
adopting as correct the approach taken by French SM in
Burrows and CEO,
National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS)
[2025] ARTA 607 (at [78]):
Applying these principles, it is to be recognised that s 24(1)(c) is a component
of a statutory test, the overall purpose of which
is to determine if a
prospective participant meets the requirements for access to the NDIS. In this
regard, it is an express object
of the NDIS Act to “facilitate the
development of a nationally consistent approach to access to ... supports for
people with
disability”.
In my opinion, fulfilment of this purpose
requires that the test operate normatively rather than arbitrarily.
can only do so if the tasks that fall within each activity area for the purposes
of s 24(1)(c) are designated and determinate rather
than infinitely variate
and elastic.
(Emphasis added.)
support of its arguments in relation to s 24(1)(c), the Agency referred
extensively to the ART decision of French SM in
Foster and NDIA
hearing before French SM in the ART, it was mostly agreed between the parties
that Mr Foster suffered from permanent neurological
impairments in the form of
urinary and faecal incontinence and the main controversy concerned whether his
impairments resulted in
substantially reduced functional capacity to perform the
tasks and actions that make up the social interaction and self-care life
activity areas. In assessing Mr Foster’s capacity to undertake the
activity of social interaction for the purposes of s 24(1)(c)(ii),
noted that there were two conflicting decisions of the former AAT as to the
approach that should be taken, namely
and National
Disability Insurance Agency
[2020] AATA 4025
Lampard and National
Disability Insurance Agency
[2024] AATA 315
Lampard and
), the decision on appeal in this case.
at [87], the AAT found that s 24(1)(c)(ii) was “directed
principally at personal skills needed for social interaction, and only
marginally about opportunities to exercise those skills”. For that
reason, although the AAT did not accept that “self-consciousness
awkwardness” prevented Ms Madelaine from participating in social
activities, it opined that if those factors did
in fact prevent a person from
attending social events, it would be “difficult” to see how such
supposed reduced functional
capacity resulted from their impairments:
Lampard and NDIA
at [161], the AAT found that Ms Lampard was reluctant to
engage in social activities due to embarrassment about her bowel issues
resulted in her having substantially reduced functional capacity in the area of
social interaction for the purposes of s
enough, the respective approaches adopted in
Lampard and
cannot sit together.
Ultimately,
noting that it would not be possible to follow conflicting decisions made by
different AAT Deputy Presidents, French SM
Foster and NDIA
preferred and adopted the approach taken in
and found that Mr
Foster did not meet the requirement in s 24(1)(c) because his case failed
to “recognise the distinction between
functional capacity and functional
performance”. French SM subsequently reasoned:
[80] The Applicant’s incontinence impairments undoubtedly affect his
capacity for social and economic participation. They have
a serious quality of
life limiting impact. But this goes to the s 24(1)(d) disability requirement. If
that requirement were to be
reached in this review, as I have said, I would have
found it to be met.
[81] The s 24(1)(c) disability requirement is distinct from and does not overlap
with the s 24(1)(d) disability requirement. It is
concerned with the prospective
participant’s “functional capacity to undertake” one or more
of the activities specified
in the section, which must be substantially reduced
for the requirement to be met. As noted above, in
[at [56]] the
Court conceptualised the Tribunal’s task as determining what the
prospective participant ‘can and cannot
do’, and not ‘what
they choose to do’.
[82] Within the conceptual framework of the ICF [
nternational
lassification of
unctioning, Disability and Health, World Health
Organisation, Geneva, 2011] this invokes the essential distinction that must be
between a person’s functional
to carry out a task or
action in a life domain in their intrinsic (or “naked”) state and
their functional
performance
of the task, which may be impacted by
personality, personal characteristics, and various extrinsic factors in the
legal, social and
built environment (see footnote 52). Functional performance is
relevant to the s 24(1)(d) enquiry. It is not relevant to the s 24(1)(c)
Agency contends that while
Foster and NDIA
provides no precedential value
– indeed it is not a curial decision – it may be a useful tool for
analysing the AAT’s
reasons in this appeal, in the sense that it is
contended that the Deputy President here made the same error as Mr Foster by
functional capacity and functional performance.
response, Ms Lampard submits that the dichotomy between capacity and
performance should be rejected, as it does not appear in the
statutory text and
caution is needed to not elevate the AAT’s remarks in
as imposing some kind of fetter on the content of the statutory test in
s 24(1)(c). In this respect, regard should be had to the
remarks of Hayne
and Heydon JJ in
v Migration Agents Registration
[2008] HCA 31
235 CLR 286
, where their Honours reiterated the
importance of focusing on the statutory language (at [92]):
As this Court has so often emphasised in recent years, questions presented by
the application of legislation can be answered only
by first giving close
attention to the relevant provisions. Reference to decided cases or other
secondary material must not be permitted
to distract attention from the language
of the applicable statute or statutes. Expressions used in decided cases to
explain the operation
of commonly encountered statutory provisions and their
application to the facts and circumstances of a particular case may serve
to mask the nature of the task that is presented when those provisions must be
applied in another case. That masking effect
occurs because attention is focused
upon the expression used in the decided cases, not upon the relevant statutory
provisions.
reasoning in
does not preclude adopting the reasoning of an
administrative decision-maker if it conveniently captures the meaning of
legislation
as independently arrived at by a Court. That is especially so when
such reasoning is at least in part based on prior judicial reasoning,
case the reliance placed by French SM on the observations of Mortimer J in
in part of [56] that:
the legislative scheme is based on a functional, practical assessment of
what a person can and cannot do
. Critically, the scheme makes detailed
provision for that assessment, and it is sufficient for a person to have
substantially reduced
functional capacity in relation to one activity. That, in
my opinion, recognises the spectrum of impairments which can be experienced
persons with disabilities, and accommodates different abilities within one
person in terms of her or his daily activities. That
is why a detailed
functional assessment is so important.
(Emphasis added.)
passage, which is clearly a correct interpretation of s 24(1), amply
supports the reasoning of French SM in
Foster and NDIA
(reproduced
in full above at [
]). French SM was
correct to be guided by
and correct to discard the approach
taken by the Deputy President in this case,
Lampard and NDIA
distinction between functional capacity and functional performance is
fundamental. French SM’s consequential reasoning
in applying that
distinction is compelling.
follows that the task both for the Agency’s delegate, previously the AAT,
and now the ART, is to maintain a distinction between
to carry out a task or action and their functional
performance
of that task for the purposes of assessing whether
s 24(1)(c) has been met. Functional performance is relevant to the s
enquiry and may be impacted by, as French SM helpfully put it,
“personality, personal characteristics, and various extrinsic
the legal, social and built environment”, but that is not relevant to the
s 24(1)(c) enquiry as to capacity.
Before the AAT
the AAT hearing in December 2023, substantial medical evidence was adduced,
consisting of almost 1,000 pages of medical records
and reports concerning
Ms Lampard’s chronic conditions. Ms Lampard, her treating
psychologist, Dr Shirin Fernandez, and a
medico-legal psychiatrist called
by the Agency, Dr Tanveer Ahmed, gave oral evidence at the hearing.
Ms Lampard was assisted by
her sister, Ms Kaye Swan, who re-examined
Dr Fernandez, cross-examined Dr Ahmed, and re-examined Ms Lampard
herself, on her behalf,
and prepared written closing submissions. Final written
submissions were furnished on 18 March 2024.
was not in dispute between the parties before the AAT that Ms Lampard
satisfied the age and residence requirements in s 21(1)(a)
and (b). The
issues were confined to whether Ms Lampard satisfied either the
s 21(1)(c)(i) (disability requirements) or the s 21(1)(c)
(ii) (early
intervention requirements). In relation to the early intervention requirements
set out in s 25, the AAT found that Ms
Lampard did not meet the
criteria in s 25(1), nor overcome the prohibition set out in s 25(3) (now
repealed). As already noted,
s 25(1) is not in issue in this appeal.
relation to the disability requirements set out in s 24(1), the AAT’s
reasons were structured using subheadings mirroring
each of the paragraphs in
that provision. The determinative parts of the AAT’s decision that ground
the challenge on appeal
are more usefully reproduced than summarised, because
both the criticism and defence of key parts of them turn on questions of
read against the terms of s 24(1) and the corresponding
Impairment: s 24(1)(a)
to s 24(1)(a), containing the requirement of a disability attributable to
identifiable impairments, the AAT found (omitting footnotes):
[68] Section 24(1)(a) of the Act requires that a person “has a disability
that is attributable to one or more intellectual,
cognitive, neurological,
sensory or physical impairments or the person has one or more impairments to
which a psychosocial disability
is attributable.”
[69] Though initially contended for some conditions, agreement was reached
between the parties that the Applicant met this criterion
for all applicable
conditions. I accept the parties’ position that s24(1)(a) is
satisfied in relation to all of the Applicant’s
claimed conditions.
because of the global nature of the agreed position between the parties as to
the conditions from which Ms Lampard suffered,
the AAT did not specifically
identify the impairments attributable to any disabilities. As will be seen,
this became a problem when
the AAT proceeded to consider whether permanence had
been established for the purposes of s 24(1)(b), and whether substantially
functional capacity to undertake any of the listed activities had been
established for the purposes of s 24(1)(c), because the AAT’s
was not, as required, upon impairments, but rather on Ms Lampard’s
conditions. The problem was exacerbated by the slide
between AAT[68] and
AAT[69] in referring first to impairments, and then to conditions, which may
have contributed to an unfortunate
conflation in the Deputy President’s
mind of disability or condition with impairment, affecting his subsequent
Permanency: s 24(1)(b)
to s 24(1)(b), containing the requirement that the impairment(s) relied
upon be permanent, the AAT found (omitting footnotes):
[71] Section 24(1)(b) is concerned with the permanence of the impairment, rather
than the medical condition necessarily.
[72] It was eventually accepted by the Respondent that the Applicant meets the
permanence requirements for her condition of Anorexia
Nervosa. It was also
accepted that her Compulsive Adjustment Disorder was permanent for the purposes
of the Act. After considering
the evidence, I consider the Respondent’s
concession appropriate, and I find both of the two above conditions to be
[73] The Respondent maintained that the Applicant does not meet the s 24(1)(b)
requirements in relation to:
(a) Major Depression Disorder;
(b) Anxiety;
(c) Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease;
(d) Osteoporosis;
(e) Degenerative Disc Disease;
(f) Disc Bulge and Stenosis;
(g) Incontinence; and,
(h) Irritable Bowel Syndrome.
Deputy President does not overtly conflate disability or condition with
impairment, but the reference to Ms Lampard’s conditions
permanent, when the issue raised by s 24(1)(b) is only concerned with the
permanency of the impairment, may have contributed
to at least a blurring of
what was being assessed.
AAT then turned to each of the items in the list at AAT[73] above under the
following headings:
Major Depression Disorder and Anxiety
Osteoporosis
Degenerative Disc Disease
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) and Incontinence
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
only items for which the AAT made a finding of permanence were as follows, which
again reflects a conflation between disability
or condition on the one hand, and
impairment on the other:
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) and Incontinence
[108] The Respondent submitted that there is insufficient evidence to satisfy
the Tribunal that “there are no known, available,
and appropriate
evidence-based clinical, medical or other treatments that would be likely to
remedy the impairments” associated
with IBS and incontinence.
[109] They submitted that “the evidence of the Applicant and Ms Fernandez
suggests that psychological treatment of the Applicant’s
stress has not
been optimised. Equally, Ms Fernandez's evidence of attempts to build the
Applicant's independence and capacity to
care for her physical health is not
adequate to satisfy the Tribunal that all options have been
exhausted.”
[110] They also submitted that the evidence of Ms Maree Taylor, dietician,
recording that “less stress equals better appetite
diarrhoea,” suggests that reducing stress levels is a means of addressing
at least one aspect of the Applicant’s
IBS and incontinence –
namely, diarrhoea – and thus, not “all available and appropriate
treatment options have
been pursued”.
[111] In response, the Applicant submitted that the testing done by Dr Yellapu
evidenced by reports dated 15 March 2021 indicates
deterioration of bowel muscle
control resulting from multiple surgeries, and that this lack of bowel control
is a permanent condition.
[112] In regard to the comments of Ms Maree Taylor, dietician, that “less
stress equals better appetite and less diarrhoea,”
the Applicant submitted
that a “Dietician is not a Mental Health Practitioner, and she is not
treating the Applicant’s
stress. The Dietician is not qualified to assess
or comment on the Applicant’s IBS and Incontinence namely
diarrhoea.”
[113] The Applicant submitted further that reduction of stress has already been
treated by a range of practitioners, and that this
treatment has been identified
as adequate for the management of her physical health. As such, they submit that
that the Tribunal
cannot be satisfied that there are further treatment options
for this condition.
[114] I note the Respondent’s submissions about the evidence of Ms Taylor,
dietician, but in view of the deterioration of the
Applicant’s bowel
muscle control resulting from her multiple surgeries, I am satisfied that there
are no known, available and
appropriate medical or other treatments available to
remedy the Applicant’s IBS and that the deeming provisions of Rule 5.8
[sic] are met.
[115] Pursuant to s24(1)(c)(ii) I find that the Applicant has a substantially
reduced functional capacity resulting from her IBS
in relation to her social
interaction because it causes her to be reluctant to leave her house and also to
engage in social activities.
reference in AAT[114] to r 5.8 should be read as a typographical error
because the words “no known, available and appropriate
evidence-based
clinical, medical or other treatments that would be likely to remedy” are
drawn from r 5.4, even though, with
that correction, the reference remains
partly erroneous as r 5.4 is not a deeming provision.
critical part of the AAT’s reasoning reproduced above is sparse, if not
perfunctory, because AAT[108]-[113] largely comprise
direct quotes and summaries
of the parties’ submissions with little or nothing added, while
AAT[114]-[115] records only the
Deputy President’s conclusions, not his
reasons for reaching them.
Substantially reduced functional capacity: s
to s 24(1)(c), containing the requirement of substantially reduced functional
capacity, the AAT commenced as follows (omitting
footnotes):
[125] Rule 5.8 provides that an impairment results in substantially reduced
functional capacity of a person to undertake one or more
of the following
relevant activities; communication, social interaction, learning, mobility,
self-care and self-management and it
results in one or more of the matters set
out at [11] above.
[126] The Respondent’s general position was that while the
Applicant’s functional capacity is somewhat reduced, this
is a result of
her advanced age rather than her conditions. However, I consider that her
conditions do affect her functional capacity,
and accordingly I consider those
affects [sic] below.
AAT then addressed the activities listed in [125] above under the following
Social interaction
Self-management
Communication
noted earlier in these reasons, the only activity for which the AAT made a
finding of substantially reduced functional capacity
was social interaction.
The totality of the findings on that topic are relatively brief, such that it is
again more convenient to
reproduce them than summarise them, as
Social interaction
[153] This activity is defined as “how you make and keep friends, or
interact with the community, or how a young child plays
with other children. We
also look at your behaviour, and how you cope with feelings and emotions in
social situations”.
[154] The Tribunal has previously held that “the criteria referred to in
the Guideline are directed principally at personal
skills needed for social
interaction, and only marginally about opportunities to exercise those
[155] The Respondent submitted that while the Applicant has limited
opportunities to socialise, the evidence suggests she retains
the personal
skills needed for social interaction. They submitted that the evidence indicates
the Applicant is able to keep and make
friends, interact with her community, and
interact appropriately in social situations.
[156] The Applicant disagreed with the Respondent's submissions in that she
submitted that she lives alone and will not leave her
house most days. Her
neighbour will get her groceries and drop them off at her front door while she
stays behind closed doors, sometimes
refusing entry to her carers. She maintains
that she does not attend family events and does not contact her 95-year-old
[157] The Applicant maintained that she overstated her social connections and
that although she said that she sometimes spoke on
the phone to her best friend
of 55 years there had only been four calls in the past two years. They had only
got together for cheese
and wine twice in the last two years.
[158] Although at times assisted by her sister, the Applicant impressed me by
being able to answer questions effectively. Once again,
a Functional Capacity
Assessment may have provided relevant information sufficient to satisfy me that
the Applicant’s condition
met the appropriate thresholds.
[159] The Applicant seems to be able to interact effectively enough to have her
80-year-old neighbour do her grocery shopping and
Dr Ahmed opined that the
Applicant had a reduced capacity in social interaction.
[160] A reduced capacity is not sufficient to demonstrate that the Applicant is
unable to effectively or completely participate in
social interaction.
Accordingly, I do not find that the Applicant’s impairments of Anorexia
Nervosa, and Compulsive Adjustive
Disorder result in the Applicant having a
substantially reduced functional capacity in the area of social integration.
[161] However, I find that the Applicant’s impairment of IBS results in
the Applicant having substantially reduced functional
capacity in the area of
social integration because it causes her to be reluctant to leave her house and
engage in social activities.
I accept her evidence to the effect that she does
not leave the house for the embarrassment of her bowel issues, and the impact of
her having to change her bedding and clothing due to her bowel incontinence.
above passages again disclose at least a blurring of the distinction between
disability or condition on the one hand, and impairment
on the other.
Capacity for social or economic participation:
to s 24(1)(d), containing the requirement that the impairment(s) relied
upon affect Ms Lampard’s capacity for social or economic
participation, the AAT found (at [185]):
I have already found that the Applicant’s IBS is permanent, and impacts
upon her social interaction. I find this impairment
to be so severe that it
causes the Applicant great embarrassment and severely restricts her ability to
participate in social activities.
I accept that the condition is so chronic as
to cause her severe embarrassment and result in regular soiling of her clothes
and bedding.
Accordingly, I find that s24(1)(d) is satisfied in relation to the
Applicant’s capacity for social participation.
blurring between the concepts of disability or condition, and impairment, is
once again apparent.
Need for lifetime support: s 24(1)(e)
to s 24(1)(e), containing the requirement that Ms Lampard be likely to
require support under the NDIS for her lifetime, the AAT
considered the
competing arguments at some length between [186] and [208].
conclusions the AAT reached for the purposes of s 24(1)(d) and (e) cannot
independently survive if the challenges to the approach
taken and conclusions
reached, or not reached, as to the identification of impairment, the finding of
permanence, or the finding
of substantially reduced functional capacity in
relation to social interaction activity are vitiated.
The grounds of appeal
grounds for each of the questions in the notice of appeal conveniently summarise
the error on the part of the AAT as asserted
by the Agency. Success on any of
the questions raised is sufficient for the appeal to succeed. However, in this
case, each question
is potentially of some importance to the administration of
this aspect of the NDIS Act, as well as for future consideration of
Lampard’s position, and accordingly should be addressed.
The grounds for Question 1
grounds for Question 1 in the notice of appeal are as follows:
In order to comply with the statutory criteria in section 24 of the NDIS
Act, the Tribunal was required to find, relevantly, that:
(a) the Respondent had a ‘disability attributable to one or more
intellectual, cognitive, neurological or physical impairments’:
section 24(1)(a);
(b) the impairment or impairments are, or likely to be, permanent:
section 24(1)(b); and
(c) the impairment or impairments result in a substantially reduced functional
capacity to undertake one or more of the activities
section 24(1)(c).
The Tribunal accepted that the Respondent had a number of disabilities,
including irritable bowel syndrome (paragraph [2]) and adopted
parties’ agreement that section 24(1)(a) was satisfied, accepting
that the Respondent had disabilities, including the irritable
bowel syndrome,
attributable to an impairment at a global level (paragraph [69]).
The Tribunal failed to identify with sufficient precision the
‘impairment’ to which the irritable bowel syndrome is attributable.
It therefore failed to make any finding as to whether the impairment is
permanent, and whether that impairment results in a substantially
functional capacity to undertake one the activities of daily living set out in
section 24(1)(c). It therefore failed to carry
out the statutory task required
by s 24(1)(c).
the grounds themselves also display a certain level of confusion, the thrust of
the Agency’s argument is that the AAT
erred by confusing the concepts of
disability and impairment, relying upon what was said in
topic in part of [51] (reproduced in full above):
... The term “disability” is used in the Act, and in s 24, as a
descriptive concept for the overall effect of a person’s
impairments on
that person’s abilities to participate in all aspects of personal and
community life. Threshold provisions such
as s 24 operate not on the concept of
disability, but on the concept of an impairment ...
from the reasoning in
, the Agency submits that the AAT needed to
identify Ms Lampard’s impairments in order to address the
requirements in s 24(1)(b)
and (c) as to permanence and capacity. This
alleged error became most acute at AAT[114], where the AAT focused on whether
Ms Lampard’s
IBS was permanent, which it undoubtedly was given that
she had suffered from that condition for over 30 years, rather than focusing
whether impairments associated with IBS were permanent and gave rise to
substantially reduced functional capacity in respect of
one or more of the
listed activities. By asking the wrong question, obtaining the necessary answer
was virtually impossible.
AAT fell into this error despite demonstrating an awareness at times of the
difference between an impairment and a condition.
For example, the Deputy
President stated at [108]:
The Respondent submitted that there is insufficient evidence to satisfy the
Tribunal that “there are no known, available, and
appropriate
evidence-based clinical, medical or other treatments that would be likely to
the impairments” associated with IBS and incontinence
(Emphasis added.)
reference to “impairments associated with IBS” suggests that the AAT
was aware that the condition of IBS was distinct
from the various impairments it
caused, but this recognition was not carried through to the analysis and
conclusions that followed.
In some ways, the fact that the AAT was clearly able
to differentiate between an impairment and a condition at points in its reasons
renders it less likely that it used “IBS” as a shorthand for the
related impairments of diarrhoea and faecal incontinence,
as contended by Ms
Lampard. This remains the case in the context of concessions made by the Agency
before the AAT. There was some
dispute and confusion about which impairments
were conceded, but the Agency ultimately accepts that they conceded to the
of incontinence arising from Ms Lampard’s HPV. However,
regardless of what impairments were conceded, the AAT was still required
identify the specific impairment(s) considered for the purposes of s 24(1).
Some degree of agreement between the Agency and Ms
Lampard did not
discharge the AAT’s statutory task, which required it to go further.
counsel for Ms Lampard, appearing pro bono, valiantly tried to rescue the
AAT’s reasoning by calling upon a beneficial
interpretation of the
language deployed, applying the well-established principles to that effect. In
a less stark case, Ms Lampard’s
otherwise cogent argument might well
have prevailed. However, the manifest defects in the AAT’s approach were
compounded beyond
rescue when it considered the issue of permanence without
taking the necessary first step of identifying the relevant impairment.
undoubted permanence of Ms Lampard’s IBS did not even ask, let alone
answer, the question of permanence of any of the
impairments
resulting from that diagnosed condition and giving rise to her disability.
failure to identify the relevant impairment was even more obvious when it came
to assessing whether Ms Lampard had substantially
reduced functional capacity to
undertake social interaction. The absent reasoning as to impairment and the
resultant defective reasoning
as to permanence meant that the proper question as
to Ms Lampard’s
to undertake social interaction was
never even referred to, much less considered, by reference to any such
impairment.
follows that the legal error identified in Question 1 has been
established.
The grounds for Question 2
grounds for Question 2 in the notice of appeal are as follows:
To validly make a finding that the Respondent met the access criteria under rule
5.4 of the Access Rules, the Tribunal was required
to find that there were no
known, available and appropriate evidence-based clinical, medical or other
treatments that would be likely
to remedy the impairment.
The Tribunal noted the Respondent’s submission that ‘... the testing
done by Dr Yellapu evidenced by reports dated 15
March 2021 indicates
deterioration of bowel muscle control resulting from multiple surgeries, and
that this lack of bowel control
is a permanent condition’ (paragraph
[111]). This conclusion was not supported by the evidence before the Tribunal.
In particular,
Dr Yellapu’s report did not state nor otherwise support the
conclusion that the Respondent’s lack of bowel control is
a permanent
The Tribunal concluded that, ‘...in view of the deterioration of [the
Respondent’s] bowel muscle control resulting from
her multiple surgeries,
I am satisfied that there are no known, available and appropriate medical or
other treatments available to
remedy [the Respondent’s] IBS and that the
deeming provisions of Rule 5.8 are met’ (paragraph [114]).
There was no evidence to support a finding that there were no known, available
and appropriate medical or other treatments available
to remedy the impairment
from the irritable bowel syndrome.
speaking, Question 2 is not reached because the error in relation to
Question 1 has been established. However, the issue
raised as to the
operation of r 5.4 is important and can be addressed succinctly. The
substance of that rule is that an
cannot be found to be
permanent unless the decision-maker is satisfied that it is unlikely to be able
to be remedied, in the sense
identified by Mortimer J in
(reproduced above at [
]) of meaning
more than just relief or improvement, but rather something approaching a removal
or cure of the impairment. That is,
there had to be a positive finding as to a
negative – that there
are no known, available and appropriate
evidence-based clinical, medical or other treatments that would be likely to
remedy an identified impairment. This accords with the overall scheme of the
NDIS Act, which is not to provide supports that replace
or constitute
medical treatment addressing an identified impairment, but to ameliorate the
impairments that are not capable of being
so addressed.
is a significant departure from what the High Court described as the traditional
meaning of a “no evidence” ground
of review, which will fail if
there is even a skerrick of evidence in support of the finding of fact made: see
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
Affairs v Viane
[2021] HCA 41
; 274 CLR 398 at
(Keane, Gordon, Edelman,
Steward and Gleeson JJ). Here, to defeat the ground, Ms Lampard had
to be able to point to at least some
evidence that there was no such medical or
other treatment available to remedy the impairment upon which she relied, rather
the overall disability or condition. Yet there was no such evidence to
that effect whatsoever, both because the question was asked
and answered by
reference to IBS, and not to any impairment resulting from IBS.
defects in the AAT’s reasoning are twofold:
(a) by not identifying the impairment, the AAT focused on the question of a
remedy for the overall condition of IBS, which as already
noted was undoubtedly
permanent and without a cure, whereas there might well have been a remedy for an
impairment associated with
that permanent disability (also described by the AAT
as a condition);
(b) perhaps in part led astray by Ms Lampard’s submission recorded at
AAT[113] that the AAT could not be satisfied that there
treatments for
, the AAT found that there were “no known,
available and appropriate medical or other treatments available” to remedy
not an identified impairment as required, but rather IBS, again as a permanent
disability (also described by the AAT as a condition).
intact, that reasoning would shift the required focus of s 24(1)(b) from
impairments, for which there may be a range of remedies,
to making the NDIS
available for all people with incurable disabilities or conditions, irrespective
of the impairments they experience
and what is available to remedy them. That
outcome would plainly be contrary to the evident purpose and design of the
legislative
degree of divergence from what was required of the AAT is made even more
apparent by the limitations in the evidence that was
before the Deputy
again, there was a valiant effort made on behalf of Ms Lampard to rescue
this manifestly defective reasoning by the AAT, to no
follows that the legal error identified in Question 2 has been
established.
The grounds for Question 3
grounds for Question 3 in the notice of appeal are as follows:
The Tribunal was satisfied that the impairments from the irritable bowel
syndrome resulted in a substantially reduced functional
capacity in social
interaction, ‘because it causes [Ms Lampard] to be reluctant to leave
her house and engage in social activities.
I accept her evidence to the effect
that she does not leave the house for the embarrassment of her bowel issues, and
the impact of
her having to change her bedding and clothing due to her bowel
incontinence’ (paragraph [161]).
The Tribunal misconstrued the words ‘functional capacity to
undertake’ by focusing on the Respondent’s voluntary
avoidance from
activities because of the disability, rather than whether the subject impairment
reduces the Respondent’s functional
capacity to undertake the
The Tribunal also misconstrued the term ‘social interaction’ by not
focusing on the Respondent’s personal skills
needed to establish and
maintain interpersonal interactions and relationships, but rather focused solely
on her opportunity to exercise
those skills.
noted earlier in these reasons, the AAT was only satisfied that Ms Lampard
had “substantially reduced functional capacity”
in relation to one
of the activities listed in s 24(1)(c), being “social interaction”.
The reasons for this conclusion
were reproduced in full above at [
Agency focuses on the final paragraph of this part of the AAT’s reasons in
the context of those preceding it, AAT[161]:
However, I find that the Applicant’s impairment of IBS results in the
Applicant having substantially reduced functional capacity
in the area of social
integration because it causes her to be reluctant to leave her house and engage
in social activities. I accept
her evidence to the effect that she does not
leave the house for the embarrassment of her bowel issues, and the impact of her
to change her bedding and clothing due to her bowel incontinence.
central legal issue raised by Question 3 concerns the requirement imposed by the
express terms of s 24(1)(c) to focus on Ms Lampard’s
, relevantly, to socially interact, rather than her willingness
to do so, no matter how good the reason. The error in the AAT's approach
24(1)(c), which is revealed at AAT[161], was to proceed upon the basis of
Ms Lampard’s
willingness
to engage in social interaction, and
her embarrassment, erroneously treating that as synonymous with the required
test of capacity.
As Ms Lampard’s capacity will need to be addressed
upon any remittal, based on the circumstances that prevail at the time
fresh hearing in the ART (being the relevant time), it is best that the issues
raised by Question 3 are addressed at a level
of abstraction, rather than the
prior precise factual context that was before the AAT. The circumstances in
which this issue will
arise are many and varied, and the risk is that a
conclusion will be expressed by this Court in universal terms that are not
necessarily
applicable in all cases or circumstances.
makes several possibly sound points in characterising the Agency’s
approach to what is required by s 24(1)(c) as
being too narrow, asserting
that it departs from the “functional,
assessment”
contemplated by
. She contends that the
Agency’s approach ignores r 5.8(a), where it refers to a person being
“unable to participate
effectively
or completely”. She
contends that there is no support for the Agency’s focus on
“skills”, a word that does
not appear in the Guidelines, which in
any event do not provide definitions, but rather provide non-exclusive content
of tasks and actions comprising the activities that are required to
be considered, citing
at [62]. Ms Lampard further contends
that the distinction that the Agency draws between “social
interaction” in s 24(1)(c)(ii)
being concerned with skills in
contrast with “social participation” s 24(1)(d) being concerned
with opportunities for
such social interaction is no more than an assertion, and
that it also ignores the references also in r 5.8(a), (b) and (c) to
participation.
Reliance is placed on parts of French SM’s reasoning in
Foster and NDIA
, but not on others, also with the caveat that both
s 24(1)(c) and (d) refer to “capacity”.
is merit in Ms Lampard’s argument, which is to focus on whether a person
is unable to participate
effectively
or completely
in one or more
of the relevant activities. The Agency’s focus on whether a person has
the “skills” to undertake,
say, the activity of social interaction
might not be appropriate in the case of an adult, as opposed to a child.
However, the problem with Ms Lampard’s argument is that none of
these features received even passing attention by the Deputy
President. Her
argument encourages an almost advisory approach because it seeks consideration
and invites an assessment of matters
that were never hinted at. That there
have been reasoning that properly addressed the statutory test, and
that the Agency’s approach on this appeal
, at least in some
very different circumstances, be too rigid, does not engage with what actually
happened in this case, where there
was no serious attempt by the Deputy
President to address the statutory test in s 24(1)(c) properly.
is also important to note the different way in which “capacity” is
referred to in s 24(1)(c) and s 24(1)(d):
(a) In paragraph (c), it is a direct reference to capacity itself:
substantially reduced functional capacity to undertake, or psychosocial
functioning in undertaking, one or more of the following
activities: ... .
(b) By contrast, paragraph (d) is concerned with aspects of an applicant’s
impairment(s) that impact on their capacity:
the impairment or impairments affect the person’s capacity for social or
economic participation.
Thus, paragraph (d) can be seen to permit opportunity reasoning, while the
paragraph (c) is concerned with what an access applicant
can actually do, as
recognised in
Foster and NDIA
addressed s 24(1)(c) in a thorough and
comprehensive way: see ART[49] to [64]; see also ART[81] to [83]. But that is
not the decision
being challenged in this case. If there is any infelicity or
error in French SM’s reasoning, and none is readily apparent,
this is not
the time or place to review and analyse it, because the present case does not
call for that to occur.
contrast between the perfunctory approach taken by the Deputy President in this
case, and the thorough, thoughtful and methodical
approach taken by French SM in
Foster and NDIA
, especially at ART[49] to [64], and also ART[81] to [83]
could not be more stark. There is nothing in the reasons of the Deputy
President here to rescue it from the manifest error in reasoning identified by
the Agency. As it is obvious the wrong question was
asked, it was inevitable
that the Deputy President reached the wrong answer.
follows that the legal error identified in Question 3 has been
established.
appeal succeeds on the grounds for all three questions.
should be noted that although the Agency argued, in the context of Question 2,
that there was no evidence to support the only basis
on which the AAT was
satisfied that Ms Lampard was suffering from an impairment that was, is or is
likely to be, permanent, for the
purposes of s 24(1)(b), the Agency sought
an order that the matter be remitted to the ART for reconsideration according to
The Agency took the same approach in the context of Question 3, which
concerned the only basis on which the AAT was satisfied about
that part of the
disability requirements addressed by s 24(1)(c).
Ms Lampard seeks to be heard on remedies before any orders are made, the
better course is to order that the decision of the
AAT be set aside and that her
application for review of the Agency’s decision be remitted to the ART for
determination, but
to stay those orders for a short time, and to give her leave
to seek to have any different order made.
Agency did not seek any order for costs and accordingly none will be
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
one (101) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Justices Bromwich, Neskovcin and
Dated: 10 October 2025
RTF format (802 KB)
Signed PDF/A format