URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/SSATACSA/2011/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brown v Arnold [2011] SSATACSA 19 (18 August 2011)
APPLICATION
UNDER REVIEW
A decision of an objection officer on 21 January 2011 to
allow an objection by Ms Arnold to a decision of the Child Support Agency
November 2010 which allowed Mr Brown’s application to change the
percentage of care he had for Elizabeth to 87% (315 nights
per annum) from 30
September 2010. The decision of the Objection officer was that Mr Brown and Ms
Arnold each parent has 50% care
for Elizabeth from that
The Tribunal was constituted
by XXXXXXXX
SECOND PARTY
DATE OF APPLICATION
A hearing was conducted on 18 August
Both parties spoke to the Tribunal by conference telephone.
Brown and Ms Arnold both gave their evidence under
affirmation.
determination
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
On 18 August
2011 the Tribunal decided to set aside the decision under review and send the
matter back to the Child Support Registrar
for reconsideration in accordance
with the directions that:
Brown’s care percentage for Elizabeth is determined to be 65% from 30
September 2010.
Arnold’s care percentage for Elizabeth is determined to be 35% from 30
September 2010.
This means that the application for review is
successful.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Reasons for decision
are attached.
DATE OF DESPATCH:
30 AUGUST 2011
STATEMENT OF REASONS
John Brown and Ms Julie Arnold are the parents of Elizabeth Brown (DOB 1998).
As at 29 September 2010 the Child Support Agency
assessed that Elizabeth was in
each of her parent’s care for 50% of the time. The arrangement was not
based on any Court orders,
parenting plan or oral agreement.
30 September 2010 Mr Brown notified the Child Support Agency that Elizabeth
spent most of her time in his care and requested a
change to the care assessment
on the basis that there had been a change in the pattern of care. He said that
Elizabeth spent no more
than 50 nights a year with Ms Arnold.
Child Support Agency contacted Ms Arnold, and she disputed Mr Brown’s
claim. She said that Elizabeth spends every Tuesday
and Wednesday night with
her, as well as every second Friday, Saturday and Sunday night.
Brown and Ms Arnold both provided statements from a range of people in support
of their own care claims.
1 November 2010 the Child Support Agency decided that Mr Brown’s evidence
was more persuasive, revoked the existing care
assessment and adopted a new care
assessment to reflect that Mr Brown had above primary care (315 nights per
annum) and that Ms Arnold
had below regular care (50 nights per annum) from 30
September 2010.
23 November 2010 Ms Arnold objected to this decision, restating that she had
care for Elizabeth for 50% of the time. She and Mr
Brown provided some further
information. The objections officer determined that it was not possible to
decide whose evidence was
more persuasive and so determined to follow the care
determination used by Centrelink. This care determination was that each parent
had 50% of the care for Elizabeth. The objections officer therefore decided that
the care decision should reflect 50% care for Elizabeth
with each parent from 30
September 2010.
Brown lodged an application for review of this decision with this Tribunal on 6
April 2011. He was granted an extension of time
in which to apply for a review
by this Tribunal (differently constituted) on 16 June 2011. The matter was heard
on 18 August 2011.
issues to be decided by the Tribunal are:
existing determination of percentage of care for Elizabeth be revoked? If so,
from when should it be revoked?
Should a new
determination of a percentage of care for Elizabeth be made? If so, what is the
percentage of care under the new determination
and from when should it
RECORD OF HEARING
following is not a transcript of the evidence Mr Brown and Ms Arnold gave, but
is a summary of the information relevant for this
to the hearing the parties were both sent the papers from the Child Support
Agency file. Mr Brown also provided further written
information to the Tribunal
marked A1-A42. Ms Arnold was sent a copy of this additional information. Ms
Arnold also sent the Tribunal
additional evidence which was marked B1 –
B54. Mr Brown was sent a copy of this information, however at the hearing he
that he had not been to the post office to check his mail for a week,
and had not seen this evidence. The Tribunal read Mr Brown
the evidence that
directly contradicted his own evidence, and sought his comments on
Mr Brown’s evidence
Brown told the Tribunal that he and Ms Arnold attended mediation last year, and
had planned to sign an agreement that Elizabeth
would be with Ms Arnold every
Tuesday and Wednesday night, and every second weekend, Friday to Monday morning.
Their lawyers were
drawing up the agreement to sign, but whilst this was
underway Ms Arnold failed to comply with the agreement, so he declined to sign
it. He said that Ms Arnold does have Elizabeth some of the time, and sometimes
it is in accordance with this pattern. However she
is often inconsistent and
sometimes will go without seeing her for weeks. He told the Child Support Agency
that Ms Arnold had Elizabeth
for 50 nights a year, but this was just a guess
– it is probably more than this, however it is definitely not seven nights
a fortnight every fortnight. For example, she did not have Elizabeth last
Tuesday and Wednesday night.
sees the situation as Elizabeth living with him and staying with her mother when
she is available. Ms Arnold is not consistent.
There have been many occasions
when Ms Arnold had been supposed to have Elizabeth, but has rung at the last
minute to say that she
cannot have her, and he has had to arrange babysitting
either from a friend or his sister.
said that they way they arrange the time Elizabeth spends with Ms Arnold, is
that Ms Arnold will ring Elizabeth and see if she
wants to come and stay and
then Elizabeth will tell him.
said that they would usually expect to share the school holidays 50/50, but
again this does not always happen. For example, in
the Easter school holidays
this year, Elizabeth was with her mother and sisters for half the time, but the
most recent school holidays
(July) she was not with her at all, and he had
Elizabeth for the whole time.
Tribunal specifically asked Mr Brown about evidence that Ms Arnold had provided
which he had not seen (because he had not collected
his mail). This evidence
included a statement from Jason Wilson, dated 28 June 2011 who had previously
provided a statement in support
of Mr Brown’s claim to have the majority
of the care for Elizabeth. In his statement of June 2011, Mr Wilson states that
original statement (dated 12 October 2010) was incorrect and that he was
under pressure at the time to support Mr Brown because he
worked for him. Mr
Wilson stated that Elizabeth “...spends quite a bit of time with her
[mum]. Definitely more that 13%”
response to this Mr Brown said that he had dismissed Mr Wilson from his job, and
that he therefore had a “bone to pick”
with Mr Brown. Nevertheless,
he said that the statement was not inconsistent with what he is saying. He does
not deny that Elizabeth
spends time with Ms Arnold, just not 50% of the
response to information provided by Ms Arnold regarding charges against Anna
Moore, who had provided a statement for him, Mr Brown
said that whether or not
she had committed these offences made no difference to the truth of the
statement she provided about where
Elizabeth lives. He can’t choose
Elizabeth’s friends and she is very close to Ms Moore’s daughter. He
that Ms Moore’s statement is accurate.
Tribunal asked Mr Brown for a his comments on a statement dated 29 June 2011,
from Robert Atkins, who operates a local bus service,
and which states that
Elizabeth catches the school bus service to and from school, to and from her
mother’s house on Tuesday
afternoon, Wednesday morning, every second
Friday afternoon, and every second Monday morning. Mr Brown said that the
statement is
not accurate – it may be that Elizabeth has been on the bus
in accordance with this statement sometimes but not all the time.
He said that
Elizabeth had only started catching this bus quite recently, and does not like
it. It is a long way out to her mother’s
house and the bus trip is
Brown said that they had agreed at mediation to tell Centrelink that they had
50/50 care so that Ms Arnold would receive Family
Ms Arnold’s evidence
Arnold told the Tribunal that she did not keep records of the time Elizabeth was
with her or her father. However she maintained
her claim that Elizabeth always
spends every Tuesday and Wednesday night with her, and every second Friday,
Saturday and Sunday night.
She said that this was the arrangement they made in
mediation, although Mr Brown never agreed to sign off on the agreement once
had been written up.
Arnold said that last month she actually had Elizabeth with her for three
weekends in a row. She was unsure, when questioned further,
which month this
was, and agreed that it may have been July, but then could not reconcile this
with Mr Arnold’s evidence that
he had Elizabeth throughout the July school
holidays. She also agreed that she had not had Elizabeth during the July school
because she had been asked to pick up some extra weekday shifts at
work. Ms Arnold then said she and Mr Brown were very flexible
with the care
arrangements and would regularly help each other out. She recently had Elizabeth
with her for seven days straight because
she was in trouble at school and did
not want to go to her dads because she knew she would be in
Arnold said that she calls Elizabeth every day to find out whether she is coming
over that afternoon. The Tribunal asked why this
was necessary if there was a
stable pattern of care as she had claimed. She said that sometimes Mr Brown
takes Elizabeth off the
bus at his place, which is on the way to her place. Then
she needs to drive to his place and collect her. This is why she has recently
changed the bus that Elizabeth catches, which doesn’t go past Mr
Brown’s house.
Arnold said that the letter from Mr Atkins (referred to earlier) is correct.
When the Tribunal pointed out that the letter was
inconsistent with her
evidence, Ms Arnold said that she had not noticed the discrepancy when Mr Atkins
had given her the letter to
check. She offered to arrange for Mr Atkins to
provide a new letter confirming the arrangement as she claimed it to
response to a question from the Tribunal Ms Arnold said that the reason the
statements she provided did not refer to the pattern
of care she has for
Elizabeth was because people don’t know about their life in this level of
detail. They just know that Elizabeth
lives with her and they spend time
Arnold referred to a police report she provided to the Tribunal about an
incident in June 2011 when Elizabeth had been left alone
by Mr Brown whilst he
was out with friends. In particular she noted that the report stated that the
parents have a 50/50 care arrangement.
Ms Arnold maintained that this was
evidence of the care arrangement.
DISCUSSION OF
Tribunal considered the evidence provided to the Child Support Agency, as well
as the evidence provided by both parties to the
in any legal proceedings, there is a range of evidence available, largely
provided by the parties. Unlike a court, the Tribunal
is not bound by the rules
of evidence and so is able to take into account evidence that might be second
hand, or other evidence that
a court could not accept. This does not mean,
however, that the Tribunal gives equal weight to all of the evidence that it
Evidence is often of different quality and it is the job of the
Tribunal to weigh up this evidence, by making decisions about the
is important for the parties to understand that the decision being made by the
Tribunal is not which of them is the better parent,
or who loves Elizabeth the
best, or even who cares for her the best. These matters are irrelevant to the
Tribunal’s decision,
which is simply about where Elizabeth spends her time
during each week, and specifically, where she sleeps. The Tribunal therefore
given no weight to the evidence provided by either party about the relative
merits of their parenting skills or making disparaging
observations about their
parties have provided extensive evidence of expenses they have incurred,
presumably for Elizabeth. These largely consist of photocopied
shop receipts for
clothes and stationery consistent with items that might be purchased for a
school aged child. There are also some
receipts relating to health expenses. In
this case, it is not disputed by either party that the other parent spends time
with Elizabeth
or indeed spends money on her to purchase necessary items and so
the Tribunal does not consider that this evidence is of assistance
in deciding
the time Elizabeth spends with each of her parents.
Arnold relied on the police report to show that Mr Brown told the police that
they have 50/50 care. It is unclear to the Tribunal
where the information in the
police report came from. Ms Arnold was the informant and it is just as likely
that this is how she
described the situation to the police. The Tribunal did not
consider that this evidence held any weight in demonstrating the care
arrangements for Elizabeth.
Brown has told the Tribunal that he concedes that Ms Arnold has Elizabeth more
than 50 nights a year, however he denies that they
share the care equally, even
if this was something they agreed to try last year. He said that this has never
happened on a consistent
basis because Ms Arnold didn’t stick to it. With
this concession, however, it is clear that the decision of the Child Support
Agency which determined that Mr Brown had 87% care for Elizabeth is not correct,
as this equates to Ms Arnold having Elizabeth for
just 50 nights a
Brown has provided documents to the Tribunal, signed by a number of people, on
which he has written that the undersigned have known
him for a number of years
and can confirm that Elizabeth lives with him full time. Whilst there would be
no expectation that members
of the general public would be familiar with the
Child Support jurisdiction, or the terminology used within this jurisdiction, it
is not unreasonable to presume that even in lay person’s language
“full time” means just that – i.e., all
the time, not
“part time”. This is clearly inconsistent with Mr Brown’s own
evidence that Elizabeth lives with
her mother for more than 50 nights a year,
and so is of little value.
Arnold has provided a number of letters signed by various friends and family.
Many of these are typed in the same font and format
or written in the same
handwriting which appears to be Ms Arnold’s handwriting. For example, the
statement from Phil Burns
refers to the fact that Ms Arnold is writing the
statement on his behalf. In the Tribunal’ view, the fact that Mr Brown
written a petition and Ms Arnold has written statements for people to sign
limits the reliability of this evidence, as they are not
in the words of the
person themselves. This concern is supported by the fact that most of the
statements provided by Ms Arnold
use similar wording, for example, making the
assertion that Ms Arnold has “at least 50% care of Elizabeth, if not
Again, this is inconsistent with Ms Arnold’s own evidence
that she has Elizabeth exactly 50% of the time. These statements
are also of
limited use because it is not necessarily apparent from these statements what
period of time the person is referring
to, nor is it necessarily clear how the
person purports to have the knowledge about the care
arrangement.
statements Ms Arnold provided generally do not refer to the care arrangement Ms
Arnold asserts, except a letter from her employer,
Ms Jennifer Dickenson, which
refers to Ms Arnold working on Mondays, and Thursdays and every second weekend,
to coincide with the
days she cares for Elizabeth. Ms Dickenson’s
statement is also inconsistent with the other statements which suggest that Ms
Arnold has Elizabeth for more than 50% of the time.
statement Ms Arnold provided from Mr Atkins may well be his observation of the
situation, but is inconsistent with her evidence.
The Tribunal was concerned
Arnold) when Ms Arnold said
that she had not noticed the “mistake”
when Mr Atkins gave her the statement to check, but that if the Tribunal wished,
she could get him to redo it and correct this. This suggested strongly to the
Tribunal that Mr Atkins had been asked to make a statement
in accordance with
information Ms Arnold gave him, rather than in accordance with his own
observation and knowledge.
the Tribunal’s view, the best available evidence was from people who have
a more independent relationship with the parties,
such as employers, or service
providers. The Tribunal also found Mr Brown and Ms Arnold’s evidence at
the hearing to be invaluable
in making the decision.
summary this evidence was consistent with the view that Ms Arnold sometimes has
Elizabeth in accordance with the abandoned parenting
plan, but not all the time.
Although Ms Arnold said that this arrangement was always adhered to, she also
said that she and Mr Brown
had a flexible arrangement, and “helped each
other out”. She gave examples of this happening in recent time. Ms Arnold
also said that she calls Elizabeth every afternoon to find out if she is coming
over, which is inconsistent with there being a fixed
regular pattern of care,
and suggests that Mr Brown’s house is the “default” place for
Elizabeth to stay.
balance, after careful consideration the Tribunal is satisfied that from 30
September 2010, the care arrangement for Elizabeth
has been that she spends
around two thirds of her time with her father and about one third with her
mother. This is by no means
a scientific assessment, but it is, in the
Tribunal’s view, a reliable estimate of the care, given that both parents
have provided
unreliable and inconsistent evidence about the situation. This
assessment equates approximately with Ms Arnold having Elizabeth
in accordance
with the plan more often than not, but not every fortnight. This might equate to
her missing a weekend once a month,
or to having Elizabeth for either Tuesday or
Wednesday night (but not both) for several weeks in a row. As there is no
pattern, it
is not possible to be exact about this, however the Tribunal
considers that Ms Arnold has Elizabeth on average for five nights a
or 130 nights per year. This is not grossly inconsistent with Mr Brown’s
evidence at the hearing, and is, in the
Tribunal’s view, also sufficiently
close to the arrangement asserted by Ms Arnold to be broadly consistent with her
at the hearing that there is both a regular pattern of care and
substantial flexibility.
Tribunal notes that the objections officer rejected both parties’ evidence
and decided to rely on the care assessment on
Centrelink’ records. The
Tribunal has not had access to the information on the Centrelink record, but has
had regard to Mr
Brown’s uncontradicted evidence at hearing that he and Ms
Arnold had advised Centrelink of a 50/50 care arrangement in order
to ensure Ms
Arnold received family tax benefit. Based on this evidence, the Tribunal is
satisfied that Centrelink’s care assessment
does not reflect the actual
care for Elizabeth, but was made based on information provided by the parties to
obtain a particular
FINDINGS OF FACT
John Brown and Ms Julie Arnold are the parents of Elizabeth Brown (DOB 1998).
As at 29 September 2010 the Child Support Agency
assessed that Elizabeth was in
each of her parents’ care for 50% of the time. The arrangement was not
based on any Court orders,
parenting plan or oral agreement.
30 September 2010 Mr Brown notified the Child Support Agency that he had actual
care of Elizabeth for greater than 50% of the time
and that a change should be
made to the assessment.
Tribunal finds that from 30 September 2010 the pattern of care changed and that
from that date Mr Brown has had actual care for
Elizabeth of 235 nights per
annum and Ms Arnold has had actual care for Elizabeth of 130
APPLICATION OF THE LAW
law relevant to this decision is contained in the
Child Support (Assessment)
Sections 49
of the Act require a new
determination of percentage of care for a child to be made where an existing
determination has been revoked.
Subsection 54F(1)
sets out certain circumstances
in which a determination of percentage of care must be revoked:
54F Determination must be revoked if there is a change to the responsible
person’s cost percentage
(a) a determination of a responsible person’s percentage of care
existing percentage of care
) for a child has been made under
applied in relation to the responsible
person—the interim period for the determination has ended; and
(c) the Registrar or the Family Assistance Secretary is notified, or
otherwise becomes aware, that the care of the child that is
actually taking
place does not correspond with the responsible person’s existing
percentage of care for the child; and
(d) the Registrar is satisfied that the responsible person’s cost
percentage for the child would change if the Registrar were
to determine, under
, another percentage to be the person’s percentage of care
for the child; and
section 54G
does not apply; the Registrar must revoke the
determination.
Note: The Registrar must make a new determination under
to replace the revoked determination: see paragraph 49(1)(b) or
Tribunal has found that there are existing determinations of Mr Brown and Ms
Arnold’s percentages of care for Elizabeth
of 50% care
did not apply to the existing determinations in this
Tribunal has found that Mr Brown notified the Child Support Agency on 30
September 2010 that the actual care of Elizabeth did
not correspond with the
percentage of care under the existing determinations.
Tribunal must consider whether each person’s cost percentage would change
if a new percentage of care determination were
the Act. In this case, the Tribunal has found that each parent has a pattern of
care of Elizabeth and therefore will consider
the relevant parts of
50 Determination of percentage of care—responsible person has had
etc. a pattern of care for a child
(1) This section applies if:
(a) ................
(b) the Registrar:
(i) revokes, under Subdivision C of this Division, a determination of a
responsible person’s percentage of a care for a child
that was made under
or this section; and
(ii) is satisfied that the responsible person has had, or is likely to
have, a pattern of care for the child during such period (the
) as the Registrar considers to be appropriate having regard to all
the circumstances.
(2) The Registrar must determine the responsible person’s
percentage of care for the child during the care period.
(3) The percentage determined under subsection (2) must be a
percentage that corresponds with the actual care of the child that
the Registrar
is satisfied that the responsible person has had, or is likely to have, during
the care period.
Tribunal must consider the actual care of Elizabeth. “Actual care”
may be worked out based on the number of nights
the child was or will be in the
care of the person
(subsection 54A(1)).
Tribunal is required to consider the actual care during the care period. The
care period is such period as the Child Support Registrar
considers to be
appropriate having regard to all the circumstances
(sections 49
Act). The Child Support Agency’s policy in this regard, as set out in
chapter 2.2.1 of the Child Support Agency Guide,
is that a care period is
generally a 12 month period from the day on which the actual care for a child
Tribunal considers an appropriate care period in this case to be the 12 month
period from the date the care changed. The Tribunal
has found that the care
changed on 30 September 2010. The Tribunal has found that Mr Brown will have
care of Elizabeth for 235 nights
during the care period, or a percentage of care
of 65%. The Tribunal has found that Ms Arnold will have care of Elizabeth 130
during the care period, or a percentage of care of 35% (using the
rounding rules in
section 54D
of the Act).
of the Act contains a table that is used to work out a person’s cost
percentage:
55C Working out cost percentages
Cost percentages
Percentage of care
Cost percentage
0 to less than 14%
14% to less than 35%
35% to less than 48%
25% plus 2% for each percentage point over 35%
more than 52% to 65%
51% plus 2% for each percentage point over 53%
more than 65% to 86%
more than 86% to 100%
the child support assessment based on the existing percentage of care
determinations, Mr Brown and Ms Arnold each had a cost
percentage of 50%. If new
determinations were to be made, Mr Brown would have a cost percentage of 75% and
Ms Arnold would have a
cost percentage of 25%. Accordingly, the Tribunal is
satisfied that, if new determinations were to be made, both Mr Brown and Ms
Arnold’s cost percentages would change.
does not apply in this case because Ms Arnold has regular care for Elizabeth
and so there is no mandatory revocation to the existing
percentage of care
determination based on this provision.
all of the requirements of
subsection 54F(1)
are met, the Tribunal must revoke
the existing determinations of percentage of care.
of the Act sets out when the revocation of the determination takes
effect. The date of effect depends on whether the CSA was notified
of the care
change within 28 days after it occurred. The Tribunal has found that the care
change occurred on 30 September 2010 which
was the day that Mr Brown notified
the CSA of the change. As such the revocation of the existing determination
takes effect in accordance
with subparagraph 54F(2)(a)(ii) on 29 September 2010,
the day before the care change occurred.
revoked the existing determinations, the Tribunal must make new determinations
of Mr Brown and Ms Arnold’s percentage
of care under either
of the Act.
make the new determinations, the Tribunal must consider the actual care of
Elizabeth during the care period, as discussed above.
The Tribunal has already
found that during the 12 month care period from 30 September 2010 Mr Brown has
care of Elizabeth for 235
nights and Ms Arnold has care of Elizabeth for 130
of the Act, the Tribunal determines that Mr Brown’s percentage
of care for Elizabeth is 65% for the care period commencing
on 30 September 2010
and Ms Arnold’s percentage of care for Elizabeth is 35% for the same
of the Act sets out the date of effect of the new determinations of
percentage of care. The percentage of care applies to each day
support period on and from the “application day”. In accordance with
subparagraph 54B(2)(c)(ii), the application
day for the new determinations of
percentage of care is the day after the revocation of the existing
determinations. The Tribunal
has revoked the existing determinations with effect
from 29 September 2010 and as such the new determinations apply from 30
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
August 2011 the Tribunal decided to set aside the decision under review and send
the matter back to the Child Support Registrar
for reconsideration in accordance
with the directions that:
Brown’s care percentage for Elizabeth is determined to be 65% from 30
September 2010.
Arnold’s care percentage for Elizabeth is determined to be 35% from 30
September 2010.
This means that the application for review is
successful.
Member of the Tribunal:
Date: 30 August
The publication of Social Security Appeals Tribunal child support
decisions is authorised under
subsections 16(2AB)
(2AC) of the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act
Personal particulars of parties to an appeal and their children are
removed to protect their privacy. Names used in all published
decisions are
pseudonyms. Reasons for decisions are published in full (with any information
which may identify involved individuals
to a member of the public removed) to
ensure that the full context and basis for the decision can be understood. The
Social Security
Appeal's Tribunal's decisions in relation to child support
matters demonstrate the application of the Child Support legislation to
individual circumstances of the case being decided. Different fact situations
or subsequent changes to legislation may result
in different outcomes.
The CSA reviews all SSAT decisions to identify opportunities to improve
its services and ensure its processes and policies are robust
and accurate. The
CSA publishes further information about SSAT decisions on their website
www.csa.gov.au/publications/1313.aspx#ssat
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (5.47 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter