Deeley & Dallas [2013] FMCAfam 249 (4 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2013] FMCAfam 249
FAMILY LAW – Property – application
for property settlement – contributions by parties – where applicant
a discrete period of cohabitation in a
relationship
ending in 1996 – no jurisdiction – where applicant claims separate
period of cohabitation and subsequent
marriage – allegations of family
violence – whether applicant’s contributions made more difficult by
family violence
– length of marriage – short marriage – where
evidence establishes period of cohabitation of 2 years and 4 months
whether adjustment should be made under s.75(2)
Family Law Act 1975
due to respondent’s ill health.
PRACTICE & PROCEDURE – Where parties elected to proceed on the
papers without oral evidence – difficulty in making
of findings of fact
where factual issues in dispute – absence of independent corroborating
Family Law Act 1975
Law Amendment (De Facto Financial Matters and Other Measures) Act 2008
Hickey & Hickey
[2003] FamCA 395
(2003) 30 Fam LR 355
; FLC 93-143
Kennon v Kennon
[1997] FamCA 27
(1997) 22 Fam LR 1
Norbis & Norbis
(1983) 9 Fam LR 385
Stanford v Stanford
[2012] HCA 52
Respondent:
File Number:
SYC 658 of 2012
Judgment of:
Scarlett FM
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors for the
PCR Law & Associates
Solicitors for the Respondent:
(1) The Applicant wife is to retain and be solely
entitled to the proceeds of all bank accounts standing in her sole name.
(2) The Applicant wife is to retain and be solely entitled to the sum of $300.00
being the proceeds of sale of a Daihatsu Mira motor
(3) The Applicant is entitled to retain and is solely entitled to the following
items of personalty:
household contents;
(b) Two Bolex
movie cameras;
(c) A painting
of a boat by Percival;
(d) A crayon
picture by Arthur Murch;
docking saw;
(f) A Comet
welding set;
(g) A 200 litre
welding set;
(h) A quantity
of stackable tool boxes currently in her possession;
(i) A Bosch
power drill;
(j) An Ozito
angle driver and diamond tools;
(k) A Dremel
grinder and diamond tools;
(l) An Abbott
& Ashley polisher machine;
(m) A Wurth
cabinet of consumables;
(n) A washing
machine currently in her possession;
(o) All items
of furniture in her possession.
(4) The Applicant is declared to be solely entitled to the following
(a) The caravan
standing at [address omitted] in the State of New South Wales; and
(b) The replica
Stradivarius violin held by Mr F at [omitted] in Melbourne.
(5) The Respondent is to do all things and sign all documents necessary to
facilitate the items in Order (4) above being put into
the possession of the
(6) The Applicant is to be liable and indemnify the Respondent and keep him
indemnified for the following liabilities:
(a) A debt of
$2,500.00 owing to the Applicant’s mother Ms G;
(b) An amount
of $670.00 owing to an apprentice; and
(c) An amount
of $800.00 being a telephone account owing to Optus.
(7) The Respondent is declared to be solely entitled to a painting of himself by
David Renn and the Applicant is to do all things
necessary to put the Respondent
into possession of that item at the Respondent’s expense.
(8) The Respondent is declared to be solely entitled to the following items of
personalty:
(a) A Toyota
Hilux motor vehicle currently in his possession;
(b) A quantity
of blacksmithing tools currently in his possession; and
(c) All other
items of personalty currently in his possession or control.
(9) The Respondent is to pay to the Applicant the sum of $87.00 within two (2)
months of the date of these Orders.
IT IS NOTED
publication of this judgment under the pseudonym
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYC 658 of 2012
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Application
is an Application for settlement of property between parties to a marriage.
Applicant is the wife. She seeks orders as set out in her Application filed on 9
February 2012, being:
1. That the
net assets and resources of the marriage be divided between the Applicant and
the Respondent with the caravan, blacksmithing
and general tools and trailer
being divided 50 per cent to each party and 100 per cent of the remainder to the
2. That all
amounts due from the Respondent to the Applicant be paid by the Respondent and
any remaining issues regarding the property
be addressed min the distribution of
that property.
Respondent filed a Response seeking these orders on a final
1. That the
Applicant return all of my tools and personal effects as listed in Part O of my
Financial Statement filed in these proceedings
and all of my personal papers and
documents in her possession.
Respondent has also sought an expedited final hearing of the Application as he
has deposed that he is suffering from a terminal
illness. He has forwarded to
the Court a medical certificate signed by a Dr B of [omitted] dated 2 April 2012
stating that he suffers
from Mesothelioma, an asbestos-related pulmonary disease
which is incurable and terminal.
the basis of this diagnosis the Respondent was granted leave to attend Court by
telephone, as his medical certificate states that
he is unable to travel.
Respondent was not represented by a lawyer.
Applicant was born [in] 1954.
Respondent was born [in] 1953.
parties were married [in] 2009 and separated on or about 31 August 2011. They
are not divorced.
are no children of the marriage.
Applicant commenced these proceedings by filing an Application, a Financial
Statement and a supporting affidavit on 9 February
Respondent filed a Response, a Financial Statement and an affidavit in support
on 4 June 2012. On that same date the parties were
directed to attend a
Conciliation Conference before a Registrar of the Court.
parties attended the Conciliation Conference on 20 July 2012 but the matter did
not settle.
Application was listed for final hearing on 23 November 2012.
Applicant and her solicitor, Mr Roberts, attended Court for the hearing. The
Respondent attended by telephone. The parties agreed
that no witness was
required for cross-examination, so the matter proceeded by a consideration of
the affidavit material. The Applicant’s
solicitor and the Respondent each
made oral submissions.
The Proper Approach to Determination of a Property Application
way a court approaches property matters has been authoritatively set out by the
Full Court of the Family Court in its decision
Nicholson CJ, Ellis & O’Ryan JJ held at [39]:
law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of an
application brought pursuant to the provisions
That approach involved
four inter-related steps. Firstly, the Court should make findings as to the
identity and value of the property,
liabilities and financial resources of the
parties at the date of the hearing. Secondly, the Court should identify and
contributions of the parties within the meaning of
ss. 79(4)(a)
and (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties
expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property
of parties. Thirdly,
the Court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in
, (e), (f) and (g), (the “other factors”) including, because
s. 79(4)(e)
, the matters referred to in
so far as they are relevant
and determine the adjustment (if any) that should be made to the contribution
based entitlements of the
parties established at step two. Fourthly, the Court
should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what
order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the
Court should also have regard to the recent decision of the High Court of
Australia in
the majority held at [35] - [37]:
recalled that
provides that “[t]he court shall not make an order
under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances,
just and equitable to make the order”.
Section 79(4)
prescribes matters
that must be taken into account in considering what order (if any) should be
made under the section. The requirements
of the two sub-sections are not to be
conflated. In every case in which a property settlement order under
sought, it is necessary to satisfy the court that, in all the circumstances, it
is just and equitable to make the order.
expression “just and equitable” is a qualitative description of a
conclusion reached after examination of a range
of potentially competing
considerations. It is not possible to chart its metes and bounds. And while the
power given by
is not “to be exercised in accordance with fixed
rules”, nevertheless, three fundamental propositions must not be obscured.
is necessary to begin consideration of whether it is just and equitable to make
a property settlement order by identifying,
according to ordinary common law and
equitable principles, the
legal and equitable interests of the
parties in the
property...
The Parties’ Property and Liabilities
Unfortunately,
the parties have not prepared an agreed balance sheet or any statement of agreed
value of the assets. However, the
Applicant has sworn an affidavit on 30 July
2012 to which she has annexed various list of items of property. She deposes
that a number
of items on the lists provided by the Respondent no longer
Applicant has annexed to her affidavit and marked with the letter
“D” a list of assets and liabilities, to which she
paragraphs [7] to [10] of her affidavit, saying:
to the best of my knowledge and belief the only substantial assets and
liabilities of the marriage are those set out in
Annexure D. The other items
referred to by the Respondent in Annexures A to C do not exist to the best of my
knowledge and belief.
also set out in the second column on Annexure D the current location of all the
items on that list in terms of whether
they are in the possession or control of
the Respondent or myself.
set out in the fourth column on Annexure D my position as to which items should
go to the Respondent and which items should
go to me. In the last column I have
allowed space for the Respondent to provide his response regarding each of these
10. Furthermore
there are a number of items that (are) contained in the Respondent’s lists
in Annexures B and C that are not
in the list in Annexure D as they do not exist
to my knowledge and
Applicant goes on to depose that she perused lists provided by the Respondent
and says that a considerable number of the items
on those lists do not exist.
The Applicant goes on to say at paragraph [13]:
basis of the above evidence I request the Court to refer only to Annexure D as
the correct list of the current assets and
liabilities of the marriage for the
purposes of these
proceedings.
parties have each filed a Financial Statement, neither of which is particularly
and little in the way of
affidavit evidence as to the provenance of items whose value is in dispute. Each
party seems want to conduct
the case on an asset-by-asset basis rather than
taking a global view of the totality of the assets to be divided (see
the same time, Mr Roberts, who appeared for the Applicant, submitted that the
Applicant seeks 65% of the total value of the joint
assets whilst the Respondent
submitted that he only sought 17 and a half per cent of the assets. It is rare,
in my experience, that
the total value of the percentages argued by the parties
falls short of 100%.
the best I can, from the parties’ financial statements and the
Applicant’s balance sheet annexed to her affidavit
of 30 July 2012, I find
the asset pool to be:
Applicant’s Commonwealth Bank Account $41.00
Applicant’s
Bendigo Bank Account $120.00
Applicant’s
household contents $2,000.00
Mira motor vehicle sold by Applicant $300.00
Toyota Hilux 4WD
(Respondent’s
possession)
Blacksmithing
tools (Respondent’s possession) $8,000.00
trailer (Respondent’s possession) $2,500.00
Respondent’s
Commonwealth Bank account $8.00
guns (with Respondent’s friend Mr A) $2,000.00
equipment (Respondent’s possession) $600.00
movie cameras (Applicant’s
possession) $7,500.00
Stradivarius violin (Mr
F) $2,500.00
of boat by Percival
(Applicant) $700.00
by Arthur Murch
(Applicant) $3,000.00
of the Respondent by David
Renn $3,000.00
Docking saw
(Applicant) $300.00
welding set
(Applicant) $400.00
litre water tank
(Applicant) $200.00
boxes (Applicant) $2,200.00
power drill
(Applicant) $200.00
angle grinder and disc
(Applicant) $120.00
grinder & diamond tools
(Applicant) $220.00
& Ashley polisher machine
(Applicant) $660.00
cabinet of consumables
(Applicant) $1,000.00
items of furniture (Applicant’s possession)
machine (Applicant’s
possession) $500.00
non-superannuation assets
are various assets claimed to be held by one party rather than the other, such
as a John Deere Golf Mower said to be worth $12,000.00
in the possession of the
Respondent and items such as a handmade Tomahawk and a Michael Hirst (whatever
that may be) said to be worth
$5,000.00 and $3,000 respectively in the
possession of the Applicant, but there is no evidence about them, particularly
their value.
Applicant claims that the Respondent claims to have an unused Sine Wave
Converter worth $3,500.00 in his possession, but, again,
there is no evidence
party claims to have any superannuation.
“D” to the Applicant’s affidavit
of 30 July 2012. The
Respondent does not deny the existence of these liabilities.
Accordingly,
I find the parties’ liabilities to be the following:
to the Applicant from her mother: $2,500.00
Superannuation
payment due to Apprentice: $670.00
telephone bill: $800.00
Total liabilities
find the net value of the asset pool to be
The Parties’ Contributions
Applicant deposes in her affidavit of 11 November 2012 that there were two
periods of cohabitation between herself and the Respondent.
As to the first
period of cohabitation, she deposes:
Respondent and I started a relationship about 22 years ago and we cohabitated
together for about 6 years.
that time we lived in a variety of locations in New South Wales and Queensland
finally moving to [G], Sydney. I left the
relationship in about 1996 after the
Respondent assaulted me at home in
Applicant also deposes that they commenced to cohabit again in October 2008 and
were married at [omitted], New South Wales, [in]
2009. They separated on or
Applicant claims that throughout the latter period of cohabitation she and the
Respondent were involved in a start-up business
aiming to [omitted]. They
incorporated a company called [F] Pty Limited, of which the Applicant was the
sole director and, for a
time, secretary. They formed a joint venture with a
company called [S] Pty Ltd and formed a company called [H] Pty Ltd for the
of operating the [omitted] project. The promised investment of
$200,000.00 never eventuated and the project went into liquidation.
Applicant claims she also made a contribution as homemaker and carer for the
Respondent, who was on a disability support pension.
She was receiving an
invalid pension. She deposed that in about April 2010 she became the
Respondent’s primary carer:
He had just
lost his driver’s licence and he was frequently under the influence of
alcohol so I became his driver and carer.
I applied for and obtained a
Carer’s Supplement from the Commonwealth Government in the amount of
approximately $100 per
Applicant also deposes that during both periods of cohabitation the Respondent
was frequently violent towards her and her two
children of another relationship.
She reported some of those assaults to the Police.
his affidavit affirmed on 1 June 2012 the Respondent denies that he and the
Applicant cohabited from about 1990. He denies assaulting
her. He concedes that
he was involved in a relationship with the Applicant but denies that it was an
exclusive relationship.
Respondent refers to several business ventures in which he and the Applicant
were involved between 1990 and 2000, such as the
purchase of a [omitted] and a
[omitted] service. He claims that he gave to the Applicant an amount in excess
of $100,000.00 over
Applicant is claiming that there have been two discrete periods of cohabitation
between the Respondent and herself:
relationship from 1990 to 1996; and
period from about October 2008 until about 31 August 2011, during which time the
parties were married, on [date omitted] 2009.
Respondent denies that the parties were in a
relationship from
1990 to 1996.
my view, taking the Applicant’s claim at its highest, if the parties were
involved in a
relationship in this earlier period, on her own
evidence it came to an end in 1996. The parties’ resumption of
cohabitation
in October 2008 and subsequent marriage in [omitted] 2009 cannot
bring the earlier relationship within the jurisdiction of the Court.
Court has no jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act
to deal with property
matters arising out of
relationships that came to an end before
the commencement of the
Family Law Amendment (De Facto Financial Matters and
Other Measures) Act 2008
on 1 March 2009
Court has jurisdiction to deal with the Applicant’s claim arising out of
the marriage in [omitted] 2009, including the claim
that cohabitation commenced
in October 2008.
Applicant claims that this period of cohabitation came to an end on or about 31
August 2011. However, this is specifically denied
by the Respondent in his
affidavit of 1 June 2012, where he states at [9]:
Applicant and I separated in about February 2011. I left the premises at [G]
after an argument and apart from seeing each other
for a couple of days here and
there since that time, we have not lived
parties elected to proceed on the papers by way of submissions only. Where the
parties do not give oral evidence, the Court is
not able to have that evidence
tested by cross-examination and is unable to make a definitive finding of fact
on a matter in dispute
unless there is some other independent evidence.
the Court can only make a finding about the length of cohabitation where there
is no opposing evidence. Accordingly, the period
of cohabitation must be
regarded as from October 2008 to February 2011, as the Respondent denies that
the parties did not separate
until the end of August 2011.
Applicant is claiming that domestic violence by the Respondent should be taken
into account under s.79 when assessing her contributions.
She sets out in her
affidavit evidence a broad claim of violence towards her by the
Respondent:
27. When we
started to cohabit again in October 2008 I thought that the Respondent has left
his violent tendencies behind and for
a while he was not violent towards me.
However about six months after we were married he started again on me. For the
next 18 months
or so after the violence towards me escalated and I needed to
call the po9lice about six (6) times because I had become terrified
28. Towards
the end of our period of cohabitation the arguments and violence became too
much. He had become paranoid and kept accusing
me falsely of having affairs. In
the end I decided that I couldn’t take this any longer and asked him to
Respondent denies the allegations of violence in his affidavit of 1 June 2012 at
paragraph [21]:
objection to her involvement in these activities would lead to serious arguments
resulting in the Applicant making false
allegations and the issue of various
AVO’s against me. I also suffered the indignity of being incarcerated as a
result of an
alleged breach of an AVO, only to have this, and all other,
AVO’s ultimately
my view, the allegations of family violence, which are denied, are so
broadly-based that the Applicant has not substantiated her
claim that her
contributions have been made more difficult by the Respondent’s behaviour
evidence is not sufficient.
evidence is only sufficient to establish a period of cohabitation of two years
and four months, including the period from October
2008 up to the parties’
marriage on [date omitted] 2009. Contributions are of particular importance in
the case of a short
this case, both parties took relatively little by way of assets into the
marriage and their respective incomes were relatively
low, being an invalid
pension on the part of the Applicant and a disability support pension on the
part of the
Respondent.
Respondent has been suffering from Mesothelioma for several years, which he
describes as
“a very painful and debilitating
The applicant deposed that from about April 2010 she became the primary carer
for the Respondent, who no longer had a driver’s
licence. The
parties’ accounts differ as to the circumstances in which the Respondent
parted with his licence but the Applicant
claims that she became the
Respondent’s driver and carer and obtained a Carer’s Supplement in
the amount of approximately
$100.00 per fortnight.
my view, acting as her husband’s carer would constitute a contribution by
the Applicant above that which would otherwise
be the case.
all the circumstances, I assess the parties’ contributions as 60% to the
Applicant and 40% to the Respondent.
Other Factors taken into Account under Subsection 79(4)(d) to (g)
(d) of subsection 79(4) requires the Court to take into account the effect of
any proposed order on the earning capacity
of either party. There will be no
effect on the earning capacity of either party.
(e) of subsection 79(4) requires the Court to take into account the matters
referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they
are relevant.
Applicant was born [in] 1954. She is currently 58 years old. She deposed in her
affidavit of 11 November 2012 that:
result of the violence inflicted by the Respondent I suffer ongoing
post-traumatic anxiety and depression. In the past I needed
counselling for this
and in the future I expect that I am going to need more counselling from time to
Applicant has not provided any medical evidence as to her anxiety or
depression.
Respondent was born [in] 1953. He is 59 years old and is due to attain the age
of 60 years in just under two months’ time.
The Respondent deposed in his
affidavit of 1 June 2012 that:
the later stages of Mesothelioma, a very painful and debilitating terminal
disease, I humbly request that this Honourable
Court grant an expedited hearing
of this matter so that I may enjoy what little time I have left, perhaps only
Respondent has forwarded to the Court a medical certificate dated 2 April 2012
from Dr B, a general medical practitioner stating
that he is suffering from
incurable and terminal Mesothelioma.
party is in employment. The Applicant states that she is in receipt of a
disability support pension and receives an income
of $374.40 per week. The
Respondent states that he receives a pension from the Department of Veterans
Affairs which provides him
with an income of $354.00 per week. Neither party
appears to have the capacity to engage in gainful employment.
party has the care and control of a child of the marriage who has not attained
the age of 18 years.
party has the duty to maintain a child or any other person.
party has the responsibility to support any other person.
Applicant is in receipt of a disability support pension. The Respondent is in
receipt of a pension from the Department of Veterans
Affairs. Neither party has
any entitlement to any superannuation.
parties’ standard of living seems not to have changed since they
marriage was of relatively short duration, with a period of cohabitation of only
two years and four months.
party is cohabiting with any other person.
are no issues of child support under the
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
(s.79(4)(e)
is no other fact or circumstance which, in the opinion of the Court, the justice
of the case requires to be taken into account.
are no other orders under the
Family Law Act
affecting either of the
(s.79(4)(f)).
there is to be any order for property adjustment at all, it would appear that an
adjustment should be made in favour of the Respondent
because of his terminal
Mesothelioma, which may well require additional medical and care expenses. The
Respondent has not provided
any details of any such needs. He no longer has a
driver’s licence. If there is to be an adjustment in his favour, it would
be in the nature of five per cent.
Just and Equitable
provides that:
shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all
the circumstances, it is just and equitable
to make the
subsection has taken on a greater significance as a result of the decision of
the High Court in
now seems clear that the Court should consider whether it is just and equitable
to make an order at all.
my view the Court should make orders altering the interests of the parties with
respect to the property of the parties to the marriage
or either of them.
Although they are not divorced and there is no evidence of any pending Divorce
Application, it is clear that the
relationship of the parties has irretrievably
broken down and there is no reasonable likelihood that cohabitation will resume.
party claims that the other party has one or more items in their possession that
belongs to them, although it is sometimes difficult
to ascertain which one of
them was the original owner of a particular item. In many cases, that is of no
significance.
the other hand, there are some items in the possession of one party that quite
clearly should be transferred to the other. A case
in point is a painting of the
Respondent by David Renn, which is currently in the Applicant’s
possession. She would be more
than pleased for it to go to the Respondent.
difficulty is that there is no available sum of money or any real estate. The
net asset pool consists largely of items of personalty.
However, the Court must
consider the overall value asset pool, which amounts to the relatively modest
figure of $42,269.00.
my view, there should be an adjustment in the Respondent’s favour of 5%,
for the reasons referred to in paragraph [70] above.
Applicant will therefore be entitled to 55% of the net assets, amounting to
$23,248.00 in round figures.
Respondent will accordingly be entitled to 45% of the net assets, amounting to
$19,021.00 in round figures.
Applicant will retain:
Commonwealth Bank Account $41.00
Bendigo Bank Account $120.00
household contents $2,000.00
proceeds of sale of the Daihatsu Mira car $300.00
Bolex movie cameras $7,500.00
painting of the boat by Percival $700.00
crayon by Arthur Murch $3,000.00
CMG docking saw $300.00
Comet welding set $400.00
200 litre water tank $200.00
stackable tool boxes $2,200.00
Bosch power drill $200.00
Ozito angle grinder and disc $120.00
Dremel grinder and diamond tools $220.00
Abbott & Ashley polisher machine $660.00
Wurth cabinet of consumables $1,000.00
furniture in her possession $2,170.00
machine $500.00
above items are already in the possession of the Applicant.
Applicant should be responsible for payment of the loan from her mother
amounting to $2,500.00. She also appears to have assumed
responsibility for
payment of the other liabilities, being the superannuation payment of $670.00
due to the apprentice and the Optus
telephone bill. This does not mean that the
Respondent should avoid liability, but due to his state of health it would
be more likely that the Applicant will see that these outstanding
amounts are paid. An allowance should be made accordingly.
means that the replica Stradivarius violin, said to be worth $2,500.00, and the
caravan, said to be worth $3,000.00, should be
transferred to the Applicant. In
my view, the evidence from the Applicant indicates that these two items should
more properly be
placed with her.
portrait of the Respondent by David Renn, currently in the possession of the
Applicant, should go to the Respondent.
Applicant will therefore receive or retain assets worth $27,131.00 and will
incur the responsibility of the liabilities, which
amount to $3,970.00. The net
total that she receives will amount to $23,161.00.
may be argued that this will lead to a shortfall of $87.00, but in my view that
cannot be helped. The Respondent will retain the
Toyota Hilux which the
Applicant sought. It would not be just and equitable to require that vehicle or
any other asset to be sold
to make up such a relatively small amount, but an
order will be made that the Respondent should pay that sum to the Applicant. He
will be allowed two months to pay.
Respondent will retain the other items of personalty currently in his
possession.
parties need to be aware that property settlement proceedings under
Family Law Act
are not intended to be precise mathematical exercises and
the Court will not normally undergo a piece by piece analysis of the provenance
of every item of personal property that forms part of the asset pool.
is regrettable that the parties were not able to negotiate a fair division of
such a modest asset pool without the need for litigation
to a final hearing.
I certify that the preceding eighty-nine (89) paragraphs are a
true copy of the reasons for judgment of Scarlett FM
Date: 4 April 2013
[2003] FamCA 395
(2003) 30 Fam LR 35; FLC
[2012] HCA 52
Affidavit of Ms Deeley 30.7.2012 at paragraphs
(1983) 9 Fam LR 385
(1984) FLC 91-543
possession of the Respondent – claimed by the Applicant
Claimed by the
value – claimed by both
Respondent claims it is worth
Agreed value
Agreed value – currently in the possession of the Applicant but she
concedes it should go to the
Agreed value
Agreed value
Agreed value
Agreed value
Agreed value
Agreed value
Agreed value
Agreed value
Agreed value
These are not referred to by
Respondent claims it is worth
Affidavit of Ms Deeley 11.11.2012 at paragraphs
Affidavit of Ms Deeley 11.11.2012 at
of Mr Dallas affirmed 1.6.2012 at paragraph
of Mr Dallas 1.6.2012 at
of Ms Deeley 11.11.2012 at
Affidavit of Mr Dallas 1.6.2012 at
[1997] FamCA 27
Affidavit of Ms Deeley 11.11.2012 at [20]
Affidavit Of
Mr Dallas 1.6.2012 at
of Ms Deeley 11.11.2012 at
of Mr Dallas 1.6.2012 at
RTF format (181 KB)
Signed PDF/A format