Application by AusNet Electricity Services Pty Ltd [2017] ACompT 3 (17 October 2017)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by AusNet Electricity
Services Pty Ltd
[2017] ACompT 3
Review from:
Australian Energy Regulator
Final Decision:
AusNet Services distribution determination 2016 to 2020
File number:
ACT 8 of 2016
ROBERTSON J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
MR RF SHOGREN
DR DR ABRAHAM (MEMBER)
Date of Determination:
Catchwords:
ENERGY AND RESOURCES
– application
under s 71B of the
National Electricity Law
for review of
distribution determination by the Australian Energy Regulator (
–whether reviewable error on the part of the AER – topics for review
– return on debt: Bloomberg Valuation Service
(BVAL) curve –
forecasting opex: self-insurance
Legislation:
National Electricity Law
National Electricity Rules
Cases cited:
Application by ActewAGL Distribution
[2010] ACompT 4
Application by ActewAGL Distribution
[2017] ACompT 2
Application by APT Allgas Energy Limited (No 2)
[2012] ACompT
Application by Envestra Limited (No 2)
[2012] ACompT 4
Application by Jemena Gas Networks (NSW) Ltd (No 5)
[2011] ACompT 10
Application by Jemena Gas Networks (NSW) Ltd
[2016] ACompT 5
Applications by Public Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd and Ausgrid
[2016] ACompT 1
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Australian Competition
[2006] FCAFC 83
Australian Energy Regulator v Australian Competition Tribunal (No 2)
[2017] FCAFC 79
Dates of hearing:
14-18, 21-25 November 2016
Date of last submissions:
Dates of Community Consultation:
6 and 7 October 2016
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for AusNet Electricity Services Pty
Mr PJ Bick QC with Mr AJ Weinstock
Solicitor for AusNet Electricity Services Pty Ltd:
Counsel for the Australian Energy Regulator:
Mr MH O’Bryan QC with Ms KL Walker QC, Mr J Arnott and Mr T
Solicitor for the Australian Energy Regulator:
Australian Government Solicitor
Counsel for the Minister for Energy, Environment and Climate Change for the
State of Victoria, Intervener:
Mr SR Horgan QC with Mr GR McCormick
Solicitor for the Minister for Energy, Environment and Climate Change for
the State of Victoria, Intervener:
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 8 of 2016
IN THE MATTER OF APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 71B OF THE NATIONAL
ELECTRICITY LAW FOR A REVIEW OF A DISTRIBUTION DETERMINATION MADE BY
AUSTRALIAN ENERGY REGULATOR IN RELATION TO AUSNET ELECTRICITY SERVICES PTY LTD
PURSUANT TO CLAUSES 6.11.1 AND 11.60.4 OF THE
NATIONAL ELECTRICITY
AUSNET ELECTRICITY SERVICES PTY LTD (ACN 064 651
ROBERTSON J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
SHOGREN (MEMBER)
DR DR ABRAHAM (MEMBER)
DETERMINATION:
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES THAT:
reviewable regulatory decision, being the
Final Decision AusNet Services
distribution determination 2016 to 2020
, is affirmed.
THE TRIBUNAL NOTES:
the AER’s error in calculation identified at
[376] of its reasons in
Application by ActewAGL Distribution
and, in accordance with [377] of those reasons, leaves it to the AER to
determine the appropriate response to its error.
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
THE TRIBUNAL:
INTRODUCTION
THE STATUTORY
RETURN ON DEBT – BLOOMBERG
VALUATION SERVICE (BVAL) CURVE
What the AER decided
The applicant’s
submissions
submissions
UnitingCare Australia’s
submissions
The Tribunal’s
FORECASTING OPEX –
SELF-INSURANCE
What the AER decided
The applicant’s
submissions
submissions
submissions
The Tribunal’s
CONCLUSION AND
DETERMINATION
INTRODUCTION
reasons concern two issues which involve only one distribution network service
), AusNet Electricity Services Pty Ltd (
They arise from the AER’s final decision and distribution determination
Final Decision: AusNet Services distribution determination 2016 to
Final Decision
), published on 26 May 2016.
reasons are to be read with the reasons in
Application by ActewAGL
Distribution
[2017] ACompT 2.
Those reasons provide the relevant
background.
two issues to which we have referred are (i) return on debt – Bloomberg
Valuation Service (
) curve and (ii) forecasting opex –
self-insurance.
THE STATUTORY FRAMEWORK
basis of the Tribunal’s powers of review is as follows.
National Electricity Law (
71C Grounds for review
(1) An application under section 71B(1) may be made only on 1 or more of the
following grounds:
(a) the AER made an error of fact in its
findings of facts, and that error of fact was material to the making of the
(b) the AER made more than 1 error of fact in its findings of facts, and that
those errors of fact, in combination, were material
to the making of the
(c) the exercise of the AER's discretion was incorrect, having regard to all the
circumstances;
(d) the AER's decision was unreasonable, having regard to all the
circumstances.
(1a) An application under section 71B(1) must also
specify the manner in which a determination made by the Tribunal varying the
regulatory decision, or setting aside the reviewable regulatory
decision and a fresh decision being made by the AER following remission
matter to the AER by the Tribunal, on the basis of 1 or more grounds raised in
the application, either separately or collectively,
would, or would be likely
to, result in a materially preferable NEO decision.
(2) It is for the applicant to establish a ground listed in subsection (1) and
the matter referred to in subsection (1a).
“national electricity objective” (
) set out in s 7 stated
as follows:
7 National electricity objective
The objective of this Law is to promote efficient investment in, and efficient
operation and use of, electricity services for the
long term interests of
consumers of electricity with respect to--
(a) price, quality, safety, reliability and security of supply of electricity;
(b) the reliability, safety and security of the national electricity
expression “materially preferable NEO decision” was defined in s 71A
with reference to s 71P(2a)(c) as follows:
71P Tribunal must make determination
(1) If, following an application, the Tribunal grants leave in accordance with
section 71B(1), the Tribunal must make a determination
in respect of the
application.
See section 71Q for the time limit within
which the Tribunal must make its
determination.
(2) Subject to subsection (2a), a determination under
this section may--
(a) affirm the reviewable regulatory
decision; or
(b) vary the reviewable regulatory decision; or
(c) set aside the reviewable regulatory decision and remit the matter back to
the AER to make the decision again in accordance with
any direction or
recommendation of the Tribunal.
(2a) Despite subsection (2), the Tribunal may only make
a determination--
(a) to vary the reviewable regulatory
decision under subsection (2)(b); or
(b) to set aside the reviewable regulatory decision and remit the matter back to
the AER under subsection (2)(c),
(c) the Tribunal is satisfied that to do so
will, or is likely to, result in a decision that is materially preferable to the
regulatory decision in making a contribution to the achievement of
the national electricity objective (a
“materially preferable NEO
) (and if the Tribunal is not so satisfied the Tribunal must
affirm the decision); and
(d) in the case of a determination to vary the reviewable regulatory
decision--the Tribunal is satisfied that to do so will not require
the Tribunal
to undertake an assessment of such complexity that the preferable course of
action would be to set aside the reviewable
regulatory decision and remit the
matter to the AER to make the decision
(2b) In connection with the operation of subsection (2a)
(and without limiting any other matter that may be relevant under this Law)--
(a) the Tribunal must consider how the
constituent components of the reviewable regulatory decision interrelate with
each other and
with the matters raised as a ground for review; and
(b) without limiting paragraph (a), the Tribunal must take into account the
revenue and pricing principles (in the same manner in
which the AER is to take
into account these principles under section 16); and
(c) the Tribunal must, in assessing the extent of contribution to the
achievement of the national electricity objective, consider
the reviewable
regulatory decision as a whole; and
(d) the following matters must not, in themselves, determine the question about
whether a materially preferable NEO decision exists:
(i) the establishment of a
ground for review under section 71C(1);
(ii) consequences for, or impacts on, the average annual regulated revenue of a
regulated network service provider;
(iii) that the amount that is specified in or derived from the reviewable
regulatory decision exceeds the amount specified in section
(2c) If the Tribunal makes a determination under
subsection (2)(b) or (c), the Tribunal must specify in its determination--
(a) the manner in which it has taken into
account the interrelationship between the constituent components of the
reviewable regulatory
decision and how they relate to the matters raised as a
ground for review as contemplated by subsection (2b)(a); and
(b) in the case of a determination to vary the reviewable regulatory
decision--the reasons why it is proceeding to make the variation
in view of the
requirements of subsection (2a)(d).
(3) For the purposes of making a determination of the
kind in subsection (2)(a) or (b), the Tribunal may perform all the functions
exercise all the powers of the AER under this Law or the Rules.
(4) (Repealed)
(5) A determination by the Tribunal affirming, varying or setting aside the
reviewable regulatory decision is, for the purposes of
this Law (other than this
Part), to be taken to be a decision of the AER.
refer to the decision of the Full Court in
Australian Energy Regulator v
Australian Competition Tribunal (No 2)
[2017] FCAFC 79
general review of the content of the grounds of (limited) merits review in s 71C
note in particular what the Full Court said at [146] and [148]-[149] about
“findings of fact”, as follows:
... the AER submitted that when the Tribunal considered
whether there was an “error of fact”, the concept of
set a threshold that was not passed simply because there was
material that could support a different finding of fact or simply because
Tribunal might, if it considered the material afresh, prefer to make a different
finding of fact:
at [326] and
WA Gas Networks
at [22]. Thus
far we agree.
... we accept the submission on behalf of the electricity network respondents
that the concept of ‘findings of fact’
encompasses more than
‘primary’ fact finding. In our opinion, findings of facts within s
71C would generally include
inferences drawn from primary facts or conclusions
drawn from primary facts. We would also observe that we would not regard
‘evaluative
judgment’ as an appropriate discrimen for the purposes
of s 71C. In our opinion, depending on the particular circumstances,
‘findings of fact’ may include such a finding even where it is based
on an ‘evaluative judgment’.
... In our view the touchstone for s 71C material error is that the Tribunal may
not act where there is no error and error is not
made out by choosing one
available fact or opinion over others. For example, the mere availability of a
different inference from
facts would not establish error within s 71C: the
Tribunal must find that there was error in the AER’s decision-making
it may intervene.
RETURN ON DEBT – BLOOMBERG VALUATION SERVICE (BVAL) CURVE
What the AER decided
page 3-115 of Attachment 3 to the Final Determination, the AER said:
We are satisfied that using a third party data series
(or multiple series), appropriately chosen, is commensurate with the efficient
debt financing costs of a benchmark efficient entity. It is also consistent with
the rule requirement that the change in revenue
(resulting from the annual debt
update) is effected through the automatic application of a formula that is
specified in the determination.
This is because:
A third party data series can be practically applied in the
annual debt update process—We discuss this point further below.
A third party data series is independent information developed by finance
experts with access to financial datasets—These
experts develop this
independently from the regulatory process and for the use of market
practitioners.
Using a third party data series also reduces the scope for debate on debt
instrument selection and curve fitting—For instance,
independent data
service providers have already exercised their judgement on bond selection,
curve fitting and adjusting yields.
However, we still must exercise our
regulatory judgement to assess which third party data series (or combination of
series) is better
suited for contributing to the achievement of the ARORO.
pages 3-118 and following of Attachment 3 to the Final Determination, the AER
said, omitting footnotes:
Choice of third party data series (including
adjustments)
In the previous section, we explained our decision is to use third party
published data series to estimate the allowed return on
debt, rather than
deriving our own data series. In this section, we explain our choice of third
party data series, including adjustments
we have decided to make to those data
Our decision is to adopt a simple average of the debt data series published by
the RBA and Bloomberg that match, as close as available,
our benchmarks of a
BBB+ credit rating and a 10 year debt term. Specifically, our decision is to
adopt a simple average of:
the 10 year estimate from the non-financial corporate BBB
rated data series published by the RBA (the RBA curve), and
the 10 year yield estimate from the Australian corporate BBB rated Bloomberg
Valuation Service (BVAL) data series published by
Bloomberg (the BVAL curve).
The RBA and BVAL curves are both 'broad BBB' rated data
series in that they reflect bond pricing generally across the BBB+, BBB and
rated spectrum of bonds.
Our decision is also to make certain adjustments to the RBA and BVAL curves so
these rates are consistent with our 10 year benchmark
debt term and also so they
can be applied across the dates of a service provider's averaging periods. Those
adjustments are:
For the RBA curve, to extrapolate the data series from a 'target' 10 year term
to an 'effective' 10 year term using the method recommended
by Dr Lally (the
Lally method), to interpolate the monthly data points to produce daily
estimates, and to convert the estimates from
a semi-annual to an effective
annual rate.
For the BVAL curve, to convert the estimates from a
semi-annual to an effective annual rate.
The above positions are consistent with the approach we adopted in the first
round of decisions since the publication of the Guideline,
the most recent being
our decisions released in November 2015.
We are satisfied that a simple average of the two curves
will result in a return on debt that contributes to the achievement of the
ARORO. This is because:
Based on analysis of the bond selection criteria (including
approach for identifying outliers), we consider that both approaches
employed by
the RBA and Bloomberg have their unique strengths and weaknesses, but we are not
satisfied that either is clearly superior.
Based on analysis of the curve fitting (or averaging) methodologies, we
consider that both approaches have their unique strengths
and weaknesses, but we
are not satisfied that either is clearly superior.
Both curves require adjustments from their published form to make them
fit-for-purpose, and we are not satisfied that either can
be more simply or
reliably adjusted to estimate the annual return on debt.
A simple average is consistent with expert advice from Dr Lally that we adopt a
simple average of the BVAL curve and the RBA curve,
subject to the necessary
adjustments to each curve. In particular, Lally concluded that based on analysis
of the curves, it was reasonably
likely that a simple average of the two curves
would produce an estimator with a lower mean squared error (MSE) than using
curve in isolation. Lally also advised:
...on the question of which
index better reflects the cost of debt for the efficient benchmark entity, there
is no clear winner.
The two curves have regularly produced materially different
results at particular points in time. Both curves have their strengths
shortcomings, but it is not clear to us that one approach is clearly superior.
Consequently, when the curves depart, we consider
it is not easily discernible
which curve produces estimates that better reflect the efficient financing costs
of a benchmark efficient
entity. We also note that the BVAL curve has produced
estimates both higher than, lower than, and similar to, the RBA curve, depending
on the particular point in time. So there is no clear indication that one curve
produces systematically higher or lower estimates
than the other.
A simple average of two curves, in these circumstances, is consistent with the
Tribunal's decision in the ActewAGL matter where
the Tribunal concluded that:
...if the AER cannot find a
basis upon which to distinguish between the published curves, it is appropriate
to average the yields
provided by each curve, so long as the published curves
are widely used and market
A simple average of the two curves will reduce the likely
price shock if either curve becomes unavailable or produces erroneous estimates
during the period.
We have assessed the new information received in current proposals from service
providers who recommend that we depart from our previous
position of adopting a
simple average of the RBA and BVAL curves. That new information does not
persuade us to depart from our position
or reasons from recent decisions. We
explain our reasons for this decision in the remainder of this section and in
Appendix I.
We also requested Dr Lally review the recommendations from his previous report
in light of the material submitted by service providers
with current proposals.
As part of that analysis, we requested Dr Lally review both the AER's approach
and the various approaches
proposed by service providers with current proposals
against a set of criteria drawn from the requirements of the law and the rules,
including the ARORO. After reviewing that material, Dr Lally concluded:
...the AER’s proposed approach
satisfies the criteria and these criteria are not satisfied by any other
proposed approach.
Finally, I have previously provided advice on these implementation issues to the
AER and nothing in these submissions warrants any
change in that
This is by no means a complete extract of the AER’s
Appendix I, the AER set out its more detailed analysis on its responses to
issues raised by key stakeholders, including: the Reuters
curve; new criticisms
of the BVAL curve; and other issues. It said, at page 3-320, in relation to its
detailed analysis of the key
issues raised by stakeholders relating to the
implementation of the return on debt approach:
Overall, we consider that much of this analysis
indicates the shortcomings of annual testing or re-evaluation of the choice of
series at each decision stage. Much of the new analysis submitted prior to
this decision is based on ex-post analysis of the performance
of yield curves
over a short averaging period. In contrast, we require service providers to
specify averaging periods ahead of time
because this avoids the introduction of
bias into the analysis that can arise where the outcome of the choice is already
known. Especially
where this analysis is highly qualitative, we are not
satisfied that this process can be automatically implemented by application
Importantly, we must be satisfied that the approach that we adopt will continue
to contribute to estimates which achieve the allowed
rate of return objective
for each annual update over the five year regulatory period. For this reason, we
consider it is most critical
that the approach we adopt is reasonable and fit
for purpose over an extended period. At any points in time, it is possible that
one curve or the other will better reflect the costs of the benchmark entity.
However, for the reasons set out in this and previous
decisions, we are not
satisfied that there is a robust means to quantitatively identify which of the
curves this is using the information
currently before us. For this reason, our
detailed analysis and expert advice focused on the underlying characteristics of
their fitness for purpose, and their representativeness of the
benchmark efficient entity. Having done so, we remain satisfied that
average of the BVAL and RBA curves will contribute to an estimate that achieves
the allowed rate of return objective.
AER said that in
Applications by Public Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd and
[2016] ACompT 1
) at [983], the Tribunal had
addressed the question whether the AER should estimate the allowed return on
debt using the RBA data
series alone or a simple average of the RBA and
Bloomberg data series. The Tribunal upheld the AER’s decision and found
“averaging of the two curves was an acceptable measure of the
relevant statutory provision was in the following terms:
Return on debt
6.5.2(h) The return on debt for a
regulatory year
must be estimated such
that it contributes to the achievement of the
allowed rate of return
(i) The return on debt may be
estimated using a methodology which results in either:
(1) the return on debt for each
regulatory year
control period
being the same; or
(2) the return on debt (and consequently the
allowed rate of return
being, or potentially being, different for different
regulatory years
regulatory control
The applicant’s submissions
submitted that in deciding to estimate the return on AusNet’s debt from an
average of two yields, the yield charted by
the BVAL curve at 10 years and the
yield charted by the RBA curve at 10 years, the AER had made errors of fact,
exercised its discretion
incorrectly, and acted unreasonably.
summary, AusNet submitted that under r 6.5.2(h) of the
construed, the return on AusNet’s debt must be estimated such as to be
commensurate with the efficient financing
costs of a pure-play, regulated
energy-network business operating within Australia, which borrows money for 10
years at a time. The
yield charted by the BVAL curve at 10 years was not
commensurate with the efficient financing costs of such a business for three
the spread to the swap rate implied in the BVAL curve at 10 years was determined
virtually exclusively by just one bond, the
Asciano bond. That bond matured in
8.5 years. None of the other bonds underlying the BVAL curve matured in more
than 6 years. Of
the bonds underlying the RBA curve, by contrast, 11 matured in
8–12 years.
the return on 80% of AusNet’s debt, over the regulatory control period
2016–20, would be extrapolated from the
averaging period 25 January to 19
February 2016. During that period, Asciano was the target of two takeover bids.
Those bids heavily
influenced the yield on the Asciano bond, but would not have
influenced the efficient financing costs of a pure-play, regulated
energy-network
business operating within Australia.
Yet none of the money borrowed under any of
the bonds underlying the BVAL curve
was borrowed from overseas. By contrast, 74% of the money borrowed under the
bonds underlying
the RBA curve was borrowed from overseas.
oral submissions, Senior Counsel for Ausgrid submitted as follows.
evidence disclosed the Asciano bond as a disproportionate influence on the BVAL
curve at 10 years. That had two important consequences.
The first was that
factors specific to the Asciano bond were virtually exclusively setting the
level and driving the movement of
the BVAL curve at 10 years. Secondly, that
obscured movements in the wider financial market. In the result, the BVAL curve
years did not reflect the efficient financing costs of the benchmark
efficient entity. It reflected the actual financing costs of
Asciano as they
were perceived to be during AusNet’s averaging period of 25 January to 19
February 2016 at a time when Asciano
was subject to two takeover bids by larger
more diversified firms. This meant that the market perception of the risk
associated with
Asciano was low. Again, that was not relevant to the benchmark
efficient entity.
AER’s assessment of these curves was only carried out once every five
years, around the beginning of the regulatory control
period. If a simple
average of two curves was used and one curve was performing well and one was
performing badly as an indicator,
then the one that was performing badly would
blunt the one that was performing well, and that would produce a result which
consistent with the allowed rate of return objective. A better outcome
was to rely on the one that was performing well.
performed differently at different points in time and could, therefore, perform
differently and have a different impact depending
on the averaging period. Here,
AusNet had identified concerns of a different type in relation to the BVAL
curve, that is, that it
was lagging behind market conditions and not reflective
of them. For AusNet’s averaging period, there was only one long dated
in the BVAL curve in a relatively small sample of bonds under which all of the
debt was raised in Australia, when the benchmark
efficient entity raised at
least 80 per cent of its funds overseas. Those concerns were, therefore,
exacerbated in relation to the
BVAL curve.
there was the aberrant performance of the BVAL curve during AusNet’s
averaging period, attributable to the two takeover
offers and the status of
those offers. There were very good reasons, demonstrated by statistical analysis
by CEG, for discarding
the BVAL curve altogether in the case of AusNet. That did
no violence to the DNSPs as a group because their averaging periods were
different. And because the AER in allowing different averaging periods must
shoulder the burden of considering each distributor individually.
to the alternative position of adopting the BVAL seven year estimate
extrapolated out to 10 years, the AER’s fallback
position, the way in
which the seven year BVAL curve was to be extrapolated out to 10 years was to
use the 7 to 10 year curve from
the RBA curve and adjust the BVAL curve by
taking that component of the RBA curve. That in itself, it was submitted,
demonstrated
the inappropriateness of relying on the BVAL curve. Only one bond
had a greater duration than 6.5 years, and it was, therefore, necessary
the RBA curve to make adjustments to it if the BVAL curve was taken to be 7
to the errors involved in the decision, AusNet relied on the grounds of review
set out at [80]-[84] of its application. In relation
to error of fact,
AusNet’s case was that the AER found that the BVAL curve was fit for
purpose when it averaged it with the
RBA curve. The submission was that that was
an error of fact. The AER should have found the BVAL curve was not fit for
purpose and,
therefore, not used it. That was the case, firstly, because of the
influence of the Asciano bond; secondly, because of circumstances
pertaining to
the Asciano bond, being the takeover offers; and thirdly as to the source of
debt, that is, 80 per cent of the funds
of the benchmark efficient entity being
borrowed overseas 10 years at a time, which was not reflected in the BVAL curve.
AusNet also
relied on the great disparity in bond population, 22 bonds in the
BVAL curve versus 85 in the RBA curve. There was only one over
six years in the
BVAL curve, and 11 in the 8 to 12 year tenor in the RBA curve. Therefore, it was
submitted, a simple average of
the two curves constituted an error of fact. In
relation to incorrect exercise of discretion and unreasonableness, AusNet
that the AER incorrectly exercised its discretion in conducting the
average of the two curves for the reasons already outlined. In
relation to
unreasonableness, AusNet submitted that the AER’s decision lacked reason,
was unreasoned, and, further, was unreasonable
in the result.
relation to remedy, AusNet submitted the Tribunal should set aside the decision
or vary it. The Tribunal should not remit the matter
to the AER but should
correct the decision itself.
Counsel for AusNet referred to
Application by ActewAGL Distribution
[2010] ACompT 4
Application by Jemena Gas Networks
(NSW) Ltd (No 5)
[2011] ACompT 10
, [62] and [69], and
Application by Envestra Limited (No 2)
[2012] ACompT 4
submitted that
at [968]-[983] and
Application by Jemena Gas
Networks (NSW) Ltd
[2016] ACompT 5
were distinguishable.
The AER’s submissions
AER submitted, in summary, that AusNet’s application relied on a number of
matters as supporting a conclusion that the AER
erred in using the BVAL curve in
its return on debt estimate.
AER considered AusNet’s submissions, notwithstanding that the submissions
were filed outside time and close to the time
for the AER to make a final
decision. The AER decided that each of the RBA and BVAL curves had strengths and
weaknesses and that
a simple average of the two curves was the preferable
course. That decision was consistent with what was said in
[78] and was also endorsed in
the earlier of these two decisions,
, the Tribunal said, at
If the AER cannot find a basis upon which to distinguish
between the published curves, it is appropriate to average the yields provided
by each curve, so long as the published curves are widely used and market
the later decision,
, the Tribunal said, at [983]:
In the Tribunal’s view, whilst there are arguments
for the sole use of the RBA curve, it has not been shown that – for
purposes of estimation of the return on debt – any ground of review has
been made out. The AER had a choice to make as
to what data services, or
combination of data services, it should use. Its reasons for selecting the
combination of data services
are cogent, and reasonable. It is not shown to have
misunderstood or overlooked material information. Although there are facts
the choice of the AER, the Tribunal is not persuaded of any
particular material factual finding which is different from those made
AER. For the purposes of the relevant Final Decisions, the AER does not
positively find that the RBA curve was clearly superior
to the BVAL curve, so
that its averaging of the two curves was an acceptable measure of the DRP. The
Tribunal is not satisfied that,
on the material, the AER should have exercised
its discretion to select either the RBA curve only, or some other formula for
estimation of the return on debt. Consequently, the Tribunal is not
satisfied that the AER made an irrational decision in this
to the lack of foreign currency bonds in the BVAL curve, the AER submitted
(a) that matter was never raised by AusNet
as an issue in the regulatory process and the issue was therefore excluded by s
(b) regardless, the issue was considered by the AER and the AER’s decision
did not involve error, particularly having regard
to the fact that the RBA curve
was likely to be overweight with regard to foreign currency bonds in comparison
to a suitable benchmark.
to the Asciano bond in the BVAL curve, the evidence did not support a conclusion
that the 10 year spread to swap implied by the
BVAL curve was inappropriately
low and, in the relevant period, the BVAL curve generated more typical results
than the RBA curve.
to the other matters raised by AusNet, the AER submitted that the strengths and
weaknesses of both curves were considered by the
AER and it concluded that
neither curve was clearly superior. That was a reasonable opinion to arrive
the Tribunal found that there was error in the AER’s decision, it
(a) the Tribunal should nevertheless affirm
the AER’s decision because the decision was already conservatively biased
(b) alternatively, the Tribunal should implement the alternative approach
foreshadowed by the AER, to use the BVAL 7 year estimate
extrapolated to 10
oral submissions, Senior Counsel for the AER submitted that AusNet relied on
five matters as giving rise to an error of fact. The
same five matters were also
identified as the matters that gave rise to an incorrect exercise of discretion
and/or unreasonableness.
first matter was the point relating to overseas borrowings, particularly the
foreign currency of the bonds, and a proposition
was put that about 80 per cent
of money borrowed by a benchmark efficient entity was borrowed overseas. That
fact was contentious.
It was also contentious whether and when that issue was
raised by AusNet in this regulatory process. The second and third points
related to the Asciano bond: the second was the proposition that the spread to
swap rate implied by the BVAL curve of 10 years
was determined virtually
exclusively by the Asciano bond. The ancillary and third point was that Asciano
had been the subject of
recent takeover and, therefore, it was asserted by
AusNet, the pricing of its bond would have been affected by that takeover. The
fourth point was a sample size point. It was a point relating to the fact that
the RBA curve was derived from 85 bonds; whereas the
BVAL curve was derived from
22 bonds. AusNet’s fifth and related point was that, by reason of the
underlying sample, the RBA
curve was clearly superior.
AER submitted the claim was that the AER’s use of the simple average of
the two curves gave rise to an error of fact. The
point was that the RBA curve
was representative of the efficient financing costs of a benchmark efficient
entity when the BVAL curve
was much less so, and that was said to be an error of
fact. The AER submitted that that point was not properly characterised as an
error of fact. It submitted that that opinion it formed about the relative
merits of the curves and the extent to which they were
reflective of the
efficient financing costs of a benchmark efficient entity, and whether one was
superior or the other, was really
a qualitative opinion and one about the
satisfaction of the rule criterion. The rule criterion was the criterion of
efficient financing
costs of a benchmark efficient entity. The AER accepted that
it may be possible to identify matters of fact that underlie the formation
the opinion, and those matters of fact could be identified to see if there was
any error in an underlying finding of fact. Here
there was no real relevant
dispute between the parties about underlying matters of fact. The only available
grounds were wrong exercise
of discretion and/or unreasonableness. It was
properly reviewed as a question of the reasonableness of the view that the AER
to in making its assessment.
finding that the AER “still considered that the BVAL curve was fit for
purpose” was, essentially, a qualitative opinion
because “fit for
purpose” can only take its meaning from the raw criterion. The purpose was
for seeking to estimate the
efficient financing costs of a benchmark efficient
entity. Once one identified the sort of matters that Dr Lally identified and the
AER took into account, it was very much an evaluative exercise which must be a
judgement or an opinion. An assessment of fit for
purpose was not properly a
finding of fact but a judgement. The proper task for the Tribunal to review the
AERs decision was, essentially,
to assess whether it was reasonable. AusNet had
not said much about incorrect exercise of discretion. Neither in its written
submissions
nor in its oral submissions had AusNet articulated what aspect of
the exercise of discretion was incorrect.
to the five points referred to at [38] above, the AER submitted as follows.
to the first point, it was not raised before the final decision in the
regulatory process. Indeed, to the contrary, AusNet endorsed
using the Reuters
curve in its revised regulatory proposal, knowing that the Reuters curve only
included Australian currency bonds.
Far from raising the issue, AusNet’s
submissions to the AER were really almost to the contrary to the point it now
was a s 71O point. As to the substance of the point, the AER
submitted the point did not identify error on the part of the AER. That
because the AER had previously given attention to this issue and had formed a
view that the Bloomberg curve was, nevertheless,
representative of the benchmark
efficient entity. Where this was given attention by the AER was Dr Lally’s
November report.
In that report Dr Lally observed that Australian corporates
drew debt financing from three primary sources, local bank borrowing,
issues and foreign bond issues. Amongst Australian regulated energy businesses a
report from PwC in 2013 estimated the
2012 proportions at approximately 25 per
cent local bank borrowing, 50 per cent local bond issues and 25 per cent foreign
bond issues
respectively. And Dr Lally then went on to explain the reasons for
this mix, and there were a number of reasons why that mix was,
apparently, seen
as observed amongst Australian energy regulated businesses. AusNet relied for
its contention of 80 per cent foreign
bonds on the CEG Jemena memoranda, which
made some reference to this figure. So there was no doubt CEG had a different
AER submitted there were both pros and cons from the inclusion of
foreign currency bonds. There was material before it that supported
conclusion. It was contrary to CEG’s claim that 80 per cent of long-term
debt was raised by a benchmark efficient entity
and foreign currency.
Nevertheless, the AER was entitled to rely on the material that it had before it
on that point. The AER submitted
no error arose in that respect.
to the second and third points, the AER undertook an analysis of the impact of
the Asciano bond and, more relevantly, analysed
what the Bloomberg curve was
demonstrating and showing through the relevant period. It asked whether there
was a proper basis to
conclude that the Bloomberg curve could not be relied upon
to give an appropriate estimate of the efficient financing costs of a
efficient entity, and whether it should be jettisoned. At that time there would
only be one curve available to the AER,
being the RBA curve with its particular
features and some disadvantages. The AER, based on its analysis, came to the
view that it
considered the most appropriate course was still to rely upon the
Bloomberg curve, which was published by a highly reputable and
independent firm,
Bloomberg, and could be expected to be relied upon by market participants.
to the fourth and fifth points, the fact that the RBA curve had a larger sample
size of bonds was uncontentious. That was common
factual ground known by the
AER. But that fact in and of itself was not a matter raised by AusNet as an
issue during the regulatory
process. The AER observed in its decision that the
first significant weakness in the RBA curve by way of comparison was that while
it had a larger sample size, the RBA only published estimates for one day in
each month and as a consequence the AER needed to interpolate
between month-end
estimates in order to have a daily yield series. The impact of this was that
where the AER adopted the RBA estimate,
it had only 12 data points for the
spread to risk-free rate, the Commonwealth Government securities that were used
to produce a full
year of estimates. In contrast, the Bloomberg curve was
published daily, which meant there were approximately 20 times as many data
points for estimating the spread to swap over the course of a month compared to
the RBA curve. Dr Lally discussed the relative merits
of the two curves. First,
there was the discussion of the fact that the RBA curve might be considered to
be overweight in 20 foreign
currency bonds, and the consequences of that and
some of the issues that arose from that. Also the Lally November 2014 report
that the bonds in the RBA curve were likely to have inferior liquidity
compared to the bonds in the Bloomberg curve. Of course, there
were pros and
cons discussed in that Lally report, but it was the AER’s view, and based
on the material before it, that it
would not be desirable to base the estimate
of the return on debt only on the RBA curve. There were a number of reasons for
partly that it was only an estimate once a month, partly it was overweight
in foreign currency bonds compared to the material before
the AER as to how the
Australian regulated entity was likely to raise its debt, and inferior liquidity
of the bonds. The AER considered
the material about the Asciano bond, looked at
a number of aspects of the Bloomberg curve, but still came to the conclusion
over any lengthy period the Bloomberg curve ought to be an appropriate
basis on which to base an estimate.
UnitingCare Australia’s submissions
UnitingCare
Australia submitted that an important part of the 2013 guideline was the
transition process from “on the day”
to “trailing
average”. The guideline accepted that in applying the “trailing
average” approach an average
of estimates from the RBA and Bloomberg
valuation service would be utilised. The average from the two data sets was to
minimise impacts
of data fluctuations over time, providing a degree of certainty
for both network businesses and end consumers. The AER had made the
decision in maintaining the guideline transitional approach to “trailing
average”, which was fair for both businesses
and consumers, over time.
The Tribunal’s analysis
turn to consider these submissions.
power of the Tribunal is first to identify any error of the specified kind.
Although this is merits review, it is limited merits
our opinion, the claim that the conclusion of the AER that the Bloomberg curve
was fit for purpose, as challenged by AusNet, was
not a finding of fact within s
, that is, that the AER made an error of fact in its
findings of facts. We find it to be a matter of choosing an available opinion
over another involving no error of fact. This is not to say that a matter of
opinion or judgement may never involve an erroneous
finding of fact: see [9]
do not accept the submission on behalf of AusNet to the effect that further
fact-finding on the part of the AER was necessary once
it had selected a method.
reach the same conclusion in relation to AusNet’s claim that a secondary
finding of fact was that a simple average of the
two curves was appropriate.
Again, in our view, this was a matter of opinion involving no error of
do not accept AusNet’s submission that, under r 6.5.2(h) of the
, the return on AusNet’s debt must be estimated such as to be
commensurate with the efficient financing costs of a pure-play,
energy-network business operating within Australia, which borrows money for 10
years at a time. The rule does not state
that and that submission is
inconsistent with a provision concerned with the concepts of
“estimate”, “contribution”
and “objective”
with which the rule is concerned.
claim that the AER incorrectly exercised its discretion in taking the average of
the two curves was put essentially
on the same basis as the claimed error or
errors of fact. In our view it fails for the same reasons.
reach the same conclusion in relation to AusNet’s submission that the
AER’s decision lacked reason, was unreasoned,
and was unreasonable in the
result. In our opinion the AER’s decision was one on which reasonable
minds might differ, but that
does not establish that the decision was
unreasonable. Indeed, in our opinion, the AER’s decision was both reasoned
and reasonable.
a consequence, in our opinion it is not necessary to decide the questions which
arose in relation to s 71O or s 71R of the
to the former, it provided:
71O Matters that may and may not be raised in a
(2) In a review under this Subdivision, the following provisions apply in
relation to a person or body, other than the AER (and so
apply at all stages of
the proceedings before the Tribunal):
(a) a regulated network service provider to
whom the reviewable regulatory decision being reviewed applies may not raise in
to the issue of whether a ground for review exists or has been made out
any matter that was not raised and maintained by the provider
in submissions to
the AER before the reviewable regulatory decision was made;
(b) a regulated network service provider whose commercial interests are
materially affected by the reviewable regulatory decision
being reviewed may not
raise in relation to the issue of whether a ground for review exists or has been
made out any matter that
was not raised and maintained by the provider in
submissions to the AER before the reviewable regulatory decision was made;
(c) an affected or interested person or body (other than a provider under
paragraph (a) or (b)) may not raise in relation to the
issue of whether a ground
for review exists or has been made out any matter that was not raised by the
person or body in a submission
to the AER before the reviewable regulatory
decision was made;
(d) subject to paragraphs (a), (b) and (c)--
(i) the applicant, or an
intervener who has raised a new ground for review under section 71M, may raise
any matter relevant to the
issues to be considered under section 71P(2a) and
(ii) any person or body, other than the applicant or an intervener who has
raised a new ground for review under section 71M, may
not raise any matter
relevant to the issues to be considered under section 71P(2a) and (2b) unless it
is in response to a matter
raised by--
(A) the AER under subsection (1)(b)(iii); or
(B) the applicant under subparagraph (i); or
(C) an intervener under subparagraph
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(d)--
(a) a reference to an applicant includes a
reference to a person or body who has applied to the Tribunal for leave to apply
review under this Subdivision; and
(b) a reference to an intervener includes a reference to a person or body who
has applied to the Tribunal for leave to intervene
in a review under this
Subdivision.
we are of the view that this ground fails even if AusNet is permitted to raise
it, we do not need to decide whether it constitutes
or consists of “any
matter that was not raised and maintained by the provider in submissions to the
AER before the reviewable
regulatory decision was made”. We refer here
particularly to the overseas bond point.
to the latter, it provided:
71R Matters to be considered by Tribunal in making
determination
(1) Subject to this section, the Tribunal, in acting under this Division with
respect to a reviewable regulatory decision--
(a) must not consider any matter other than
review related matter (and any matter arising as a result of consultation under
(b) must, before making a determination, take reasonable steps to consult with
(in such manner as the Tribunal thinks appropriate)--
(i) network service users and
prospective network service users of the relevant services; and
(ii) any user or consumer associations or user or consumer interest groups,
that the Tribunal considers have an interest in the determination, other than a
user or consumer association or a user or consumer
interest group that is a
party to the review.
(2) (Repealed)
(3) If in a review the Tribunal is of the view that a ground for review has been
made out, the Tribunal may, on application by a
party to the review, allow new
information or material to be submitted if the party can establish to the
satisfaction of the Tribunal
that the information or material--
(a) was publicly available or known to be
available to the AER when it was making the reviewable regulatory decision;
(b) would assist the Tribunal on any aspect of the determination to be made and
was not unreasonably withheld from the AER when it
was making the reviewable
regulatory decision,
and was (in the opinion of the Tribunal) information or material that the AER
would reasonably have been expected to have considered
when it was making the
reviewable regulatory decision.
(4) Subject to this Law, for the purpose of subsection
(3)(b), information or material not provided to the AER following a request
that information or material by it under this Law or the Rules is to be taken to
have been unreasonably withheld.
(5) Subsection (4) does not limit what may constitute an unreasonable
withholding of information or material.
(5a) In addition, if in a review the Tribunal is of the view--
(a) that a ground for review has been made
(b) that it would assist the Tribunal to obtain information or material under
this subsection in order to determine whether a materially
preferable NEO
decision exists,
the Tribunal may, on its own initiative, take steps to obtain that information
or material (including by seeking evidence from such
persons as it thinks
(5b) The action taken by a person acting in response to
steps taken by the Tribunal under subsection (5a) must be limited to considering
decision related matter under section 28ZJ.
(6) In this section—
“review related matter”
(a) the application for review; and
(b) a notice raising new grounds for review filed by an intervener; and
(c) the submissions made to the Tribunal by the parties to the review; and
(d) decision related matter under section 28ZJ; and
(e) any other matter properly before the Tribunal in connection with the
relevant proceedings.
we are of the view that this ground for review has not been made out, the
occasion does not arise for allowing new information
or material to be
FORECASTING OPEX – SELF-INSURANCE
What the AER decided
pages 7-9 of the Final Decision, the AER noted
that AusNet included a
category specific forecast for self-insurance above actual self-insurance it
incurred in 2014. This was $8.4
million ($2015) higher than in the AER’s
preliminary decision. In its preliminary decision the AER did not include a
specific forecast for self-insurance.
page 7-24, under the heading “7.4.4, Other costs not included in the base
year”, the AER said:
We have included debt raising costs and guaranteed
service level payments in our final decision opex forecast. We have not included
any other category specific forecast in our final decision opex forecast.
AER said AusNet proposed a category specific forecast for self-insurance;
however, the AER had applied a “base-step-trend”
approach to
forecasting self-insurance consistent with its Guideline.
pages 7-95 to 7-98, the AER said, omitting footnotes:
Consideration of self-insurance forecast
We do not consider AusNet Services provided sufficient new information for us to
move from our preliminary position not to include
a category specific forecast
for self-insurance in the opex forecast. We prefer a 'base-step-trend' approach
for the reasons discussed
In its revised proposal, AusNet Services proposed a category specific forecast
for self-insurance of $16.9 million ($2015). This
increased its total opex
forecast by $7.7 million ($2015) compared to leaving self-insurance costs in the
AusNet Services considered self-insurance losses are volatile and can vary
markedly from year to year. For this reason, it stated
the quantification of
these losses is best suited to an actuarial analysis that forecasts
self-insurance based on expected losses
determined from historical data, rather
than on actual losses in a single year. It stated the AER’s approach will
in a more accurate forecast of total opex than such an analysis,
particularly when base year opex is materially influenced by losses
abnormal events.
Both we and AusNet Services have forecast opex for 2016–20 by
predominantly using a top down revealed cost methodology. That
is, both we and
AusNet Services have taken the costs incurred in 2014 and used them to estimate
total opex for 2016–20.
We use this approach because total opex tends to be relatively recurrent -
suggesting it is a reasonable basis for forecasting total
opex for the next
regulatory control period. ... AusNet Services’ total opex has been
similar in the three most recent regulatory
years. This is the case even though
AusNet Services incurred a self-insurance loss of $10 million in 2015.
By using a revealed cost approach neither we nor AusNet Services are forecasting
that the opex AusNet Services incurred in 2014 for
each specific program or
category will be the same in each year of the next regulatory control period. We
have not considered what
forecast opex AusNet Services will spend on each opex
program and project in the next regulatory control period. The top down nature
of this approach (which is consistent with the NER requirement to determine opex
in total) means it is not necessary to consider
exactly how AusNet Services will
allocate opex to programs and projects in the next regulatory control period.
AusNet Services seems
to accept this given it did not present evidence analysing
what it expects to spend on each program and project in the next regulatory
control period.
We would generally expect that to keep opex relatively recurrent, a service
provider can reallocate resources between different projects
and between
different categories.
We also have concerns about category specific forecasting approaches when used
in conjunction with a revealed cost forecasting approach.
Under such a hybrid
approach, a service provider has an incentive to use a bottom-up forecasting
approach for new projects or programs,
or where the cost is expected to rise in
the forecast period. Where a service provider expects the costs of projects or
to decline, its incentive is to use a base year approach. Under such a
hybrid forecasting approach, a service provider would be financially
rewarded as
a result of the costs of projects and programs that are declining but would not
be penalised for the costs of the projects
and programs that are increasing.
AusNet Services considered our preliminary decision failed to recognise the
impact of self-insurance losses on total opex. It stated
that if it paid a $10
million deductible during 2014 (the base year for the current period) rather
than in 2015, its opex forecast
for the current period would be at least $50
million higher under the AER’s self-insurance approach. However, AusNet
statement assumes we do not assess the efficiency of the base year
before we use it as a starting point for our estimate of total
opex. If the base
year appears to be inefficient, we may choose to undertake a more detailed
review or substitute it with our own
AusNet Services’ submission also assumes that if AusNet Services incurred
a large self-insurance loss it would not adjust any
of its costs in response. If
a service provider incurred a large increase in costs in one area, it may try to
reduce its costs in
other areas to limit the net impact to the business. For
example, AusNet Services incurred a self-insurance loss of $10 million in
however, its actual total opex only increased by $5.6 million ($2015) in that
In any case, in the next regulatory control period, the revenue impacts of one
off self-insurance losses in the base year will be
addressed by including
self-insurance in the EBSS. The interaction of the EBSS with a revealed cost
forecasting approach means the
net impact on total revenue of a self-insurance
loss (or savings) in the base year is small. For example, if AusNet Services
a $10 million self-insurance cost in the base year, its opex forecast for
the following period will be $50 million higher. However,
its EBSS reward will
be lower by a similar magnitude, offsetting the higher opex forecast. Similarly,
if AusNet Services pays no
self-insurance costs in the base year, its opex
forecast going forward will be lower but it will receive an offsetting EBSS
When the EBSS applies, the costs of a self-insurance event will be
shared between the network service provider and network consumers
according to
the sharing ratio in the EBSS. That is, regardless of the timing of the event
the cost will be shared approximately
30:70 between the service provider and
network consumers.
AusNet Services also stated our preliminary decision did not treat
self-insurance consistently with insurance. It stated self-insurance
analogous to insurance, with the “premium” being a self-insurance
allowance. Therefore, just like for insurance, the
relevant cost in the base
year is the allowance, or premium, not the self-insurance losses incurred. It
stated by accepting that
insurance premiums are a cost that should be allowed
for in opex forecasts, but not adopting the same position on self-insurance,
preliminary decision provides a perverse incentive to rely solely on insurance,
rather than self-insurance, to manage insurable
risks. We disagree. Our
forecasting approach does not create incentives for a network service provider
to spend opex on one category
rather than another. We do not forecast
expenditure for individual categories of opex such as insurance and
self-insurance. Rather
we forecast total opex. In other words, we provide
network service providers with a total opex forecast which they are free to
as they determine. This means AusNet Services has an incentive to
choose the most efficient mix of total opex including insurance,
self-insurance
and risk mitigation for its circumstances.
The applicant’s submissions
submitted, in summary, that in its Regulatory Proposals, it proposed an
actuarial forecast of the cost it would incur in self-insuring
certain events
over the regulatory control period 2016–20. That forecast was rejected by
the AER, which substituted the self-insured
losses suffered by AusNet in 2014,
escalated by a rate of change.
doing so, AusNet submitted, the AER equated the cost of self-insurance with
self-insured losses. That was an error of fact. The
cost of self-insuring an
event in each of a sequence of years was the amount, equivalent to a premium,
reserved in each of those
years to split the risk of the event across those
years. It was not the amount that must be paid out when the event occurred. That
amount was equivalent to the insurance payout. That was the self-insured
submitted it was possible that self-insured losses may, in any given year, equal
the cost of self-insuring them. But, given
the volatility of such losses, it was
not probable. Therefore it was unreasonable to forecast that the losses will
equal the cost.
denying AusNet the full cost of its self-insurance, the AER did allow it the
full cost of its external insurance. That gave
it an incentive to insure
externally when it could more cheaply insure itself. That was not an
“effective incentive ... to
promote economic efficiency with respect to
direct control network services”, as required by the revenue and pricing
) laid down in s 7A(3) of the
submitted that greater external insurance would ultimately, contrary to the NEO,
cost consumers more without improving either
the supply of their electricity or
the electricity system. Thus that incentive was the product of an incorrect
exercise of discretion.
oral submissions, Senior Counsel for AusNet submitted as follows.
making a distribution determination the AER was required to make each of the
decisions which were listed as constituent decisions
in r 6.12.1. The relevant
constituent decision was r 6.12.1(4), a decision in which the AER, acting
in accordance with r 6.5.6(d),
did not accept the total of the forecast
operating expenditure for the regulatory control period that was included in the
building block proposal. In that case the AER must set out its reasons
for that decision and an estimate of the total of the distribution
network’s or DNSP’s required opex for the regulatory control period
that the AER was satisfied reasonably reflected the
opex criteria, taking into
account the opex factors.
statutory provisions relied on by AusNet were in the following terms:
6.5.6 Forecast operating expenditure
building block proposal
must include the total forecast operating
expenditure for the relevant
regulatory control period
Distribution Network Service Provider
considers is required in order to
achieve each of the following (the
operating expenditure objectives
(1) meet or manage the expected demand for
standard control services
over that period;
(2) comply with all applicable
regulatory obligations or requirements
associated with the provision of
standard control services
(3) to the extent that there is no applicable
regulatory obligation or
requirement
in relation to:
(i) the quality, reliability or
security of supply of
standard control services
(ii) the reliability or security of the
distribution system
through the
standard control services
, to the relevant extent:
(iii) maintain the quality, reliability and security of supply of
control services
(iv) maintain the reliability and security of the
distribution system
through the supply of
standard control services
(4) maintain the safety of the
distribution system
through the supply of
standard control
(b) The forecast of required operating expenditure of a
Distribution Network Service Provider
that is included in a
block proposal
(1) comply with the requirements of any
regulatory information instrument
(2) be for expenditure that is properly allocated to
standard control
in accordance with the principles and policies set out in the
Cost Allocation Method
Distribution Network Service
(3) include both:
(i) the total of the forecast
operating expenditure for the relevant
regulatory control period
(ii) the forecast operating expenditure for each
regulatory year
regulatory control period
must accept the forecast of required
operating expenditure of a
Distribution Network Service Provider
included in a
building block proposal
is satisfied that
the total of the forecast operating expenditure for the
regulatory control
reasonably reflects each of the following (the
expenditure criteria
(1) the efficient costs of achieving the
operating expenditure objectives
(2) the costs that a prudent operator would require to achieve the
expenditure objectives
(3) a realistic expectation of the demand forecast and cost inputs required to
achieve the
operating expenditure objectives
is not satisfied as referred to in
paragraph (c), it must not accept the forecast of required operating expenditure
Distribution Network Service Provider
that is included in a
building block proposal
(e) In deciding whether or not the
is satisfied as referred to in
paragraph (c), the
must have regard to the following (the
operating expenditure factors
(4) the most recent
annual benchmarking report
that has been
under rule 6.27 and the benchmark operating expenditure that would be
incurred by an efficient
Distribution Network Service Provider
regulatory control period
(5) the actual and expected operating expenditure of the
Distribution Network
Service Provider
during any preceding
regulatory control periods
(5A) the extent to which the operating expenditure forecast includes expenditure
to address the concerns of electricity consumers
as identified by the
Distribution Network Service Provider
in the course of its engagement
with electricity consumers;
(6) the relative prices of operating and capital inputs;
(7) the substitution possibilities between operating and capital expenditure;
(8) whether the operating expenditure forecast is consistent with any incentive
scheme or schemes that apply to the
Distribution Network Service Provider
under clauses 6.5.8 or 6.6.2 to 6.6.4;
(9) the extent the operating expenditure forecast is referable to arrangements
with a person other than the
Distribution Network Service Provider
in the opinion of the
, do not reflect arm’s length terms;
(9A) whether the operating expenditure forecast includes an amount relating to a
project that should more appropriately be included
contingent project
under clause 6.6A.1(b);
(10) the extent the
Distribution Network Service Provider
has considered,
and made provision for, efficient and prudent non-
alternatives;
(11) [Note: Clause left intentionally blank]
(12) any other factor the AER considers relevant and which the AER has notified
the Distribution Network Service Provider in writing,
prior to the submission of
its revised regulatory proposal under clause 6.10.3, is an operating expenditure
6.12 Requirements relating to draft and final distribution determinations
6.12.1 Constituent decisions
A distribution determination is predicated on the following decisions by the
constituent decisions):
(1) a decision on the classification of the services to be provided by the
Distribution Network Service Provider
during the course of the
regulatory control period
(2) a decision on the
Distribution Network Service Provider's
building block proposal
in which the
either approves or
refuses to approve:
annual revenue requirement
Distribution Network Service Provider
, as set out in the
building block proposal
regulatory year
regulatory control period
(ii) the commencement and length of the
regulatory control period
proposed in the
building block proposal
(3) a decision in which the
(i) acting in accordance with clause
6.5.7(c), accepts the total of the forecast capital expenditure for the
regulatory control period
that is included in the current
block proposal
(ii) acting in accordance with clause 6.5.7(d), does not accept the total of the
forecast capital expenditure for the
regulatory control period
included in the current
building block proposal
, in which case the
must set out its reasons for that decision and an estimate of the total of
Distribution Network Service Provider’s
required capital
expenditure for the
regulatory control period
satisfied reasonably reflects the
capital expenditure criteria
into account the
capital expenditure factors
(4) a decision in which the
(i) acting in accordance with clause
6.5.6(c), accepts the total of the forecast operating expenditure for the
regulatory control period
that is included in the current
block proposal
(ii) acting in accordance with clause 6.5.6(d), does not accept the total of the
forecast operating expenditure for the
regulatory control period
included in the current
building block proposal
, in which case the
must set out its reasons for that decision and an estimate of the total of
Distribution Network Service Provider’s
required operating
expenditure for the
regulatory control period
satisfied reasonably reflects the
operating expenditure criteria
into account the
operating expenditure
amount sought by AusNet for expected actuarially assessed future insurance
losses was $3.4 million per annum. The amount allowed
was the $1.7 million per
annum that AusNet sought to have excluded. There was, in fact, some overlap with
other categories but this
was essentially an issue of principle to be determined
by the Tribunal.
net effect on AusNet was that it received $8.5 million less opex than it would
have received had the actuarial assessment of the
likely annual cost of
self-insured losses been accepted by the AER.
distribution network was the most bushfire prone in the world. Therefore, for
AusNet, appropriate risk management was
a highly important issue.
complaint was that a category-specific forecast was not included as it had
sought for the cost of self-insured losses.
The AER did not include any other
category forecasts.
section dealing with consideration of self-insurance forecast disclosed the
AER’s approach to be as follows. First, opex
tended to be recurrent.
Secondly, the concept of self-insurance being part of opex was acceptable to the
AER. Thirdly, opex can be
reallocated if, for example, there was a higher than
provided for self-insurance loss in any year. Opex can be reallocated to cover
that loss, whilst still keeping within the total allowed opex for that year.
Fourthly, the AER was not prepared to permit what it
regarded to be an
inefficient cost in the base year to form part of its base-step-trend
methodology. Fifthly, any extraordinary self-insured
losses in any year were to
be dealt with by the Efficiency Benefit Sharing Scheme (
which those extraordinary self-insured losses would be shared as to 30 per cent
by AusNet and 70 per cent by consumers, which
carried with it the proposition
that AusNet would be unfunded as to 30 per cent of those self-insured losses.
Sixthly, the AER made
the point that self-insurance losses in the base year were
the equivalent of the cost of self-insurance to AusNet.
Counsel for AusNet submitted the AER’s reasons did not respond to the opex
criteria in the rules. The AER, having rejected
AusNet’s proposal for
opex, was required to estimate its own total opex and in doing so was required
to make an assessment
of the efficient costs of a prudent DNSP in achieving the
opex objectives. The opex objectives, in r 6.5.6A(2), could be summarised
“Maintaining the quality, reliability, security and safety of the network
and supply to consumers under the network.”
was the task of the AER to estimate total opex which it was satisfied reasonably
reflected the opex criteria, that is, the efficient
costs of a prudent DNSP in
achieving the opex expenditure. That had not occurred in relation to
self-insured losses. If the starting
point was that self-insurance was efficient
risk management, and there was no issue that the risks AusNet self-insured were
appropriate
risk management by AusNet, and if it was accepted that there was an
opex cost to retaining self-insured losses, then it was necessary
consideration to what was an efficient cost of doing so. That had not occurred
at all in this case.
the AER considered it was doing was identifying something which was likely to be
relatively recurrent and, therefore, a reasonable
basis for forecasting total
opex, which included within it self-insured losses. It must, therefore, have
assumed that self-insured
losses were at least relatively recurrent, when, in
fact, they were not, and the examples given by the AER in its Final Decision
demonstrated that.
chose to self-insure as part of its risk management strategy. The wisdom of its
choices had not been challenged or questioned.
The issue was: what was the
appropriate component that should be allowed for in opex for self-insured
losses? That, in turn, threw
up the question of how that should be assessed. The
issue here was not the total amount of opex
, but whether the AER
should have included a category-specific forecast for self-insured losses, which
it did not. That state of affairs
was founded on the AER deciding that the
self-insured losses incurred in the base year were efficient costs. But they
could not be
an efficient cost which could be used to predict the so-called
smooth or recurrent efficient cost in future years.
the AER had not made any other adjustments for things which could not be
controlled or were not recurrent, AusNet’s case
might be considerably more
difficult. But the AER did, in fact, adopt the hybrid approach that it referred
to in its Final Decision,
and its error here was to not accept a
category-specific forecast for self-insured losses. Had the AER not done a
category-specific
forecast for anything, AusNet’s case would be much
weaker. But here it had chosen to identify costs it considered were not
efficient, or were unlikely to be recurrent, or which should be assessed on a
category-specific basis using a different measure,
for example, debt raising
costs. So it was clear from its treatment of self-insured losses that the AER
did not address the opex
criteria in its assessment of AusNet’s total
AER’s proffered reasons seemed to assume that self-insured losses would be
reasonably recurrent. They were not. In addition,
the AER took comfort from the
fact that although there was almost six times the level of uninsured losses in
2015 when compared to
2014, the opex was almost the same. That was not a
relevant consideration to the opex criteria.
AER did not, in relation to self-insured losses, follow the approach it followed
in relation to debt raising costs, that is, replacing
the figure put forward by
AusNet with the figure that was appropriate for a benchmark firm. As AusNet has
a unique network in terms
of risk and, therefore, had unique issues in relation
to risk management, which included the question of what to self-insure and
not to self-insure, special and specific consideration should have been given to
that component of AusNet’s opex. And
the suggestion that notwithstanding
the matters that were unique to AusNet and its network and the risks to which it
was exposed,
it could, like all the other DNSPs with less risk exposed networks,
move its opex or capex around to cover uninsured losses, was
not an appropriate
application of the opex criteria.
AER eschewed a hybrid approach whilst, in fact, embracing it where it saw fit.
It had, in substance, accepted the base year self-insured
losses as efficient.
That was its answer to AusNet’s proposal. Then, in substance, the AER
stated that no more detailed review
or different approach was required. But
because self-insured losses were not equivalent to forecast future expenditure
on self-insured
losses, the position taken by the AER was in error. Likewise,
the impact of the EBSS was not relevant to the opex criteria and, in
would leave AusNet potentially exposed to 30 per cent self-insured losses for
which it had no provisional cover.
submitted that what the AER was required to do and did, as part of the final
determination, was to estimate the total of AusNet’s
opex for the
regulatory control period, and that in doing so it was required to be reasonably
satisfied that its estimate reflected
the operating expenditure criteria. That,
in turn, required its estimate to reasonably reflect the efficient costs of a
prudent DNSP
in the context of a realistic expectation of demand and realistic
cost inputs required to achieve the objectives.
AERs Final Decision, AusNet submitted, consisted of making an assessment of
likely future occurrences and states of affairs in
connection with
AusNet’s network, and doing so on the basis of a variety of evidence,
which included historic facts. The issue
came down to whether the AER should
have removed self-insured losses from the base year and accepted a
category-specific forecast,
in which case it has no dispute with the AON report
and the figure contended for by AusNet.
to the question of errors of fact, four were pressed. The first was that the AER
equated self-insured losses in the base year
with the cost to AusNet of
self-insurance, when the two were not the same. Secondly, the AER failed to find
that self-insured losses
were volatile and may vary considerably from year to
year, but the cost of self-insurance was relatively stable. Thirdly, the AER
failed to find that the cost of self-insurance to a DNSP was, in substance, a
self-insurance premium conceptually equivalent to the
premium for external
insurance of the same risks, so that it required a category-specific allowance
or forecast on an actuarial basis
to be included in the base year. Fourthly, the
AER found that self-insured insurance losses could be controlled or funded by
costs in other areas, which was an erroneous finding of fact because
self-insured losses were unpredictable and volatile and highly
submitted that in substituting its own estimate of the total opex for the
regulatory period, it may be inferred that the AER
accepted that the
self-insurance risk management practices of AusNet were prudent and efficient,
that self-insurance had a cost,
that there should be an allowance for the cost
of self-insurance in the substitute forecast it made, and that its task was to
an appropriate allowance. It identified the appropriate allowance to be
the equivalent of the sum paid out in 2014. That, AusNet
submitted, was material
to the making of the decision because, firstly, it was a significant item of
opex; secondly, the total amount
involved was $8.5 million; thirdly, the issue
was of considerable importance to AusNet in the context of its particular
to the incorrect exercise of discretion and unreasonableness, AusNet submitted
as follows.
discretion that the AER exercised was to make and substitute its own estimate of
total opex under r 6.12.1(4) of the
. In doing so, the AER was
required to decide what opex reasonably reflected the opex criteria, taking into
account the opex expenditure
factors to achieve the opex objectives. It
exercised the discretion to make and substitute its own estimate of total opex
preliminary decision and varied it slightly in the Final Determination.
In that exercise of discretion, it applied the base-step-trend
methodology,
which commenced with determining whether actual expenditure in the base year
reasonably reflected the opex criteria.
The common genesis of the exercise of
discretion that occurred with the AER deciding to make and substituting its own
estimate of
total opex was in various findings of fact. Here, the findings of
fact were in relation to the opex that it considered was the appropriate
for AusNet for the regulatory period, which in turn were based on findings of
fact concerning opex in the base year, and findings
of fact in relation to the
step and trend parts of the escalation and adjustment process. The AER weighed
up the considerations that
it considered to be relevant and it made decisions as
to what weight to give those considerations, and it thereby determined, by
process, what it considered to be the right result, that is, the appropriate
opex allowance for the regulatory period.
illustrated by
Envestra Limited (No. 2)
Application by APT Allgas Energy Limited (No 2)
[2012] ACompT 5
, the discretion can be incorrectly exercised in a number of ways. AusNet
submitted that what occurred here was that none of the reasons
advanced by the
AER in consideration of self-insurance forecast in the Final Decision were
permitted by the rules, were relevant
to the opex criteria, or relevant to the
opex objectives.
also submitted that the exercise of discretion was in error by a failure to have
regard to mandatory relevant factors. The
authority for those general
propositions was
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Australian
Competition Tribunal
[2006] FCAFC 83
Limited (No 2)
at [36] and
APT Allgas (No. 2)
those principles to the present case, the AER had taken the view that opex
tended to be recurrent. It was appropriate to
include self-insurance losses.
Opex could be reallocated. It would not permit an inefficient cost in relation
to self-insurance in
the base year. Extraordinary losses could be dealt with via
the EBSS. Self-insurance opex in the base year was the equivalent of
self-insurance losses paid out in the base year. All of those matters were
incorrect and did not engage with the opex criteria. None
of them, except
whether it was appropriate to include self-insurance in opex, affected the
question of whether self-insured losses
were efficient expenditure. Each of the
reasons set out in the Final Decision between pages 95 and 98 were otherwise
irrelevant to
and did not discharge the AER’s obligations in estimating
its own forecast total opex.
errors in the exercise of the AER’s discretion were summarised as follows.
First, self-insurance costs were not the equivalent
of self-insurance losses and
vice versa. A self-insurance premium or something analogous to a self-insurance
premium actuarially
calculated was the appropriate opex allowance. That was put
to the AER and rejected. Secondly, the AER should have made a category-specific
assessment of the appropriate allowance for self-insured losses within total
opex, as it did in respect of debt raising costs, but
it did not do so. Thirdly,
the AER considered that the actual self-insured losses in 2014, the base year,
represented the cost of
self-insurance in the base year which was, in effect,
the converse of AusNet’s complaint that the AER erred in considering
self-insurance losses were the same as self-insurance costs. And, fourthly, in
applying the base-step-trend methodology, it was an
error to use self-insured
losses as a revealed cost of self-insurance. AusNet further submitted that the
AER failed to have regard
to the high volatility and unpredictability of
self-insured losses, and that was an error in the exercise of its discretion.
submitted that by reason of that high volatility and unpredictability it
was wrong to use self-insured losses to forecast the cost
of self-insurance, the
burden of self-insurance in the future. AusNet submitted the AER erred in the
exercise of its discretion by
regarding it as available and appropriate to a
DNSP to reallocate opex to cover some or all of its uninsured liability
relation to unreasonableness, AusNet accepted that unreasonableness must be of
the decision itself, not a step in the factual findings
or the reasoning. It
accepted that there must be something like logical error or irrationality in the
decision. It submitted that
the ground would be made out if the AER’s
decision could not be justified by reference to its stated reasons, and it
that that was, in fact, what had occurred. There was an arbitrary and
capricious result which had not been determined by reference
to the applicable
criteria in the rules and which was unreasonable. It was unreasonable because
the component of opex in respect
of self-insurance, being one year’s
losses, was not reflective of the actual reasonable forecast cost to AusNet of
self-insured
losses in the future. One year’s incurred losses could be no
more than one element in a very long chain of elements required
to reliably
predict the cost of uninsured losses in the future. AusNet submitted that it was
unreasonable for the AER, in the exercise
of its discretion, to suggest the
allowance for uninsured losses was the amount AusNet paid out in 2014 for
uninsured losses, and
that it could cover any greater losses by moving parts of
its opex or capex to cover those losses because in recent years AusNet’s
opex had been relatively stable. A further reason for the AER taking that
position was that AusNet had the ability to choose how
it dealt with its
uninsured losses. It was able to choose between external insurance,
self-insurance and other risk mitigation tactics.
This was simply unreasonable
and incorrect. What was required, and what the AER failed to do, was to
determine whether or not there
should be a category-specific allowance for
uninsured losses, and if so on what basis. It was required to do that, firstly,
AusNet raised it, and, secondly, because the discharge of its tasks in
arriving at its own estimate, which it was required to be
reasonably satisfied
reflected the criteria in the rules, compelled the AER to assess separately and
on an actuarial basis the likely
cost of uninsured losses in the future for the
regulatory period. So, in conclusion, AusNet submitted that the AER deciding to
and making its own estimate of total opex for the regulatory period
had produced an unreasonable result.
to the materially preferable NEO in respect of self-insured losses, AusNet
submitted it had been denied $8.46 million in total
for the upcoming regulatory
period of its efficient costs of self-insurance, there being no dispute that its
self-insurance was an
efficient cost at some level or another. That compelled
AusNet to meet its costs of self-insurance by reducing expenditure in other
areas where the allowance for those areas was considered to be efficient. That
was inappropriate. If it was prudent and efficient
for AusNet to self-insure as
part of its risk management strategy, then it should have an appropriate
allowance for the predicted
cost of its self-insured losses for the regulatory
period. This issue was of prime importance to AusNet given the nature of its
and it was an issue which had a long tail.
the error in approach taken by the AER in relation to AusNet’s
self-insured losses was not corrected in this review, it was
likely to have
significant adverse long-term consequences not only for AusNet, but in respect
of all DNSPs who chose to self-insure
as part of their risk management
strategies. It created an artificial incentive to insure externally, regardless
of the cost. If
less risk was self-insured and more risk was externally insured,
the obvious ultimate consequences would be that those additional
costs would be
passed on to consumers, and at a level which was considered by AusNet and AON to
be likely to be considerably in excess
of the cost of self-insurance. The reason
was that, as AON had indicated, the cost of insuring externally the risks which
were self-insured
was considered to be uncommercial, to the extent that AusNet
chose to carry that risk itself.
appropriate allowance within total opex for self-insured losses was infinitely
preferable to using the EBSS, and using the pass-through
provisions of the
legislation as a primary risk management tool. AusNet also submitted that
correcting the decision in relation to
self-insurance losses within opex would
materially advance the revenue and pricing principles and, therefore, the NEO.
The AER’s submissions
AER submitted, in summary, that insisting on the correct identification of the
decision made was fundamental. In determining base
opex, the AER submitted it
was not required to, and did not, estimate “self-insurance costs” as
a discrete subcategory.
Rather, the AER did not accept AusNet’s proposal
that its self-insurance costs should be excluded from the revealed base year
costs, and forecast as a separate category. That was the step in the AER’s
decision-making to which AusNet objected.
substance, the AER submitted, AusNet’s complaint went to the method that
AER used to derive base opex:
(a) Was the AER permitted simply to use the
revealed costs in the base year (without applying any special approach for
self-insurance)?
(b) Or was the AER required to (i) remove self-insured losses from the base
year, and (ii) substitute an actuarial forecast of self-insured
AER submitted the
did not require the AER to remove self-insured
losses from the base year: r 6.12.3(a). It distinguished the position prior to
2012 rule change, under former r 6.12.3(f).
AER submitted it did not “equate” self-insured losses with
self-insurance costs. Actuarial estimates were not self-insurance
“costs” for the purposes of opex. A premium paid to an external
insurer was an expenditure; an actuarial forecast was
did not maintain provisions for the self-insurance costs that it now claimed.
The amounts in question were “theoretical
2011-2015 the AER estimated self-insurance as a discrete sub-category of opex.
But it was incorrect to describe that sub-estimate
as an earmarked
“self-insurance allowance”.
AER submitted its decision did not perversely incentivise inefficient external
if error was established, any revenue impact was negligible and was in the
short-term only. Varying the decision in the way proposed
by AusNet would not
advance the long-term interests of consumers in a materially better way.
the materially preferable NEO decision threshold was satisfied, then, the AER
submitted, the decision should be remitted to the
AER for it to review
AON’s actuarial assumptions and consider whether any consequential
adjustments were required.
oral address to the Tribunal, Counsel for the AER submitted as follows.
premise of AusNet’s submissions was that the AER was required to make, and
did make, an estimate of costs of self-insured
losses for the 2016-2020 period.
The AER rejected that proposition. Rule 6.12.3 dealt with the extent of the
AER’s discretion.
By rr 6.12.1(4)(i) and (ii), the AER must accept or
reject the estimate of total forecast opex, and if it did so, it must determine
its substitute forecast of the total amount of opex required in accordance with
r 6.5.6. In r 6.5.6(c), where the opex criteria were
stated, again, the
AER’s obligation was to decide whether the total forecast of opex for the
2016-2020 period was one that
it was satisfied reasonably reflected the opex
the AER did was not to make any estimate of self-insured losses or costs as a
category. Rather, it declined AusNet’s invitation
that it should do so,
for stated reasons. That was, ultimately, the question of principle. Was the AER
required to make a category
forecast for opex, or was it open to the AER to take
the approach of applying the revealed cost method to the total base year opex
a whole by taking a (top-down) assessment of overall base year opex that
included the self-insured losses that had been incurred
in 2014 and using that
as the base component in the AER’s base-step-trend method.
making its assessment of the substitute forecast of total opex, the AER’s
decision about the base component was an intermediate
step in arriving at its
assessment of the total forecast overall. The decision that was made under r
6.12.1(4)(ii).
proposed a category-specific forecast for self-insurance. However, the AER
applied a base-step-trend approach to forecasting
self-insurance, consistent
with the guideline.
in its submissions referred to matters that the AER did not include in its
assessment of the revealed costs for the 2014 base
year. It was more helpful,
the AER submitted, to address these matters in terms of category-specific
were four items to address. The first was debt raising costs. The second was
guaranteed service level payments. The third was
the demand management incentive
allowance. The fourth was movements in provisions.
to the first of these items, the approach that the AER took across all networks
for the costs of raising equity and the costs of
raising debt was that they were
done on a benchmark basis consistent with the benchmark approach that the AER
applied to estimating
return on equity and estimating return on debt. In the
return on debt field, there was much debate about assumptions about timing
the way in which a benchmark efficient entity would go about raising debt, and
the AER took the approach of attributing benchmark
debt raising costs in
conjunction with the benchmark approach that it took to the return on debt. At
page 372, in relation to AusNet’s
response to the primary decision, the
AER said it was still not persuaded the proposed approach would provide a
realistic estimate
of the efficient costs required to meet the opex objectives.
It considered that it was important to forecast debt raising costs based
benchmarking approach rather than service providers’ actual costs. This
was also a matter that was hardwired into the
post-tax revenue model that the
AER publishes. When a business submitted that it was required to make an input
of the percentage
amount of its debt raising costs, that was calculated through
the model in accordance with the imputed debt raising schedule of the
efficient entity. And so that applied across the networks and it was not a
matter that was adjusted idiosyncratically.
second item was guaranteed service level payments. These were a continuation of
a Victoria-specific incentive scheme that was
originally administered by the
Essential Services Commission (
). Historically the ESC had calculated
those on a historical average basis and the AER continued that historical
method, inter alia
because transitioning from that old method to the revealed
cost method may create windfall gains and losses. No-one complained against
AER continuing to do that in relation to guaranteed service level payments.
third item was the demand management incentive allowance. That referred to a
revenue allowance that was given under the AER’s
demand management
incentive scheme. That was an incentive scheme that was in a similar category as
the EBSS, the Service Target Performance
Incentive Scheme and the like. Its
purpose was to give networks a revenue allowance to investigate and conduct
demand management
projects. And so the expenditure that a DNSP used for those
projects in the base year was not included because, conceptually, that
was funded through the incentive building block, not through the opex. To
include that expenditure in opex would result
in double counting.
fourth item was movements in provisions. The simple point was that the AER took
a standard approach in relation to its expenditure
forecast of basing its
forecasts exclusive of movements in provisions year to year. It was a question
of accounting treatment, akin
to the question whether one accounted on a cash
basis or on an accruals basis. So that was not, strictly speaking, an exclusion
costs as much as just a matter of accounting approach.
four matters, the AER submitted, were a matter of the regulatory framework and
the evolution of regulatory practice. It was
not sufficient to reason, as AusNet
did, that because the AER chose not to include those amounts in the revealed
cost in the base
year, that therefore it was inconsistent for the AER not to
have done so in relation to self-insurance.
page 7-27 of the Final Decision, the AER summarised that the difference in the
base opex amount for this period was attributable
to differences in the
allocation approach to, amongst other things, self-insurance and debt
page 7-92, under the heading ‘Other Costs Not Included in the Base
Year’, the AER explained that it preferred a base-step-trend
approach to
assessing most opex categories and said:
However, when appropriate, we may assess some opex
categories using other forecasting techniques.
may be necessary to take category-specific forecasts, for essentially practical
and common sense reasons. The contest here was
whether the AER erred, within s
71C, by not making a category-specific forecast in relation to self-insurance.
This, the AER submitted,
was plainly about a matter of method, about which the
AER had a discretion under r 6.12.3 and that was because the rules said
self-insurance.
Tribunal had to approach that question by reference to what was the
regulator’s statutory task, which was to make an estimate
of total opex,
and what it had said in the guideline about the approach that it proposed to
take, and take into account those matters
and the submissions that it received
from AusNet. The AER considered whether it should make a category-specific
forecast and, for
the reasons given in the final decision, decided not to adopt
that approach but to use the revealed cost method, including
self-insurance.
for the AER referred to the changes to the rules that were made in 2012 and to
the deletion in 2012 of r 6.12.3(f). Formerly
r 6.12.3(a) stated:
Subject to this clause and other provisions of this
Chapter 6 explicitly negating or limiting the
discretion, the
has a discretion to accept or approve, or to refuse to accept or
approve, any element of a
regulatory proposal
That discretion was previously limited r 6.12.3(f) which read:
refuses to approve an amount or value
referred to in clause 6.12.1, the substitute amount or value on which the
distribution determination
is based must be:
(1) determined on the basis of the current
regulatory proposal
(2) amended from that basis only to the extent necessary to enable it to be
approved in accordance with the
read in conjunction with the opex criteria, the effect of the former r 6.12.3(f)
was that if AusNet came with a regulatory proposal
to estimate its opex with a
category-specific forecast for self-insurance, then the AER was obliged to make
its determination using
a category-specific forecast of self-insurance, and
amend it from that basis only to the extent that it was necessary for the AER
be satisfied that it reasonably reflected the opex criteria. That was the
position until 2012.
limitation was removed by the rule change in 2012 to make clear that the AER was
free to determine an opex estimate that reasonably
reflected the opex criteria
without any limitation or constraint as to the basis for that forecast being
imposed by the method applied
in the DNSP’s regulatory proposal.
change was mirrored by the guideline that the AER published in 2013, the
Expenditure Forecast Assessment Guideline at page vii:
Economic benchmarking techniques will allow us to
analyse the efficiency of NSPs over time and compared to their peers. They will
also allow us to estimate a top down forecast of expenditure and estimate
productivity change.
So in conjunction with the introduction of opex benchmarking, there was a
change of approach to a more top-down method of assessing
expenditure forecasts. At page 62, under the heading Assessing Base Opex it was
We agree with CitiPower, Powercor, SA Power Networks and
the ENA that the EBSS provides a strong continuous efficiency incentive and
therefore base year opex should be an efficient starting point for forecasting
opex. However, this is only true if the NSP responds
to that incentive.
statement was an important background consideration in understanding the
philosophy behind the revealed cost approach to the
base component of the
expenditure. Base opex was intended to reflect those categories of opex that
were largely recurrent year to
year. And because the EBSS was in place, and
because it had now been in place for at least two previous periods, that imposed
incentives consistently throughout the process, and so it was
reasonable to assume that a network’s revealed expenditures in
year – typically the penultimate year of the previous period – would
have responded to those incentives and,
therefore, the
prima facie
assumption was that those expenditures ought to reflect efficient costs.
did not prevent the AER from deciding that those expenditures did not reflect
efficient costs. But in this case the AER was satisfied
that DNSPs had responded
to the efficiency incentives and, therefore, the base component was, in
aggregate, reasonably reflective
of the efficient costs that a prudent operator
would incur.
for the AER was asked by the Tribunal what was the position, on this approach,
if the base year costs did not actually reflect
the underlying costs faced by
the firm: it could have significantly higher self-insurance costs not reflected
in the losses in a
particular year, or even a sequence of years associated with
those categories of risk expenditure. The decision, in effect, not to
them in the base opex gave rise to the question whether that was an appropriate
thing to do with costs which were not revealed
in ongoing expenses for a
category of cost, which would be expected to be volatile, or to vary from year
to year. The problem was
that the actual expense in any year could be volatile;
whereas the notional costs, the actuarially assessed risk, could actually
stable. Could a large number of volatile components be added up to something
which was relatively stable?
responded that, first, it was important that the task was to estimate aggregate
opex, not to estimate expected self-insurance
costs over the five years. The AER
did not assume that self-insurance losses in the base year were equivalent. It
simply disagreed
with the proposal that it had been given to carry out a
category-specific forecast for self-insurance costs. Second, as the 2015
showed, the fact that a sizeable loss was incurred did not mean, therefore, that
aggregate opex would increase correspondingly.
It did not follow from the fact
that a large loss was incurred in this category in relation to a particular
category of opex, that
aggregate opex cease to be recurrent year to year. The
fact that self-insurance costs have been estimated within the revealed costs
the base year, did not mean that aggregate costs would cease to be relatively
recurrent year on year such that it was inappropriate
to use that measure of
aggregate costs, which included self-insured losses, as the measure for the base
year. Counsel submitted it
was within the range of reasonable methodologies to
suggest that an actuarial approach could be taken.
the mere fact that there was an alternative approach open did not establish the
exercise of discretion was incorrect. The mere
fact that the Tribunal might,
starting by itself, think that this ought to be a case for a category-specific
cost, was not by itself
enough to amount to an incorrect exercise of discretion.
It had to be shown that the AER’s own exercise of discretion miscarried
was incorrect for a reason that rose to the level of, as AusNet put it,
misapplication of principles or methodologies mandated
by the rules.
Expenditure Forecast Assessment Guideline at page 75 addressed the
appropriateness of including these cost categories, such as
self-insurance, in
the overall opex estimate for the base year where the amount of the losses
incurred year to year may be volatile.
The topic heading was “Assessing
lumpy costs” and it was said:
We agree with Incenta that caution is required were
there are significant lumpy costs. However, the question is not whether
cost categories are lumpy but whether total opex is lumpy.
Forecasting some categories bottom up, for example, but others using revealed
cost risks upwardly biased forecasts. This is because NSPs would have an
incentive to only use an alternative forecasting approach
for those lumpy cost
categories where expenditure is atypically low in the base year. For categories
where expenditure is higher
than usual in the base year they have an incentive
to forecast using revealed costs. Similarly, NSPs have an incentive to use an
alternative forecasting approach where work volumes are expected to increase in
the next period but use revealed cost for those categories
where volumes are
expected to decline. Consequently there is a risk that a 'hybrid' forecasting
approach will give upwardly biased
forecasts. If total opex is not materially
lumpy then a revealed cost forecast is appropriate regardless of whether
individual categories
are lumpy or not.
was the principle that the AER was giving effect to in its approach in the Final
Decision. As facilitated by the change to the
rules in 2012, the AER now had a
clear preference for using methods of broad and general application that tried
to limit the number
of exclusions of specific categories that needed to be
assessed individually, because it was the case, and regulatory experience
taught, that there were real difficulties in the AER’s ability to
meaningfully assess efficiency when everything is broken
down into subcategories
of subcategories.
the 2013 report of the Productivity Commission,
Electricity Network
Regulatory Frameworks
, in Volume 1 on page 189, about incentive regulation,
it was said:
Another important feature of incentive regulation is
that it is based on high-level outcomes, such as yearly expenditure and network
reliability. It is designed to leave the day-to-day decisions, such as project
choice and the timing of asset replacement, to the
network business.
page 303 under the subheading “(c) Benchmarking, information and efficient
contracting” the following was said in relation
to the pre-2012 regulatory
In the current regulatory regime, network businesses
have large information advantages over the regulator, which they may be able
exploit to increase regulatory revenue allowances. For example, ex ante, they
may claim the need for allowances to meet additional
demand or to replace
specific ageing assets, and then, ex post, invest at lower levels, taking the
residual as a surplus. Ex ante,
the regulator may not know enough information to
challenge highly detailed ‘bottom-up’ costs and demand forecasts.
the scope for gaming the regulator can be reduced (and the scope for
efficient contracts strengthened) if a benchmarking model can
be built that:
uses a small set of verifiable data
takes account of the key operating differences of the businesses
adequately predicts efficient costs.
had been a marked change in the AER’s approach since 2012 on account of
the rule change, and on account of matters such
as the Productivity
Commission’s investigation. That had led to the introduction of
benchmarking, whatever the lived experience
might have been. That was the
fundamental change in approach that had been applied.
to AusNet’s Regulatory Proposal for this period at page 183, these were
the adjustments or exclusions for base year
opex for which AusNet contended in
its initial proposal. There were nine matters that were sought to be excluded.
Some of them were
negative amounts and some of them were positive amounts. That
things, or from year to year. These nine categories of exclusions were the nine
categories of costs that were excluded from
the base year component of
AusNet’s previous opex forecast for the 2011 to 2015 period. So the
starting point for AusNet’s
proposal was a continuation of the way in
which things had been done previously.
to the Final Decision, at page 7-95, there were approximately five categories
listed, and some of them would result in increases
to the base opex if they were
included – if the revealed costs were included in the base opex.
the insurance, the AER concluded that it would have no material impact. And for
self-insurance, including the cost in the revealed
base opex, the AER concluded
it would result in a reduction to the base opex amount. AusNet’s response
to the preliminary decision
was to accept the first four categories as
categories included in the base year opex, but to reject self-insurance, which
one whose inclusion in the base year would result in a reduction.
page 7-94, which preceded the direct discussion of self-insurance, the AER
acknowledged that using a category-specific forecast
may produce more accurate
forecasts of expenditure for those categories: but that was not the exercise.
The critical question was:
accepting that self-insured losses was a volatile
category in and of itself, did the inclusion of self-insured losses in the base
year mean that total opex will, therefore, be lumpy or volatile from year to
was an important point here of proportion. AusNet said that the AER had
underfunded by $8.4 million. AusNet also said that the
aggregate cost on the
actuarial basis, using AON’s figures, was $17.1 million. That underfunding
amount, $8.4 million, reflected
0.7 per cent of total opex. That was not total
revenue but was only 0.3 per cent of total revenue. Even if the Tribunal were to
AON’s numbers as being correct, the extent of underfunding in this
case is said to be only 0.7 per cent of opex. That was not
an unmanageable
variability year to year.
if one made the simplifying and incorrect assumption that the aggregate of all
the other categories would remain exactly identical
year to year, even quite
sizeable changes in self-insured losses from one year to the next had a very
small overall effect on total
one had regard to that question of proportion here, it simply did follow that
because self-insurance losses were volatile year
to year, that including it in
the base opex will cause total opex to be lumpy year to year. And that went
directly to the passage
in the guideline set out at [132] above.
requirement of the rules was that the AER must be satisfied that its estimate of
total opex reasonably reflected the opex criteria.
The highest case put against
the AER was that it got the true forecast of opex wrong by only 0.7 per cent. It
was open to the Tribunal
to find that an estimate that is within 0.7 per cent of
the true answer did, in fact, reasonably reflect the opex criteria as they
opex. It was the total estimate of opex, not the
estimate of self-insurance, that must reasonably reflect the opex criteria.
effect of the change to the legislation was intended to prevent these minor or
relatively trivial contests, particularly on these
matters of expenditure. Here
the issue was about 0.3 per cent of overall revenue. And so the complaints that
AusNet made about underfunding
needed to be seen in proportion. The point
applied as well at the materially preferable level.
AER’s primary position was that as a matter of regulatory methodology
there was no error in applying the revealed cost approach.
next point related to AusNet’s submission that the AER took an approach of
equating self-insured losses with self-insured
costs. It started life as an
allegation of error of fact. In the AER’s written submissions it
challenged AusNet to identify
where in the reasons it had made the finding of
fact, and that challenge was not taken up in AusNet’s reply submissions or
in oral submissions. The first full paragraph on page 96 showed the AER did not
equate the two concepts (footnote omitted):
AusNet Services considered self-insurance losses are
volatile and can vary markedly from year to year. For this reason, it stated
quantification of these losses is best suited to an actuarial analysis that
forecasts self-insurance based on expected losses
determined from historical
data, rather than on actual losses in a single year.
So that sentence showed that the AER was fully aware of the distinction between
the concept of the actuarial cost on the one hand
and the revealed cost of
actual losses in a single year. The same point was exposed in the last paragraph
on page 7-98 set out at
[62] above.
for the AER submitted that if the task were to estimate self-insurance losses it
accepted that the natural way to estimate
those losses, because of their
volatile nature, would be an actuarial forecast. But this came back to the
overall regulatory exercise
that was being undertaken, which was to estimate
total opex starting with the main component of total opex being the revealed
in the base year. The regulatory task in its proper frame was total opex.
The question was not whether self-insurance as a category
was materially lumpy
from year to year but whether overall opex was materially lumpy year to year.
The AER’s answer to that
second question, as to overall opex, was that it
was not materially lumpy year to year, even when self-insurance was included.
of the reasons why it was not was because self-insurance, even if assessed
on an actuarial basis, was only a very small component
of the overall
the question whether the base opex had had swings and roundabouts, Counsel for
the AER submitted that the evidence in this case
was that the base opex had been
consistent, even when, as was the case in 2015, quite sizeable self-insurance
losses were incurred
in the amount of $10 million. What resulted was a small
reduction in opex. AusNet bore the onus of establishing that including the
self-insured amounts in the 2014 base year, or in the base year generally,
resulted in aggregate opex being lumpy to such an extent
that it was not a
reliable measure for the base year.
was an issue that arose in the
decision about the EBSS and
whether removal of movements in provisions related to defined benefit
superannuation liabilities were
an actual cost for the purpose of applying the
EBSS. The AER’s reasons were that movements in provisions were not actual
for the regulatory purpose of the EBSS and the Tribunal rejected the
networks’ claims of error. The critical paragraphs in
decision were [603] and [618], as follows:
The detailed grounds of review of Networks NSW are set
out above. It appears that, at this point in the AER’s reasoning, the
relevant asserted error of fact is that the AER concluded that changes to
provisions were not actual costs incurred in delivering
network services.
However, whatever may be the available accounting methods and assumptions from
time to time for the making of provisions,
or the appropriateness of the
reported provisioning in accordance with accounting standards, it is not the
case that the provisioning
of those costs meant that they were “actual
costs” incurred in delivering network services; they were estimates of
liabilities
incurred and to be paid in due course determined in accordance with
accounting standards and based upon assumptions made by each
of Networks NSW
ultimately, would be paid to meet those liabilities.
The AER decided to reject the provisioning approach previously adopted and
exposed by the adjustments made by Networks NSW (in particular
by the Essential
accounts and methodology for provisioning) and it decided not to directly
reflect actual efficiency gains or losses
by the accounting provisioning for
those future liabilities. Its use of the term “actual costs” is in
that context. It
does not mean that the AER simply chose to ignore the costs
incurred by Networks NSW, as reflected by the payments made by the Networks
businesses for those liabilities, or to ignore the fact that there are future
liabilities which are reflected in the provisioning
AER’s submission was that for the purpose of deriving the base year
component of opex, with which the EBSS worked hand in
glove, the same could be
said about actuarial forecasts. They were not even provisions in this case. The
same point could be made
in relation to the actuarial forecasts, changing the
word “accounting” to “actuarial”. The fact that the
had made the decision of regulatory approach to use a top-down approach to the
base year without treating self-insurance as a
special category in the special
case of AusNet did not mean that it had ignored the fact that these related to
future liabilities
which may vary year to year.
the actuarial estimate reflected an actuarial notion of a cost, the regulatory
regime was one that started from costs as
revealed and they were assumed to be
efficient because they were amounts paid out under the EBSS and under the
incentives imposed
on the EBSS and in reduction of the residual amount that was
available to go to the shareholders as profit. Because of those two
incentives, the
allowance and the EBSS, there was an assumption
that expenditures at the aggregate level – not at the category level
were likely to be efficient and that was why it was a sound starting
point to use the revealed cost in the base year. And for these
purposes in this
regulatory context the revealed cost is the amounts paid out.
good reason, the AER had included its costs in base opex and not assessed them
separately. And, as a consequence it had not assessed
separately what those
costs might have been on a year basis. In effect, it had not assessed the
efficiency of any of the individual
categories of expenditure inside base opex,
it had taken it as a whole.
was done in the previous decision was that the AER, under its old approach, did
make a category-specific forecast for self-insurance.
That became a component of
the overall estimate for opex which in turn became a component of the overall
revenue – regulated
revenue allowance for those years. It was simply
incorrect to posit that, because the AER historically made an estimate of the
that therefore that was somehow an earmarked fund out of which either
self-insured losses had to be paid or provisioned into some
separate account.
That was not how the regime worked either in relation to self-insurance or in
relation to any other category of
opex or in relation to opex as a whole. The
fundamental axiom of incentive regulation was that the network got an allowance
and it was entitled to run its business however it liked with them,
spending it on whichever categories of opex it considered most
efficient or most
advantageous. And, to the extent that it was able to reduce its expenditures
below those forecast amount, that
resulted in an increased return to the
shareholders. That was one of the incentive effects.
Ultimately,
the AER made a decision that resulted in the network receiving an overall
revenue allowance. How the AER has arrived at
that decision, whether it was by
forecasting opex as a discrete category or not, had no bearing upon whether
AusNet thought it more
efficient to self-insure or to insure externally, insofar
as there was a choice. So insofar as there was a choice available, then
incentive regime, both the
allowance, revenue allowance and the
EBSS operated to incentivise AusNet to manage its risks in the way that it
thought most efficient.
to the EBSS, under the opex factors listed in r 6.5.6(e) one of the mandatory
considerations the AER was required to consider was
how an opex forecast related
to any applicable incentive scheme. So far from being a prohibited
consideration, it was a mandatory
consideration.
to materially preferable, the s 71P(2)(a) question, the question was: was the
putative alternative decision one that will advance
the long-term interests of
consumers, or one that will promote efficiency in the long-term interests of
consumers in a materially-better
way than the decision that the AER made? Even
if one accepted the AON forecasts, the amount in issue was 0.3 per cent of
regulated revenue. Where the dollar amount and the percentage
were trivial, this was a case where even if error has been taken established,
the Tribunal must not remit or vary the decision. Secondly, there was no
structural underfunding, no long-term asymmetric impact
on this decision one way
or the other. The AER’s approach may equally result in adopting the base
year in years where the self-insured
losses were, to some extent, above the
actuarially expected amount. Thirdly, there were sound regulatory reasons,
learned regulatory
experience, why the AER had changed its approach in this way.
The question was not whether individual categories were lumpy, and
therefore be hived off and subject to a bottom-up interrogation which imposed
additional demands on the regulator and, in
practical terms, impaired its
ability to conduct meaningful assessments. The AER’s approach focussed on
assessing the overall
opex which was not, on any of the material before the
Tribunal, materially lumpy from year to year, even when, as happened in 2015,
large self-insurance event occurred. Finally, on the materially preferable
point, the threshold at which that pass-through event
kicked in was 1 per cent
of the annual regulated revenue which, for AusNet, was $6 to $7 million, and so
that mitigated the risk
of underfunding.
QEUN’s submissions
Queensland Electricity Users Network (the
) submitted that
self-insurance referred to the practice of insuring one’s own interests by
maintaining a fund to cover possible
losses, rather than by purchasing an
insurance policy. Pursuant to
r 6.4.3(a)(7), a distribution network
service provider’s opex was one building block that formed part of its
annual revenue
requirement.
submitted that self-insurance costs should be accorded the same treatment for
opex purposes as the costs of an insurance premium
and that the AER was in error
for basing its analysis on self-insurance losses rather than self-insurance
QEUN maintained that an insurance premium provided assurance to consumers that
the network business did have the capacity to restore
the network in a timely
manner following a natural disaster. This minimised the financial and lifestyle
hardship caused to consumers
connected to that section of the national grid and
to other parts of the national grid remote to the damaged section. The ability
to self-insure was dependent on the profitability of the network business and
the dividends declared to shareholders. Self-insurance
could only provide
assurance of timely restoration if the network business has a locked reserve for
natural disasters.
the request by AusNet for an additional $8.46 million to cover self-insurance
was granted, the opex for AusNet and consequently
its allowed revenue cap would
rise by $8.46 million. The AER had informed the QEUN that the allowed revenue
cap of a distribution
network business could be spent as the business saw fit.
Consequently, the $8.46 million could be provided to shareholders as a dividend
and AusNet could request a positive pass through if the cost of a bushfire
exceeded 1% of AusNet’s annual allowed revenue.
consumers throughout the NEM vehemently believed that electricity prices were
already at unsustainable levels, any further increase
in power bills would
further exacerbate the trend of consumers accessing hardship programs and would
cause bill shock.
The Tribunal’s analysis
turn to consider these submissions.
Tribunal finds that none of the four claimed errors of fact is made out.
has not established that the AER equated self-insured losses in the base year
with the cost to AusNet of self-insurance. The
Tribunal agrees that the
AER’s approach to assessing base year opex had the same effect as assuming
that self-insurance costs
were equated to self-insurance losses, but concludes
that that assumption had no material consequences for the total of the opex
allowance assessed by the AER. That is, because the AER derived the opex
allowance from a base-year aggregate, it was only required
(by r 6.12.1(4)(ii))
to be satisfied reasonably that the allowance reflected the efficient operating
costs of a prudent service provider
(meeting the operating expenditure
objectives in r 6.5.6(a)).
is clear to the Tribunal that the AER was aware of the industry-wide trends in,
and relative contributions to the total of, the
various separate operating cost
categories. The Tribunal concludes that the AER did not err in deciding that an
aggregated, “top-down”
approach to opex could satisfy the opex
criteria. In another case, this conclusion might be tempered by a potentially
larger problem
with the AER’s implementation of this approach because, as
determined in
, the AER’s benchmarking methodology for
determining the efficiency of revealed expenditure is flawed. Consequently, and
the AER’s review of trends in components of operating
expenditures, its starting point for assessing opex is not necessarily
as the AER says. This issue was not raised by AusNet. The Tribunal in these
circumstances proceeds on the basis that the
AER has appropriately identified an
efficient level of initial opex, necessarily including an amount that
compensates AusNet for
its self-insurance costs (the equivalent of a premium for
actual insurance, not the expenditure on self-insured outlays).
“error” or approximation arising from the decision not to separately
assess self-insurance costs is then a natural
consequence of the AER’s
aggregate method for assessing opex and does not constitute an error of fact.
we do not conclude that the AER’s treatment of the volatility of
self-insured losses as against the relative stability
of the cost of
self-insurance reveals error. The only potential source of error in the
AER’s aggregate approach would be if
the inclusion of self-insurance
losses, instead of, say, an actuarially determined provision in lieu of a
premium for actual insurance,
meant the aggregate base-year opex was materially
different from (understating or overstating) an amount that would be needed to
satisfy the operating expenditure objectives. The AER was aware of this
potential error and was reasonably able to conclude that
the magnitude of any
error was unlikely to be material. The AER’s decisions to assess
separately some other categories of expenditure
were irrelevant to this
conclusion.
and consequent on the first two points, the claimed failure of the AER to find
that the cost of self-insurance to a DNSP
was, in substance, a self-insurance
premium conceptually equivalent to the premium for external insurance of the
same risks, so that
it required a category-specific allowance or forecast on an
actuarial basis to be included in the base year, was not in our opinion
of fact but was a result of the methodology adopted by the AER.
fourth claimed error of fact, that the AER found that self-insured insurance
losses could be controlled or funded by reducing
costs in other areas when
self-insured losses were unpredictable and volatile and highly variable again in
our opinion was not an
error of fact but a choice of methodology.
follows that the incorrect exercise of discretion, as put on behalf of AusNet,
also fails, based as it was on the claim that none
of the reasons advanced by
the AER in consideration of self-insurance forecast were permitted by the rules,
were relevant to the
opex criteria, or relevant to the opex objectives.
also reject the claim that either the reasoning or the conclusion of the AER in
this respect was unreasonable. In our opinion the
AER’s decision is
justified by reference to its stated reasons. Further, there was not an
arbitrary and capricious result which
had not been determined by reference to
the applicable criteria in the rules. We do not accept that the AER’s
decision was
unreasonable on the ground that the component of opex in respect of
self-insurance, being one year’s losses, was not reflective
of the actual
reasonable forecast cost to AusNet of self-insured losses in the
CONCLUSION AND DETERMINATION
these reasons, the Tribunal affirms the reviewable regulatory decision, being
Final Decision: AusNet Services distribution determination 2016 to
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
seventy-three (173) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Determination
herein of the Honourable Justice Robertson, Mr RF Shogren and Dr
Dated: 17 October 2016
RTF format (890 KB)
Signed PDF/A format