Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union v Beyond Help Pty Ltd (formerly Beyond Communications Pty Ltd) [2012] FMCA 1267 (17 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
COMMUNICATIONS,
ELECTRICAL, ELECTRONIC, ENERGY, INFORMATION, POSTAL, PLUMBING AND ALLIED
SERVICES UNION v BEYOND HELP PTY LTD (FORMERLY
BEYOND COMMUNICATIONS PTY
[2012] FMCA 1267
INDUSTRIAL LAW – Extempore judgment –
respondent in default within meaning of rule 13.03A – application for
pursuant to rule 13.03B – application granted.
Corporations Act 2001
Fair Work Act
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
, r.13.03A, 13.03B
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2006] FCA 1427
Facton Limited and Ors v Dash Industries
Proprietary Limited & Anor
[2010] FMCA 709
Speedo Holdings BV v
Evans (No 2)
[2011] FCA 1227
COMMUNICATIONS, ELECTRICAL, ELECTRONIC, ENERGY, INFORMATION, POSTAL,
PLUMBING AND ALLIED SERVICES UNION
Respondent:
ALLIED SERVICES UNION v BEYOND HELP PTY LTD (FORMERLY BEYOND COMMUNICATIONS
File Number:
MLG 1181 of 2012
Judgment of:
Burchardt FM
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Counsel for the Respondent:
No appearance
Solicitors for the Respondent:
No appearance
(1) The Respondent pay the employees, Mark Burfurd, Rhys
Hodgins, Brent Abbott, Rachael Webster, Jamie Thomas and Lee Francois
employees”) the sum of $14,383.79 in outstanding wages in the
amounts indicated in Appendix B to the Statement of Claim.
(2) The Respondent pay the employees the sum of $18,428.29 in annual leave in
the amounts indicated in Appendix B to the Statement
(3) The Respondent pay employees, Mark Burford, Rhys Hodgins and Rachael Webster
the sum of $12,300.30 in redundancy in the amounts
indicated in Appendix B to
the Statement of Claim.
(4) The Respondent pay employees Mark Burfurd, Brent Abbott, Rachael Webster,
Jamie Thomas and Lee Francois the sum of $15,100.60
being payment in lieu of
notice in the amounts indicated in Appendix B to the Statement of Claim.
(5) The Respondent pay Mark Burfurd $812.78 and Brent Abbott $455.08 in
superannuation to be paid into the said workers’ nominated
superannuation
(6) The Respondent pay interest on all of the above sums at the penalty interest
rate fixed for the State of Victoria from the date
of these Orders until the
sums are paid.
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
MLG 1181 of 2012
COMMUNICATIONS, ELECTRICAL, ELECTRONIC, ENERGY, INFORMATION, POSTAL,
PLUMBING AND ALLIED SERVICES UNION
BEYOND HELP PTY LTD (FORMERLY BEYOND COMMUNICATIONS PTY LTD)
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
matter commenced by way of application supported by statement of claim, both
filed on 21 September of this year. The matter
came before the Court on 9
October 2012, and was adjourned for proof of service. On 14 November 2012, the
applicant was granted
leave to file an affidavit of service which proves that
the respondent, which is a corporation, has been served by postal service
permitted by the
Corporations Act
. The respondent was ordered by me, on 14
November 2012, to file and serve a response and defence to the statement of
claim on or
before 5 December 2012, and the matter was adjourned for directions
today. The final order made then was that, in default of compliance
respondent with order 2, the matter proceed on an undefended basis on 7 December
matter has been called. The respondent has not appeared and the respondent has
not complied with the orders made. The respondent
is clearly in default within
the meaning of order 13.03A of this Court’s Rules, in that it has failed
to comply with an order
of the Court in the proceeding. This brings into play
the Court’s discretionary powers in order 13.03B, and relevantly
13.03B(2)(c),
which provides that:
respondent is in default, the Court may:
proceeding was commenced by an application supported by a statement of
claim...give judgment against the respondent for
applicant appears entitled to on the statement of claim; and
Court is satisfied it has the power to
meaning of that phrase was considered by Riley FM in the case of
Limited and Ors v Dash Industries Proprietary Limited & Anor
[2010] FMCA
, where at [4] her Honour said:
and Ors v Vaupotic Investments Proprietary Limited and Ors
[2005] FCA 433
, Heerey J discussed the equivalent rule in the Federal Court Rules and
rule does not require proof by way of evidence of the applicant’s claim;
rather that on the face of the statement
of claim there is a claim for the
relief sought and, of course, that the court has jurisdiction to grant that
operation of the relevant equivalent Federal Court Rules was considered in
greater detail by Flick J in
Speedo Holdings BV v Evans (No 2)
and following. I do not propose to paraphrase his Honour’s
detailed discussion of all the relevant history about this rule,
but I note that
notwithstanding the court’s power, it is a power to be exercised in a
discretionary fashion, and it is not
a given that a defaulting respondent should
be shut out altogether from the case. His Honour observed at
necessarily recognising that the power must be exercised with caution, there is
little detailed consideration as to how
the discretion must otherwise be
Honour went on, nonetheless, to refer to various authorities about parallel
provisions, and referred in particular to the judgment
of Kiefel J of the
Federal Court, as her Honour then was, in
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission v DatalineNetAu Pty Ltd
[2006] FCA 1427.
However, that aspect of
the matter was concerned with whether affidavit evidence was either necessary or
permissible.
made it clear that I approach this case with all those matters in mind, I turn
to the statement of claim. The statement of
claim pleads that the plaintiff is
an organisation within the meaning of the
Fair Work Act
. It clearly is. The
respondent is pleaded to be a corporation. The employment of the six employees
with whom the court is presently
concerned is pleaded, as is their employment
and their membership of the union. The relevant enterprise agreement is also
and the breaches of that agreement – in terms of failure to pay
wages, failure to pay annual leave, failure to pay redundancy,
and failure to
pay in lieu of notice – are all pleaded. It is pleaded that this
contravened the Act in breach of
, and once again it is plain from the
that that assertion is made out.
relief sought is effectively that there be orders to pay the employees the
matters contained in schedule B of the statement of
claim, save that the
redundancy payments there detailed in respect of Jamie Thomas, Lee Francoise and
Brent Abbott are no longer
pressed, because they have already been satisfied
from an industry protection fund. Accordingly, I will make an order that Beyond
pay the employees $14,383.79 in unpaid wages, in the manner indicated in
appendix B. That is to say, each employee is individually
to be entitled to
judgment to the sums therein set out.
next order I will deal with is the order that the respondent pay the employees
compensation of $18,428.29. Once again, the employees
should be paid those
amounts, as detailed in appendix B.
next order is redundancy, and I order that there be payments as set out in
appendix B of the statement of claim to Mark Burford,
Reece Hodgins and Rachel
Webster, in the sums set out in schedule B.
next one is the payment in lieu of termination. Once again, I order that the
respondent pay $15,100.30 to the relevant employees,
as detailed in appendix B
to the statement of claim.
further next order that the respondent pay into the employees’ nominated
superannuation funds the amount of $1267.86, once
again as indicated in appendix
B to the statement of claim. I further order that interest be payable on all
these sums from the
date of judgment, at the penalty interest rate obtaining for
the State of Victoria, until the judgments are satisfied.
leaves order 11 sought in the statement of claim, which is an order for a
pecuniary penalty for breach of a civil penalty provision.
As I discussed with
counsel, the difficulty with this aspect of the application is that the
contravention of the civil penalty proceeding
is not, in fact, pleaded in the
statement of claim. It is only to be inferred, so to speak, from the relief
sought in the proposed
order 11. In my view, the court should not embark upon
the quasi criminal exercise that the civil penalty provisions involve, in
circumstances where there is not a precise and comprehensible pleading
establishing the contravention that I fully accept is highly
likely to have
occurred. Indeed, there are likely to have been multiple contraventions, but in
circumstances where those contraventions
are not pleaded, I am not prepared to
exercise my discretion to grant that aspect of the claim. So there will be
orders in those
I certify that the preceding twelve (12)
paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Burchardt FM.
Date: 17 April 2013
RTF format (104 KB)
Signed PDF/A format