1503048 [2015] RRTA 329 (1 June 2015)
[2015] RRTA 329
(1 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
Afghanistan
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
John Blount
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the
direction that the applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Statement made on 01 June 2015 at 2:29pm
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicant
a Protection visa under s.65 of
Migration Act 1958
applicant who claims to be a citizen of Afghanistan, applied for the visa [in]
August 2012 and the delegate refused to grant the
visa [in] October 2012. On 13
November 2012 the applicant applied to the Tribunal for review of that decision.
The first Tribunal
affirmed the delegate’s decision on 26 March 2013 (RRT
decision 1217618)). The applicant sought judicial review and [in] February
the Federal Circuit Court of Australia (in SZSTZ) remitted the matter for
redetermination by the Tribunal. The case subsequently
came to the Tribunal as
presently constituted on11 March 2015.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 28 May 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The Tribunal also received oral evidence
from [Mr A]. The
Tribunal hearing was conducted with the assistance of an interpreter in the Dari
and English languages.
applicant was represented in relation to the review by his registered [migration
RELEVANT LAW
criteria for a protection visa are set out in s.36 of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa
must meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c).
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has
protection obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same
Refugee criterion
36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the Convention).
is a party to the Refugees Convention and generally speaking, has protection
obligations in respect of people who are refugees
as defined in Article 1 of the
Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a refugee as any person
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group
political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or,
owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that
country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his
former habitual residence,
is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to
91R and 91S of the Act qualify some aspects of Article 1A(2) for the purposes of
the application of the Act and the Regulations
to a particular person.
are four key elements to the Convention definition. First, an applicant must be
outside his or her country.
an applicant must fear persecution. Under s.91R(1) of the Act persecution must
involve ‘serious harm’ to the applicant
(s.91R(1)(b)), and
systematic and discriminatory conduct (s.91R(1)(c)). Examples of ‘serious
harm’ are set out in s.91R(2)
of the Act. The High Court has explained
that persecution may be directed against a person as an individual or as a
member of a
group. The persecution must have an official quality, in the sense
that it is official, or officially tolerated or uncontrollable
authorities of the country of nationality. However, the threat of harm need not
be the product of government policy; it may
be enough that the government has
failed or is unable to protect the applicant from persecution.
persecution implies an element of motivation on the part of those who persecute
for the infliction of harm. People are persecuted
for something perceived about
them or attributed to them by their persecutors.
the persecution which the applicant fears must be for one or more of the reasons
enumerated in the Convention definition -
race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular social group or political opinion. The phrase
‘for reasons of’
serves to identify the motivation for the
infliction of the persecution. The persecution feared need not be
attributable to a Convention reason. However, persecution for multiple
motivations will not satisfy the relevant test unless a Convention
reasons constitute at least the essential and significant motivation for the
persecution feared: s.91R(1)(a) of the Act.
an applicant’s fear of persecution for a Convention reason must be a
‘well-founded’ fear. This adds an
objective requirement to the
requirement that an applicant must in fact hold such a fear. A person has a
‘well-founded fear’
of persecution under the Convention if they have
genuine fear founded upon a ‘real chance’ of being persecuted for a
Convention stipulated reason. A ‘real chance’ is one that is not
remote or insubstantial or a far-fetched possibility.
A person can have a
well-founded fear of persecution even though the possibility of the persecution
occurring is well below 50 per
addition, an applicant must be unable, or unwilling because of his or her fear,
to avail himself or herself of the protection of
his or her country or countries
of nationality or, if stateless, unable, or unwilling because of his or her
fear, to return to his
or her country of former habitual residence. The
expression ‘the protection of that country’ in the second limb of
1A(2) is concerned with external or diplomatic protection extended to
citizens abroad. Internal protection is nevertheless relevant
to the first limb
of the definition, in particular to whether a fear is well-founded and whether
the conduct giving rise to the fear
is persecution.
an applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations
is to be assessed upon the facts as they
exist when the decision is made and
requires a consideration of the matter in relation to the reasonably foreseeable
Complementary protection criterion
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of
a protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a real
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm: s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
‘Significant
harm’ for these purposes is exhaustively defined in s.36(2A): s.5(1). A
person will suffer significant harm
if he or she will be arbitrarily deprived of
their life; or the death penalty will be carried out on the person; or the
person will
be subjected to torture; or to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment; or to degrading treatment or punishment. ‘Cruel or
treatment or punishment’, ‘degrading treatment or punishment’,
and ‘torture’, are further defined
in s.5(1) of the Act.
are certain circumstances in which there is taken not to be a real risk that an
applicant will suffer significant harm in a
country. These arise where it would
be reasonable for the applicant to relocate to an area of the country where
there would not
be a real risk that the applicant will suffer significant harm;
where the applicant could obtain, from an authority of the country,
such that there would not be a real risk that the applicant will suffer
significant harm; or where the real risk is one
faced by the population of the
country generally and is not faced by the applicant personally: s.36(2B) of the
Section 499 Ministerial Direction
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs
and Trade expressly for protection status determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
applicant is a [age] year old man from Afghanistan, who arrived [as] an
irregular maritime arrival in May 2012.
present Tribunal has before it the Department’s file relating to the
applicant (number deleted]) which includes the notes
of the applicant’s
Entry Interview [in] May 2012 at [location], the application for protection visa
and statement made in support
thereof and a copy of the delegate’s
decision record.
Tribunal also has had regard to the material referred to in the delegate’s
written decision (a copy of which had been submitted
to the Tribunal by the
applicant in his review application of November 2012). The Tribunal also has
before it that review application
and the materials/submissions provided to the
first Tribunal and to the present Tribunal in support of that application.
evidence before the first Tribunal is comprehensively summarised in its written
Protection Visa application, [August] 2012
and claims put forward to the Department in support of the applicant's
protection visa application are conveniently summarised
at paragraphs 20 to 27
of the first Tribunal’s written decision:
In the application
for protection visa documents the applicant indicates that he was born in Kabul
City in Afghanistan in [year].
He indicates that he is Sunni and Tajek; his
language is Dari and he also speaks Hazaragi and Pashtu. He indicates that he
in Kabul in 1992.
The applicant states that he left his country [in] April 2012 departing
across the Peshawar border crossing and travelled via [several
countries] using
a fraudulent passport which was taken from him by the people smugglers in [one
The applicant indicates that his parents are deceased but his [siblings], his
wife and [children] are living in Kabul; he gives the
dates of birth of his
[children].children as between 1995 and 2002. He indicates that he lived in
Kabul in two places, which he names,
from [year] until April 2012 when he left
Afghanistan. He also indicates that he was educated in Kabul and completed
primary school
and secondary school there by [year]. The applicant also
indicates that from [year] until 1987 he was self-employed as the owner
[store] in Kabul, that he did compulsory military training in Kabul between 1987
and 1990, that he was again self employed as
the owner of a [store] between 1990
and 2005 and then self employed in Kabul from 2005 until 2011 as the owner of a
truck delivering
goods to shop [keepers]. He claims that he lived in hiding in
Kabul in 2011 making arrangements to travel to Australia before he
In the statement made in support of his claims the applicant states that the
exact date of his birth is unknown. The applicant essentially
states that he
left his country because he feared harm there from the Taliban; as a Tajek his
appearance and dialect is different
from the Taliban and he is easily
identified. He states that he was captured in about 2010 and held captive by the
Taliban when he
was working as a truck driver delivering groceries and alcohol
to shops in [various locations]; he had done this job for many years.
believes he was captured and held because of his employment and his religion but
also because he was Tajek. Anyone associated
with alcohol, including drinking,
selling and delivering alcohol, is regarded negatively and the Taliban believe
that anyone associated
with alcohol is an infidel to be punished by
death/beheading. The applicant states that he continued doing this work because
lucrative and he needed to provide for his family.
The applicant describes his capture by the Taliban when he was driving from
[a certain town] to Kabul; his truck was empty as he had
done his deliveries. He
states that he was detained for six nights by the Taliban. He describes his
escape on the sixth night through
a window of the place he was held. He states
that he does not know why he was captured and held but he believes it was
is Tajek and was delivering alcohol and because his [relative] who is
a Taliban associate informed the Taliban about his work. He
explains that the
relationship between the [relative] and the family is strained because his
father refused to agree to the [relative]
marrying the applicant’s sister;
this disagreement happened about 30 years ago but the [relative] is still
angered by the incident.
The applicant states that in 2011 when he was still working as a delivery
driver the Taliban approached shopkeepers to whom the applicant
delivers and
told them that if the applicant delivered alcohol they would kill him. He went
into hiding in Kabul because he was afraid
the Taliban would find him and kill
him. He decided to flee from Afghanistan as he knows the Taliban will find him
there. He fears
that he will be abducted, abused, punished and killed if he
returns to his country. He fears the Taliban and anti Tajek insurgents.
he will be harmed because of his imputed religious beliefs; his association with
alcohol means he will be viewed as against
the Taliban. He also fears harm
because he is Tajek and because he is Sunni Muslim. He states that the
authorities will not protect
him. The authorities cannot protect themselves and
the Taliban carry out crimes with impunity.
Attached to the application for visa are documents in the applicant’s
language described by the applicant in his statement as
a copy of his Afghan
taskera, a copy of his Afghan driver’s licence and a copy of his Afghan
sim subscriber contract.
The applicant was interviewed by the delegate about his claims [in] August
First RRT application, November 2012
of del decision YES, with original review application
Submission, 23 January 2013
noted at paragraph 29 of the decision of the first Tribunal:
January 2013 the Tribunal received submissions from the applicant’s
advisers addressing the applicant’s family and
background in Kabul, his
claims, to be considered separately and cumulatively, including his claims about
his capture and warnings
by the Taliban, his fears of persecution due to his
imputed political belief and religious opinion including because of his
of alcohol, the role of his [relative] who was acting with the
Taliban out of revenge, the applicant’s fear of persecution
left his country illegally and applied for asylum in the West so that he will be
considered anti government and pro Western.
Relevant country information is
referred to in the submissions.
The full text of that submission can be found on RRT file 1217618.
Hearing by first Tribunal, 5 February 2013
hearing before the first Tribunal is conveniently summarised at paragraphs 30 to
47 of the first Tribunal’s written decision
(the audio file of the hearing
is held by the Tribunal):
The applicant appeared before the Tribunal
on 5 February 2013 to give evidence and present arguments. The Tribunal hearing
was conducted
with the assistance of an interpreter in the Dari and English
languages. The applicant was represented in relation to the review
registered migration agent. The applicant produced to the Tribunal a NSW photo
ID card, copies of two documents in his language
which he described as warning
letters from the Taliban and a handwritten document in the applicant’s
language with dates noted.
The applicant explained that the handwritten document
with dates was a reminder for him of dates such as the birthdates of his family
as his memory is not good.
In answer to questions from the Tribunal the applicant said that the
documents attached to his application for visa were sent to him
by e mail from
his family; the registration document is in relation to the registration of his
The applicant told the Tribunal that he made the decision to leave
Afghanistan [in] April 2012 because he had received warnings from
the Taliban
before that date and had been detained by them. He made the decision to leave
but he needed money and he started to get
the money together before [that date
in] April 2012; he borrowed money, sold his car and left money for his family.
He started making
plans to leave about two months before [that date in] April
The applicant told the Tribunal about his work delivering alcohol, his
capture and detention by the Taliban in 2010 and the conflict
[relative]. He agreed that his capture and detention by the Taliban happened
some time before he left his country but said
his life was in danger and his
[relative] was “with them”. He explained that he was taken to a
place he named by armed
persons who had their faces covered; they covered his
eyes. He is sure they were Taliban. They told him he was selling alcohol and
said that his [relative] was right when he accused him of acting against his
religion. They beat him. He was detained for six days.
The Tribunal asked him
why they did not take further action against him at that time if he were of such
interest to them. He said
that they were awaiting their commander and then he
The applicant agreed that he travelled on a false passport to Australia. The
false passport was taken from him by the smuggler. He
said that he had a genuine
family passport at some time in the past but does not know where it is. He said
that the only time that
he has travelled out of Afghanistan prior to coming to
Australia was when he took his wife to [another country] for a week about
years ago because she was sick.
The Tribunal asked the applicant about his family members in Afghanistan. He
said that he and his family have always lived in Kabul
in the family home there.
He said that his wife and family have now moved out of the family home and are
living with his brother
in Kabul; the brother’s house is about 20
kilometres away from the applicant’s family home. The applicant said that
family moved because there was no one to look after them and because warning
letters were sent to the house. The letters were sent
to the house one month
ago, and 20 days ago and the neighbours told his family about them. The
applicant agreed that the letters
had come to the house after his family had
moved from there and he agreed that the main reason they had left the family
he had left and there was no one to look after them. He said
however that after he had left his country his family were living in
fear of the
The Tribunal asked the applicant about his brother who is living in Kabul. He
said that his brother has his own family. His brother
is a shop keeper; their
father was also a shop keeper. His brother inherited the shop/business from
their father. The applicant said
that he also worked in the shop; he worked
there with his father after he finished school. After he worked in the shop he
to do his delivering business and did that work from 2005 until 2011. He
said that he was working doing deliveries to support his
family just before he
came to Australia. He did this work until he sold his car and he sold his car
his country in April 2012.
The applicant told the Tribunal that as well as his brother he has a sister
and brother in law living in Kabul; his sister is a housewife
with children. All
his family members are living around the same area in Kabul. The applicant said
that his own wife looks after
the children. All of his children are attending
the public school In Kabul; his eldest son who is [age] years old is studying in
year [grade]. They were all living together in the family home in Kabul just
before he left to come to Australia.
The applicant told the Tribunal that he has no relationship with his
[relative] because there was a conflict with the [relative] about
26 years ago
when the [relative] asked to marry the applicant’s sister; his request was
refused. Although this happened a long
time ago it is common in Afghanistan for
conflicts to continue. The conflict has continued with the [relative] until the
applicant received the warning letters. The Tribunal asked the
applicant if there had been any other incidents involving the [relative].
applicant said that many years ago his [relative] beat up his brother in the
shop. The applicant said that when he was stopped
and detained by armed people
in 2010 those people mentioned that his [relative] was right, that he wanted to
kill the applicant.
The applicant said that he understood that his [relative]
was involved in the incident in 2010 but he did not speak to his [relative]
were any other incidents with the [relative] apart
from the warning letters
delivered to the family home. The applicant said it was just that the family
conflict continued and then
later they received the warning letters. When he was
captured and detained they said they would kill him.
The Tribunal told the applicant that in its view the fact that he was living
and working for many years in Kabul, and worked there
up until about two months
before he left there to come to Australia according to his evidence, is not
consistent with his claim that
he left Kabul because he feared harm there and
will be harmed there if he returns to Kabul/Afghanistan as he claims. The
then said that he was not working “openly”, that he worked
secretly and that a shopkeeper whom he named had told him
that they had warned
they would kill him. The Tribunal asked the applicant how he did his deliveries
to shops “secretly”.
The applicant said that he did do deliveries of
goods to shops but he did not do it openly, he did not travel distances; it was
so he just worked in Kabul. The Tribunal asked him why then he could
not return to Kabul and continue working and earning his living
there as he had
done before coming to Australia. The applicant said that he cannot return to
Kabul because of the warning letters
which show that they are after him and his
[relative] is helping them and gave them his photo. He said that it is not safe
and the government there cannot protect him and cannot protect its own
The applicant said that he fears harm from the Taliban and his [relative] in
Afghanistan; the Taliban has announced they will kill
him. The applicant agreed
that the documents that he describes as warning letters from the Taliban are
dated around the end of 2012.
The Tribunal asked the applicant why the Taliban
would start sending him warning letters when they did, after he had left the
The applicant said that he does not know why they did not send him
letters before; they have become aware of his trip to Australia
because his
[relative] is co operating with them. The Tribunal raised with the applicant his
evidence that his [relative] has been
in Kabul for many years during which time
the applicant has been living and working in Kabul; the applicant described only
one altercation
with the [relative] that occurred some years ago. The Tribunal
told the applicant that these facts are not consistent in its view
claims about his [relative] and the Taliban. The applicant said that they (the
Taliban) do what suits them; they are looking
for an opportunity to harm him.
The Tribunal asked him why they did not harm him previously when they took him
and detained him.
The applicant said they would have killed him but he
applicant told the Tribunal that he had received the copies of the
warning letters from Afghanistan recently; they were sent by his
Tribunal told the applicant that it had to decide if those documents were
reliable evidence of the facts in them. It told
the applicant generally about
the country information that it had consulted which indicates that document
fraud is prevalent in Afghanistan
and Pakistan. The Tribunal told the applicant
that it had to look at the reliability of the documents he had produced having
to the country information and in the light of its assessment of his
credibility.
The Tribunal asked the applicant if he fears harm in his country for any
other reason, apart from fearing the Taliban because he has
been delivering
alcohol and apart from the situation with his [relative]. The applicant told the
Tribunal that selling/delivering/buying
alcohol is against Islamic law and he is
blamed for acting against Islamic law; death is the punishment. He did this to
money, to support his family. The Tribunal asked the applicant how he
managed to keep doing this work given that he claims that the
Taliban knew he
was delivering alcohol in 2010. He said that he had no choice; he continued to
work in the city however he did not
go out of Kabul to the dangerous zones and
after 2010 he did not return to the area around where he was detained in 2010.
The Tribunal
asked the applicant how he managed to work/earn a living and live
with his family in Kabul up until just before he came to Australia,
children managed to attend school which they still do according to his evidence,
if he had the difficulties he claims in
his country. The applicant said that it
is difficult to work in that environment; delivery work endangered his life and
in danger. The Taliban has decided to kill him; he made the decision
that he did as “it is a danger for me”.
The Tribunal asked the applicant if there was any other reason that he feared
to return to his country. He said that he fears the
Taliban and he will be
harmed because he had come to Australia. He will be considered a non believer
because he is in Australia and
has asked for protection. Everyone knows he is in
Australia as it is “all open there”. He said “they will be
of me if I return there”.
The Tribunal told the applicant its main concern about his claims, namely
that his evidence is that he has been living and working
in his country
including in Kabul for many years until just before he came to Australia and
that also his family remain living there,
including his children who are
attending school there. The applicant said that are going to school but it is
like they are in hiding
The applicant said that because of what has happened to him he has
depression. He has a report from a doctor. He is worried about
his wife and his
children. He asked the Tribunal to believe him and give him protection so that
he can join his children.
The Tribunal asked the applicant about his claimed fear of harm because he is
Tajek and told the applicant that country information
that it had consulted
indicates that there are many Tajek Sunni Muslims living in Kabul/Afghanistan.
The applicant agreed and said
that it is hard to tell how many Tajeks are living
in Kabul because there are many displaced people living in Kabul now. The
said that he is afraid of harm because he is Tajek as the Taliban are
against the Tajeks. He said that there was once a conflict
with the Tajeks in
the north of the Kabul city when the Taliban destroyed many homes of the Tajeks.
The applicant agreed this conflict
happened many years ago. The applicant said
that the Taliban see the Tajeks as their enemy and encourage the conflict with
the Tajeks;
the conflict is religious, linguistic and ethnic; the Taliban regard
Tajeks as their enemy.
The Tribunal allowed the applicant until 20 February 2013 to provide
translations of the documents in the applicant’s language
produced to the
Tribunal and to allow the adviser time to consider and submit a psychological
report in respect of the applicant.
noted at paragraph 48 of the decision of the first
Following the hearing the Tribunal received two documents
described as copies of the Taliban threatening letters, with translations,
in November and December 2012, and a report dated [in] December 2012 from a
clinical psychologist in respect of the applicant.
The report describes the
applicant as having symptoms consistent with depression and stress and also
anxiety related symptoms.
Further evidence and submissions before the present Tribunal
February 2015 the Federal Circuit Court of Australia remitted the matter for
redetermination by the present Tribunal
Submission, 21 May 2015
following does not purport to be a detailed or exhaustive summary of the
submission which, with attachments, runs to some 329
pages. The full submission
and attachment are on the RRT file.
document comprises
inter alia the following
declaration of the applicant dated 1 May 2015
Psychological
declaration by [Mr A in] May 2015
Letter dated 19
March 2015 by [Mr B]
information
submission sets out the additional claims and material provided in the attached
statutory declaration.
was submitted that the applicant has a well-founded fear of persecution because
Ethnicity as a
political opinion as an infidel who opposes the political outlook of the
Taliban, Taliban sympathisers and IS;
religious identity as an infidel in the eyes of the Taliban, Taliban
sympathisers and IS;
Membership of a
particular social group of persons involved in alcohol trade in Pakistan;
Membership of a
particular social group of persons supporting or associated with the
international community;
Membership of a
particular social group of persons supporting or associated with foreign
Membership of a
particular social group of returnees from western countries’
Membership of a
particular social group of failed asylum seekers.
was submitted that these factors combined (including having worked for foreign
journalists) make the applicant a clear target for
the Taliban.
was submitted that the security situation in Afghanistan has worsened with the
progressive withdrawal of foreign troops which has
seen increased levels of
applicant’s statutory declaration of 1 May 2015
reflects his
earlier claims in relation to delivering alcohol and capture by, and escape
from, the Taliban, as well as a subsequent
Taliban threat in 2011 leading to his
departure from Afghanistan in early 2012. The statutory declaration also
included significant
new material.
applicant stated that a letter had been left with his family in Kabul in early
2014 threatening his life and signed by “Islamic
Movement of
friend in Kabul with whom the applicant had kept in contact, a shopkeeper from
his former neighbourhood, told the applicant in March
2015 that Pashtun
strangers had been enquiring about the applicant and, when told that he was not
there but in Australia, had said
“He used to work with foreigners too.
The foreigners might have taken him away”. The applicant was concerned
years after he left Afghanistan Pashtuns who looked like Taliban were
saying that he had worked with foreigners. Before he had thought
he had been
targeted by the Taliban because of his work delivering alcohol, because he was
Tajik and because of his [relative], but
after this he was thinking that he was
targeted because had worked as a driver for foreign media in Kabul.
applicant stated that he had been hired by [Mr A] as a driver for him and
foreigners working in media and journalists, from 2007
until 2012, for a few
weeks at a time when foreigners arrived for different projects.
applicant stated that although he was a (non-practicing) Sunni, his mother was
Shia and so he could be seen as a Shia by the Taliban
who regard Shias as
applicant expressed particular concern that ISIS had now started in Afghanistan
as they are even worse than the Taliban and have
a strong presence in Kabul
where they are claiming responsibility for suicide attacks,.
applicant stated that if he returned he believed he would be a target of the
Taliban, ISIS and other extremists, as:
As an Afghan
returnee from a Western country
Being known as
having worked for foreigners
Being known as a
driver who delivered alcohol
The son of a
As a person who
does not practise Islam.
applicant stated that ISIS will give priority to punish Afghan returnees who
they believe have been converted to Christianity
and are returning to spy for
non-Muslim countries.
psychological report dated [in] May 2015
, a registered psychologist
diagnosed Major Depression, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and Panic
statutory declaration dated 15 May 2015, [Mr A]
stated that he is a
Tajik who came to Australia in 2008 and is now a permanent resident. He had
worked from 2007 to 2014 assisting
foreign journalists and media organisations
visit Afghanistan, as “[occupation]”. From 2009 he had travelled
Afghanistan each year for this purpose.
was stated that the applicant had worked for him as a driver in Kabul during the
period 2007 to late 2011 or early 2012, for about
two or three weeks about every
three months when a media crew came from overseas. The applicant was one of two
drivers employed
to drive himself and the foreign crews around Kabul, including
to the home or offices of political figures for interviews. The applicant
also assisted with changing local currency and obtaining goods and local SIM
cards for the foreigners. Part of the applicant's
duties had been to stay with
the hire car and to see if anyone had tried to place explosives under it.
A] stated that the work of himself (and of those who assisted him) was very
dangerous; he had often been threatened and employed
security guards when in
Afghanistan. Others had been killed. It had been hard to find drivers to work
for him because of the risk.
A] stated that after the applicant came to Australia he had contact with him in
September 2012 but only became involved in his
refugee application in March
was attached documentation in relation to [Mr A]’s work and accreditation,
including from
Human Rights Watch
Financial Times
was submitted a copy of a
letter dated [in] March 2015 by a [journalist], [Mr
. He stated that the applicant had worked as his driver when he was
[working in Afghanistan]. The applicant had been employed by
[Mr A], who worked
with [Mr B] in 2010 and 2011, filling in as their driver when [Mr A]’s
primary driver was unavailable.
was subsequently submitted a
letter dated [in] May 2015 from “[a news
correspondent]”
, stating that the applicant had worked for him in 2010
during coverage of news events in Kabul.
RRT hearing, 28 May
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 28 May 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The Tribunal also received oral
evidence from [Mr A]. The
Tribunal hearing was conducted with the assistance of an interpreter in the Dari
and English languages.
The applicant was accompanied by his [agent] and, as an
observer, by his [wife].
applicant expressed concern that he would be persecuted and his life in danger
should he return to Kabul, because of his previous
problems over delivering
alcohol and driving foreigners, as well as because he is in Australia and would
therefore be seen as a spy
for Westerners.
applicant recounted his detention, and escape from, the Taliban in 2010
generally consistently with previous evidence. While
detained the Taliban had
referred to him delivering alcohol but had deferred further questioning until
their commanders should arrive
but before this the applicant had effected his
escape. He escaped on foot leaving his own truck behind; after this he bought a
vehicle which was used sometimes when driving foreigners in Kabul. The
applicant stated that in Kabul he resumed delivering alcohol
circumspectly, avoiding dangerous areas, using a hired vehicle. The Taliban had
spoken to shopkeepers, warning that those
involved in selling and delivering
alcohol would be punished.
Tribunal then raised with the applicant the significant new claims set out in
the most recent submission with supporting documentation,
in relation to driving
in Kabul for foreigners Asked why this had not been advanced previously, the
applicant replied that he had
not realised its significance but had focused on
his difficulties over delivering alcohol However, in March 2015 a friend in
had been approached by two men who said they knew he was overseas, the
friend had confirmed that the applicant was in Australia.
The enquirers said
they knew that the applicant had been working for foreigners.
applicant explained that he had been employed by [Mr A] who worked for
foreigners, and that he had driven them from place to place.
Sometimes he used
his own vehicle and sometimes they hired cars. This work just involved driving.
He was undertaking this work
from 2007 onwards until he left for Australia, from
time to time as required.
Tribunal also took evidence from [Mr A], who provided detailed evidence
consistent with his written statement. Over the period
from 2007 to early 2012
he had often hired the applicant as a driver when foreign media visited Kabul,
perhaps every three months
for a week or so at a time. The applicant would
drive the foreign journalists and media crews from the airport to their
accommodation
and to appointments. The applicant had not told [Mr A]
specifically about being detained by the Taliban in 2010 but, from about
tine, he had refused to undertake any driving for [Mr A] outside Kabul city,
saying that his life would be in danger.
FINDINGS AND
Country of Reference.
Tribunal accepts that the applicant is a national of Afghanistan and is not a
national or citizen of any other country. Nor does
he have an established right
to enter and remain in any other country. The country of reference is therefore
Afghanistan.
Credibility
considering an applicant’s account, undue weight should not be placed on
some degree of confusion or omission to conclude
that a person is not telling
the truth. But nor can significant inconsistencies or embellishments be lightly
dismissed. The Tribunal
is not required to accept uncritically any and all
claims made by an applicant.
this particular instance, the Tribunal found the applicant's evidence about his
own direct experiences to be generally credible.
Country Information
Tribunal has had regard to country information cited and specifically referred
to in the delegate’s decision as well as
material cited by the
applicant’s adviser in support of his submissions.
Tribunal has also consulted and taken into account the DFAT Country Report,
Afghanistan
, 26 March 2014, the DFAT Thematic Report,
Afghanistan and Pakistan
, 26 March 2014, and the DFAT Thematic Report,
Conditions in Kabul
, 3 October 2014. The Reports are stated to be based on
DFAT’s on-the-ground knowledge and discussions with a range of sources,
taking into account relevant and credible open source reports. Where DFAT does
not refer to a specific source of a report or allegation,
this may be to protect
the source.
the Tribunal accepts that DFAT advice is recent and authoritative, the Tribunal
has also had regard to the currency and provenance
of the country information
provided for the applicant and has relied upon other material as cited in the
ensuing discussion. The
Tribunal has had particular regard to the most current
material where it comes from reliable sources (especially when considering
reasonably foreseeable future), and which in some respects goes beyond the DFAT
reports of March and October 2014, particularly
with regard to the increasing
ISIS presence in Afghanistan..
applicant’s claims have been set out fully. The Tribunal has focussed
initially on the claim to have worked as a driver
for foreign media visiting
factual claim to have been so employed was firmly established. The Tribunal
found [Mr A] to be a credible witness whose
were established
by the documentation provided, including media accreditation and references.
The Tribunal also attached weight
to the supporting letters from [a] journalist
[Mr B] and [a news] correspondent [name deleted].
Tribunal accepts that over a period of several years the applicant was regularly
employed as a driver for foreign media visiting
Kabul, sometimes using his own
vehicle and sometimes hire vehicles. It is quite likely that this was known or
could easily be ascertained
by anyone taking an interest in the applicant (as,
the Tribunal accepts, the Taliban already had done).
is plausible that the Taliban initially targeted the applicant because he was
detected delivering alcohol outside Kabul and that
follow-up interest after he
escaped established not only that the applicant had left the country but that he
had also been involved
in assisting foreign media visiting Kabul. The Tribunal
accepts the applicant's account of enquiries made with his friend in Kabul
March 2015, which indicated that this work was known.
is a reasonable inference that persons in Kabul are aware that the applicant has
worked assisting foreign media and is now in Australia
and it is not unlikely
that this is known to the Taliban or others (including possibly ISIS) who might
target the applicant for this
is ample evidence that persons who are perceived as being involved with or
assisting foreigners (not least, the foreign media)
are targeted and harmed by
the Taliban. For example, UNHCR’s
Eligibility Guidelines For Assessing
The International Protection Needs Of Asylum-Seekers From Afghanistan
August 2013 and the DFAT Country Report,
Afghanistan
, 26 March 2014.
This specifically includes persons involved with the foreign media (see for
example Human Rights Watch,
Afghanistan: Media under attack
, 21 January
these circumstances, suspicion or hostility towards the applicant for this
reason would likely be exacerbated by the fact that
he would be returning from a
Western country where he had spent a significant period of time.
danger does not exist for the applicant only if he is apprehended on the roads
outside Kabul by the Taliban. There is ample evidence
of Taliban presence and
activity within Kabul where they have a clear capacity to target specific
individuals.
DFAT assesses that the Government maintains effective control in major urban
areas, including Kabul, the October 2014 DFAT
Report also acknowledges that
insurgents regularly conduct high-profile attacks in Kabul. Other reports
consistently suggest increasing
violence and insecurity in Kabul in recent
times. Most of these attacks have targeted Afghan government personnel and
institutions,
security forces, foreigners and foreign institutions and have
often involved significant civilian casualties as well as those targeted.
clear that persons associated with foreigners and foreign institutions are also
Washington Post
report of November 2014 suggested that the total number
of attacks in Kabul thus far in 2014 had already exceeded double that of 2013
military analysis group had recorded 80 insurgent attacks in Kabul as of
mid-November) and that “The city is now the front
line of the
indications of a covert ISIS presence in Kabul are also disturbing.
Tribunal is satisfied that as a result of being associated with foreign media in
Afghanistan, by driving for them on a regular
basis over a period of years, the
applicant faces real chance of serious harm amounting to persecution by reason
of an imputed political
reached this conclusion, it is not necessary for the Tribunal to address in
detail other aspects of the applicant’s claims.
However, in the
circumstances the Tribunal is satisfied that the prior adverse attention by the
Taliban (because of the applicant's
involvement in delivering alcohol)
significantly strengthens the chances of harm in relation to his association
with foreign media.
CONCLUSIONS
the reasons given above, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is a
person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the
Refugees Convention. Therefore the applicant satisfies the criterion set out in
s.36(2)(a).
Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the direction that the
applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
John Blount
Washington Post,
Taliban brings war to Afghan capital”, 29 November 2014, at
http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/in-afghanistan-taliban-fighters-attack-foreign-compound-in-capital/2014/11/29/f0aef902-77d4-11e4-a755-e32227229e7b_story.html
accessed 20 April 2015.
RTF format (237 KB)
Signed PDF/A format