CQMS Pty Ltd v Metalogenia Research & Technologies S.L. [2025] APO 22 (15 July 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT
CQMS Pty Ltd v Metalogenia Research & Technologies
[2025] APO 22
Patent Application: 2020316932
Title: Fall detection method, corresponding system and machine
Patent Applicant: Metalogenia Research & Technologies S.L.
Opponent: CQMS Pty Ltd
Delegate: Xavier Gisz
Decision Date: 15 July 2025
Hearing Date: 20 May 2025
Catchwords:
- opposition to the
grant of the patent under s 59 – grounds of opposition: manner of
manufacture and inventive step –
opposition unsuccessful – costs
Representation: Counsel for the Applicant:
Marcus Flemming
Patent attorney for the Applicant: Chris Schlicht and Peter Wassouf of
Phillips Ormonde Fitzpatrick
Counsel for the Opponent: Peter Creighton-Selvay
Patent attorney for the Opponent: Joseph Garven of James & Wells
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Patent Application: 2020316932
Title: Fall detection method, corresponding system and machine
Patent Applicant: Metalogenia Research & Technologies S.L.
Date of Decision: 15 July 2025
The opposition is unsuccessful. The claimed invention is a
manner of manufacture. The claimed invention involves an inventive step.
Subject to appeal, I direct that the patent application proceed to grant.
I award costs according to the amounts specified in Schedule 8 against CQMS
REASONS FOR DECISION
application 2020316932 (the Application) in the name of Metalogenia Research
& Technologies S.L. (the Applicant) is the
national phase entry of
PCT/EP2020/070620 (publication number WO2021013866A1) which claims priority from
EP 19382633.6 (priority
date 24 July 2019).
was advertised on 17 August 2023. A Notice of Opposition was filed on
17 November 2023 by CQMS Pty Ltd (the Opponent).
A Statement of Grounds and
Particulars was filed on 16 February 2024.
in Support was filed on 16 May 2024. Evidence in Answer was filed on 16 August
2024. Evidence in Reply was filed on 16 October
Evidence in support
Evidence in Support comprises a declaration by Dr Nicholas Simon Hillier (which
I will refer to as Hillier 1) dated 14 May 2024
and accompanying Exhibits NH-1
Evidence in answer
Evidence in Answer comprises a declaration by Dr Edgar Ripoll Vercellone (which
I will refer to as Vercellone) dated 15 August
2024 and accompanying Annexures
ERV-1 to ERV-5.
Evidence in reply
Evidence in Reply comprises a declaration by Dr. Nicholas Simon Hillier (which I
will refer to as Hillier 2) dated 15 October
2024 and accompanying annexure
Applicable Law and Onus
present Application is governed by the
as amended by
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment (Raising the Bar) Act
as the Application was filed after 15 April 2013.
Opponent has the onus to satisfy me, on a balance of probabilities, that a
ground of opposition to grant exists. Then, if satisfied,
I may refuse the
application or, where appropriate, give the Applicant a reasonable opportunity
to amend the relevant specification
to remove any ground of opposition, as per
Section 60(3A) & (3B) of the
Grounds of Opposition
Statement of Grounds and Particulars opposes the grant of the patent on the
following grounds: Novelty, inventive step, clear
and complete enough
disclosure, best method, clarity, support, manner of manufacture, and
Opponent’s submissions (and Applicant’s responding submissions) were
limited to the grounds of manner of manufacture
and inventive step.
The experts
Hillier’s educational qualifications include a doctorate in mechanical
engineering (paragraph 14 of Hillier 1). His work
experience extensively is in
the field of mining involving research and development in relation to hydraulic
excavators (paragraph
15), recording data through sensors in hydraulic
excavators (paragraph 18), and ranging sensor research and evaluation in mining
robotics technologies (paragraph 17).
Vercellone’s educational qualifications include a doctorate in electronic
engineering (paragraph 3 of Vercellone). His work
experience has been in the
development of systems to detect the loss of teeth attached to the bucket of an
excavator used in underground
mining operations (paragraphs 4 and
Hillier and Dr Vercellone each provide expert evidence regarding the invention
and common general knowledge at the priority date.
I am satisfied that both have
provided relevant evidence. I will assess the evidence according to its
relevance to particular aspects
of the analysis.
The Specification
Field of the invention
description provides a summary of the field of the invention at page 1 lines 10
The invention is comprised in the field of earth moving machines, for
example, excavators, provided with replaceable wear elements
that contact the
earth to perform works, such as excavation works. In the field of the art, these
wear elements are also known with
the name ground engaging tools (GETs). They
comprise elements such as:
- teeth: they have the function of penetrating the ground and protecting the
blade of the excavator shovel;
- tooth adapters: they have the function of protecting the blade and bearing
- front guards: they have the function of protecting the lip in the areas
comprised between the teeth and also perform penetration
function, but to a
lesser degree than the teeth; and
- side guards: they protect the sides of the excavator bucket.
More specifically, the invention relates to a fall detection method for
detecting the fall of a wear element from among a plurality
of wear elements of
an earth moving machine, in which each wear element is provided with a
three-axis accelerometer. Said accelerometer
is formed as a single element or by
several individual accelerometers which, together, are capable of providing
measurements with
respect to three axes.
The invention also relates to a fall detection system implementing the
preceding method, as well as to an earth moving machine provided
with said fall
detection system.
The invention
invention is a method which utilises accelerometers and transmitters that are
embedded in GET (ground engaging tools). The accelerometers
can be used to
determine the orientation of each GET.
orientation of each GET is transmitted to a control module. The orientation of
the GETs are averaged together. The orientation
of each GET is compared against
the average. If the orientation of a GET is different from the average (beyond a
threshold level),
then the GET is determined to have fallen off the earth moving
cross section of a GET and accelerometer is shown in Figure
2 also shows the three axes of orientation. Two of the axes of rotation: pitch
(107) around the Y’ axis and roll (108)
around the X’ axis, can be
calculated from the accelerometer data.
flow-chart of the algorithm is shown in Figure 4:
can be seen in the flow chart, there is a split in the flow from step (100)
which indicates that the calculation for pitch (107)
and roll (108) are
performed independently. The steps of: determining a mean reference value (103),
determining a deviation value
(104), and determining if the deviation value
exceeds a threshold value (105), are performed independently for pitch (107) and
Example of the invention
will use an example to help to illustrate the invention. First, consider a
machine with 6 GET/wear members. The pitch and roll of
the GET can be derived
from the accelerometer data (see description page 9 lines 7 to 19). The mean
calculations are done for pitch
and roll separately (see Figure 4 already
reproduced above in the decision).
orientation is measured in degrees between the alignment axes of the wear member
(page 7 lines 21 to 26) and the Earth’s
natural alignment axes (“X
and Y are parallel to the ground and axis Z is vertical”, page 5 line
this example, consider a roll measurement. If the orientation of the first five
GET had an orientation 2° (indicated on the
chart below by the blue dots on
the 2 row) and the sixth GET had an orientation of 8° (indicated by the
blue dot on the 8 row),
then the average of these values (2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 8)
would be 3° (indicated by the orange line).
threshold is chosen to be 1.5; the threshold is indicated by the magenta lines
1.5 above and below the average (i.e. at 0.5 and
first 5 values fall within the threshold. The sixth value falls outside the
threshold. Thus, the sixth GET is at an orientation
sufficiently different from
average that it is determined that it has fallen off the machine.
are 14 claims including 1 independent claim:
1. A fall detection method for detecting the fall of a wear element from
among a plurality of wear elements of an earth moving machine,
wherein each wear
element is provided with a three-axis accelerometer;
wherein at least one reference axis is selected, and said method comprises
the following steps
when said earth moving machine is in an operative state:
a) for each of said wear elements, obtaining an accelerometer measurement of
said wear element provided by said three-axis accelerometer
of said wear
for each of said at least one reference axis:
b) for each of said wear elements, determining a rotational position
measurement with respect to said reference axis of said wear
element based on
said accelerometer measurement of said wear element;
c) determining a mean reference value based on said rotational position
measurements of each of said wear elements;
d) for each of said wear elements, determining a deviation value of said wear
element based on the deviation between said rotational
position measurement of
said wear element with respect to said mean reference value;
e) for each of said wear elements, determining that there is a fall of said
wear element if said deviation value of said wear element
exceeds a threshold
f) repeating steps (a) to (e) in successive iterations.
Manner of Manufacture
18(1) of the Patents Act states, in part, that:
“Subject to subsection (2), an invention is a patentable invention for
the purposes of a standard patent if the invention, so
far as claimed in any
(a) is a manner of manufacture within the meaning of section 6 of the Statute of
Monopolies”
concept of manner of manufacture has developed over time and is not readily
reduced to a simple formula. The classic definition
of manner of manufacture is
National Research Development Corporation v Commissioner of
[1959] HCA 67
“The inquiry which the definition demands is an inquiry into the scope
of the permissible subject matter of letters patent and
grants of privilege
protected by the section ... The right question is: ‘Is this a proper
subject of letters patent according
to the principles which have been developed
for the application of s 6 of the Statute of Monopolies?’”
Grant v Commissioner of Patents
[2006] FCAFC 120
(“Grant”) it
was found at [47] that the claimed systems and methods were not for a manner of
manufacture in the sense
described in
“It has long been accepted that ‘intellectual information’,
a mathematical algorithm, mere working directions and
a scheme without effect
are not patentable. This claim is ‘intellectual information’, mere
working directions and a scheme.
It is necessary that there be some
‘useful product’, some physical phenomenon or effect resulting from
the working of
a method for it to be properly the subject of letters patent.
That is missing in this case.”
recently, there have been a number of Full Court decisions which considered some
of the more specific considerations relevant
to computer implemented inventions,
relevantly including
Research Affiliates LLC v Commissioner of Patents
[2014] FCAFC 150
Commissioner of Patents v RPL Central Pty Ltd
Encompass Corporation Pty Ltd v Infotrack Pty Ltd
Research Affiliates LLC v Commissioner of Patents
, it was stated that at paragraph 94:
“When the authorities in Australia prior to and
are considered, a consistent approach emerges
as to the relevance of:
a distinction
between a claim to a business scheme and claims to methods which in practice
result in a new machine or process or an
old machine giving a new and improved
result – that is, a distinction between mere intellectual information and
a method that
affects the operation of an apparatus in a physical form
the fact that
the claimed steps are foreign to the normal use of computers, such as the
production of an improved curve image (
at 225-226);
the particular
mode or manner of achieving an end result which is an artificially created state
of affairs, such as the storage of
data as to Chinese characters and retrieval
of graphic representations to enable word processing (
whether part of
the invention is an inventive method which includes the application and
operation in a physical device (
the distinction
, as explained in
a technological innovation which is patentable and a business
innovation which is not”
, Heerey J did not
accept that a physically observable effect was necessarily required (at [128])
but the Full Court in
expressed the opinion that a
physical effect in the sense of a concrete effect or phenomenon, or
manifestation or transformation
is required (at [32]).
the fact that a
physical effect is required does not make it sufficient to confer
patentability;
the fact that a
method may be called a business method does not prevent it being properly the
subject of letters patent (
at [125]-[126]);
the fact that
for claimed computer programs, the courts look to the application of the program
to produce a practical and useful result,
so that more
“intellectual information”
is involved
at [29]). A method that is in the nature of directions for
use does not constitute an invention or a manner of manufacture in the
of some previously unrecognised property of an aspect of the method
Consideration
Opponent’s submissions on manner of manufacture have several elements
which are considered below.
(a) Mere idea or scheme
Opponent submissions state at paragraphs 47-49:
The claimed invention is a mere scheme or idea,
of the type which has never been considered patent eligible. In short, the
invention is directed to the idea of using a known sensor (an
accelerometer) to obtain the very types of data that such a sensor
is known to
be appropriate to measure (roll and pitch), and then undertaking unspecified
mathematical calculations on that data,
to monitor whether a wear element has
fallen (or not).
The asserted ingenuity in the claimed invention resides in a series of
, which involve nothing more than taking the data
output by the accelerometer and undertaking unspecified mathematical
calculations
by reference to that data to determine whether a
“deviation value”
“mean reference
by more than a
“threshold value”
“the ingenuity of the inventors must be in the steps of
the method itself”
This is not sufficient to establish a MM.
consider that the mathematical calculations are not ‘unspecified’ as
argued by the Opponent. I consider that the steps
of calculation to determine if
the wear member has fallen off are adequately disclosed and defined. I agree
that “the ingenuity
of the inventors must be in the steps of the method
itself”, and I consider that this (the steps of the method itself) is
the invention lies in this case.
indicator that the claimed invention is more than a ‘mere idea or
scheme’ is that the invention results in a technical
solution to a
technical problem. The technical problem (not being aware when wear member falls
off the earth moving machine) has
been solved with a technical solution (using
accelerometer data passed through an algorithm to determine if a wear member has
off the earth moving machine).
(b) Proper characterisation, physical integers and analogous
Opponent submissions state at paragraphs 50 and 57:
Whilst the claimed invention might refer, in passing, to some physical
components (such as an accelerometer and a wear element), it
is properly
characterised, as a matter of substance, as an idea or mere scheme for the
monitoring of wear elements, using known components
and generic computing
technology.
The claimed invention, in the Application, when characterised as a matter of
substance, is indistinguishable from those considered
by Delegates of the
Commissioner in each of
Caterpillar Inc
and by Rofe J in
present invention is a method of determining if a wear member has fallen from an
earth moving machine. This invention is quite
different from:
Caterpillar
[2024] APO 8
- “[a] system for detecting a load location and a
dump location at a worksite”
Amsted Rail
Company, Inc.
[2021] APO 25
- “a plurality of transportation
vehicles” with “data control system”, and a “first
reader device”
and “plurality of second portable reader
[2022] APO 40
- “system for managing a retrieval of a
prepared medication”
Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Patents
[2024] FCA 1145
improved logistics method or scheme for delivering goods to an optimal
consider that summarising the invention to be “known components and
generic computing technology” is reductionist and
unhelpful. At some level
all inventions are a combination of known elements; inventions reside in how
those elements are combined.
In this case, the invention (the characterisation
of the invention) resides in three axis accelerometers and using the
accelerometer
data in an algorithm for determining if a wear member has fallen
off the earth moving machine.
note that the Opponent’s use of the words “matter of
substance” do not make inventions in referenced case law
ostensibly quite different from the present invention to be somehow
“indistinguishable” from the present invention.
I further note that
the cases chosen by the Opponent (which all happen to be cases where the claims
were found to lack a manner of
manufacture), though generally relevant to the
consideration of manner of manufacture, are not necessarily the closest or most
to the present case.
(c) Use of known components for known
functionality
Opponent submissions state at paragraph 58-60:
The claimed invention features the use of a known component, an
accelerometer, for its known functionality (to monitor roll and pitch,
generally, orientation). The ingenuity in the claimed invention does not reside
in any characteristic of the accelerometer,
nor in the selection or the use of
an accelerometer
Notably, Dr Vercellone has confirmed that the
“sensing and hardware
components described in AU932 were known to the persons skilled in the art (PSA)
in July 2019”
. In this respect, the claimed invention uses
off-the-shelf components which are simply utilised for their known
properties.
Further, the high level of
“genericity and functionality”
at which those components are recited reveals that they
“are not part
of the substance of the present invention”
. The use of
uncharacterised apparatus (which includes an uncharacterised electronic
processing device) to carry out the steps of [an]
abstract method”
will not constitute a MM.
is correct that the invention “features the use of a known component, an
accelerometer, for its known functionality (to monitor
roll and pitch, or more
generally, orientation)”. However, it is typical in almost all inventions
that a known component is
used for its known functionality. If the invention
includes interactions between components in ways that is not commonly known in
the art, then the existence of a known component in the invention being used for
its known functionality is not helpful in determining
whether the invention is a
manner of manufacture.
may be the case that “[t]he use of ‘an uncharacterised apparatus
(which includes an uncharacterised electronic processing
device) to carry out
the steps of [an] abstract method’ will not constitute a MM”.
However, the present invention is
not an “uncharacterised apparatus”
and does not carry out the steps of an “abstract method”. The
specification
provides an adequate level of detail, and the features of the
claim are adequately defined, so is not an “uncharacterised
apparatus”.
The steps of the method, and the result of the method, are
adequately defined and are not abstract.
(d) Generic computer implementation
Opponent submissions state at paragraphs 61:
It is implicit, in claim 1, that these steps of the method are to be
undertaken, in an automated manner, by a generic computing device.
objective of the Application is to solve the known problems with existing
methods and systems for detecting fall of wear
elements. Self-evidently, the
claimed method would not provide any solution to such problems if the PSA was
required to calculate
by themself, in realtime, the
“mean reference
“deviation value”
. The method only has utility if automated, by way of its
implementation in a computing device.
do not consider it necessarily true (let alone self-evident) that “the
claimed method would not provide any solution to such
problems if the PSA was
required to calculate by themselves”. I note that claim 1 does not define
that the invention is performed
on a computer, nor do dependent claims 2-12.
Claims 13 and 14 define that the invention is performed on a “control
module configured
for carrying out the method”; the control module is
understood to be a computer.
method involves steps which are agnostic as to how the steps are carried out,
whether by automation or by hand, though it is clear
that the invention is far
more practical when performed by automation (i.e. by computer) than by hand. The
specific computing device
has not been specified in the description implying
that a generic computer would be adequate to perform the invention. I note that
the use of a generic computer in an invention is incidental to the determination
of whether the invention is a manner of manufacture.
An invention using a
generic computer may be patentable when there is a material advantage in the
invention – simply looking
to the computer is too narrow an
(e) Invention resides in use of mathematical
calculations
Opponent submissions state at paragraph 67:
Dr Vercellone appears to identify the
“new or innovative”
aspect of the claimed invention as the use of accelerometer data (a well-known
component) to
“determine the mean reference value”
“deviation value”
“a threshold”
if this is correct, these are mathematical calculations, and the Application
repeatedly teaches that
“different formulations can be used”
to undertake these calculations and admits that the PSA will be able to
“perform suitable calculations”
. Thus, it is apparent that,
even adopting the characterisation urged by Dr Vercellone, the claimed invention
is concerned with (non-inventive)
“mathematical modelling”
“by nature an idea or scheme”
, and not a MM.
“mathematical modelling” of the type considered in
Caterpillar
[2024] APO 8
at paragraph 91 are calculations of hypothetical
scenarios. The present invention is not “mathematical modelling”
it is a real-world calculation, with an immediate and real-world result:
the determination of whether a wear member had fallen off
the earth moving
machine. This is a material advantage of the type long held to be
patentable.
(f) No contribution of the type that attracts patent
Opponent submissions state at paragraphs 68-70:
It is useful to consider the type of contribution
of the claimed invention to the art, noting that
“the contribution for
the purposes of novelty and inventive step under s18(1)(b) of the Act is not the
same as the contribution
for the purposes of manner of manufacture under
s 18(1)(a). Manner of manufacture assesses whether the contribution of the
of a nature or type that attracts patent
(emphasis added).
As will be explained in more detail below, D1 discloses providing monitoring
devices comprising accelerometers and/or orientation
sensors to GETs to monitor
presence, that
“Loss of a product member is detected when one
monitoring device deviates beyond a certain range from its established position,
or orientation”
and refers to
“detecting the presence of the
product through its relative position and orientation with the other
Accordingly, the contribution of the claimed invention cannot relate to the
detection of lost GET by comparing the orientation of
each GET with the others
(since that idea is already known from D1, for example). The contribution, if
any, could only relate to
the mathematical calculations referenced in claim 1.
This is clearly not a contribution
“of a nature or type that attracts
patent protection”
contribution of the invention is not mathematical calculations alone. The
contribution of the invention is not the articulation
of the problem alone. The
contribution of the invention is the new method of determining if a wear member
has fallen. This method
includes data from accelerometers, a specific algorithm
to calculate with that data, and an output. The contribution of the invention
not common general knowledge and is the type that attracts patent
protection.
Does the invention provide a concrete, tangible, physical,
or observable effect?
have considered (and rejected) each of the Opponent’s arguments on manner
of manufacture. However, there is one aspect of
manner of manufacture which was
not explicitly raised in the Opponent’s written submission but is worth
considering. In the
hearing I asked the Applicant why the claimed method did not
include a step of using the information when it was determined that
element had fallen off (such as an alert/alarm). The Applicant said that this
was an implicit feature. The Applicant noted
that an analogous situation
occurred in
UbiPark Pty Ltd v TMA Capital Australia Pty Ltd (No 2)
decision states at paragraph 205:
While at one level the claims comprise a series of instructions to be
executed by a computer, the invention as claimed does have some
tangible, physical, or observable effect” (
namely the opening of the entry barrier and the exit barrier. While this is not
explicitly stated in claims 1, 11 and 16,
it flows from the references to
generating and transferring an entry request and exit request, read in the
context of the specification
as a whole. Similarly, and for the same reasons,
the invention as claimed constitutes an abstract idea that is “implemented
on a computer to produce an artificial state of affairs and a useful
at [122]). The artificial state of affairs is
the opening of the entry barrier and exit barrier. The useful result is that the
associated with a vehicle is granted entry into, and exit from, a
restricted area.
agree with the Applicant that the reasoning in paragraph 205 of
is relevant to the present consideration. I consider that the use of the
information to alert the operator of the missing wear member
appears to be
implied in the preamble of the claim.
preamble of the claim states:
“A fall detection method for detecting the fall of a wear element from
among a plurality of wear elements of an earth moving
machine...”
consider the words “fall detection” and “detecting the fall of
a wear element” imply detection
and informing
the operator of the
fallen wear element. This implication is derived from the description, for
example at page 2 lines 6 to 14:
For these reasons, in the present cases, if the operator suspects that a wear
element may have fallen, he/she must stop the machine
as soon as possible for
inspection, which entails a loss of time and productivity resulting in financial
loss. Moreover, the element
can be mixed with the excavated soil and, for
example, in the case of an installation for extracting minerals that must be
if the wear element enters the grinder and can cause serious damage
thereto. This point is particularly problematic regarding safety
would imply that an operator must access the grinder manually to extract the
tooth from inside it. Generally, this involves
a direct action by the operator,
subsequently putting his/her physical integrity at risk.
am satisfied that the claimed invention is implicitly directed to informing the
operator of a fallen wear member which is a concrete,
tangible, physical or
observable effect analogous to the
Conclusion on manner of manufacture
have addressed each of the Opponent’s manner of manufacture arguments and
have found none to be persuasive. Although the claimed
invention does not have
an explicit step for using the information that a wear member has fallen to
alert the operator, I consider
this to be implicit to the
claimed invention is a manner of manufacture.
Inventive step
to subsection 7(2) of the
Patents Act
(1990), an invention is taken to
involve an inventive step when compared with the prior art base unless the
invention would have
been obvious to a person skilled in the relevant art in the
light of the common general knowledge as it existed before the priority
the relevant claim, whether that knowledge is considered separately or together
with the information mentioned in subsection
7(3) provides that the information for the purposes of subsection (2) is:
(a) any single piece of prior art information; or
(b) a combination of any 2 or more pieces of prior art information that the
skilled person mentioned in subsection (2) could, before
the priority date of
the relevant claim, be reasonably expected to have combined.
test for obviousness was provided by Justice Aicken in
Wellcome Foundation
Ltd v VR Laboratories (Aust) Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 12
“The test is whether the hypothetical addressee faced with the same
problem would have taken as a matter of routine whatever
steps might have led
from the prior art to the invention, whether they be the steps of the inventor
High Court in
Aktiebolaget Hässle v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 59
- [53]; approved this approach, in addition to that taken in
Mathieson Chemical Corporation v Biorex Laboratories Ltd
[1970] RPC 157
187 in which Graham J had posed the question:
“Would the notional research group at the relevant date in all the
circumstances directly be led as a matter of course to try
[the claimed
invention] in the expectation that it might well produce a useful [desired
usual approach to determining inventive step is the problem-solution approach.
Once the problem has been formulated and the common
general knowledge and the
prior art base has been determined, the question of whether the claimed solution
is obvious must be addressed.
Consideration
use of accelerometers in GET/wear members was known before the priority date;
for example, in D1 (US 2016/0237657), D2 (WO 2018/095536)
2015/0284935).
(US 2016/0237657) discloses at paragraph 122:
Alternatively, the remote device 38 detects the positions of the monitoring
devices 25 to ensure the presence of each product in its
established position
relative to the other monitoring devices 25.
And at paragraph
The monitoring device 25 and/or remote device 38 may be, for example, passive
or active and may include a receiver, transmitter, and/or
a digital sensor. The
receiver and/or transmitter may be, for example, a radio communication device,
an electromagnetic wave receiver
and/or transmitter, a mechanical wave receiver
and/or transmitter, a laser receiver and/or transmitter, or Global Positioning
(GPS). The electromagnetic waves preferably have a wavelength outside of
the visible spectrum (e.g., infrared, microwave, or Radio
Frequency [RF]), but
may be in the ultrasonic spectrum. Further, the devices 25, device 35 may
include a temperature sensor, a camera,
a digital inclinometer unit, a digital
compass, an RFID, an accelerometer, a timer, a proximity sensor, a force sensor,
sensor, and/or other sensors that provides information regarding the
operating conditions in which the ground engaging product is
being used.
(WO 2018/095536) discloses at page 23 line 30 to page 24 line 1
Optionally, the SOS signal may be based on sensor data 52 that is outside of
a predefined range (or beyond a threshold value) as would
be expected from a
'detached' GET. For example, such an SOS signal could be based on the
accelerometer data 54 in that a detached
GET will be stationary.
(US 2015/0284935) states at paragraph 37:
Now, however, it may happen that the dredger tooth 4 is still signed onto the
reader 11 with its wireless communication 7, despite
the fact that the dredger
tooth itself is no longer functional. In such a case, the additional feature of
the present invention provides
a remedy, so that an acceleration sensor 6 is
also provided in the dredger tooth 4 in addition to the RFID tag 5. The
acceleration
sensor may be connected directly to the RFID tag or may be
installed with it in a shared housing.
summary, the use of accelerometers to determine if a GET had fallen off the
machine is disclosed in D1-D3 as follows:
D1 discloses
accelerometers to establish the relative position of the GETs
D2 discloses
using accelerometers to determine if a wear member is stationary
D3 is not clear
how the accelerometer is used, but it could be inferred that (similar to D2), it
determines if a wear member is stationary
present invention is not merely the use of accelerometers to determine if a GET
has fallen off the machine. The present invention
is also specific to the
algorithm to determining if a GET has fallen off the machine.
D1 - US 2016/0237657 A1 (Carpenter et al.)
Opponent’s inventive step argument in their written submissions is made
only in relation to D1 (and not D2 or D3 which were
raised in the Statement of
Grounds and Particulars).
Opponent summarises the disclosure of D1 in their submissions at paragraphs
“D1 is entitled
“Monitoring Ground-Engaging Products For Earth
Working Equipment”
. The abstract discloses that D1 concerns both a
“product and system”
“monitoring a
characteristic”
of GET used on
“various kinds of earth working equipment”
The system and product can be explained, at a high level, by reference to
The GET is the point/tip (15). It has a cavity (18) to receive a base upon
which it is
mounted. There are one or more recesses (50C and 50D) in the mounting portion
the point/tip into which one or more monitoring devices (25) are
The monitoring device
“is secured to a ground engaging product to
monitor characteristics such as ... presence”
and that monitoring
“may include one or more sensors from a group consisting of
radio frequency enabled modules,
orientation sensors
, temperature
accelerometers
, proximity sensors, force sensors and position
D1 repeatedly explains that the monitoring device (25), in conjunction with a
range of sensors, including accelerometers and orientation
sensors, can be used
to monitor the presence, orientation and relative positions of the
Opponent provides at paragraph 81 a table indicating where features of claim 1
are asserted to be disclosed in D1:
Claim feature
Exemplary disclosure in D1
A fall detection method for detecting the fall of a wear element from among
a plurality of wear elements of an earth moving machine,
“The present invention pertains to a device and system for
identifying and monitoring characteristics such as... presence”
also: [0099], [0118].
wherein each wear element is provided with a three-axis
accelerometer;
It is clear from Figure 5 (above) that the monitoring device (25) and
sensor (35) are provided at the wear element. See also:
[0018]-[0019].
[0019] and [0116] disclose that the sensor may be an
accelerometer.
Further, [0017] discloses the monitoring devices (mounted
on the GET) are to determine whether they are
“in established relative
positions for the equipment on which they are secured”
. See also:
The use of a three-axis accelerometer would be the routine way of
undertaking such monitoring at the Priority Date.
wherein at least one reference axis is selected, and said method comprises
the following steps when said earth moving machine is in
an operative
This is not expressly disclosed, but is an implementation detail that would
“immediately apparent”
to a PSA which they would consider,
as a matter of routine, and without the need for any ingenuity, for the reasons
set out below.
a) for each of said wear elements, obtaining an accelerometer measurement
of said wear element provided by said three-axis accelerometer
of said wear
This is disclosed. As explained, [0019] and [0116] disclose that the sensor
may be an accelerometer or orientation sensor. In order
for such sensors to be
used to monitor
(see: [0019]) an accelerometer
measurement must be provided by the accelerometer.
for each of said at least one reference axis:
See integer 1(iii) above.
b) for each of said wear elements, determining a rotational position
measurement with respect to said reference axis of said wear
element based on
said accelerometer measurement of said wear element;
[0017] discloses using the monitoring device in the following manner:
“Loss of a product member is detected when one monitoring device
deviates beyond a certain range from its established position,
orientation”
. It would be routine and intuitive for a PSA to determine
the orientation of the wear element based on the accelerometer measurement.
also [0122] which refers to
“detecting the presence of the product
through its relative position and orientation with the other
. D1 discloses that one embodiment is the use of
accelerometers as part of the monitoring devices in the GETs and the subsequent
and comparison, of each GET to detect presence/loss of the GET. When
the PSA follows these instructions they would consider determining
a rotational
positional measurement about a reference axis as this is a routine and intuitive
way of determining orientation.
c) determining a mean reference value based on said rotational position
measurements of each of said wear elements;
This is disclosed by [0017] and [0122] and, in any event, is an
implementation detail that a PSA would consider, as a matter of routine,
without the need for any ingenuity, for the reasons set out below.
d) for each of said wear elements, determining a deviation value of said
wear element based on the deviation between said rotational
position measurement
See integer 1(vii) above.
e) for each of said wear elements, determining that there is a fall of said
wear element if said deviation value of said wear element
exceeds a threshold
This is disclosed by [0017]
(“Loss of a product is detected when
one monitoring device deviates beyond a certain range from its established
) and [0122]
(“Loss of a product ... a significant
change in position of the monitoring device is detected when one monitoring
device deviates
beyond a certain range of its established
f) repeating steps (a) to (e) in successive iterations.
This is disclosed. [0002] discloses a system for identifying and monitoring
characteristics. To have any utility, D1 must be describing
a system which is
“iterated in practice”
submissions on the integers of the claims are considered below.
Integer 1(i)
Integer 1(i) is uncontroversial, both parties accepting that this integer is
disclosed in D1.
Integer 1(ii)
Opponent’s submissions on Integer 1(ii) at paragraph 85-88
Integer 1(ii):
There does not appear to be any contest that D1
discloses the use of an accelerometer. Nevertheless, it appears that Dr
takes two points, neither of which withstand scrutiny.
, Dr Vercellone asserts that
“I am not told that an
accelerometer (which is mentioned later) is provided with each GET”
This point has no substance. D1 discloses that
“each ground engaging
product on a digging edge includes at least one monitoring device”
and two paragraphs later, that
“As examples, the at least one
monitoring device may include ... accelerometers”
. It is quite
irrelevant that D1 might also disclose other systems, in which an accelerometer
is not used on each GET.
, Dr Vercellone asserts that
“I can find no statement
elsewhere in D1 as to the type of accelerometer that could be used”
and in particular,
“D1 does not tell me to use a three-axis
accelerometer”
. This point has no more substance than the first point.
It was CGK at the Priority Date that accelerometers could be used for
orientation
detection and D1 repeatedly teaches that the monitoring device
(which may include an accelerometer) may be used for this purpose.
As to whether
“three-axis accelerometer”
is disclosed, it is relevant to
note that claim 2 exposes that a “three-axis accelerometer” may be
either a single three-axis
accelerometer, or alternatively, three single-axis
accelerometers. Either way, however, the key point is that the evidence makes
clear that the use of such accelerometers would be inevitable, if a PSA was to
follow the teaching in D1 to implement a monitoring
system using an
accelerometer [Hillier 2 at [18]]:
I consider it inevitable that the person skilled in the art following the
directions in D1 would select a three-axis accelerometer
or three single-axis
accelerometers. When using accelerometers for orientation detection, the first
choice, would be an accelerometer,
or set of accelerometers, configured to
provide readings with respect to three axes. Otherwise, some orientations would
be indistinguishable
from one another. Three-axis accelerometers were common by
2019 for orientation detection and they were also inexpensive.
Therefore, it is unlikely that the person skilled in the art, at July
2019, would select less than a three-axis accelerometer device/arrangement
following the directions in D1 to use accelerometers to monitor orientations of
GET on a lip, particularly so if the orientation
monitoring was to differentiate
between GET on a lip and those that are detached.
Put simply, there was a known, technical need, to use a three-axis
accelerometer when implementing the teaching of D1 at the Priority
Further, there was no technical difficulty in doing so.
Applicant’s submissions at paragraphs 73-74 regarding the integer 1(ii)
are as follows:
Integer 1(ii):
It is implicit from OS [Opponent submissions] that the
Opponent accepts D1 does not disclose any particular type of accelerometer,
alone a three-axis accelerometer. The submission at OS [87] relies on the
proposition that it was "inevitable" a PSA would select
out of the myriad
sensors described in D1 an accelerometer, and would then select a three-axis
accelerometer, or an arrangement of
three single-axis accelerometers, when
implementing D1. That submission cannot be sustained.
The contention that it was CGK at the Priority Date to use three-axis
accelerometers (or three single-axis accelerometers) for orientation
is unsupported by probative evidence. In his first declaration, Dr Hiller
provides a general account of sensors used in
systems for monitoring GETs,
including inertial sensing systems, but does not identify any instance in which
three-axis (triaxial)
accelerometers were known to be used in any such
application, including in the context of wear element loss detection. While Dr
asserts in his second declaration that the use of three-axis
accelerometers for orientation detection was well-known at the Priority
does not provide any specific references to technical publications or other
contemporaneous materials to support that evidence
which demonstrate such use at
the Priority Date.
the context of accelerometers used to determine orientation, I consider Dr
Hillier’s evidence that three-axis accelerometers
would be used to be
persuasive. I consider Integer 1(ii) to be obvious in light of D1.
Integer 1(iii)
Opponent submissions state at paragraph 89:
Integer 1(iii)
: Dr Vercellone asserts that
“D1 makes no
mention of selecting ... reference axes”
, and further,
also does not direct me to use an accelerometer to determine the orientation of
. This is another example of Dr Vercellone adopting an unduly
narrow and literal approach to disclosure. There can be no debate that
teaches the use of accelerometers in the monitoring device, nor that D1 teaches
the use of the monitoring device to determine
orientation of a GET. That being
so, as Dr Hillier explained,
“[d]efining orientation by reference to a
reference axis would be immediately apparent as a possible approach to the
“defining the orientation by reference to reference
axes (about which the rotation is measured) would be
the most likely approach
the PSA would have taken
“any orientation must be
defined relative to some other (known) orientation and
the reference is most
commonly defined by an orthogonal set of (reference) axes”
(emphasis added). Indeed, the reality is that any orientation must be defined
relative to some other (known) orientation. Thus, the
use of a reference would
“required as part of the way to define orientation”
taught in D1. Notably, Dr Vercellone does not suggest that the use of a
reference axis would involve some contribution
“beyond the skill of the
or any difficulty to be overcome. Rather, the extent of his
evidence seems to be that he cannot locate a literal disclosure of this
implementation step.
Applicant’s submissions at paragraph 75 state:
Integer 1(iii):
The submissions at OS [89] rest on the assumption
that, when following D1, the PSA would implement a system for monitoring
of a wear element using orientation measurements obtained from an
accelerometer. As observed above, D1 refers to the possible inclusion
an “accelerometer” is to be
used for orientation, as opposed to any
other purpose. The submissions at OS [89] are therefore circular. They assume
that an accelerometer
would be used to determine orientation and then argue
that, having made that assumption, it would be routine to define orientation
with respect to a reference axis. For the reasons outlined above, the underlying
proposition is not established on the evidence.
accept that D1 is using accelerometers to determine orientation of the wear
members, which undermines the Applicant’s argument
on this point. Although
I agree with Dr Vercellone that a reference axis is not explicitly disclosed in
D1, I also agree with Dr
Hillier’s evidence that a reference axis would be
used by a person skilled in the art to measure orientation against. I consider
Integer 1(iii) to be obvious in light of D1.
Integer 1(vi)
Opponent’s submissions state at paragraph 90:
Integer 1(vi)
: Dr Vercellone asserts that
“D1 does not tell
me to use an accelerometer measurement to determine the rotational position of a
. Again, this is an example of Dr Vercellone adopting an unduly
narrow and literal approach to disclosure. The point being made by
Dr Vercellone
is that, even though D1 teaches the use of accelerometers in the monitoring
device, and even though D1 teaches the
use of the monitoring device to determine
orientation of a GET, D1 does not expressly state
“what characteristics
an accelerometer is to determine”
and it would also be possible to use
an accelerometer to measure other characteristics (such as
“the extent
of usage of the GET”
). This may be literally true, but is quite
irrelevant. The question is whether it would be obvious to a PSA, armed with D1,
teaches the use of accelerometers and the measurement of rotational
position of GET, to use accelerometers to measure rotational
position of GET. In
circumstances where Dr Vercellone has admitted that
“[a]ccelerometers
were known and used in a wide variety of devices and vehicles prior to July
, and the evidence makes plain that
“it is, and was at
July 2019, well known that accelerometers can be used for orientation
, it would have been obvious to a PSA, armed with D1, to use
the type of sensor disclosed (an accelerometer) to detect the metric
(rotational position, that is, orientation).
Applicant’s submissions at paragraph 76 state:
Integer 1(vi):
The submissions at OS [90] overlook the significance of
the point being made by Dr Vercellone. In the absence of any express teaching
D1 regarding the use of an accelerometer for orientation detection, it is
entirely appropriate to consider other potential uses
of such a device. That
observation is not irrelevant pedantry, but a reflection of the lack of
disclosure in D1. Where a component
has several plausible applications, it
cannot simply be assumed that a PSA would understand a bare reference to that
component as
teaching its use for the purpose that aligns with the claimed
invention. Further, the uses postulated by Dr Vercellone – calculation
use time or assessments of machine operation or efficiency by reference to
information provided by an accelerometer based on movement
measurements –
are entirely consistent with the limited teaching in D1 regarding the use of
accelerometers, namely, to provide
“information regarding the operating
conditions in which the ground engaging product is being used”
brief, the disclosure in D1 at [0122] which refers to “detecting the
presence of the product through its relative position
and orientation with the
other products” seems to be only possible as being understood as a
disclosure of Integer 1(vi).
Integers 1(vii), 1(viii) and 1(ix):
Opponent states at paragraph 91-100:
Integers 1(vii) & 1(viii)
: These integers require the calculation
“mean reference value”
based on the
“rotational
position measurements”
of the wear elements and a
of a wear element based on the deviation between the
“rotational position measurement”
of that wear element and
“mean reference value”
Dr Vercellone disputes that there is any disclosure of the determination of a
mean reference value, on the basis that the disclosure
and does not expressly recite that
“there is a
comparison made of one GET to another GET”
. It appears that Dr
Vercellone denies the disclosure of a deviation value on the same basis.
Yet again, this involves Dr Vercellone requiring a strict, literal
disclosure, rather than approaching the nature of the disclosure
in D1, and how
it would be implemented by a PSA at the Priority Date, with commonsense.
At [0017], D1 teaches that
“Loss of a product member is detected
when one monitoring device deviates beyond a certain range from its established
or orientation.”
At [0122], D1 then further teaches that
(emphasis added):
Loss of a product (e.g., through breakage or pin ejection) results in loss
of the monitoring device from the established electronic
framework; i.e.,
significant change in position of the monitoring device is detected when one
monitoring device deviates beyond a certain range of
its established position
with the other monitoring devices
...Alternatively, the remote device 38
detects the positions of the monitoring devices 25 to ensure the presence of
each product in
established position relative to the other monitoring
. In either case, by detecting the presence of the product through
relative position and orientation with the other products
, the system
operates irrespective of the movement and operation of the earthworking
equipment with the ground engaging products.
These passages make clear that D1 is teaching that a comparison be made
between the rotational position of the monitoring device on
a GET and the
rotational position of the monitoring devices on the other GET (i.e. the
“other monitoring devices”
which are on
). As Dr Hillier has explained,
“In order to detect
the presence (or absence is implied) of the GET relative to the others via
orientation, then evaluating
the general or average orientation of the other GET
is implicit”
. Dr Hillier also noted that his view of this point is
supported by the
“broad meaning of
“mean reference
that is established by the Opposed Application”
observed that when following the directions in D1 to compare the orientation of
one GET to the other GETs, the PSA
“would immediately consider
comparing the orientation of the GET under investigation to an arithmetic mean
of the orientation
of the other GETs, as this is a very straightforward and
intuitive way to determine how far one measurement deviates from a set of
measurements”
Similarly, in order to determine whether a GET has
“deviate[d]
beyond a certain range”
“relative position and
orientation with the other products”
, it is necessary to undertake a
comparison between the position/orientation of that GET and other GET, thereby
resulting in the calculation
of a deviation value. These are straightforward
implementation details that a PSA would address when following the teaching of
to detect the orientation of a GET relative to the other GET, as described in
Dr Vercellone merely asserts that
“It is not necessary to obtain a
mean reference value in order to compare the orientation of one GET with the
orientation of
. However, that is not what D1 discloses. D1 at
[0122] expressly, and repeatedly, teaches a comparison between the orientation
one GET “with the other monitoring devices”, that is, all such
other devices. The comparison which Dr Vercellone asserts
to potentially avoid
the need for a mean reference value is not the comparison which D1 teaches and
discloses. It follows that the
point made by Dr Vercellone goes nowhere.
Further, and importantly, Dr Vercellone does not anywhere suggest that the
use or calculation of a mean reference value or deviation
value would be
“beyond the skill of the calling”
or require any difficulty
to be overcome. Indeed, it is to be recalled that the Application expressly
admits that
“the skilled person will understand that different
formulations can be used to obtain representative values”
otherwise allows the PSA complete discretion as to how a mean reference value or
deviation value is to be calculated, thereby
revealing that this involves
nothing more than the deployment of CGK. Thus, even taken at face value, the
evidence of Dr Vercellone
appears to rise no higher than an assertion that there
might have been another, equally obvious, and technically straightforward,
of implementing the teaching of D1. That is no answer to an allegation of lack
of inventive step.
Integer 1(ix)
: this integer requires a determination that there has
been a fall of the wear element if its deviation value exceeds a threshold
value. Although Dr Vercellone denies this is disclosed, that appears to be on
the basis that D1 does not literally use the words
. It could not be clearer that D1 discloses this integer at
[0017] & [0122], where it is explained that
“significant change in
of a monitoring
device “beyond a certain
will indicate
“loss of a product”
“certain range”
discussed in [0017] & [0122] is the
“threshold value”
required by this integer.
It follows that claim 1 of the Application does not involve an inventive step
over D1 when combined with the CGK.
Applicant states at paragraph 77-79:
Integers 1(vii) and 1(viii): The submissions at OS [91]-[98] rely heavily on
the proposition that D1 teaches or necessarily implies
the calculation of a
“mean reference value” based on “rotational position
measurements” of the wear elements
and a “deviation value”
based on the deviation between the “rotational position measurement”
of that wear
element and the “mean reference value”. That
proposition cannot be sustained.
D1 does not disclose the use of comparative statistical operations –
such as determining an average or deviation – as
part of the detection
method. Instead, it refers generally to detecting when a monitoring device
“deviates beyond a certain
range”, without identifying what that
range is or how it is derived. Dr Hillier’s evidence regarding these
including that “evaluating the general or average
orientation of the other GET is implicit” and that the PSA “would
immediately consider comparing the orientation of the GET under investigation to
an arithmetic mean of the orientation of the other
improperly elevates hindsight reasoning.
Further, the Opponent’s attempt (at OS [97]-[98]) to dismiss Dr
Vercellone’s evidence is misplaced. Dr Vercellone correctly
that D1 does not describe determining a mean reference value based on the
rotational position of all monitoring devices
Hillier states in Hillier 2 at [23]:
Regarding paragraph 49vii., Dr Vercellone says that D1 does not disclose the
determination of a mean reference value based on rotational
measurements of each wear element. I disagree and stand by the comments in my
First Declaration that, when following the
directions at paragraph [0122], for
example, to detect the presence (and therefore loss) of a product (GET) through
its relative
orientation with the other products (GETs), it is implicit that the
orientation of each GET is compared to the general or average
orientation of the
others (described in D1 as the “established orientation”). My view
on this point is strengthened by
the broad meaning of “mean reference
value” that is established by the Opposed Application. Regardless of how
meaning of “mean reference value” may be, when the PSA
follows the directions in D1 to compare the orientation of one
GET with the
orientation of the other GETs, I believe they would immediately consider
comparing the orientation of the GET under
investigation to an arithmetic mean
of the orientation of the other GETs, as this is a very straightforward and
intuitive way to
determine how far one measurement deviates from a set of
measurements.
Reiterating
an excerpt from the above passage, it is Dr Hillier’s evidence that a
person skilled in the art would:
“...compare the orientation of one GET with the orientation of the
other GETs...”
“...comparing the orientation of the GET under investigation to an
arithmetic mean of the orientation of the other GETs...”
Hillier states that the orientation of the
GET under investigation
be compared with the mean of the
. However, this is
the invention as presently defined.
present invention is to take the mean of
all the GETs orientations
orientation of each GET is then individually compared with this calculated mean
of all the GETs.
Hillier, even after he had read the opposed specification, gave evidence that
the person skilled in the art would make an invention
to the claimed invention. This is clearly detrimental to the Opponent’s
position that these claimed features (Integers
1(vii), 1(viii) and 1(ix)) are
Additionally,
in other parts of Dr Hillier’s evidence he also does not arrive at the
claimed invention. For example, Hillier
states in Hillier 1 at paragraph
There are any multitude of ways to quantify that the orientation of one item
of GET is different to the others – the most obvious
being variations on
that presented in AU ‘932, i.e. simple comparisons of the difference of
the orientations of the GET against
each other, and against a threshold,
although I would consider minor adjustments in the method to take advantage of
simple statistical
outlier analysis methods would also be quite run-of-the-mill
ways to identify the lost item of GET given this data.
Hillier is envisaging a simple difference calculation between the orientation of
the GET against each other GET. This is not the
same as the calculating the mean
value of the orientation of all GETs defined in the claims.
paragraph 86 of Hillier 1 Dr Hillier states:
The specific use of a weighted sum (or weighted mean) to get the reference
value seemed unusual to me, but as I alluded to before,
there are any number of
ways that this concept can be implemented, and within reason, the various
implementations would perform the
same function without real impact to the
overall method’s or system’s performance.
Dr Hillier talks about a weighted mean which can be understood as a more
generalised version of a mean (where a simple mean calculation
would be where
all the weightings were set to 1). However, it is not clear whether he is
referring to the weighted mean of
the GETs, or calculating the
weighted mean of the other GETs aside from one (as he discusses in further
detail in Hillier 2). It
is notable that Dr Hillier considers the use of
weighted mean to be ‘unusual’ which seems to be the contrary of
consider that Dr Hillier’s evidence is not persuasive that the modifying
D1 to include integers 1(vii), 1(viii) and 1(ix)
would be obvious in light of
D1. The evidence of Dr Vercellone is also not supportive of a finding that the
claims lack an inventive
step, at least with respect to these
Inventive step conclusion
have found that integers 1(i) and 1(vi) are disclosed in D1. I have found
integer 1(ii)
– using a three-axis accelerometer rather than merely an accelerometer
disclosed in D1; and
integer 1(iii)
– measuring the orientation with respect to a reference
would each be an obvious step for a person skilled in
the art. I have found that a person skilled in the art would not, as a matter
routine, modify D1 such that it includes the integers 1(vii), 1(viii) or
Consequently,
the claimed invention constitutes an inventive step over D1.
claimed invention is a manner of manufacture.
claimed invention is inventive in light of the prior art.
opposition is unsuccessful. The Application can proceed to grant.
typically follow the event. I see no reason to depart from this practice in this
the opposition is unsuccessful, I will award costs according to Schedule 8
against the Opponent, CQMS Pty Ltd.
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
RTF format (5.77 MB)
Signed PDF/A format