Walsh and Comcare (Compensation) [2024] AATA 3616 (11 October 2024)
Walsh and Comcare (Compensation) [2024] AATA 3616 (11 October
Division: GENERAL DIVISION
File Number(s):
WALSH, Adiran
Senior Member A
The decision under review is affirmed.
.........................[sgnd]...............................................
Senior Member A Ward AM
CATCHWORDS:
Rehabilitation Compensation Act - Aids and Appliances - rehabilitation programme
– E-scooter – recreational device
– remote hearing –
the decision under reviewed is affirmed.
LEGISLATION
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1975
WBJM and Comcare
[2015] AATA 143
Keane and Telstra Corporation Limited (Compensation)
[2016] AATA
Chugha and Comcare
[2020] AATA 2835
SECONDARY MATERIALS
Administrative Appeals Tribunal / Guideline / Persons
Giving Expert and Opinion Evidence (dated 30 June 2015)
REASONS FOR DECISION
Member A Ward AM
Applicant, Mr Adrian Walsh, sought a review of the Respondent Comcare’s
reviewable decision dated 24 May 2023. This concerned
his claim for compensation
for his purchasing an E-scooter which he said assisted him with mobility. He had
previously suffered an
injury to his right leg.
the reviewable decision on 24 May 2023, the previous determination dated 12
April 2023, which denied the Applicant’s claim
for compensation in respect
of an E-scooter under
Safety Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1988
”) was affirmed.
extent of the claim was generally broadened so that the applicant sought
compensation under s 39 of the SRC Act in respect of
his acquisition of two
E-scooters and a ramp. This was for a
Bolzzen Atom
Light E-scooter ($799) which the Applicant obtained on or about 27 July 2022 and
then a Segway 9bot Max G2 Electric
($1,699) which he obtained from JB HiFi on or about 8 October 2023. In
addition, there was a ramp which he purchased from Bunnings,
also on 8 October
2023, for $52. The ramp was used by Mr Walsh to load and unload the Segway
Scooter from his motor vehicle.
applicant had sustained injuries to his right leg, in particular his right tibia
and fibula, on 9 September 1994 in work circumstances.
Liability had been
accepted under the SRC Act for various conditions arising as a result of that
injury. It is of note that it
was the leg fracture and then also osteoarthritis
in the lumbar spine. In addition, he had osteoarthritic changes in his left
and patella. He had an altered gait which caused problems with his right
hip and he suffered right thigh and calf muscle wasting.
In addition, he had
symptoms in his left hip. These problems have been accepted in various
determinations over the years. There
is no dispute that the Applicant had a
serious right leg injury which, over time, has led to other problems as a direct
consequence.
is no dispute that the Applicant has problems with mobility which continue to be
dispute to be determined is whether the claimed E-scooters and ramp are an aid
or appliance as contemplated by s 39 of the SRC
Act, and in the event that they
are, whether they were reasonably required having regard to the nature of the
Applicant’s impairments.
the issues of injury and employment relationship are not in dispute in this
39 of the SRC Act deals with the compensation payable in respect of certain
alterations and other matters arising as a result
of impairment arising as a
result of an injury.
completeness, section 39 is set out as follows:
(a) an employee suffers
an injury resulting
in an impairment; and
(b) the employee is
undertaking, or has completed, a rehabilitation program or has been assessed as
not capable of undertaking such
the relevant authority is liable to pay
compensation of such amount as is reasonable in respect of the costs, payable by
the employee,
(c) any alteration of the employee's
place of residence or place of work;
(d) any modifications of a vehicle or article used by the employee;
(e) any aids or appliances for the use of the employee,
or the repair or replacement of such aids or appliances;
being alterations, modifications or aids or appliances reasonably required by
the employee,
having regard to the nature of the employee's
impairment and, where appropriate, the requirements of the rehabilitation
(2) The matters to which the relevant authority shall have regard in
determining the amount of compensation payable in a particular
under subsection (1)
include such of the following matters as are relevant in that case:
(a) the likely period during which the alteration, modification, aid or
appliance will be required;
(b) any difficulties faced by the employee in
gaining access to, or enjoying reasonable freedom of movement in, his or her
of residence or work;
(c) any difficulties faced by the employee in
gaining access to, driving or enjoying freedom and safety of movement in, a
used by the employee;
(d) any alternative means of transport available to the employee;
(e) whether arrangements can be made for hiring the relevant aid or
(f) when the employee has
previously received compensation under this section in respect of an alteration
of his or her place of
residence or a modification of a vehicle and has later
disposed of that place of residence or vehicle--whether the value of that
of residence or vehicle was increased as a result of the alteration or
modification.
(3) An amount of compensation payable under this section is payable:
(a) to, or in accordance with the directions of, the employee;
(b) if the employee dies
before the compensation is paid and without having paid the cost referred to
in subsection (1)
and another
not being the legal personal representative
of the employee,
has paid that cost--to that other person;
(c) if that cost has not been paid and the employee,
or the legal personal representative
of the employee,
is unable, or refuses
or fails, to make a claim for the compensation--to
the person to
whom that cost is payable.
(4) Where a person is
liable to pay any cost referred to in subsection (1),
any amount paid under subsection (3)
to the person to
whom that cost is payable is, to the extent of the payment, a discharge of the
liability of the first - mentioned person.
issue under assessment is s 39(1)(e) referring to any aids or appliances for the
use of the employee being reasonably required
by the employee, having regard to
the nature of the employee’s impairment and where appropriate the
requirements of the rehabilitation
noted above, the section goes on to state the matters to which the relevant
authorities should have regard in determining the amount
of compensation payable
in this particular case.
Tribunal proceeds on the basis that whilst there are other cases that provide
assistance with the interpretation of s 39 and the
SRC Act in general, the
actual factual determination will be dependent on the circumstances of the
particular case. If an appliance
has been considered as falling within the remit
of s 39 in one case that does not automatically mean it would so be covered in
case. Similarly, if one has been denied compensation in a previous case,
it does not mean it would be denied automatically in all
future case. To assess
the correct and preferable decision the Tribunal needs to review the merits of
the individual matter.
the reasons set out below, and in accordance with
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
, the reviewable decision dated
24 May 2024 is affirmed.
set out in the opening paragraphs, there is no doubt as to the significant
injuries the Applicant suffered. Indeed, immediately
prior to and during the
course of the hearing that took place on 5 September 2024, Comcare confirmed
that as a result of the Applicant’s
compensable condition, he would
benefit from the use of a mobility aid. Comcare indicated this would be a three
or four-wheeled
mobility scooter to enable the applicant to travel over longer
distances and to reduce the exacerbation of his pain.
acknowledgement was based on the proviso that this would require a comprehensive
assessment with a suitably qualified occupational
therapist for the trial of
appropriate mobility aids which offer stability and are designed to be used by
people with disabilities.
information was contained in a report that was provided in evidence in the
hearing of the Occupational Therapist (OT) specialist,
Ms Mikaela Kelly-Irvin,
dated 3 November 2023.
Irrespective
of the decision in this matter on its very specific issues, Comcare remains open
to funding of an assessment and trial
of the type of mobility aid recommended by
Ms Kelly-Irvin.
Tribunal had the benefit of oral evidence from Mr Walsh, along with evidence
from the physiotherapist who has personally treated
him from time to time, Ms
Jude Perrett. She provided a document which would not be classed as an expert
report as contemplated by
the Rules of the
Administrative Appeals
but more in the
nature of a reference, dated 4 April 2024. She had observed Mr Walsh using an
E-scooter on that day.
Tribunal also had the assistance of evidence from Ms Kelly-Irvin who had
provided detailed reports which did align with AAT Rules.
No criticism is made
of Ms Perrett in that regard. She was assisting her client as per his request
but the procedural steps with
regard to expert witnesses were not taken by Ms
Perrett. Nevertheless, she gave detailed evidence to the Tribunal which was of
assistance.
the course of his dealings with Comcare and in preparation for the Tribunal
process, Mr Walsh provided a number of extensive
letters on certain occasions or
otherwise, shorter letters commenting on information that had been obtained for
the purpose of his
claim. He was able to use these documents for advocacy. They
contained factual matters and also made representations which were
advocacy for
the positions that he wanted to be taken into account by the decision maker.
following is not a complete recitation of those matters, but factual issues
arising from them. In his evidence before the Tribunal,
the applicant adopted
and endorsed the matters raised in those various items of correspondence as part
of his evidence.
his Application for Review of the Decision dated 18 July 2023, the Appellant
For the last few years I have wanted to
purchase a light foldable electric scooter that I can easily transport in the
back of my car,
as a medical mobility aid for my ‘last mile commute for
work; for a daily one kilometre return lunch time trip to the Cairns
(to get out of the office daily) and for use at the weekend as a medical
mobility aid to engage in outdoor activities –
predominantly along the
Cairns esplanade, Cattana Wetlands and the Smithfield Bypass Walking Track where
I take photographs of wildlife
Walsh asserted that public transport was not an option for him due to what he
described as “
my ambulatory complications
”. The extent of
those complications and their effect on his use of public transport were not
further described nor dealt with
to any extent in evidence that he
the Application for Review of
he said that he could
commute to work in his automatic car and park adjacent to his work building
which would cost him (at that time)
$7.00 for the day for a car park. He would
have to walk 100 -150 metres to the building elevator. There was no suggestion
the walk of that distance would be physically beyond him.
decided in July 2022 to purchase a Bolzzen Atom Light electric scooter
(E-scooter) so that he could park for free outside the
Cairns CBD and then use
the E-scooter as a “medical mobility aid” to commute the last mile
to his work. He said: “
that would reduce the amount of time I would
need to walk
”. He would use it for other activities as well.
the Applicant’s statement,
I did not at the time request Comcare to approve the device for
these purposes
Walsh confirmed in his evidence that the initial obtaining of the E-scooter in
or around July 2022 was not something he did in
consultation with either his
treating orthopaedic surgeon, his general practitioner or his treating
physiotherapist, or anyone else
providing him with treatment. It was not
obtained as part of a rehabilitation programme. It was his own idea. The
Tribunal finds
that the primary consideration for purchasing the light electric
scooter (E-scooter) was that he could park for free outside the
Cairns CBD and
use the E-scooter to commute the last mile.
Walsh’s use of the term “
medical mobility aid
label. He was not prescribed the E-scooter as a medical mobility aid. He did
not seek advance consideration by Comcare
prior to obtaining it.
initial E-scooter had two wheels. It had a platform on which the operator would
stand, holding on to handlebars. It had an internal
engine to propel it. It
would need to be recharged. Mr Walsh’s evidence is that he enjoyed the
use of the E-scooter in his
circumstances both for travelling the kilometre (or
mile) to work from his car park and the other uses in non-work situations.
Walsh decided to purchase another better (in his view) electronic scooter. He
then attended upon his general practitioner on or
advised the GP of his intentions, asking him to support his claiming the new
scooter as an “
aid or appliance
”. He acknowledged in his
evidence that this was not something the GP had discussed with him. The general
practitioner acquiesced
to Mr Walsh’s request to support this
general practitioner, Dr Ballestero, executed a document but provided no real
detail as to why the aid or appliance was required
other than “dealing
with arthritic pain” for walking over distances. The document is
handwritten by Dr Ballestero and
difficult to interpret, but no further
information was provided on that. Suffice to say that Mr Walsh does not assert
this as part
of some rehabilitation plan formulated by Dr Ballestero.
is also important to note that a specific electric scooter was contemplated at
that time, namely a Zero 10 Model. This was not
the device that the Applicant
eventually obtained, namely a
Segway 9Bot Kick
Nothing at all turns on
this in the Tribunal’s view, except that the applicant has been critical
of other later documents
that have referred to the Zero 10 model. Those
complaints are not material because that is the model he referred to himself in
noted, the Applicant did obtain the Segway 9bot Kick Scooter and the product
manual was in evidence before the Tribunal. The Applicant
was very happy with
its performance and considered himself a safe rider of it. The basic version of
the Segway 9bot Kick Scooter
is a two-wheeled scooter upon which the rider
stands and controls with handlebars. The Applicant augmented the scooter with a
placed on the scooter. He advises that the chair was part of the Segway
product range rather than a modification he made himself.
An important detail
is that the Segway 9bot Kick Scooter has only two wheels.
the product manual, which is contained in Exhibit
it is specifically stated
The Kick Scooter is a recreational
Whenever you ride the Kick Scooter you risk injury from loss of
control, collision and falls. When entering into public spaces always
with the local laws and regulations. As with other vehicles, faster speeds
require longer braking distance
addition, the manual warns:
Do not ride at an unsafe
speed. Under no circumstances should you ride on roads with motor
regard to a section headed “
People who should not ride the Kick Scooter
who suffers from a disease that puts them at risk if they engage in strenuous
physical activity.
who has problems with balance or with motor skills that would interfere with
their ability to maintain balance
a number of the documents put forward in his claim, Mr Walsh said it was his
personal choice to use a two-wheeled E-scooter.
response to the occupational therapist’s report, Mr Walsh stated
I absolutely reject the opinion of someone, no
matter how highly qualified, to impose upon me a device that in their opinion I
more suited to, when they are not living my life with a disability that I
have learned how to manage, and when I have been very successfully
two-wheeled E-scooter that I consider perfect for my disabilities for such a
is clear from the manufacturer’s information is that this is not a
mobility device. To the contrary, it is a recreational
Perrett, in her brief reference dated 4 April 2024,
I recommend that Adrian receives funding for the
following mobility aid: Segway 9bot Max G2 E-scooter
use of the term ‘mobility aid’ is (probably) unintentionally
misleading. It is not that, it is a recreational device.
problem with the use of the Segway E-scooter is that it can go at higher speeds.
Tribunal was advised that due to Australian regulations, the higher speed was
potential problem with it is the lack of stability. The Tribunal accepts the
evidence of Ms Kelly-Irvin that the two-wheeled
vehicle has to be less stable
than a three or four-wheeled vehicle. It follows as a matter of logic.
Information
was in evidence before the Tribunal from the Centre for Accident Research and
Road Safety based in Queensland (known as
CARRS-Q). It referred to the use of
E-scooters (which these devices under consideration are) often replace walking
or cycling or
public transport and are for recreational use – rather than
commuting. It noted that most E-scooter riders’ injuries
resulted from
falls rather than collisions with other vehicles. It noted that the Royal
Australasian College of Surgeons (RACS)
concluded that E-scooter riders were
twice as likely to be injured as bicycle riders.
RACS noted from the data assessed that 6 percent of injured patients had lower
limb fractures. That is of some relevance here
as it is the Applicant’s
right lower limb that is so problematic, but he has now developed problems in
his left leg as well.
it was noted that the small size of the wheels on E-scooters raise concerns
regarding their stability on uneven surfaces.
Applicant has an issue with balance. Whilst the Tribunal accepts his assertion
that he has not had an accident during his use
of the E-scooter, he does have an
issue with balance. It needs to be assessed from time to time with regard to
his injuries. It
had not been assessed with regard to his use of E-scooters by
any of those treating him prior to his acquisition of the E-scooters.
not been assessed by Ms Perrett prior to her observations of him using them as
to their suitability to his situation.
a request for a reconsideration of an earlier decision to decline the
the Applicant expressed
concerns that his views were being overridden by the views of the occupational
therapist and the compensating
authority. He said with regard to the request
being accepted under s 39 that:
It should be entirely my
responsibility to accept the risk of this device, as the elderly and mobility
impaired are also accepting
the risk of the use of mobility scooters, which are
approved daily by occupational therapists all over Australia
And further:
It should entirely be my reasonability to accept the risk of this
narrative went on to say on three occasions that it “
should entirely be
my responsibility to accept the risk of this device”
the Applicant is aware of the risks in using the device.
his very detailed letters of advocacy, he has referred continuously to the fact
that the E-scooter has a maximum speed of 25 km/hr.
Kelly-Irvin provided detailed reports and gave evidence to the Tribunal. She
noted the appropriateness of mobility devices of three
or four wheels and a
maximum speed of walking pace (the term ‘scooter’ can also be used
for these – which is discussed
considered that “
two-wheeled E-scooters are not specifically designed
for people with lower limb or mobility impairments, and would instead be
for recreational use, or as an alternative means of
transportation
”. The Tribunal accepts this opinion.
said that with a capped speed of 25 km/hr: “
I consider this
inappropriate for a device which would be utilised as a mobility
said that she would “
not recommend the use of a two-wheeled E-scooter
(like the Zero 10 Scooter or similar) as a solution for mobilising over long
I considered the use of alternative mobility scooters would offer a
more appropriate
noted, above, the reference to the Zero 10 is a red herring because she
mentioned that or similar vehicles. From the information
provided, the Zero 10
Scooter is a two-wheeled device which is the same as the Segway device the
Applicant subsequently purchased.
Kelly-Irvin made it clear in her evidence that her assessment of approximately 2
to 3 hours would not be the assessment used as
contemplated in the proposal put
forward by Comcare prior to the hearing. That would be a far more comprehensive
review trialling
use of devices. Such a review has not taken place yet with
regard to the Applicant’s use of the two-wheeled scooters. Ms
Kelly-Irvin
made it clear that a mobility device would travel at walking speed which is 8 to
10 km/hr. Thus, the speed of up to
25 km/hr for the applicant’s Segway
9bot Kick Scooter is considerably in excess of that. A speed in excess of
walking speed
might be appropriate for a recreational vehicle. People can take
risks for recreational purposes, such as water-skiers or snow-skiers.
Tribunal accepts that is not appropriate for a rehabilitation aid contemplated
under s 39.
Tribunal notes the observations of Senior Member McCabe in the matter of
and Comcare.
dealt with the use of an earlier version Segway (which is quite different to the
scooter under consideration here) and the relied
upon this decision.
Importantly
in that case, Comcare had agreed to the applicant using that Segway. So that
issue was not before the Tribunal in that
that case, the Learned Senior Member refers to the differentiation of the
expenses under s.16 of the SRC Act and s.39.
the difference in this matter is that it was considered that the traditional
Segway which if the reader can imagine has a
platform upon which the rider
stands and the two wheels are on the outside of the rider’s feet, with the
rider holding a set
of handlebars. That contrasts with the Segway in
contemplation here which is a scooter which has one wheel at the front,
arising from that wheel and then a standing platform and wheel at the
rear. That matter did not concern the suitability of the Segway
had been agreed by the compensating authority - but whether insurance for that
vehicle could be claimed as compensation.
a person with difficulties with balance, a two-wheeled mobility device has to be
on the face of it more dangerous than a three
or four-wheeled mobility device.
If, as discussed during the course of the hearing, for whatever reason, the
two-wheeled scooter
was falling to the right then the applicant would have to
put out his right foot to create a 3-point contact to stabilise the E-scooter.
Given his right leg is significantly damaged, that would either cause further
injury or otherwise might cause him to not use his
right foot to stabilise and
fall over completely. These are matters of speculation for the purpose of the
hearing rather than important
to the final determination. It is an illustration
in a matter that would be taken into account by the expert in a detailed
as to the safety or otherwise of the use of such a device as part of
a rehabilitation programme or as part of a properly considered
elements of s 39 are made out that the Applicant has suffered an injury which
has resulted in an impairment. He has undertaken,
but many years ago, a
rehabilitation programme. He has not been assessed as not capable of
undertaking such a programme with regard
to more recent years.
considerations are made pursuant to s 39(1)(e) with regard to “
or appliances for the use of the employee or the repair or replacement of such
aids or appliances
aids or appliances need to be “
reasonably required by the employee
having regard to the nature of his impairment and where appropriate the
requirements of the rehabilitation
”. There is no programme
contemplating the use of mobility devices.
Respondent accepts that mobility devices would be a proper consideration for the
Applicant now, although that is a matter that
requires proper investigation and
evaluation.
Difficulties
faced by the Applicant in gaining access to or enjoying reasonable freedom of
movement in his or her place of residence
or work are contemplated. The
Applicant made a decision to park in a free parking space so as to avoid that
expense. That was his
deliberate choice. There is no doubt that walking that
kilometre (or mile) would cause him difficulties due to his injuries. On
face of it, that is avoidable.
Applicant does not have difficulty gaining access to driving or enjoying freedom
of safety and movement in a vehicle.
Alternative
means of transport available to the Applicant are not really relevant here. He
can and does ride a pushbike. He would
not ride a bike to work. However, that
is again a choice that he makes. He can ride a bike and that is referred to in
the medical
evidence. However, in regard to alternative means of transport
available to the Applicant, the primary reason that he needed the
E-scooter was
to avoid paying parking fees when parking in the vicinity of his workplace.
is not a matter in which hiring an E-scooter would be appropriate instead of
purchasing one. Evidence was not put forward as
to the availability of
E-scooters in share riding applications in the Cairns area.
39(2)(f) is not relevant here. There is no suggestion of a modification of his
main section under consideration is s 39(2)(b) which deals with the difficulty
faced by the employee in gaining access to his
or her place of residence or
work. In this regard, it is work.
this has to be a reasonable acquisition, and it needs to be safe. Thus, the
importance of a rehabilitation programme. There
was no involvement of any
medical personnel prior to the decision being made to use an E-scooter (which
ever one it was). These
decisions were served up to the GP and to the
physiotherapist as thing already done. They supported their patient in his
is very important that in the report of Ms Kelly-Irvin and in her evidence, she
referred repeatedly to the fact that the mobility
device should be at walking
pace which is considered 8 to 10 km/hr, and the information from the Tribunal
that the pace of the E-scooters
could be greater, which is a matter with regard
Applicant’s assertions as to his rights and responsibilities and his
freedoms are important to him - but they are matters
of his personal choice and
do not for that reason only equate to the safe use of a mobility device.
device in question is first and foremost a recreational device.
this regard, the claim was broken down into the first E-scooter and then the
second E-scooter and the ramp to facilitate the loading
of the second E-scooter
into the back of the Applicant’s vehicle.
Respondent had no knowledge of the first E-scooter. It had constructive
knowledge of the acquisition of the second E-scooter
even though a different
manufacturer was nominated.
Applicant has not succeeded in demonstrating that these E-scooters were aids
contemplated by s 39.
they were, the ramp would be an appropriate aid as well but that has not been
demonstrated.
of course does not prevent the Applicant from continuing to use the E-scooter
from which he derives benefit and pleasure, but
it does not come under the
consideration of the expenses contemplated by s 39 in the circumstances of this
REHABILITATION PROGRAMME
noted, the Applicant was involved in a rehabilitation programme, but many years
prior to the current application. The Tribunal
notes the situation in
and Telstra Corporation Limited
(Compensation)
that matter, the Applicant was seeking compensation under s 39 of the SRC Act
for a vehicle hoist and four-wheeled motor bike.
He had fractured his right leg
and the Respondent had accepted liability. The Tribunal noted the Applicant was
not undertaking,
or had not completed, a rehabilitation programme, nor had he
been assessed as not capable of undertaking one.
is of note that the Tribunal referred to motorised scooters as being developed
with injured or disabled persons in mind. It should
be noted that the term
“scooter”, which was also used in this case, would deal with a three
or four-wheeled device.
This contrasts with the childhood vision of a scooter
of somebody born in the 1950s or 1960s which would be a device with a front
wheel and a back wheel and a platform between them for standing on with
handlebars rising from the fore-wheel. Clear evidence was
given on the use of
‘scooters’ but not meaning that type of scooter. An E-scooter
however is precisely in that configuration
with a fore-wheel and an aft-wheel, a
platform between them and handlebars rising from the fore-wheel.
reasoning of the Tribunal in the case of
is quite similar to the
situation faced in this matter and is adopted for these reasons. There, the
Tribunal considered that s 39
would not apply because the Applicant was not
undertaking and had not completed a rehabilitation programme and had not been
as being incapable of undertaking such a programme. The Applicant had
undertaken a rehabilitation programme, but it was so many
years prior to this
application it could not be counted as relevant to this situation.
HEARING REMOTELY
hearing proceeded on 5 September 2024 by way of Microsoft Teams. Whilst this
was not as a consequence of the COVID pandemic,
the Tribunal nevertheless had
reference to the guidelines on cases on Microsoft Teams as set out in the matter
there were some problems at times with communication, these were able to be
circumvented (sometimes the use of mobile phones
was necessary when computer
microphones, for unknown reasons, failed). The parties and the Tribunal were
satisfied that there was
an appropriate level of communication and understanding
for the matter to proceed. It may be a matter which is difficult for
transcribers
of evidence if that become necessary, but no objection was raised
by the parties, nor the Tribunal, as to whether the remote witnesses
to understand what was said to them or that they were able to be understood.
case practically supports the proposition that when conducting cases on
Microsoft Teams, counsel, witnesses and the Tribunal
must be careful that only
one person is talking at any given time and that patience and courtesy are
decision under review is affirmed.
I certify that the preceding eighty-nine (89) paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for the decision herein of Senior Member A
.............................[sgnd]......................................
Date of hearing:
for the Applicant:
Self-represented
Advocate for the Respondent:
Matthew Hawker
(Sparke Helmore)
ANNEXURE A – LIST OF EXHIBITS
Exhibit no.
T-Documents
Quotes for e-scooter 1
Quotes for e-scooter 2
Response to Medical Report by Ms Kelly-Irvin (received on
04.02.2024)
List of accepted medical conditions (received on
05.03.2024)
1. Jude Perrett (Applicant’s Physiotherapist)
Statement (04.04.2024)
2. Applicant’s comment on Ms Perrett’s Statement
(14.04.2024)
1. Briefing letter to Ms Kelly-Irvin
2. Report cover (dated 09.11.2023)
3. Evidence – Medical Report by Ms Kelly-Irvin
(03.11.2023)
1. Request for Supplementary Report (dated
07.05.2024)
2. Supplementary Medical Report (dated 17.05.2024)
Respondent’s Tender Bundle
Respondent’s Letter to Applicant (dated
29.08.2024)
Elsewhere referred to as a
Segway 9Bot Kick Scooter.
As per General Practice
Direction 30 June 15 and Guideline ‘Persons Giving Expert and Opinion
Exhibit 1, T-Documents, T2,
Exhibit 1, T-Documents,
‘Statement of Applicant’ (dated 18.07.2023),
There was no such
discussion with the GP with regard to the purchase of earlier scooter.
As per the JB HiFi receipt
contained in Exhibit 3.
Exhibit 8, Respondent’s
Tender Bundle, 233-4.
Exhibit 8, Respondent’s
Tender Bundle, 105.
Exhibit 1, T-Documents, T14,
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 171.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 172.
[2015] AATA 143.
and Comcare
[2015] AATA 143
[2016] AATA 76.
[2020] AATA 2835.
RTF format (1.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format