AKV23 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1844 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
AKV23 v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1844
File number(s):
CAG 5 of 2023
Judgment of:
JUDGE LEISHMAN
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Protection (subclass 866)
visa – Review application filed outside the prescribed period –
Whether Tribunal lacked
submission alleging fraud by authorised recipient – Whether decision of
affected by fraud – Whether applicant afforded natural justice
– Whether Applicant entitled to a hearing – No jurisdictional
– Application dismissed
Legislation:
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Migration Act 1958
, 360, 412, 422B, 425,
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) General
Federal Law Rules
(Cth) Sch 2,
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) regs 2.16(3), 4.31
Cases cited:
DZAFH v Minister for Immigration
DZAFH v Minister for Immigration
[2017] FCA 984
DFQ17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] FCAFC
BMY18 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2019] FCAFC 189
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
SZFDE v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2007) 232 CLR
Wati v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1996] FCA 1043
(1996) 71 FCR
Beni v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] FCAFC
Calimoso v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
SZEYK v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
Alam v Minister for Home Affairs
[2019] FCA 389
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Self-represented litigant, in-person, with the
assistance of a Mandarin interpreter
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Ms Egbert of HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
Submitting appearance
CAG 5 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Second Respondent
JUDGE LEISHMAN
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
application filed on 14 February 2023 is dismissed.
Applicant pay the First Respondent’s costs fixed in the amount of
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or
order to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
or to record a
variation to the order pursuant to r 24.04
Federal Circuit and Family Court
of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE LEISHMAN
INTRODUCTION
14 February 2023, the Applicant applied to this Court for judicial review of a
decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(‘the Tribunal’), as
it then was, made on 6 February 2023.
its decision, the Tribunal had determined it did not have jurisdiction to
consider the Applicant’s application for review
of a decision of a
delegate of the Minister for Home Affairs (‘the Delegate’) to refuse
to grant him a protection visa
Migration Act 1958
(‘the Act’).
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Applicant is a citizen of China.
Applicant first arrived in Australia on 28 January 2018 on a Visitor visa, see
Court Book (‘CB’) at page 10.
11 April 2018, the Applicant applied for a Protection (subclass 866) visa
(‘the visa’).
his application, the Applicant included a Form 956A, being an appointment or
withdrawal of an authorised recipient form (CB23-26).
In this form, the
Applicant appointed an authorised recipient and provided their contact details
(CB24). On the Form 956A, the Applicant
provided his residential address which
was different to that of the authorised recipient. However, the
Applicant’s email address,
postal address and mobile number were identical
to the email address, postal address and mobile number provided for the
17 April 2018, the Department of Home Affairs (‘the Department’)
sent the authorised recipient an email acknowledging
the Applicant’s visa
application and invited the Applicant to provide additional information in
relation to his application
29 July 2020, the Department sent a letter to the Applicant via post to his
residential address pursuant to
of the Act, to advise him that his
authorised recipient was not a registered migration agent and that the
Department reasonably suspected
that they were giving immigration assistance
(CB40). The letter stated that as a result, the Delegate was considering
the discretion not to communicate with the authorised recipient as
required by
of the Act, and to send any further documents about the
application directly to the Applicant (CB40).
Thereafter,
the Department sent all correspondence to the Applicant at the residential
address nominated on his Form 956A and continued
to send correspondence to the
authorised recipient at its postal address.
envelope containing the letter dated 29 July 2020 sent to the Applicant was
subsequently returned to sender and received by the
Department on 17 August
2020. However, no other correspondence sent by the Department to the Applicant
at his residential address
was returned.
16 October 2020, the Department sent a letter by post pursuant to
Act, to the Applicant and to the authorised recipient, requesting more
information with respect to the application (CB44-47).
The letter stated that
the Applicant had 35 days after receiving the letter to provide the information.
29 October 2020, the Department sent both the Applicant and his authorised
recipient a further letter by post requesting additional
information to support
the application as set out in a checklist which was enclosed (CB51-57).
3 December 2020, the Delegate refused to grant the Applicant the visa (CB67-72).
The Applicant and the authorised recipient were
notified of the Delegate’s
decision on that date (CB66). The Applicant’s notification was sent to him
at his nominated
residential address.
17 October 2022, the Applicant applied to the Tribunal for review of the
Delegate’s decision.
19 October 2022, the Tribunal sent a letter to the Applicant acknowledging
receipt of the application.
25 October 2022, the Tribunal invited the Applicant to comment in writing by 8
November 2022 on the validity of the review application.
In the invitation, the
Tribunal noted that it appeared the application was not valid as it was not
lodged within the prescribed time
limit of 28 days, commencing on the day the
Applicant is notified of the decision, as prescribed by reg 4.31(2) of the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) (‘the Regulations’)
Applicant did not respond to the invitation to comment.
6 February 2023, the Tribunal decided it did not have jurisdiction to determine
the review application.
7 February 2023, the Tribunal notified the Applicant of its decision
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
Tribunals decision dated 6 February 2023 is at (CB93-94).
[1] of the Tribunal’s decision, the Tribunal confirmed that the review
application was lodged on 17 October 2022.
[2], the Tribunal correctly identified that as the Applicant was not in
immigration detention, an application for review of the
decision had to be made
within 28 days, commencing on the day the Applicant is notified of the decision,
pursuant to reg 4.31(2)
of the Regulations.
[3], the Tribunal noted that the Applicant was notified of the decision by
letter dated 3 December 2020 dispatched by post and
was satisfied that the
Applicant was notified of the Delegate’s decision in accordance with the
statutory requirements.
[5] of the Tribunal’s decision, the Tribunal found that the Applicant is
taken to have been notified of the Delegate’s
decision on 14 December
2020, pursuant to s 494C of the Act, and that the prescribed period to apply for
review ended on 10 January
494C(4) of the Act is as follows:
494C When a person is taken to have received a document from the
Dispatch by prepaid post or by other prepaid means
(4) If the Minister gives a document to a person by the method in subsection
494B(4) (which involves dispatching the document by
prepaid post or by other
prepaid means), the person is taken to have received the document:
(a) if the document was dispatched from a place in Australia to an address in
Australia—7 working days (in the place of that
address) after the date of
the document; or
(b) in any other case—21 days after the date of the document.
Tribunal correctly identified at [6] that as the last day of the prescribed
period fell on a Sunday, the Applicant had until the
end of the next day that
was not a Saturday, a Sunday or a holiday to lodge the application for review in
the Tribunal, pursuant
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
the Tribunal found that the Applicant had until 11 January 2021 to apply to the
Tribunal for review.
Tribunal at [4] of its decision noted that they invited the Applicant to comment
on whether a valid application had been made
but that the Applicant did not
respond to the invitation.
Tribunal concluded at [7] and [8] of its decision that as the application for
review was not received by the Tribunal until 17
October 2022, the application
was not made in accordance with the relevant legislation, and it did not have
the matter.
CURRENT PROCEEDINGS
14 February 2023, the Applicant applied to this Court pursuant to s 476 of the
Act for judicial review of the Tribunal’s
decision (‘the
application’). The Applicant also filed an affidavit annexing the decision
of the Tribunal.
11 August 2023, the parties appeared via telephone before a Registrar. The
Applicant was assisted by a Mandarin interpreter. The
Registrar made procedural
orders which included an order permitting the Applicant to file any written
submissions, amended application,
and additional evidence upon which he sought
to rely, 28 days prior to the hearing and listed the matter for a final hearing
date to be advised.
3 June 2025, the parties appeared via telephone before a Registrar. The
Applicant was assisted by a Mandarin interpreter. The following
Notations were
made on that date:
A. The applicant confirmed that they have retained a copy of their court
applicant confirmed that their contact details as set out in their application
for judicial review remain current.
Court explained to the applicant that the Court does not have power to grant a
visa to the applicant, and that the Court’s
function is to determine
whether the second respondent’s decision was made according to
Court summarised the concept of jurisdictional error to the applicant and
explained that it would be necessary for the applicant
to establish that the
second respondent’s decision was affected by such an error for their
application for judicial review
to be successful.
Applicant did not file any further material.
matter was listed for a final hearing on 7 November 2025.
MATERIAL RELIED UPON
the hearing, the material listed below was before the Court.
Applicant relied upon the following material:
(a) The Court Book which was tendered and marked as Exhibit ‘C1’;
(b) The Supplementary Court Book which was tendered and marked as Exhibit
(c) Application filed on 14 February 2023; and
(d) Affidavit of AKV23 filed on 14 February 2023.
First Respondent relied upon the following material:
(a) The Court Book which was tendered and marked as Exhibit ‘C1’:
(b) The Supplementary Court Book which was tendered and marked as Exhibit
(c) Response filed on 9 August 2023;
(d) Outline of Submissions filed on 24 October 2025;
(e) Affidavit of John O’Connell filed 24 October 2025; and
(f) Affidavit of Dominic Robert Leal Smith filed 29 October 2025.
GROUNDS OF REVIEW
Applicant’s two grounds of review and particulars are set out on page 3 of
the Application filed on 14 February 2023 and
are as follows:
Tribunal has failed to discharge its statutory function of reviewing the
decision. It has failed to exercise its statutory discretion
properly, to act
fairly and reasonably.
Particulars
Tribunal’s exercise of his discretion in deciding on the review without
taking any further action to obtain the information
was unreasonable.
was no reason provided as to how the Tribunal had exercised his discretion and
made the decision. Failure to provide the reason
was legally
unreasonable.
Tribunal’s failure to take further action to obtain information from the
Applicant means that
Applicant was not afforded natural justice.
Tribunal failed to consider relevant matters that the Applicant would have
provided if the Applicant was afforded a hearing or
an opportunity to provide
Tribunal failed to satisfy the object of section 360 and Div V of the
doing (a), (b) and (c) above, jurisdictionally erred, and those errors were
Was the Tribunal wrong in finding it lacked
considering the Applicant’s grounds of review, I need to consider whether
the Tribunal’s decision, that it did
not have jurisdiction to hear and
determine the review application, was affected by a factual error, which would
mean the decision
should be set aside.
412(1)(b) of the Act, in force at the time of the Tribunal’s decision,
provided that:
412 Application for review of
‑reviewable decisions
(1) An application for review of a
‑reviewable decision must:
(b) be given to the Tribunal within the period prescribed, being a period
ending not later than 28 days after the notification of
the decision; and
4.31(2) of the Regulations provides that the prescribed period for lodging a
merits review in the Tribunal commences on
the day the applicant is notified of
the decision. The day of notification is included in the calculation of the
28-day period: see
DZAFH v Minister for Immigration
[2017] FCCA 387
[44]-[46], upheld on appeal in
DZAFH v Minister for Immigration
, Item 2 of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) which provides that, where the period “is expressed to begin at, on
or with a specified day”, the period is taken
to include that specified
to reg 2.16(3) of the Regulations, the Minister had to notify an applicant of a
decision by one of the methods specified
in s 494B of the Act.
under s 494B(4), the Delegate was permitted to send the decision by registered
post to either the last address for service
or the last residential address
provided by the Applicant for receiving documents.
to s 494D(5) of the Act, the Delegate was not required to comply with s 494D(1)
if the authorised recipient was not a registered
migration agent and the
Department reasonably suspected that the authorised recipient was giving
immigration assistance as was the
case in respect of the Applicant’s
authorised recipient.
this instance, the notification letter from the Department dated 3 December
2020, was sent by registered post to the Applicant
at the last address provided
by the Applicant for receiving documents, which was the residential address
given by the Applicant on
the visa application and the Form 956A. The Delegate
also sent the notification letter to the Applicant's nominated authorised
A copy of the registered post envelope is at Supplementary Court Book
(‘SCB’) at page 34.
to s 494C(4) of the Act, if the Minister gives a document to a person by the
method in s 494B(4) and the recipient’s
address is in Australia, the
person is taken to have received the document seven working days after the date
of the document. Thus,
the Applicant is taken to have received the notification
letter on 14 December 2020.
66(2)(d)(ii) of the Act provided that if an Applicant has a right to have a
decision reviewed by application under Part 7
of the Act, the notification of
the decision must state the time in which an application for review may be
notification letter sent to the Applicant on 3 December 2020 clearly stated that
an application for review must be given to the
Tribunal “within the period
of 28 calendar days, commencing on the day you are taken to have received this
letter” (CB63-64).
Thus, the letter complied with the requirements of
subparagraph 66(2)(d)(ii).
particular, the notification letter in this case had none of the defects
identified in
DFQ17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] FCAFC 64
BMY18 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2019] FCAFC
In this matter, the notification letter:
(a) specified the correct prescribed time limit within which the Applicant could
seek review (i.e. 28 calendar days commencing on
the day they were taken to have
received the letter) under the correct heading ‘Review rights’; and
(b) explained when the Applicant was deemed to have received the notification
letter (i.e. seven working days after the date of the
letter) in the same
section under the heading ‘Review rights’.
oral submissions, the Applicant stated that he had not received any
correspondence from the Department, including the decision
of the Delegate. When
it was pointed out to the Applicant that the decision of the Delegate had been
sent to the Applicant at his
residential address, he claimed that the address
was not his, although agreed that he had signed the visa application and Form
which had this residential address on it.
do not accept the Applicant’s submission and find that he was properly
notified of the Delegate’s decision to refuse
the visa in accordance with
ss 494B(4) and 66(2)(d)(ii) of the Act.
respect of the delay in lodging the review application, the Applicant alleged
this was directly related to his authorised recipient
being involved in
migration fraud. As a result, the Applicant stated that he did not know what to
do, and that when he found out
his visa had expired, he tried to obtain advice
to find a lawyer as no-one would represent him because of his connection
to the unregistered migration agent, and that was the reason
for the lengthy
delay, in lodging his review application.
Applicant did not plead fraud by his authorised recipient in the grounds
contained in his application to this Court. It was raised
for the first time in
his oral submissions.
Applicant did not identify any fraud committed by his authorised recipient in
respect of him or his visa application. He simply
referred to having found out
in the news that members of the migration service that had assisted him with his
visa application, had
been arrested for migration fraud.
was submitted on behalf of the First Respondent that where an applicant is
alleging fraud, it must be distinctly pleaded and proved
to the level of
satisfaction in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
this case, the Applicant has not alleged any particular fraud in respect of his
visa application or review application. He simply
alleges that his former
authorised recipient was engaged in migration fraud in another case and
circumstances where fraud is alleged, the Court in
SZFDE v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
(2007) 232 CLR 189, concluded at [47] that the
issue to be determined is the effect of the fraud on the Tribunal’s
decision-making
Wati v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1996] FCA 1043
(1996) 71 FCR 103
112, Lindgren J held that the “fraud” was not limited to that of the
decision-maker, a party, or a party’s representative,
but that the
decision in question must be actually induced or affected by the fraud.
find that the Applicant has not adduced evidence of or identified any fraud that
affected the decision of the Tribunal.
respect of whether the Tribunal had jurisdiction, the Court stated in
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] FCAFC 228
merits review of a Delegate’s decision is only available subject to the
time limits in the legislation. The Court agreed
with the reasoning of
Charlesworth J in
Calimoso v Minister for Immigration and Border
(2016) 162 ALD 361
, in which he stated at [29]:
The time period in which an application for review must be filed is absolute.
The Tribunal has no discretion to extend the time in
which an application may be
made. However, that harsh consequence is one brought about not so much by s
494C(5) of the Act, but rather
by s 347(1)(b)(iii) and by the absence of any
provision granting a discretionary power on the Tribunal to alter the statutory
where an applicant has been properly notified as in this case and seeks review
in the Tribunal outside the relevant statutory
timeframe, the Tribunal has no
discretion to extend time and is obliged to find it has no jurisdiction.
Accordingly,
I conclude that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to review the decision of
the Delegate.
this background, I now consider the grounds contained within the
Applicant’s Application filed on 14 February 2023.
Consideration
Applicant alleges by this ground that the Tribunal failed to discharge its
statutory function of reviewing the decision and failed
to exercise its
discretion fairly and reasonably.
Applicant appears to misunderstand the manner in which the Tribunal proceeded
and alleges the Tribunal’s decision involved
the exercise of a discretion.
the reasons outlined above, the Tribunal correctly determined it did not have
as the review application
had been filed outside the period prescribed and the Tribunal is not empowered
to alter the statutory time-frame.
such, the Tribunal did not exercise any discretion, nor was it required to do
so, and no jurisdictional error is established by
this ground.
Applicant alleges by this ground that the Tribunal failed to obtain information
from him and that he was not afforded natural
was submitted on behalf of the First Respondent that because the Tribunal did
not have jurisdiction to review the application it
therefore did not have the
power to obtain information from the Applicant regarding his substantive
protection claims.
respect of Particular (a), it is contended that the Tribunal did not afford the
Applicant natural justice.
19 October 2022, the Tribunal sent a letter to the Applicant to via the email
address on his review application which acknowledged
receipt of the review
application and stated in the second paragraph (CB82):
Please note that the validity of your application has not yet been assessed. We
can only review a decision if a valid application
for review has been made. You
will be advised if it appears that your application may not be valid.
letter also stated:
If you wish to provide material or written arguments for us to consider, you
should do so as soon as possible.
25 October 2022, the Tribunal sent a second letter to the Applicant via email
inviting him to comment by 8 November 2022 on the
validity of his application
(CB88-90). The letter clearly stated that it appeared to the Tribunal the
application was not valid
as it had not been lodged within the relevant time
limit. The letter set out the relevant provision of the Regulations, the time
limit and when the time limit commences. The Applicant did not reply to the
422B(1) of the Act in force at the time provided that Part 7, Division 4 is an
exhaustive statement of the requirements of
the natural justice hearing rule as
to the conduct of a review. As the Tribunal had formed the view that it did not
have jurisdiction
to review the Delegate’s decision, s 422B and Part 7,
Division 4 of the Act were not engaged.
SZEYK v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2008] FCA 1940
Bennett J stated that:
Common law natural justice and procedural fairness require that the applicant be
given a reasonable opportunity to deal with matters
adverse to his interest that
the decision maker proposes to take into account in exercising its power.
was submitted on behalf of the First Respondent that the letter sent by the
Tribunal afforded the Applicant natural justice by
providing him with a
reasonable opportunity to respond to the adverse information relating to the
validity of his application for
agree that the Applicant was given the opportunity to respond to the Tribunal
and chose not to do so. In oral submissions, the Applicant
claimed that the
email address the letter was sent to was not his email address. I do not accept
that submission in circumstances
where the Applicant acknowledged he completed
and signed the review application which provided the email address on it. The
subsequently filed his judicial review application in this Court a
week after the Tribunal’s decision had been sent to that
find the Tribunal acted in accordance with the common law principles of natural
justice and fairness and no error is established
by this aspect of the ground.
Particulars
(b) to (d) contend that the Tribunal failed to comply with s 360 by which the
Applicant appeared to mean s 425 of the
Act, and that the Applicant should have
been afforded a hearing or an opportunity to provide evidence. This contention
is misconceived.
As already identified, in circumstances where the Tribunal
determined that it had no jurisdiction, the procedural fairness requirements
Part 7 of the Act did not apply: see
Alam v Minister for Home Affairs
[2019] FCA 389
the Tribunal was not required to provide the Applicant with a hearing under
section 425 of the Act, and no jurisdictional
error is established by this
aspect of the ground.
the reasons given above, I find that no jurisdictional error is established and
the application for judicial review is, accordingly,
First Respondent sought an order for costs in the fixed amount of $5,600 which
is below the scale amount in Sch 2,
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) General Federal Law Rules
Applicant has been unsuccessful. I also take into account that the length of the
hearing was extended by the Applicant raising
fresh grounds in support of his
application, which should have properly been put before the Court by an amended
application.
therefore consider it is appropriate that an order for costs be made and will
order that the Applicant pay the First Respondent’s
costs fixed in the
amount of $5,600.
I certify that the preceding eighty-four (84)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (451 KB)
Signed PDF/A format