N v Restaurant [2010] PrivCmrA 17 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
N v Restaurant
[2010] PrivCmrA 17
Subject Heading:
Disclosure of personal information
National Privacy Principle 2.1 in Schedule 3 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
The complainant applied for a job at a restaurant while employed at another
local restaurant. The complainant cited their current
employer in their
curriculum vitae but did not include them as a referee.
A staff member from the respondent restaurant attended an evening business
function which was also attended by the complainant’s
employer. The
complainant alleged the restaurant disclosed their personal information to their
current employer by mentioning that
a member of its staff had applied for a
position at the respondent restaurant.
The complainant was not mentioned by name. However, because the current
employer telephoned the complainant that night to verify the
information, the
complainant considered the employer had identified them from the information
disclosed by the respondent.
The complainant claimed their relationship with their employer had been
jeopardised as a result of the alleged disclosure.
defines personal information as 'information or
an opinion ... about an individual whose identity is apparent, or can reasonably
be ascertained, from the information or opinion.'
NPP 2.1 provides that an organisation must not use or disclose personal
information about an individual for a purpose other than the
primary purpose of
collection unless an exception in NPP 2.1(a)-(h) applies.
Section 27(1)(a)
requires the Commissioner 'to endeavour,
by conciliation, to effect a settlement of the matters that gave rise to the
investigation'.
The Commissioner opened an investigation into the complaint under
but did not make a formal finding as both parties
agreed to conciliate the complaint.
The respondent apologised for any distress its actions caused. It also
reviewed and improved its recruitment information handling
procedures.
The complainant accepted the respondent’s apology and its revised
procedures as an appropriate resolution to their complaint
and asked that the
Commissioner close the matter.
Satisfied that the matter had been adequately dealt with by the restaurant,
the Commissioner closed the matter under
section 41(2)(a)
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (128 KB)
Signed PDF/A format