2016849 (Refugee) [2024] AATA 4209 (11 October 2024)
2016849 (Refugee)
[2024] AATA 4209
(11 October 2024)
DECISION RECORD
Migration & Refugee Division
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
Lilly Mojsin
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the
applicants protection visas.
Statement made on 11 October 2024 at 10:42am
REFUGEE – protection visa – China – particular social group
– victim of loan sharks – threats from debt
collectors –
physical assault – state protection – fear of killing – return
visit to China – decision
under review affirmed
LEGISLATION
Migration Act 1958
, 425, 441,
Regulations 1994
, Schedule 2
Kopalapillai v MIMA
[1998] FCA 1126
(1998) 86 FCR
MIMA v Rajalingam (1999) 93 FCR 220
Randhawa v MILGEA
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437
Selvadurai v MIEA & Anor
(1994) 34 ALD
Any references appearing in square brackets
indicate that information has been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431
Migration Act 1958
and replaced with generic information
which does not allow the identification of an applicant, or their relative or
other dependants.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR
This is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the
Minister for Home Affairs on 12 November 2020 to refuse
to grant the applicants
protection visas under
Migration Act 1958
The first named applicant [applicant] is the wife of the second named
The applicants, who claim to be citizens of China, applied for the visas on 13
January 2019. The delegate refused to grant the visas
on the basis that that the
applicants would not suffer serious or significant harm on return to China
within a reasonably foreseeable
The applicants appealed that decision to this Tribunal attaching a copy of the
Department decision to the review application.
By letter dated 24 September 2024 and posted to the applicants, in accordance
with section 441G of the
Migration Act 1958
, the applicants were notified that
the Tribunal had considered the material before it but the Tribunal was unable
to make a favourable
decision on this information alone. The applicants were
invited to appear before the Tribunal to give evidence and present arguments
relating to the issues arising in relation to the decision under review, at a
hearing on 28 October 2024 at 10.30 am.
The applicants were advised that, if they failed to attend the scheduled
hearing and an adjournment was not granted, the Tribunal
might make a decision
on the review without taking any further action to allow or enable them to
appear before the Tribunal.
On 8 October 2024, the applicants provided a completed response to the hearing
invitation, and signed by the applicant, in which
the applicants indicated that
they will not participate in the hearing and consented to the Tribunal making a
decision on the papers
without taking further steps to allow them to appear.
I am satisfied that the applicants have consented to the Tribunal deciding the
review without them appearing before it, and I have
proceeded to make a decision
on the information before the Tribunal and not to offer the applicants a
In accordance with s. 425(2)(b) I proceed to decide this application on the
material before me.
CRITERIA FOR A PROTECTION VISA
See Annexure A
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
The first named applicant [applicant] only made claims for protection.
In the applicants’ PV application, the applicant
• One day the underground bank sent people to her
house to collect the money, and forced her parents to pay. They smashed all
goods in her home and beat her and her parents, as they were unable to repay the
• The applicant called the police, but police did not respond to the
• The applicant wrote a public letter and distributed it to get
attention and help from society.
• The ‘gangdom’ was the protective umbrella of the
underground bank. They also colluded with the police.
• When the ‘gangdom’ found out that the applicant had
distributed a letter to get the attention of the society,
they sent police to
• Therefore, she escaped from China and fled to Australia. The Chinese
government is corrupt and only care about their own benefits.
• If she has to return to China, she will be caught by the police and
sent to prison. She will be persecuted and she will die.
On 7 October 2020, the delegate sent the applicant a letter inviting her under
of the Act to provide additional information about some of the claims made,
clarification on particular points such as dates, locations
and to provide
supporting documentation. No further information was provided to the
Department.
The applicant did not provide any further submissions or clarification of her
claims to the Tribunal.
Country Information
The 2021 DFAT Country report on China states:
People who owe money
to loan sharks
3.122 Usury has a long history in China. According to the South China Morning
Post, ‘demand for private loans’ is strong
today. This is due to
small businesses in particular being unable to access enough credit from large
banks. In modern times, loan
sharks might be known by different names such as
‘private finance companies’ and are more likely to be active in
rural areas.
3.123 Some protection is available to debtors. ‘Usurious loans’
are prohibited under China’s Civil Code, which came
into force 1 January
2021, but the interest rate considered usurious is not defined in that
legislation. The courts have capped interest
rates at four times the official
rate. A number of highly publicised violent crimes related to debt collection
were discussed in
the media in 2017 with police making arrests and people being
convicted for serious crimes such as assault and sexual assault related
collection. DFAT is also aware of a 2018-20 crackdown by authorities on usury,
which was highly public and which saw the
prosecution of a large number of
3.124 Loan shark operations may be large-scale, but police operations are
also large scale. In 2019, 253 suspects were arrested in
a campaign against loan
sharks in Lanzhou. The gang had over 1,300 mobile phone applications and
websites to facilitate usurious
moneylending. The Chinese Government claims that
41,000 suspects have been detained in 2021, but it is not clear if this is only
during the recent crackdown, or if it includes previous arrests.
3.125 DFAT assesses that loan sharks are active in China, but assesses that
state protection is available. DFAT considers that victims
of loan sharks have a
plausible fear of violence but that overall the risk is low.
5.1 The Ministry of Public Security oversees the police force, which is
organised into specialised police agencies and local, county,
and provincial
local ‘Public Security Bureau’
(PSB). The People’s Armed
Police (PAP) is a paramilitary force organised under the People’s
Liberation Army (PLA) responsible
for internal security and stability (such as
combatting riots and terrorism, but also domestic monitoring of perceived
security threats),
maritime security and support of the PLA. The PAP is also
active in Xinjiang. Regular police generally do not carry firearms and
is rare in China.
5.2 Police maintain public order and social stability, which are overriding
priorities for the CCP. Loyalty to the Party is important
among police ranks, as
it is in all government positions. Police, including at lower levels, can be
investigated for corruption (which
is a threat to stability and Party
legitimacy) and loyalty offences.
5.3 Police carry out day-to-day crime fighting activities and investigate
crimes. Day-to-day crime rates are low in China but where
crime does occur, DFAT
understands that police investigate thoroughly and prosecute alleged
5.4 Police are subject to little oversight, having the ability to issue their
own warrants without the involvement of a court (or
ignoring regulations where
this is required), for example. According to the US Department of State Human
Rights Report, while investigations
into police killings are often announced,
the findings of those investigations are often not announced. DFAT is not able
this. Freedom House’s 2021 Freedom in the World report describes
police impunity as ‘the norm’.
5.5 Police have access to enormous amounts of data and other evidence. Social
media is monitored and an unprecedented number of closed-circuit
cameras have been rolled out during the COVID- 19 pandemic as part of efforts to
control the virus.
REASONS AND FINDINGS
The applicants’ identities have been accepted by the Department in their
visa application. On the basis of their Chinese passports
I accept that the
first applicant and the second applicant are nationals of the PRC and not
nationals or citizens of any other country.
I accept that they do not have a
right to enter and reside in any country other than China. Therefore, I find
that the applicants
are not excluded from Australia's protection by
of the Act. I also find that China is the applicants’
“receiving country” for the purposes of
s.36(2)(aa).
I note that the benefit of the doubt should be given to asylum seekers who are
generally credible but unable to substantiate all
of their claims. The Tribunal
must bear in mind that if it makes an adverse finding in relation to a material
claim made by the applicant
but is unable to make that finding with confidence
it must proceed to assess the claim on the basis that it might be possibly true
MIMA v Rajalingam (1999) 93 FCR 220
). However, the Tribunal is not
required to accept uncritically any or all of the allegations made by an
applicant. Further, the
Tribunal is not required to have rebutting evidence
available to it before it can find that that the particular assertion by an
has not been made out (see,
Randhawa v MILGEA
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437
at 451 per Beaumont J;
Selvadurai v MIEA & Anor
(1994) 34 ALD 347
348 per Heerey J and
Kopalapillai v MIMA
[1998] FCA 1126
(1998) 86 FCR 547
The mere fact that a person claims fear of persecution for a particular reason
does not establish either the genuineness of the
asserted fear or that it is
“well-founded” or that it is for the reason claimed. Similarly, that
the applicant claims
to face a real risk of significant harm does not establish
that such a risk exists, or that the harm feared amounts to “significant
harm”. It remains for the applicant to satisfy the Tribunal that all of
the statutory elements are made out.
The applicant claims that she and her family had borrowed money from an
underground bank who in order to collect their money, smashed
all the goods in
her home and beat her parents, as they were unable to repay the debt. The
applicant called the police, but police
did not respond to the call. The
applicant wrote a public letter and distributed it to get attention and help.
Had the applicants
attended a hearing, information could have been obtained from
the applicant as to when the money was borrowed, how much was borrowed
whom. Information could have been obtained about the public letter and where and
when it was distributed and to whom it
was distributed and why a complaint was
not made to the police. The independent evidence, cited above, indicates that
can and do take action against usuaries.
There is no verifiable evidence before the Tribunal to support the claim that
the applicant and/or her family owned a house and
borrowed any money. Without
further information from the applicant providing details of the loan and an
explanation why the loan
was not able to be repaid I do not accept that the
applicant and/or her parents borrowed money from an underground bank who
and harmed them resulting in the applicant writing a public letter.
Therefore it follows I do not accept that the ‘gangdom’
sent police
to catch her.
Additionally, as outlined in the Department decision, attached to the review
application, the applicants came to Australia in July
2018 and then departed
Australia on 3 October 2018 and returned again to Australia [number] days later.
Had the applicant attended
hearing I would have been able to explore how and why
the applicants were able to return China after claiming to have escaped from
police in China and then leave China again returning to Australia. Without
further information from the applicants I do not accept
that the applicant
escaped from the police in China and fled to Australia.
I have considered the claims of the applicant individually and cumulatively.
The applicants, Buddhist Chinese, have made no other
claims of harm. I am
satisfied that the applicants did not suffer serious harm in China, prior to
their departure to Australia.
I am required to consider whether there is a real chance the applicants will
suffer serious harm for a refuge reason on their return
to China, within a
reasonably foreseeable future.
The applicant claims that she fears harm from the gangdom, underground bank and
police if the applicants return to China. I have
found above that the
applicants did not suffer serious harm in China therefore as the applicants did
not attend the hearing and I
have been unable to explore the applicant’s
claims with her, I am not satisfied there is a real chance that the applicants
will suffer serious harm upon their return to China, for reasons of their race,
religion, nationality, membership of a particular
social group or political
opinion, within the reasonably foreseeable future.
I have considered the claims of the applicants individually and cumulatively.
I am satisfied that the applicants do not have profiles
that would cause them to
be of any interest to the authorities or non-state agents, in the reasonably
foreseeable future, if they
For the reasons given above, I am not satisfied that the applicants are persons
in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations
s.36(2)(a).
The applicants are Buddhist Chinese. The applicants’ claims for
complementary protection are the same as those put forward
in relation to their
refugee claims. I do not accept that the applicants were now, or ever were, of
adverse interest to the Chinese
authorities. The applicants do not claim to have
been charged with any offences whilst living in China. Therefore I do not accept
that the police will arrest, imprison or harm them on their return to China.
The Department's Complementary Protection Guidelines state that there must be a
real and personal risk to the individual, saying
that where the threat is from
non-state actors, decision-makers should be satisfied that there are 'extremely
widespread conditions
of violence, coupled with a particular risk to the
individual in question' before reaching a conclusion that there is a real risk
that an applicant will be arbitrarily deprived of his or her life.
There is no evidence that there is a widespread condition of violence in China.
I have found that the applicants did not suffer
harm when they lived in China, I
do not accept that there is a real risk of harm from non-state actors.
There is no evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that the applicants have
committed any offence in China that would attract the
death penalty.
I have considered the applicants’ claims singularly and cumulatively. As
‘real chance’ and ‘real risk’
involve the same standard,
it follows that based on the same information, and for the reasons stated above,
I am also satisfied there
is not a real risk of significant harm to the
applicants if returned to China within a reasonably foreseeable future.
I am not satisfied that there are substantial grounds for believing that, as a
necessary and foreseeable consequence of the applicants
being removed from
Australia to China there is a real risk that the applicants will suffer
significant harm i.e. that there is a
real risk that they will be arbitrarily
deprived of life, that the death penalty will be carried out on them, that they
will be subjected
to torture, that they will be subjected to cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment or that they will be subjected to degrading treatment
punishment.
Accordingly, I find that the applicants do not satisfy the requirements of
s.36(2)(aa)
of the Act.
For the reasons given above, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicants
are persons in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under
s.36(2)(a).
Having concluded that the applicants do not meet the refugee criterion in
, the Tribunal has considered the alternative criterion in
s.36(2)(aa).
The Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicants are persons in
respect of whom Australia has protection obligations under
s.36(2)(aa).
There is no suggestion that the applicants satisfy
on the basis of
being a member of the same family unit as a person who satisfies
(aa) and who holds a protection visa.
Accordingly, the applicants do not satisfy the criterion in
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicants protection
Lilly Mojsin
The criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and
Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) (the Regulations). An
applicant for the visa must meet one of the alternative criteria in
s 36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That
is, he or she is either a person in
respect of whom Australia has protection obligations under the
‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other ‘complementary
protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same family unit as such a
person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same class.
Section 36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the
applicant for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the
Minister is satisfied Australia has protection obligations because the person is
A person is a refugee if, in the case of a person who has a nationality, they
are outside the country of their nationality and,
owing to a well-founded fear
of persecution, are unable or unwilling to avail themselves of the protection of
that country: s 5H(1)(a).
In the case of a person without a nationality,
they are a refugee if they are outside the country of their former habitual
and, owing to a well-founded fear of persecution, are unable or
unwilling to return to that country: s 5H(1)(b).
Under s 5J(1), a person has a well-founded fear of persecution if they
fear being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality,
membership of
a particular social group or political opinion, there is a real chance they
would be persecuted for one or more of
those reasons, and the real chance of
persecution relates to all areas of the relevant country. Additional
requirements relating
to a ‘well-founded fear of persecution’ and
circumstances in which a person will be taken not to have such a fear are
out in ss 5J(2)-(6) and ss 5K-LA, which are extracted in the
attachment to this decision.
If a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s 36(2)(a), he
or she may nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant
of the visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations
because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of being
removed from
Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that he or
she will suffer significant harm: s 36(2)(aa) (‘the complementary
protection criterion’). The meaning of significant harm, and the
circumstances in which a person will be taken not to face
a real risk of
significant harm, are set out in ss 36(2A) and (2B), which are extracted in
the attachment to this decision.
Mandatory considerations
In accordance with Ministerial Direction No.84, made under s 499 of the
Act, the Tribunal has taken account of the ‘Refugee
Law Guidelines’
and ‘Complementary Protection Guidelines’ prepared by the Department
of Home Affairs, and country
information assessments prepared by the Department
of Foreign Affairs and Trade expressly for protection status determination
to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
ATTACHMENT - Extract from
Migration Act 1958
5 (1) Interpretation
cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment
means an act or
omission by which:
(a) severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally
inflicted on a person; or
(b) pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on
a person so long as, in all the circumstances, the
act or omission could
reasonably be regarded as cruel or inhuman in nature;
but does not include an act or omission:
(c) that is not inconsistent with Article 7 of the Covenant; or
(d) arising only from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions that are
not inconsistent with the Articles of the Covenant.
degrading treatment or punishment
means an act or omission that
causes, and is intended to cause, extreme humiliation which is unreasonable, but
does not include an
act or omission:
(a) that is not inconsistent with Article 7 of the Covenant; or
(b) that causes, and is intended to cause, extreme humiliation arising only
from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions
that are not inconsistent
with the Articles of the Covenant.
means an act or omission by which severe pain or
suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a
(a) for the purpose of obtaining from the person or from a third person
information or a confession; or
(b) for the purpose of punishing the person for an act which that person or a
third person has committed or is suspected of having
committed; or
(c) for the purpose of intimidating or coercing the person or a third person;
(d) for a purpose related to a purpose mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or (c);
(e) for any reason based on discrimination that is inconsistent with the
Articles of the Covenant;
but does not include an act or omission arising only from, inherent in or
incidental to, lawful sanctions that are not inconsistent
with the Articles of
the Covenant.
receiving country
, in relation to a non-citizen, means:
(a) a country of which the non-citizen is a national, to be determined solely by
reference to the law of the relevant country; or
(b) if the non-citizen has no country of nationality—a country of his or
her former habitual residence, regardless of whether
it would be possible to
return the non-citizen to the country.
5H Meaning of refugee
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person in Australia, the person is a
(a) in a case where the person has a nationality – is outside the country
of his or her nationality and, owing to a well-founded
fear of persecution, is
unable or unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that
country; or
(b) in a case where the person does not have a nationality – is outside
the country of his or her former habitual residence
and owing to a well-founded
fear of persecution, is unable or unwilling to return to it.
Note: For the meaning of
well-founded fear of persecution
section 5J.
5J Meaning of well-founded fear of persecution
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, the person has a
well-founded fear of
persecution
(a) the person fears being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group or political
(b) there is a real chance that, if the person returned to the receiving
country, the person would be persecuted for one or more
of the reasons mentioned
in paragraph (a); and
(c) the real chance of persecution relates to all areas of a receiving country.
Note: For membership of a particular social group, see
sections 5K
(2) A person does not have a
well-founded fear of persecution
if effective protection measures are available to the person in a receiving
Note: For effective protection measures, see
section 5LA.
(3) A person does not have a
well-founded fear of persecution
if the person could take reasonable steps to modify his or her behaviour so as
to avoid a real chance of persecution in a receiving
country, other than a
modification that would:
(a) conflict with a characteristic that is fundamental to the person’s
identity or conscience; or
(b) conceal an innate or immutable characteristic of the person; or
(c) without limiting paragraph (a) or (b), require the person to do any of the
(i) alter his or her religious beliefs, including by renouncing a religious
conversion, or conceal his or her true religious beliefs,
or cease to be
involved in the practice of his or her faith;
(ii) conceal his or her true race, ethnicity, nationality or country of
(iii) alter his or her political beliefs or conceal his or her true political
(iv) conceal a physical, psychological or intellectual disability;
(v) enter into or remain in a marriage to which that person is opposed, or
accept the forced marriage of a child;
(vi) alter his or her sexual orientation or gender identity or conceal his or
her true sexual orientation, gender identity or intersex
(4) If a person fears persecution for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a):
(a) that reason must be the essential and significant reason, or those reasons
must be the essential and significant reasons, for
the persecution; and
(b) the persecution must involve serious harm to the person; and
(c) the persecution must involve systematic and discriminatory conduct.
(5) Without limiting what is serious harm for the purposes of
paragraph (4)(b), the following are instances of
serious harm
for the purposes of that paragraph:
(a) a threat to the person’s life or liberty;
(b) significant physical harassment of the person;
(c) significant physical ill‑treatment of the person;
(d) significant economic hardship that threatens the person’s capacity to
(e) denial of access to basic services, where the denial threatens the
person’s capacity to subsist;
(f) denial of capacity to earn a livelihood of any kind, where the denial
threatens the person’s capacity to subsist.
(6) In determining whether the person has a
well‑founded fear of
persecution
for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a), any conduct engaged in by the person in Australia is to
be disregarded
unless the person satisfies the Minister that the person engaged
in the conduct otherwise than for the purpose of strengthening the
person’s claim to be a refugee.
5K Membership of a particular social group
consisting of family
For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person (the
first person
), in determining whether the
first person has a well‑founded fear of persecution for the reason of
membership of a particular
social group that consists of the first
person’s family:
(a) disregard any fear of persecution, or any persecution, that any other member
or former member (whether alive or dead) of the
family has ever experienced,
where the reason for the fear or persecution is not a reason mentioned in
paragraph 5J(1)(a); and
(b) disregard any fear of persecution, or any persecution, that:
(i) the first person has ever experienced; or
(ii) any other member or former member (whether alive or dead) of the family has
ever experienced;
where it is reasonable to conclude that the fear or persecution would not
exist if it were assumed that the fear or persecution mentioned
paragraph (a) had never existed.
may be relevant for determining family relationships
for the purposes of this section.
5L Membership of a particular social group
other than family
For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, the person is to be treated as a member
of a particular
social group (other than the person’s family) if:
(a) a characteristic is shared by each member of the group; and
(b) the person shares, or is perceived as sharing, the characteristic; and
(c) any of the following apply:
(i) the characteristic is an innate or immutable characteristic;
(ii) the characteristic is so fundamental to a member’s identity or
conscience, the member should not be forced to renounce
(iii) the characteristic distinguishes the group from society; and
(d) the characteristic is not a fear of persecution.
5LA Effective protection measures
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, effective protection measures are
available to the person in
a receiving country if:
(a) protection against persecution could be provided to the person by:
(i) the relevant State; or
(ii) a party or organisation, including an international organisation, that
controls the relevant State or a substantial part of
the territory of the
relevant State; and
(b) the relevant State, party or organisation mentioned in paragraph (a) is
willing and able to offer such protection.
(2) A relevant State, party or organisation mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a) is taken to be able to offer protection against
persecution
to a person if:
(a) the person can access the protection; and
(b) the protection is durable; and
(c) in the case of protection provided by the relevant State—the
protection consists of an appropriate criminal law, a reasonably
police force and an impartial judicial system.
36 Protection visas – criteria provided for by this Act
(2) A criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant for the visa
(a) a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations because the person
is a refugee; or
(aa) a non-citizen in Australia (other than a non-citizen mentioned in paragraph
(a)) in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as
a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the non-citizen being removed from
Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that the non-citizen will
suffer significant harm; or
(b) a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (a); and
(ii) holds a protection visa of the same class as that applied for by the
applicant; or
(c) a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (aa); and
(ii) holds a protection visa of the same class as that applied for by the
(2A) A non‑citizen will suffer
significant harm
(a) the non‑citizen will be arbitrarily deprived of his or her life; or
(b) the death penalty will be carried out on the non‑citizen; or
(c) the non‑citizen will be subjected to torture; or
(d) the non‑citizen will be subjected to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment; or
(e) the non‑citizen will be subjected to degrading treatment or
punishment.
(2B) However, there is taken not to be a real risk that a non‑citizen
will suffer significant harm in a country if the Minister
is satisfied that:
(a) it would be reasonable for the non‑citizen to relocate to an area of
the country where there would not be a real risk that
the non‑citizen will
suffer significant harm; or
(b) the non‑citizen could obtain, from an authority of the country,
protection such that there would not be a real risk that
the non‑citizen
will suffer significant harm; or
(c) the real risk is one faced by the population of the country generally and is
not faced by the non‑citizen personally.
RTF format (387 KB)
Signed PDF/A format