Angre v Chief of Navy (No 3) [2017] ADFDAT 2 (27 March 2017)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Angre v Chief of Navy (No 3)
Appeal from:
General Court Martial
File number:
DFDAT 3 of 2015
TRACEY J (PRESIDENT), LOGAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND BRERETON (MEMBER) JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
application for extension of time to appeal –
application for leave to appeal against convictions by court martial –
whether convictions recorded following pleas of guilty
should be quashed –
whether a material irregularity in the course of the proceedings before the
court martial and substantial
miscarriage of justice under
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
(Cth) – where
convictions based on a plea bargain – whether inadequate advice from
counsel as to reasonably available
defences – whether prosecutorial
misconduct – whether absence of a genuine consciousness of guilt –
whether sentencing
by way of a Defence Force magistrate used as an inducement to
plead where that forum was not available as a matter of law
Legislation:
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) ss 8, 20(1)
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) sch 1
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Cases cited:
Angre v Chief of Navy (No 1)
[2016] ADFDAT
Angre v Chief of Navy
[2016] ADFDAT 2
Attorney-General’s Reference (No 6 of 1980)
[1981] EWCA Crim 1
[1981] QB 715
Chief of Navy v Angre
[2016] FCAFC 171
Coulter v The Queen
(1988) 164 CLR 350
– considered
Davis v Chief of Army
[2011] ADFDAT 1
Kumar v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 102
– considered
Lergesner v Carroll
[1991] 1 Qd R 206
McLean v The Queen
[2001] NSWCCA 58
(2001) 121 A Crim R 484
Maxwell v The Queen
(1996) 184 CLR 501 – cited
Meissner v The Queen
(1995) 184 CLR 132
[1992] 1 WLR 1006
[1993] UKHL 19
[1994] 1 AC 212
(1986) Cr App R 375
R v Percali
(1986) 42 SASR 46
– considered
Saik v The Queen
[2004] EWCA Crim 2936
Thompson v Chief of Navy
[2015] ADFDAT 1
– considered
Wilkes v The Queen
[2001] NSWCCA 97
(2001) 122 A Crim R 310
Williams v The Queen
A Crim R 213
Date of hearing:
12–16 December 2016
Melbourne (heard in Sydney)
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr AG Elliott and Mr PF Hogan
Solicitor for the Appellant:
The Benjamin Group Pty Ltd
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr AR Moses SC and Mr BD Kaplan
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 3 of 2015
ROHAN MARTIN ANGRE
CHIEF OF NAVY
TRACEY J (PRESIDENT), LOGAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND
BRERETON (MEMBER) JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
MELBOURNE (HEARD IN SYDNEY)
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
(1) The period within
which the appeal and application for leave to appeal herein must be lodged be
extended to the date on which
it was lodged.
(2) Leave to appeal, insofar as it is required, be granted.
(3) The appeal against the conviction on Charge 6 be dismissed.
(4) The appeal against the convictions on Charges 1 and 2 be allowed, and the
convictions quashed.
(5) There be a new trial of the appellant on Charges 1 and 2.
REASONS FOR
THE TRIBUNAL:
Seaman Rohan Angre and three other Able Seamen (Summers, Thompson, and Walter)
appeared before a General Court Martial in Sydney
in 2014 (“the first
Court Martial”). Each of the four accused faced charges arising out
of incidents which occurred
aboard HMAS Newcastle off the Western
Australian coast in August 2011. It was alleged that the four accused had set
upon another
sailor in some form of hazing ritual.
charge sheet contained eight charges, namely:
confinement (Charge 1) (against all four accused);
Engaging in an
act of indecency without consent (Charge 2) (against all four accused);
Engaging in
sexual intercourse without consent (Charge 3) (against all four accused);
Assault in a
service ship (Charge 4) (against Able Seaman Thompson);
abetting, counselling or procuring an assault in a service ship (Charge 5)
(against Able Seamen Angre, Summers, and Walter);
occasioning actual bodily harm (Charge 6) (against Able Seaman Angre);
Being knowingly
concerned in an assault occasioning actual bodily harm (Charge 7) (against Able
Seamen Thompson and Walter); and
Prejudicial
conduct (Charge 8) (against Able Seaman Summers).
arraignment on 16 September 2014, each of the accused pleaded not guilty to all
charges, save for Able Seaman Angre who pleaded
guilty to the count of assault
occasioning actual bodily harm (Charge 6), and not guilty to the other four
charges which he faced.
the trial had proceeded for some days and following discussions between the
prosecutor and counsel for Able Seamen Angre and
Thompson (each of whom was
separately represented), agreements were reached pursuant to which those two
accused agreed to plead guilty
to certain charges and the prosecution agreed not
to lead evidence in respect of the remaining charges. It will be necessary to
return, later in these reasons, to outline in greater detail what transpired
during these discussions and the outcome of them.
22 September 2014 (the sixth day of the trial) the prosecutor and counsel for
Able Seamen Angre and Thompson advised the Judge
Advocate of the first Court
Martial of their willingness to plead guilty to some of the charges. The
prosecutor advised the Judge
Advocate that, as a result of the agreement between
the parties, the prosecution would not lead any evidence against those accused
in respect of the remaining charges.
Judge Advocate was told that Able Seaman Angre had agreed to plead guilty to
Charges 1 and 2 but would maintain his not guilty
pleas in respect of the
other charges to which he had earlier pleaded not guilty. Able Seaman Thompson
had also agreed to change
his pleas to guilty in respect of Charges 1 and 2, and
in addition pleaded guilty to Charge 7.
Seamen Angre and Thompson were then re-arraigned before the panel and each
pleaded guilty, as foreshadowed, to those charges.
The pleas were accepted and
convictions recorded in respect of those charges. Verdicts of acquittal were
entered in respect of
each of the charges to which the two accused maintained
their pleas of not guilty.
trial proceeded against the other two accused, each of whom had pleaded not
guilty to all of the charges, and on 29 October 2014,
both were found not guilty
on all counts.
for Able Seamen Angre and Thompson thereupon applied to the Judge Advocate for
the first Court Martial to be dissolved. In
doing so, counsel repeated a
submission earlier made, namely that if the application was successful, it was
open to the Director
of Military Prosecutions to exercise a discretion to refer
the outstanding sentencing issues to a Defence Force Magistrate (“the
DFM”) for determination, and that it was the expectation of the two
accused that that would occur.
30 October 2014, the Judge Advocate directed the Registrar of Military Justice
(“the RMJ”) to dissolve the first Court
the same day, the Deputy RMJ advised the legal representatives of Able Seamen
Angre and Thompson that the first Court Martial had
formally been dissolved. He
also advised that the RMJ intended to convene another General Court Martial for
the purpose of determining
punishments for the offences for which they had been
convicted. Counsel sought to persuade the RMJ that a DFM should deal with
sentencing.
They were unsuccessful, and on 6 November 2014 the RMJ
provided them with detailed reasons for her decisions to refer both matters
second General Court Martial to deal with sentencing.
Seaman Thompson subsequently appealed to this Tribunal against his convictions.
His appeal was heard on 27 March 2015. On 22
May 2015 the Tribunal quashed his
convictions on the ground that he had changed his pleas because of wrong advice
from counsel that,
if he did so, he would be sentenced by a DFM rather than a
General Court Martial. This was found to have been a material irregularity
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
(“the DFDAA”): see
Thompson v Chief of Navy
A substantial miscarriage of justice was found to have resulted.
Seaman Angre did not immediately apply for leave to appeal against the
convictions recorded against him by the first Court Martial.
General Court Martial (“the second Court Martial”) was convened to
deal with the imposition of punishments for
the offences of which Able Seaman
Angre had been found guilty. Before the second Court Martial assembled, Able
Seaman Angre raised
and argued a series of preliminary legal points before the
Judge Advocate to that Court Martial. The preliminary hearing continued
some 11 sitting days and saw a number of witnesses called and examined.
substance, Able Seaman Angre mounted a collateral attack on his conviction on
the ground that a substantial miscarriage of justice
had occurred because, in
broad terms, his guilty pleas had been induced by various improprieties or
inadequacies attributed to his
legal advisers and by the alleged failure of the
Judge Advocate of the first Court Martial to ensure that he was fully apprised
the consequences of his pleas.
heard the evidence and arguments, the Judge Advocate of the second Court Martial
rejected Able Seaman Angre’s preliminary
objections.
Seaman Angre sought leave to appeal to this Tribunal out of time, relying on
errors said to have been made by the Judge Advocate
in his ruling in the second
Court Martial. When advised that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to
entertain such a proposed
appeal he sought and was granted leave to file an
amended notice of appeal, by which he sought leave to appeal out of time
his convictions by the first Court Martial. He did so on the grounds
that there had been a material irregularity in the proceedings
substantial miscarriage of justice had occurred. In particularising these
grounds, he substantially restated the allegations
which he had advanced before
the second Court Martial in respect of Charges 1 and 2. Additional grounds
were also advanced in respect
of the convictions on those charges and on Charge
6. We agreed to hear the application for leave to appeal and argument on the
of appeal together.
a pre-trial hearing we ordered that Able Seaman Angre be granted leave, to the
extent necessary, to adduce and rely on,
at the hearing of his leave application
and appeal grounds, the transcript of the oral evidence given and the exhibits
tendered before
the Judge Advocate to the second Court Martial and certain parts
of affidavits sworn for the purposes of the proceeding before the
second Court
Martial: see
Angre v Chief of Navy
[2016] ADFDAT 2
(appeal and related judicial review challenges subsequently dismissed:
of Navy v Angre
[2016] FCAFC 171).
Although some of the evidence given by
some witnesses (including Able Seaman Angre and his defending officers) who were
called before
the second Court Martial was contentious, counsel on both sides
expressly eschewed any desire, at the hearing before the Tribunal,
cross-examine any of those witnesses.
Chief of Navy opposed the grant of leave to appeal and submitted that, if leave
were granted, the appeal should be dismissed.
THE GUILTY PLEA TO CHARGE 6
sixth charge faced by Able Seaman Angre alleged that he had assaulted the
complainant by pouring a liquid substance over him thereby
occasioning actual
bodily harm. The charge was laid under
Crimes Act 1900
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(“the DFDA”).
appointed to represent Able Seaman Angre at the trial were (then) Major
Jonathan Hyde and Lieutenant Ross Glover RANR. They
met with Able Seaman
Angre on 15 September 2014. Lieutenant Glover took notes of what was said
during the conference. Those notes
are in point form and plainly do not provide
a transcript of all that passed between Able Seaman Angre and his counsel. That
the notes are generally consistent with Able Seaman Angre’s account
of what passed between them which he gave before the second
Court Martial. One
of the matters discussed during the conference was the prospect of Able Seaman
Angre being found guilty of Charge
notes record:
- likely that Pros will establish that, even on Rohan’s version he was
reckless as to whether the liquid would hurt him.
- that is all the prosecution need establish
- fact is, you were probably reckless as to whether it would hurt him.
- Rohan: I have admitted it
- You should think about pleading guilty
- Think will get credit from the panel for taking responsibility for what he
- Panel will be likely to look favourably on him standing up and taking
responsibility
- Don’t have to decide now but I recommend that’s what you do
- happy to do it
- what is penalty”
further conference took place before the trial resumed on the morning of 16
September 2014. Lieutenant Glover’s notes record
that Major Hyde
explained to Able Seaman Angre the effect of a plea of guilty to the sixth
charge. Major Hyde expressed the view
that the prosecution was likely to
succeed in securing a conviction on that charge and that, were he to plead
guilty, “Angre
will get some benefit from the plea in the eyes of the
panel.” The note then records that “Angre understands and willing
to plead guilty to that charge.”
THE PLEA NEGOTIATIONS
already noted, the decision by Able Seaman Angre to plead guilty to Charges 1
and 2 followed discussions between the prosecutor
and counsel representing him.
the Court had adjourned on 19 September 2014, his counsel met with the
prosecutor. Certain proposals were put by the prosecutor,
which were recorded
by defence counsel. Later in the afternoon, in the only documentary record of
the outcome of the discussions
which was in evidence, Major Hyde sent an e-mail
to the prosecutor which, with formal parts omitted and with errors as in the
“[W]e confirm that we are taking our clients
instruction in relation to an offer to resolve the subject proceedings in full
satisfaction of all charges:
our client enter a plea of guilty in relation to charge 1, 2 and 6 on the Charge
the basis of the plea in relation to Charge 1 and 2 is that our client was
knowingly concerned and not as a principal;
Charge 2 will be the subject of agreed facts namely the smearing of vegemite
between the buttocks of [the victim] as a form of
humiliation and that there is
no sexual connotation alleged with the conduct;
prosecution will agree (or not disagree) with a submission by us that a term of
imprisonment is not appropriate on the facts as
stated in respect of each and
all charges combined;
matter will be the subject of a plea before a DFM at the earliest opportunity
and will not be dealt with by the panel.
Please advise if any of the above is other than in
accordance with your understanding of our
discussions.”
No response was in evidence. Counsel for the Chief of Navy did not seek to
suggest that Major Hyde had not faithfully and accurately
reproduced the terms
of the proposed plea bargain.
on 19 September 2014 Major Hyde and Lieutenant Glover conferred with Able Seaman
Angre. Lieutenant Glover took notes of what
was said. The notes are again
terse but they are generally supportive of Able Seaman Angre and Major
Hyde’s account of what
passed between them.
much is clear. The elements of the plea bargain, proposed by the prosecutor,
were put to Able Seaman Angre. They included the
proposal that sentencing would
be undertaken by a DFM who would act on a statement of agreed facts. Major Hyde
had said that he
could not guarantee that a DFM would not sentence Able Seaman
Angre to some gaol time but expressed the view that there was a “very
chance of no jail”. He said that if he was in Able Seaman Angre’s
shoes he would “take it”. Later
in the conversation, Lieutenant
Glover’s notes record:
“JH – 6 months
JH dismissal/fine”
Able Seaman Angre understood “six months” to be a reference to the
maximum sentence which might be imposed by a DFM.
Major Hyde said that it was a
reference to the maximum sentence which Able Seaman Angre may expect to be
imposed for the offences
to which it was proposed he should plead
note then read, “RA will take deal”.
Saturday 20 September 2014, Major Hyde telephoned Able Seaman Angre, and
requested that Able Seaman Angre provide written instructions
in respect of the
proposed deal. Able Seaman Angre sent an e-mail to Major Hyde in which he said:
“Under your council [sic]
I accept the offer that was made on Friday by
the prosecution and understand it fully.”
the trial resumed, following an adjournment on the morning of 22 September 2014,
Able Seaman Angre signed an agreed statement
of facts. The circumstances in
which he did so were recorded in note form by Lieutenant Glover. Able Seaman
Angre conferred with
his counsel during an adjournment that morning. Major Hyde
gave him what was described as the “final agreed facts”.
draft of the statement was prepared by the prosecution and provided to Able
Seaman Angre’s counsel. They proposed
various amendments, most of which
were accepted by the prosecution. The note records that Able Seaman Angre
understood the document.
He commented:
“- not his recollection of things
- understands it
- going to use facts to sentence”
Major Hyde is then recorded as saying:
“... Probably DFM, no guarantees
- might be that go to a different panel
- very good chance no custodial sentence
- can’t guarantee it.
- this is best option to give best chance”
Able Seaman Angre said that he understood that there could be no guarantee but
said that he considered acceptance of the plea bargain
to be his “best
chance ... to avoid 6–10 years.” Major Hyde advised him that the
case against the other two accused
might limp on and “they might get
nothing”. Able Seaman Angre responded that those other accused had a
different case
to him. He then signed the agreed statement of facts in the
presence of his counsel.
paragraph of the statement read:
“By agreeing to these facts, the accused agrees to
plead guilty to the stated offences even if the current proceedings are
In making the above admissions, the accused agrees that he has done
so having taken legal advice from [defence]
counsel ...”
Major Hyde’s request, Able Seaman Angre signed a hand-written notation at
the end of one copy of the agreed statement—which
copy was retained by his
counsel and not provided to the prosecution nor to the Court Martial—which
“My counsel has explained to me that there is no
certainty that I will not get a custodial sentence when I am sentenced by either
another panel, this panel or a DFM.
It has been explained to me that the prospects of being dismissed from the Navy
are high following my sentencing.”
Seaman Angre gave evidence to the second Court Martial that he had agreed to
change his pleas to the first and second charges
because his defending officers
had advised him that it was a “good deal”. It removed the risk of a
long gaol term were
he to have been convicted on the third charge and he would
be sentenced, on the agreed statement of facts, by a DFM. Able Seaman
Angre said that, despite his view that the agreed statement of facts was
“bullshit” and “fictional”, he agreed
to sign it. This
was because he was advised by his defending officers that the statement was
“the best they [could] do”
and that he needed to agree to it in the
form presented to him in order to secure the deal. He felt he was
“getting railroaded”
but wanted to avoid a prison sentence.
that day, counsel appearing for Able Seamen Angre and Thompson advised the Judge
Advocate (in the absence of the panel) of the
change in their clients’
positions. One issue which arose in the course of the discussion between the
Judge Advocate and counsel
was how sentencing would proceed. It was proposed
that, after the Court Martial had completed the trial of the other two accused,
it would be dissolved and the task of sentencing Able Seamen Angre and
Thompson would be referred to a DFM. When this suggestion
was made, the Judge
Advocate responded to the defending officers as follows:
“... [S]ection 125 of the
Defence Force Discipline
provides that, at any time after a conviction, if I’m of the view
that, in the interests of justice, the court martial should
be dissolved, I can
ask the Registrar [of Military Justice] to dissolve the court martial, and a new
court martial, not a DFM, would
have to be convened for action under
the DFDA. When this trial against the others is completed, I guess that
you’d withdraw but we’d keep you in the loop
in relation to
transcript, to enable you to make any application at the end of the trial
– that I dissolve the court martial
after the hearing of the other
matters, depending on what the outcome is for the other
The Judge Advocate then asked, “[a]re you happy with that course?”
Major Hyde answered: “[f]or present purposes,
for Able Seaman Thompson did not respond.
statement of agreed facts was tendered and marked for identification. The copy
tendered did not bear the hand-written annotation
set out above at [32].
afterwards there was further discussion (in the absence of the panel but in the
presence of Able Seaman Angre and his counsel)
Seaman Thompson would be sentenced after he had changed his plea to guilty to
three of the charges.
The following exchange occurred between the Judge
Advocate and one of Able Seaman Thompson’s defence counsel:
“DEFENDING OFFICER NASH: I do feel I need to put
this on the record though. When we make that application we are of the
understanding
that the matter goes back to DMP [Director of Military
Prosecutions] and DMP can refer it to a Defence Force magistrate.
JUDGE ADVOCATE: Once it’s dissolved, it has to go back to the DMP.
DEFENDING OFFICER NASH: DMP, which would have the capacity to refer it to a
Defence Force magistrate, if they so chose. That’s
our understanding.
JUDGE ADVOCATE: It’s a matter for the DMP, yes.
DEFENDING OFFICER NASH: That’s our expectation, if I can say that. I
appreciate at the end of the day it’s your decision
whether or not to
dissolve the panel.
JUDGE ADVOCATE: Yes, but I can deal with that application. I understand the
issues involved.
DEFENDING OFFICER NASH: Thank you.”
trial then proceeded against the other two accused.
EXTENSION OF TIME TO APPEAL
essential reason why the appeal was brought out of time is that Able Seaman
Angre, instead of filing a timely appeal, applied
before the Chief Judge
Advocate, as Judge Advocate of the second Court Martial (convened under
of the DFDA for the purpose of taking action under
in relation to Able
Seaman Angre, following his convictions by the first Court Martial) to withdraw
his guilty pleas. It is usually
reasonable for a party to exhaust his or her
remedies at first instance before resorting to an appeal, and this case is no
As soon as the application before the Chief Judge Advocate was
resolved adversely to him, Able Seaman Angre filed an
appeal—notwithstanding
that it was initially misconceived, in that it
sought to rely upon errors allegedly made in the course of the Chief Judge
decision to dismiss his application to withdraw his plea,
whereas it ought to have been (as it now is) brought as an appeal from
original conviction by the first Court Martial.
was clear to the prosecution at least from 18 March 2015 (when Able Seaman Angre
notified the RMJ of his application to withdraw
his plea) that Able Seaman
Angre was seeking to withdraw his plea and overturn the convictions.
No prejudice to the Chief of Navy
could be, or has been, suggested to arise
from the delay in the formal institution of the appeal. The Chief of Navy
robustly contested
the application before the Chief Judge Advocate in respect of
withdrawal of the plea. Ultimately, the Chief of Navy did not oppose
(although he did not consent to) an extension.
for the appeal should be extended up to the date upon which the appeal was
LEAVE TO APPEAL
to appeal to the Tribunal is required, except on a question of law: see DFDAA,
The purpose of a requirement for leave to appeal is generally to
serve as a filter on unmeritorious or trifling appeals, so as to
restrict the
appeal procedure to appropriate matters and thereby promote the efficiency of
the Tribunal’s appeal procedures:
Coulter v The Queen
at 359. Most principles concerning leave to appeal have been developed
in the context of interlocutory appeals in civil matters,
and considerable
caution is required in their application in the present context of appeals from
final convictions in quasicriminal
matters, where, as Deane and Gaudron JJ
observed in
“In a case such as the present where the
application for leave to appeal was from a criminal conviction or information to
first court of appeal exercising general supervisory appellate jurisdiction,
the requirement of leave effectively represents no more
than a means of
efficiently disposing of prospective appeals which would obviously fail since it
is difficult to envisage circumstances
where a competent application for leave
to appeal to such a court could properly be refused in a case where the
conviction should
be set aside if leave were to be granted and the appeal were
to proceed to a full hearing.”
other words, leave would not be refused in a criminal appeal if it appeared to
the tribunal that there had been a miscarriage of
justice warranting the
quashing of a conviction. An equivalent approach should apply in this
is not an appeal which would obviously fail.
Chief of Navy argued that leave should be refused having regard to the
collateral proceeding before the Chief Judge Advocate involving
an application
to withdraw the plea. The Tribunal has already held that bringing this appeal
after making such an application is
not an abuse of process, although indicating
that it might be relevant to the grant of leave to appeal:
Angre v Chief of
Navy (No 1)
[2016] ADFDAT 1
. However, as indicated in that
decision, a party is not to be criticised for exhausting available remedies at
first instance before
embarking on an appeal:
Angre (No 1)
at [21], [23].
And, having exhausted those remedies, it is perfectly permissible to exercise a
right of appeal given by law for the
benefit of convicted persons to enable the
correction of error, unless some election between inconsistent rights is
involved. While
supervisory courts have refused to entertain applications for
judicial review where there is also a right of appeal (see the discussion
Angre (No 1)
at [17]–[20]), that is because the right of appeal is
regarded as a superior remedy. An application at first instance to set
judgment, or to withdraw a plea, is not a superior alternative remedy to a right
of appeal. The circumstance that Able Seaman
Angre unsuccessfully applied at
first instance to withdraw his plea does not count against his exercise of the
right of appeal which
the law gives him to this Tribunal.
to appeal should be granted.
gravamen of Able Seaman Angre’s argument in respect of Charge 6 was that
he pleaded guilty: (1) upon advice of his counsel,
which was allegedly
inadequate because it did not take into account reasonably available defences
that: (a) the victim consented
to the alleged assault; and (b) he was not
reckless as to the physical element of result, being actual bodily harm, because
his counsel
did not advert to the possibility; and (2) reinforced by the
impression that he was being “fitted up” by alleged prosecutorial
misconduct.
argument that the alleged “prosecutorial misconduct” influenced the
plea to Charge 6 should be rejected. There is
no hint in the contemporaneous
notes of Lieutenant Glover of any reference to this as a factor in the
discussions that presaged the
plea. Moreover, concurrently with his
instructions to plead guilty to Charge 6, Able Seaman Angre gave firm and clear
instructions
for cross-examination of the victim in connection with the
remaining counts, and even days later, when the notion of a plea bargain
respect of the remaining counts was first raised, Able Seaman Angre was adamant
that he would not plead guilty to anything that
he had not done. Rather, the
surrounding discussions indicate that the plea to Charge 6 was seen and
understood by him as a sound
tactical move which involved acknowledging in front
of the panel responsibility for what he admittedly had done, thereby enhancing
the credibility of his denials of what he had not done.
is true that Major Hyde does not appear to have referred in his discussions with
Able Seaman Angre to any potential defence of
consent. It is doubtful that, at
common law, consent is a defence to a charge of assault where actual bodily harm
is intended or
Attorney-General’s Reference (No 6 of 1980)
[1981] EWCA Crim 1
[1981] QB 715
[1993] UKHL 19
[1994] 1 AC 212
Davis v Chief of Army
[2011] ADFDAT 1
(1986) Cr App R 375
[1992] 1 WLR 1006. (The
position is different in the Code States,
where the statutory definition of assault involves an absence of consent: cf
Lergesner v Carroll
[1991] 1 Qd R 206.)
In any event, mere failure by
defence counsel to refer to every potential defence in the course of giving
advice to a client does
not necessarily give rise to a miscarriage of justice.
In this case, any such irregularity would be immaterial: first, because there
no hint in the available records of Able Seaman Angre’s instructions that
it would or could be suggested that the victim
had consented to the
administration of the concoction (if there were, one might have expected to see
a protest to the effect of,
“But he agreed to it”); and secondly,
because any defect in the advice was cured by the Judge Advocate in her summary
of the elements to Able Seaman Angre when he indicated his intention to plead
guilty, which referred to the absence of consent as
an element. Able Seaman
Angre acknowledged that he understood that summary.
is also true that the Judge Advocate did not, in that summary of the elements,
refer to any fault element (relevantly, recklessness)
related to the physical
element of result—namely actual bodily harm. Major Hyde’s
recollection, as he recounted it to
the Chief Judge Advocate of the second Court
Martial, was that he told Able Seaman Angre that “by not knowing what was
concoction and pouring it about the head and neck of [the complainant],
he was reckless as to whether by that conduct he was applying
force to [the
complainant]”. This, of course, does not refer to the relevant result,
being actual bodily harm, and if there
were a fault element as to result, it may
be doubted that mere absence of knowledge of the contents of the concoction
would amount
to recklessness; rather, the potential source for such a fault
element—s 20(1) of the
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT)—requires
awareness of a substantial risk that the result will happen and requires that it
be unjustifiable, in the circumstances
known to the accused, to take the risk.
any irregularity along these lines would also be immaterial, because there is no
fault element associated with this physical
element of result. The DFDA
does not make the provisions of the
Criminal Code
in respect of principles of criminal responsibility applicable
to the law in force in the Jervis Bay Territory for the purposes of
determining
whether an offence against s 61 has been committed
(DFDA s 61(6)), and s 8 of the
Criminal Code 2002
exempts, until 1 July 2017, from the application of the equivalent principles of
criminal responsibility contained in that
an offence that was in
force before 1 January 2003 (a “pre-2003 offence”). The offence of
assault occasioning actual
bodily harm contained in
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) is a “pre-2003 offence”:
Chief of Army
[2011] ADFDAT 1
. Thus, common law principles of
criminal responsibility apply, and at common law there is no requirement to
prove a fault element
in respect of the infliction of actual bodily harm, as
distinct from the assault itself:
Coulter v The Queen
(1988) 164 CLR
at 354, 364;
Williams v The Queen
A Crim R 213
R v Percali
(1986) 42 SASR 46.
The position was stated in
by King CJ in the following terms (at
“In these circumstances this Court, in my opinion,
should adhere to the law as it has always been understood, namely, that the
mental element of this crime consists in the intention to apply unlawful force,
that is to say, commit an assault, but that it is
not necessary for the
prosecution to establish that the offender intends to occasion actual bodily
harm. The test as to whether
bodily harm has been occasioned by the assault is,
in my view, on the established principles, entirely
The description of recklessness that Major Hyde recalled having given was
consistent with this common law position. What was required
for the prosecution
to prove was that Able Seaman Angre either intentionally or recklessly
applied force. An admission by Able Seaman
Angre that he (deliberately,
evidently) poured the concoction over the complainant’s head would satisfy
that element.
Accordingly,
in respect of Charge 6, there was no operative material deficiency, either in
the advice Able Seaman Angre received from
his counsel, or in the explanation
provided by the Judge Advocate. Able Seaman Angre’s plea of guilty to
Charge 6 was a genuine
acknowledgement of guilt for an offence, all the elements
of which he had admitted in his record of interview, given with a view
securing tactical advantages.
respect of Able Seaman Angre’s conviction on Charge 6, the appeal should
be dismissed.
Charges 1 and 2
respect of Charges 1 and 2, the essence of Able Seaman Angre’s complaint
is that it would be a miscarriage of justice to
hold him to the guilty pleas
upon which he was convicted by the first Court Martial, when it was not a
manifestation of a genuine
consciousness of guilt, but was entered only as part
of a plea bargain, in order to avoid the risk of a substantial sentence on
3 (sexual intercourse without consent, which offence he also denied), one
of the inducements for and benefits of which was that he
would be sentenced by a
DFM and not by a Court Martial, which benefit was in truth never available to
, the Tribunal allowed an appeal by one of Able Seaman
Angre’s co-accused who had also pleaded guilty on the basis that he would
be sentenced by a DFM. With reference (at [28]) to the judgment of Brennan,
Toohey and McHugh JJ in
Meissner v The Queen
(1995) 184 CLR 132
141–2), and other cases there mentioned, the Tribunal summarised relevant
principles concerning the quashing of a conviction
following a plea of guilty,
including: (1) that a guilty plea may be set aside as a miscarriage of justice
where it was not entered
in the exercise of a free choice in the interests of
the person entering the plea; (2) that the appellant bore the onus of
establishing,
on the balance of probabilities, that a miscarriage had occurred,
and that a finding to that effect was not lightly to be made; but
miscarriages had been found to have occurred in a wide range of circumstances,
including where the plea was procured by
“pressure and threats” or
“mistake” (at [33], citing
Maxwell v The Queen
(1996) 184 CLR
501 at 510–11), or by inappropriate advice (at [35]–[36], referring
McLean v The Queen
[2001] NSWCCA 58
(2001) 121 A Crim R 484
[2001] NSWCCA 97
(2001) 122 A Crim R 310)
—although it may readily be accepted
that mere erroneous advice by defence counsel as to prospective penalty is
insufficient
to impugn the integrity of a plea of guilty (
Saik v The Queen
[2004] EWCA Crim 2936
). To that catalogue of vitiating factors can
be added “improper inducement” and “misrepresentation”,
mentioned by the Victorian Court of Appeal in
Kumar v The Queen
, in summarising the position that fell from cases such as
“(a) A true admission of guilt of an offence means
an admission freely made of an offence of which the accused is truly guilty.
(b) An admission of guilt is not freely made and, therefore, is not a true
admission of guilt if the accused’s exercise of
free will to make or
withhold the admission is overborne or otherwise substantially compromised by
factors such as fraud, duress,
intimidation, improper inducement or
misrepresentation.
(c) Likewise, an admission of guilt, even if freely made, may not be a true
admission of guilt if it results from a mistake as to
the nature of the
admission, including without limitation, a mistake as to the nature of the
offence admitted.
(d) If, however, an admission of guilt is freely made, the fact that it might
have been motivated by hope or expectation of forensic,
sentencing or other
technical advantage will not deprive it of the quality of a true admission of
guilt unless it be shown that the
accused did not intend thereby to accept guilt
for an offence of which he believed himself to be
plea bargain appears to have arisen as a result of an initial hint by the
prosecuting officer to the defending officer, following
which Major Hyde asked
Able Seaman Angre whether he wanted him to explore a deal with the prosecution,
to which Able Seaman Angre
responded, “Okay, but I’m not going to
plead guilty to something I didn’t do”. Having been approached by
Major Hyde, the prosecution then conveyed to the defending officers the terms it
was prepared to accept. Those terms have been set
out above (at [25]).
Hyde first confirmed that his understanding of those terms accorded with the
prosecution offer, then recommended acceptance
to Able Seaman Angre (essentially
on the basis that it was his best chance of avoiding a custodial sentence).
There is no doubt
that when first presented to Able Seaman Angre (on Friday, 19
September 2014), he was told that the proposed deal included that the
would be taken away from the court martial panel and would go to a DFM. This
was one of the terms which the prosecution had
proposed. There was discussion
as to the likely outcome before a DFM. Able Seaman Angre acknowledged that his
counsel could not
say that he definitely would not go to gaol, but Major Hyde
said that he thought he would be able to “stay out of gaol”.
is also no doubt that, in the course of the advice given to Able Seaman Angre
that afternoon, reference was made to six months’
imprisonment. Able
Seaman Angre says he was told that six months’ imprisonment was the
imposed by a DFM, whereas a court martial
could impose much more severe penalties. So far as we have been able to
ascertain, Able
Seaman Angre’s version on that point was not challenged in
his cross-examination in the proceedings before the Chief Judge
Advocate; in any
event the Tribunal was not taken to any cross-examination of him on that issue.
In his cross-examination, Major
Hyde maintained that he told Able Seaman
Angre only that six months’ imprisonment was the maximum he was
likely to receive,
and that this was unconnected to a DFM’s jurisdictional
limit, but applied regardless of whether he was sentenced by a DFM
addition to the evidence before the Chief Judge Advocate, evidence was adduced
before the Tribunal from Lieutenant Glover, who
confirmed that at some
stage—though he was not certain when—Able Seaman Angre was advised
that a DFM had much more restricted
sentencing powers than a General Court
Martial, including a maximum of six months’ imprisonment. This evidence
of Lieutenant
Glover was not challenged, the Chief of Navy not seeking to
cross-examine him before us, notwithstanding a clear indication from
Tribunal that it was open to do so. Given the unchallenged evidence of
Lieutenant Glover, the apparently unchallenged evidence
of Able Seaman Angre on
this point, the circumstance that Major Hyde’s version was at least
challenged, and the objective probabilities
associated with the
circumstances—namely: (1) that one obvious advantage of the matter going
to a DFM was the reduced range
of penalties available; and (2) that the six
months which was undoubtedly mentioned happened to coincide with the
maximum, would have been known to Major Hyde as the
should be accepted that Able Seaman Angre was advised that the
maximum sentence available to a DFM was six months’ imprisonment.
the contemporaneous file notes made by Lieutenant Glover, there does not appear
to have been any reference on 19 September 2014
to any possibility that the
matter would not go to a DFM if the plea bargain were accepted. Able Seaman
Angre gave instructions
to “do the deal”. He was in great fear of
going to gaol (his mother was a corrections officer), and he was concerned
the endeavours of counsel for other accused to exonerate them were having the
effect of implicating him. Major Hyde told him
to think about it over the
weekend, but in response to Major Hyde’s assessment that there was a risk
of the offer being withdrawn,
Able Seaman Angre gave formal instructions to
accept it on 20 September 2014.
court on Monday, 22 September 2014 (Day 6), the prosecution provided the defence
with a revised proposed statement of agreed
facts, which had been formulated
over the weekend. The matter was mentioned before the Judge Advocate at 0935,
and some discussion
ensued, in the course of which the Judge Advocate adverted
to it being a matter for the Director of Military Prosecutions
whether the task of sentencing would be referred to a DFM or
another court martial. At 0953 the matter was stood down, apparently
the prosecution to finalise the agreed facts with another of the accused, and to
enable Major Hyde to discuss and obtain
instructions on the proposed statement
of agreed facts.
1040, Major Hyde gave Able Seaman Angre the final version of the proposed
statement of agreed facts. Able Seaman Angre read it,
said he understood it,
and said that it did not reflect his recollection of things. At this point,
Major Hyde mentioned that the
matter would “probably” go to a DFM,
but this was not guaranteed; it “might be that [it would] go to a
panel”. He again said that there was a very good chance that
there would be no custodial sentence, though he could not guarantee
Seaman Angre signed the statement of agreed facts.
Major Hyde, or Able Seaman Angre under Major Hyde’s direction (this was
the subject of a dispute, which it is unnecessary
to resolve), then handwrote
the endorsement set out above (at [32]) on the defence copy of the statement.
This copy was not provided
to the prosecution or the Judge Advocate.
Seaman Angre signed the endorsement, at his counsel’s request. It is
clear that the endorsement was not part of the bargain
between the
parties—which remained that the matter would be referred to a DFM for
sentence—but was for the protection
of defence counsel. The main thrust
of the endorsement was directed to the possibility of a custodial sentence,
rather than to the
possibility of the matter not going to a DFM; this is
confirmed by Lieutenant Glover’s contemporaneous note:
“JH asked RA to make a note on our copy of
statement of agreed facts to the effect that no certainty that will not get a
sentence when sentenced by another panel, this panel or a DFM &
explained to him that the prospects of being dismissed from RAN
following sentencing.”
proceedings resumed before the Judge Advocate at 1106, when it was indicated
that Able Seaman Angre intended to plead guilty to
Charges 1 and 2. In the
course of discussion of the pleas and the effect of DFDA s 125, Major Hyde
confirmed his agreement with
counsel for Able Seaman Thompson, who, as
already noted, said:
“My reading of section 125(3) is that you would
discharge the panel and then it would be a matter for DMP as to whether another
panel – a convening order for another panel would be sought. And certainly
that is significant to both ABMT Angre and ABMT
Thompson, because we have been
working on the understanding that if this panel is discharged, which we think it
must be in relation
to our clients, that DMP will seek to bring these charges
before a Defence Force Magistrate by a subsequent proceeding, not another
I simply wanted to put that as our understanding as to how it would
yet further discussion, the following transpired:
“DEFENDING OFFICER HYDE: Just for the record, our
understanding is that if you were minded to dissolve this court - - -
JUDGE ADVOCATE: I’ve got no more control over what happens, it’s a
matter for the DMP.
DEFENDING OFFICER HYDE: That’s right. But our understanding is that it
will go back to the DMP and that he will exercise his
discretion to have the
matter put before a DFM for sentencing.”
important matters emerge.
first is that Able Seaman Angre never entertained a genuine consciousness of
guilt in respect of Charges 1 and 2. At all relevant
times (in his record of
interview, and in discussions with his counsel, even in settling the agreed
statement of facts), he protested
his innocence of those allegations. He
pleaded guilty to them only as part of a plea bargain, in order to avoid the
risk of a substantial
sentence on Charge 3 (sexual assault without
consent)—which offence he also denied.
second is that the prospect of referral of the proceedings to a DFM for
sentencing was a material element of the plea bargain.
This is confirmed by the
continued reference to a referral to a DFM in the course of the proceedings on
22 September 2014. Objectively,
the attractions were: (1) the limited
sentencing powers of a DFM; and (2) the appearance that a legally experienced
DFM would be
less likely than a court martial panel of general service officers
to be influenced against Able Seaman Angre by statements of policy,
such as that
made by the Vice Chief of the Defence Force (and former Chief of Navy) on the
eve of the first Court Martial, as to
the seriousness with which conduct of the
that the panel was being adversely influenced against him by alleged
prosecutorial misconduct (including the prosecutor’s opening)
and matters
raised in defence of other accused, there was attraction in removing the matter
from the particular panel in question.
Able Seaman Angre, after the plea and while the trial proceeded against two
co-accused, confirmed to his counsel that he was
happy with the decision he had
made, does not tell against this at all. It was only when his expectation of
referral to a DFM was
falsified that he had second thoughts, sought a second
opinion, and formed an intention to seek to withdraw his plea. That is not
not inconsistent with, but positively supportive of, the view that referral to a
DFM for sentencing was a material contributing
factor to his decision to plead
subjectively and objectively, therefore, the proposal that the matter would be
referred to a DFM for sentence was a material
contributing factor to Able Seaman
Angre’s plea. The proposed referral to a DFM was by no means the only
attraction for Able
Seaman Angre in the proposed bargain. But in terms of
relative importance, while it may well have been outweighed by the desire
avoid the risk of a sentence on the more serious charges, it was nonetheless an
essential element of the bargain, and a feature
that was intended to make the
bargain attractive to Able Seaman Angre. It is properly to be inferred that the
prospect of having
the matter referred to a DFM for sentence was intended to
operate as an inducement to plead guilty; at least it was calculated to
It was one of the factors which together induced him to plead guilty to an
offence when he had no genuine consciousness of
guilt of that offence. And it
was one of the benefits for which he bargained in the agreement which produced
his plea of guilty.
third matter is that, notwithstanding the “endorsement” on the
defence copy of the statement, the prospect of the
matter not going to a DFM for
sentencing was then seen as merely hypothetical. It was raised with Able Seaman
Angre at the last
minute, as a result of the Judge Advocate’s indication
that it was not in her power, but in the power of the DMP, to determine
sentencing forum. But the prosecution represented the office—the
DMP—in whom any relevant discretion was believed
to reside, and it was the
prosecution, on the DMP’s instructions, who had proposed the terms of the
plea bargain, including
referral to a DFM. No-one—prosecution, defence or
Judge Advocate—appreciated or suggested that referral to a DFM was
a legal impossibility—and thus that it was impossible that Able Seaman
Angre would receive one of the benefits he was
given to expect would flow from
this case, it was at least represented to Able Seaman Angre that it was possible
for the matter to be referred to a DFM for sentencing,
and indeed that in all
probability that is what would happen. That was a misrepresentation, albeit an
innocent one. Alternatively,
a fundamental assumption on which the plea was
based—one to which the prosecution had materially contributed—was
Put differently, a benefit which was held out to Able Seaman Angre
in return for his plea was illusory. In each of those ways,
his plea was not,
in the relevant sense, freely made.
Chief of Navy submitted that this case was to be distinguished from
for five reasons.
it was said that unlike the
appellant in
Able Seaman Angre instructed his defending
officer to approach the prosecution to explore the possibility of a plea deal.
an oversimplification of the course of events, which has been described
above. The most important fact in this respect is that it
was the prosecution
who proposed the terms of the bargain, including referral to a DFM.
great emphasis was placed on the handwritten endorsement
signed by Able Seaman Angre on the defence copy of the statement of agreed
facts. However, as has been explained, it was a last-minute inclusion, for the
protection of defence counsel, and formed no part
inter-partes
bargain; moreover, its focus was the possibility of some custodial sentence,
rather than the sentencing forum, and the possibility
of the forum being other
than a DFM was then hypothetical rather than real.
it was argued that, unlike Able Seaman Thompson, Able Seaman Angre had been
told and understood that there was a prospect of his being
sentenced by another
panel and not by a DFM, and therefore Able Seaman Angre was not induced by the
expectation of being sentenced
by a DFM rather than a court martial. That
submission should not be accepted. True it is that Able Seaman Angre accepted
had been told by Major Hyde that there was no guarantee of being
sentenced by a DFM, and also that he knew that there was a possibility
being sentenced by a General Court Martial. However, before the Chief Judge
Advocate, it was put to Able Seaman Angre in
cross-examination, and he accepted,
that it remained his understanding that there was a “high
possibility” of being sentenced
by a DFM. Inducement by a “high
possibility” of sentencing by a DFM, rather than a perceived certainty
thereof, is not
a material point of distinction from
where in reality there was as a matter of law
no such possibility
the submission was that Able Seaman Angre was not induced materially or at all
by the prospect of sentencing by a DFM, that submission
would be contrary to
Able Seaman Angre’s evidence tendered in this Tribunal, which went
directly to that point. That evidence,
in [4] of Able Seaman Angre’s
affidavit of 5 June 2015, was not the subject of cross-examination in this
Tribunal. It was,
however, tested in cross-examination before the Chief Judge
Advocate, where he accepted that he wanted to avoid jail time “at
costs”, and that the avoidance of jail time by entry into a plea proposal
(thereby avoiding the more serious charge) was
a “contributing
factor” in his decision to plead guilty to Charges 1 and 2, and also gave
this evidence:
“The reason you wanted to get into this plea deal
was that you wanted to avoid a possibility that you could go to jail for a
lengthy period of time. Correct? Yes?---Yes, just add onto - - -
Okay?---Yes. I was worried about going to jail for something I did not do, sir,
I was petrified of it, yes, sir.”
It is fair to say that, in cross-examination, Able Seaman Angre departed to at
least some degree from the proposition in his affidavit
that sentencing by a DMP
was “the most significant and compelling factor” in inducing him to
change his pleas. However,
he also maintained (and was not seriously challenged
on this issue) that sentencing by a DFM was a contributing and indeed a major
consideration in making his decision. Moreover, as has already been observed,
the proposal that he be sentenced by a DFM was calculated
if not intended to
induce his guilty plea.
and relatedly, it was put that Able Seaman Angre was desperate to avoid
imprisonment on the more serious charge, and that that was
the motivating factor
for his plea. No doubt it was a significant and possibly dominant motivating
factor, but it was not the only
one. It suffices that the proposal that he
would be sentenced by a DFM was a contributing factor. Further and logically,
such desperation
only reinforced the attractiveness of the prospect of
sentencing by a DFM.
it was said that no representations were
made to Able Seaman Angre by his defending officer as to the limited sentencing
a DFM. But for reasons explained above, it should be concluded that
such a representation was made.
is of significance that this was not a unilateral plea, but an induced plea,
founded on a bilateral bargain. That such a bargain
may not give rise to
legally enforceable contractual rights does not detract from the significance of
its character for the purpose
of judging whether it is unjust to hold Able
Seaman Angre to his plea. There is a radical difference between incorrect
defence counsel as to likely penalty on the one hand and, on the
other, falsification of an agreed term of a plea bargain, the effect
of which is
to deprive the accused of a material benefit which the bargain was intended to
provide. And that is all the more so
where, as here, the plea was not a
manifestation of a genuine consciousness of guilt, but was entered only because
of the collateral
benefits which were not only expected, but proposed by the
prosecution. Able Seaman Angre surrendered his valuable and intrinsic
put the prosecution to strict proof, in a case where he did not entertain a
genuine consciousness of guilt, in return for
a number of benefits. Yet one of
the benefits for which he bargained and which induced his plea was in truth
never available to
him and would be denied him. To hold Able Seaman Angre to a
plea of guilty entered on that basis, when he had no genuine consciousness
guilt, would be a grave miscarriage of justice.
(a) in the notice of appeal is therefore established, and the appeal succeeds in
respect of the convictions on Charges 1 and
was not in dispute that, in the event that the appeal were to succeed, the
proper order was one pursuant to DFDAA
for a new trial. Whether, having
regard to the outcome of the trial that proceeded against two of the co-accused,
the surviving
plea of guilty in respect of Charge 6, and the protracted
proceedings in which Able Seaman Angre has been entwined since
2014—including
the original Court Martial, the proceedings before the
Chief Judge Advocate (which occupied 11 days), the interlocutory applications
this Tribunal, the Chief of Navy’s appeal to the Full Federal Court, and
ultimately the hearing of this appeal (over four
days)—his involvement as
an Able Seaman five years ago in the events of the so-called “Last Night
at Sea” ceremony
in 2011 is such as to justify his being put on trial
again, is a matter for the discretion of the DMP.
I certify that the preceding eighty (80)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment herein of the
Justices Tracey (President), Logan (Deputy President) and
Dated: 27 March 2017
RTF format (476 KB)
Signed PDF/A format