D20-21\090 [2020] SCTA 198 (26 November 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\090
FILE NUMBER : 18-1339
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
JOINED PARTY
The Insurer
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Employer
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 21 September 2020 before:
Jocelyn Furlan,
DECISIONS UNDER REVIEW
decisions under review are:
that of the
Trustee to decline to provide default insurance cover to the Complainant from
the date she commenced employment on a fixed
term contract of employment, or at
least from the date she became a permanent employee; and
that of the
Insurer to agree with the Trustee.
Trustee notified the Complainant of its decision by letter dated 29 September
2017 and, following review, by letter dated 22 December
Insurer notified the Tribunal that eligibility for insurance cover is determined
when a member first joins the Fund.
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal affirms the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
Complainant sought leave to be represented by a lawyer. Pursuant to s23 of the
Complaints Act the Tribunal considered and granted
the request.
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
submission was received from the Complainant.
Trustee declined to provide a submission, choosing instead to rely on
information previously submitted to the Tribunal. The Insurer
did not respond
to the Tribunal’s invitation.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. The Trustee and the
Insurer responded.
Tribunal then received a further response from the Complainant.
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant is currently aged 34 years.
commenced employment as a casual employee with the Employer in 2013 and joined
the Fund. As a casual employee she was not eligible
for automatic insurance.
The Trustee sent her correspondence welcoming her to the Fund, advising her that
she had no insurance and
notifying her that she could apply for insurance. The
Complainant did not opt in for cover.
Complainant moved from being a casual employee to being on a fixed term contract
on 24 February 2014 and then commenced in a permanent
role from 29 January 2015,
all with the Employer.
Employer did not terminate her casual record with the Fund. The Fund’s
superannuation system does not recognise two active
payroll numbers at the same
time. Accordingly, if the Employer leaves the casual record open it does not
terminate on the system
so the new employment relationship is not
recognised.
even though the Complainant had unbroken service with the Employer and moved
from casual to fixed term to permanent employment
without a break, she did not
receive automatic cover from the Fund.
August 2016 the Complainant was diagnosed with breast cancer. She contacted the
Trustee to enquire about making a claim for Salary
Continuance Insurance (SCI)
from the Fund and was advised that she did not have insurance.
Complainant sought a review and the Trustee maintained its position that the
Complainant did not have insurance cover.
Complainant made a complaint that the decision of the Trustee was
or unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this determination.
resolution sought by the Complainant is for the SCI cover to be applied to her
account effective from 24 February 2014 with premiums
backdated to this
Benefit in dispute
to the Trustee, if the Complainant had received automatic cover when she
commenced non-casual employment in February 2014
she would have Death and Total
and Permanent Disablement cover of $200,000 and SCI cover of $2,400 per month
with a 90 day waiting
Events not in dispute:
− the Complainant’s date of birth.
− the Complainant commenced employment with the
Employer as a casual employee.
− the Fund received the first SG contribution from
the Employer in respect of the Complainant.
− the Trustee issued the Complainant with a
Welcome letter that outlined that she did not have any insurance cover in the
because the Employer advised the Trustee that she was employed or initially
employed on a casual basis.
The letter advised her that she could apply to have insurance with the Fund.
− the Complainant commenced a fixed term
contract commenced with the Employer and her employment status changed from
to non-casual.
− the Complainant
became a permanent employee with the Employer working in a permanent role.
Around August 2016
Complainant was diagnosed with breast cancer.
the Complainant contacted the Fund
seeking confirmation of her insurance cover to make a claim for SCI benefits and
was advised that
she did not have any cover.
the date of an email from the Employer
to the Insurance Underwriting department of the Fund confirming that the
Complainant was made
permanent on 30 January 2015, and that previous to that she
was on fixed term contracts from 7 August 2014
to 30 January
January 2017
the Complainant requested a review of her
the date of an internal email, which
relevantly stated:
I have checked the payroll file we received for 13/03/2014 and the non-casual
payroll number is there [number] and shows she started
24/02/2014...
the date of a further internal email to
the Fund’s Insurance Underwriting area stating:
Apologies, the insurance should be effective the date she became a Permanent
Employee or Contractor working at least the minimum FTE.
From the below...this
should still be the 24 Feb 14.
the Trustee contacted the Complainant
and advised her that she had no insurance because she was initially employed on
a casual basis
and had not opted in for cover.
− the Complainant complained to the Trustee about
not being provided with SCI cover from 29 January 2015.
− the Trustee notified the Complainant of its
decision that she was not entitled to insurance cover.
− the Trustee notified the Complainant of its
review decision.
− the Complainant requested an independent
review of her complaint.
− the Trustee notified the Complainant of its
review decision.
January 2018
the Complainant returned to work.
− the Complainant wrote to the Trustee in response
to its letter of 22 December 2017 seeking a review of her SCI claim.
− the date the Tribunal received the
Complainant’s complaint.
− the Trustee notified the Complainant that it
maintained its position that she was not eligible for automatic insurance at
time she commenced employment with the Employer on a casual basis.
governing rules of the Fund are established by regulations made under
legislation. The Tribunal considers that the Regulations
relevant to the
complaint are those in effect on the date the Complainant commenced employment
(i.e. 5 March 2013), being the Regulations
as amended up to and including the
amendment dated 8 June 2012 (the Rules).
Rules relevant to the complaint are:
111A. Terms used
In this Division –
opt-in notice
means a notice given under regulation 111E.
Subdivision 2 — Covered [Fund] Members
111B. Covered [Fund] Members, who are automatically
Subject to regulation 111C(1), every person who becomes a [Fund] Member on or
after the coming into operation of [the Regulations
made in 2010] is a covered
[Fund] Member.
111C. Covered [Fund] Member, [Trustee] may give certain people option to
(1) [The Trustee] may determine that any person, or any member of a specified
class of persons, who becomes a [Fund] Member on or
after the coming into
operation of [the Regulations made in 2010] is not a covered [Fund] Member
unless, within such time of becoming
a [Fund] Member as [the Trustee] may
specify, that person opts to become a covered [Fund] Member.
(2) An option under subregulation (1) is to be exercised by notice in writing
to [the Trustee], received by [the Trustee] before the
expiry of the specified
(3) When a notice under subregulation (2) is received by [the Trustee] before
the expiry of the specified time, the person exercising
the option becomes a
covered [Fund] Member.
111E. Covered [Fund] Member, certain people may opt to become
(1) A [Fund] Member who is not a covered [Fund] Super Member and who is not
entitled to become a covered [Fund] Super Member under
regulation 111B may at
any time opt to become a covered [Fund] Member, subject to the provisions of
this regulation and of regulation
insurance for covered [Fund] Members, [Trustee’s] functions as to
(1) Subject to subregulation (2) [the Trustee] must provide life
insurance for each covered [Fund] Member —
(a) who is an eligible statutory [Fund] Member; or
(b) who applies to have life insurance cover.
(2) [The Trustee] is not required to provide life insurance for a covered
[Fund] Member if—
(a) under the terms of the life insurance the Member is not eligible to be
covered; or
(b) the Member has cancelled his or her life insurance cover; or
(c) the Member's cover has ceased or been terminated in accordance with the
terms of the life insurance.
(3) An application by a covered [Fund] Member –
(a) to be covered by the life insurance; or
(b) to cancel his or her life insurance cover,
is to be made to [the Trustee] in accordance with the terms of the life
insurance and salary continuance insurance, [Trustee] may provide
[The Trustee] may provide either or both –
(a) total and permanent disability insurance; and
(b) salary continuance insurance,
for all covered GESB Super Members or such classes of those Members as the
Board considers appropriate.
of insurance provided under r. 111 or 112
(1) [The Trustee] must decide the terms of the life insurance
provided under regulation 111 and any insurance provided under regulation
(2) [The Trustee] may decide on different terms for different classes of
covered [Fund] Members.
(3) The terms of the insurance may include terms in relation to all or any of
the following-
(a) eligibility to be insured;
(b) levels of cover;
(c) requirements for changing the level of cover;
(d) benefits;
(e) information and documents to be given to and by [the Trustee];
(f) premiums to be paid by Members;
(g) claims procedures and evidentiary requirements;
(h) cessation, termination or cancellation of cover;
(i) procedural and administrative matters relating to the provision of the
(4) The terms of the insurance must include terms to the effect that a
covered [Fund] Member may choose not to be covered by the insurance.
(5) [The Trustee] may enter into one or more policies of insurance, including
policies of group life assurance, to provide some or
all of the insurance.
INSURANCE POLICY
Tribunal considers that the insurance policy relevant to the complaint is that
in force on the date when the Complainant commenced
employment, (i.e. 5 March
2013) being that executed by the Trustee and the Insurer, commencing on 21
November 2011 (the Policy).
Policy relevantly provides:
Categories of Membership
Category 1: Permanent Employees, Sessional Employees and Contractors
Category 2: Casual employees working at least the Standard FTE
Category 3: Casual employees working less than the Standard FTE
Eligibility for Cover
Permanent Employees, Contractors, Casual Employees and Sessional Employees
under age sixty-five (65) and in receipt of SG contributions.
Where an eligible employee has elected to join the Plan within one hundred
and twenty (120) days of the eligible employee commencing
employment with a
Participating Employer, cover will be provided from the date the Insured Member
commenced employment with a Participating
Employer subject to the required
premiums for cover being paid and the first SG contributions being received in
respect of that Insured
Member by the Plan within sixty (60) days of the
employee commencing employment with a Participating Employer. Where the first SG
contributions have been received in respect of that Insured Member by the Plan
between the sixty-first (61st) day and the one hundred
and twentieth (1201h) day
of the employee commencing employment with a Participating Employer, cover will
be provided to the Insured
Member from the date the first SG contributions are
received in respect of that Insured Member by the Plan.
[Not applicable]
An eligible employee may elect to be provided with cover
(“opt-in”) within ninety (90) days of the first SG contribution
being received by the Plan from a Participating Employer without Evidence of
Insurability being required. The eligible employee must
complete the relevant
form including an “At Work” declaration and the requested cover will
commence from the date the
Policy Owner accepts the application. The default
level of Income Protection cover will be subject to Limited Cover for the first
two (2) years and until such time as the Insured Member meets the Category 1 At
Work criteria for at least one (1) day after the
first two (2) years have
transpired.
Where an Insured Member’s application is declined by the Policy Owner
or if the request for cover is made outside of ninety
(90) days of the first SG
contribution being received by the Plan or where the Insured Member applies for
full cover whilst the two
(2) year Limited Cover period applies, cover can be
provided subject to Evidence of Insurability being submitted and accepted by
Commencement
Cover will commence for an employee on the date they commence employment with
a Participating Employer if the employee’s first
SG contributions are
received by the Plan within sixty (60) days of the employee commencing
employment with a Participating Employer.
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
main points made by the Complainant are as follows:
Under the terms
of the Policy, the Complainant should have been covered by SCI from the time she
became employed as a non-casual or
at the very least a permanent employee.
Trustee’s assertion that if she was initially employed on a casual basis
and was later made permanent or employed on a contact
she was not eligible for
automatic cover is not supported by the Policy.
In the section
dealing with Eligibility for Cover in the Policy there is provision for members,
recommencing employment with an employer,
being eligible for automatic
acceptance for SCI cover (on the basis that they have not previously opted out).
There is no reference
to ‘automatic acceptance’ only being
restricted to being available when an employee first commences employment with a
particular employer.
The contents of
the ‘Welcome Letter’ dated 26 April 2013 are entirely irrelevant and
have no bearing on the operation
or interpretation of the Policy.
The letter dated
29 September 2017 from the Trustee refers to what appears to be a host of
entirely irrelevant considerations (including
the contents of a welcome letter,
various telephone conversations, the Complainant’s previous status as a
casual employee etc.).
However, no mention is made to the actual terms of the
Policy as a basis for deciding the Complainant’s complaint.
The Complainant
This is illustrated in the letter dated 22 December 2017
where [the Trustee] make reference to parts of the policy document...which
to casual employees (even though I am a non-casual employee). This appears to be
directly at odds with advice they have previously
received internally from [the
Insurer]. I would question whether or not [the Trustee] is in fact acting in my
bests interests in
denying me income protection insurance, in circumstances
where the policy owner/insurer [the Insurer] has agreed that I should be
and has actually asked [the Trustee] to advise me of this.
recommenced separate and discrete and different periods of employment with the
Employer on a different basis.
automatic acceptance for SCI did not commence in her case was due to some
administrative glitch or error occasioned by
the Employer keeping open a
previous record of employment of her as a casual employee.
Complainant had been aware of the issues that would arise around her access to
SCI cover because she was initially engaged
with the Employer on a casual basis;
she would have opted in for the default cover.
Complainant’s workforce there is an understanding and an expectation that
permanent employees are entitled to automatic
insurance cover including SCI.
The level of
insurance cover is referenced to employment status. It is unjust that some
permanent employees are entitled to automatic
cover by virtue of their
permanency of employment and some employees are not entitled to automatic
insurance cover notwithstanding
their permanent employment. Such employees may
have been valuable employees of the Employer for many years but simply were not
to automatic insurance cover because they commenced as a casual
An email from
the Insurer dated 23 January 2017 stated that the Complainant’s cover
should be ‘switched on as at 24 February
2014, and premiums backdated to
this time’.
An internal
email from the Trustee dated 9 January 2017 noted that, had the Employer
terminated the casual record when she started
on the fixed term contract,
automatic insurance would have begun.
The Complainant
has been contributing SG contributions as a permanent employee since 2014 and
accordingly should be treated for all
purposes as a permanent employee since
Complainant’s representative stated:
Ultimately, the question is one of fairness. With a stroke of a
pen, [the Employer] could have terminated her initial casual status.
have, as she had not worked as a casual for years before contracting cancer in
inequitable that a permanent employee of many years does not receive the benefit
of automatic insurance cover whilst a permanent
employee of a matter of months
▪ In its supplementary submission, the Complainant’s representative advised the Tribunal as follows:
We have been advised by our client that the [relevant union] has
identified that many [Employer] employees, who had subsequently become
employees, were automatically provided with basic cover without their knowledge.
These are employees in the exact same circumstances of our client, [the
Complainant].
A post from [the Union] states that:
[The Trustee] said that they had identified ‘disadvantaged’
members who had become full-time employees and who didn’t
insurance and applied this insurance to their account.
Our client then checked her own position and found that she has fallen into
this category of persons and has now been signed up for
basic insurance
including SCI.
She cannot recall making any formal request nor signing any document to do
It is simply not equitable that [the Complainant] is now automatically signed
up to a plan including SCI as a result of her permanent
employment status but is
denied SCI notwithstanding her permanent employment status since 2014. The
position is arbitrary and unfair.
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
The Complainant
initially commenced employment on 5 March 2013 on a casual basis and then
reverted to permanent employment. In these
circumstances and based on the
Policy, she was correctly not provided with automatic insurance cover.
Despite the
Complainant having since been employed as a permanent part-time employee,
automatic insurance cover is not offered to
members who have commenced on a
casual basis and then moved to permanent employment.
Changes to the
employment status for a member employed with the same Participating Employer do
not trigger automatic insurance cover.
The Complainant
was not eligible to automatically receive insurance cover when she commenced
employment on a casual basis with the
Employer. Upon changing the status of her
employment with the same Employer, the Complainant was also correctly not issued
automatic insurance cover. Specifically, the Policy does not provide for
automatic insurance cover to apply to an existing member
when their employment
with the same employer changes from casual to non-casual.
The Complainant
received sufficient disclosure through the Welcome letter and member statements
to inform her that no insurance cover
was held and how she could apply to obtain
Each of the ten
member statements issued to the Complainant reflected that no insurance cover
was held for her.
Insurer’s comment in an internal email that the Complainant should be
covered for IP insurance was erroneous.
The Trustee is
required to act in accordance with its governing legislation and the relevant
Policy documents. The Policy clearly
states the eligibility criteria that must
be met for automatic cover and the Trustee confirms that the Complainant did not
criteria at the time she first commenced employment with the
The Trustee is
satisfied that it has acted in accordance with its governing legislation
relating to the criteria that must be met
for a member to be provided with
automatic insurance cover, and that it provided the Complainant with adequate
disclosure to inform
her that she held no cover.
The Trustee does
not reassess a member’s eligibility for basic insurance cover when members
change from casual to non-casual
employment with the same Participating
Employer. In these circumstances, if a member requires insurance cover, they
are required
to apply for cover.
provides Eligibility for Cover and categories of Membership that apply to
members of the Fund. The Complainant’s
employment status meant that she
fell within Category 3, where an eligible employee may elect to be provided with
cover on an opt-in
basis within 90 days of the first SG contribution being
received by the Fund from a Participating Employer.
The Trustee has
considered the Complainant’s complaint and the outcome she is seeking and
is of the view that adequate and timely
disclosure regarding the
Complainant’s insurance status was provided. The Trustee has correctly
followed its process regarding
automatic insurance cover. The
Complainant’s lack of insurance cover is due to the Complainant not
satisfying the eligibility
criteria for automatic insurance, and not taking the
appropriate actions within the requisite timeframe to opt-in to basic cover
The Insurer
main points made by the Insurer are as follows:
The Insurer did
not decide whether or not to provide the Complainant with SCI cover.
There never was
SCI cover in force with respect to the Complainant nor a corresponding claim.
To qualify for
re-assessment of eligibility for basic cover the Complainant would have had to
leave the participating employer. As
her employer has continually been the
Employer, eligibility was not re-assessed and she is not eligible for automatic
The Insurer
maintains that eligibility criteria for the insurance cover is determined when a
member first joins the Fund. As the
Complainant was a casual employee upon
joining the Fund in 2013 she is considered a Category 2 & 3 member of the
Policy for the
purpose of determining eligibility for cover.
Complainant’s employment circumstances changed and she obtained a
permanent role in August 2014
, she already was a member of the
Fund. As eligibility for default cover is determined when a member first joins
the Fund, her subsequent
switch to permanent employment had no bearing on her
entitlement for default cover.
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must determine whether the decisions
of the Trustee and the Insurer to decline to
provide default insurance cover to
the Complainant from the date she commenced employment on a fixed term contract
of employment,
or at least from the date she became a permanent employee, were
fair and reasonable in their operation in relation to the Complainant
circumstances.
issue is not what decisions the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decisions were fair
and reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the material it has
relied on has been provided to all Parties
is not in dispute that the Complainant first commenced employment with the
Employer as a casual employee and was not entitled to
default automatic
insurance cover at that time.
Tribunal sighted a Statement of Service, which stated that the Complainant was
employed on fixed term or permanent bases from
24 February 2014. The Tribunal
also sighted correspondence from a branch of the Employer certifying that the
Complainant was employed
as a permanent employee from 29 January 2015.
essence of the Complainant’s complaint is that the Policy and the
Trustee’s interpretation of it is unfair. The Complainant’s
submissions centred around the Trustee’s view that a member who commences
employment as a casual employee and later changes
the nature of their employment
to fixed term or permanent does not become entitled to default insurance cover
under the Policy.
the Tribunal may be sympathetic to the Complainant’s view that the terms
of the Policy may not operate fairly in relation
to employees whose employment
status changes during the course of unbroken employment, the Tribunal’s
role is not to opine
on the terms of the Policy generally. Rather, the role of
the Tribunal is to review the fairness and reasonableness of the Trustee’s
and Insurer’s decisions in respect of the Complainant i.e. whether their
decisions not to provide the Complainant with default
automatic insurance when
her employment status changed from casual to fixed term, and then to permanent,
were fair and reasonable
in the circumstances.
The Trustee’s decision
the Tribunal’s view the Trustee’s decision is fair and reasonable in
the circumstances for the following reasons:
Trustee’s disclosures to the Complainant about her insurance cover were
adequate and advised her that she did not have insurance.
The Welcome letter
sent to the Complainant on 26 April 2013 stated that she did not have any cover
because she was employed on a
casual basis and advised her that she could apply
for cover. The correspondence stated:
Note: if you were initially employed on a casual basis
and were later made permanent or employed on a contract, you are not eligible
for automatic cover.
In addition, benefit statements issued to her after her employment status
changed to fixed term and then permanent continued to show
that she had no
The Tribunal
agrees with the Trustee’s submission that it provided the Complainant with
adequate disclosure to inform her that
she had no insurance cover at the time
she joined the Fund and at all times thereafter.
There is nothing
in the terms of the Policy that entitles the Complainant to receive automatic
default cover on a change of employment.
The Policy is silent in relation to
changes in status of employment.
The Tribunal
noted that internal emails indicated that there was a view that the Complainant
became entitled to automatic cover when
her employment status changed. An
internal email from the Underwriting Department of the Fund dated 9 January 2017
If [the Employer] terminated the casual record when she started on
the fixed term contract then auto insurance would have begun...
[The Employer] has confirmed both a permanent and casual role are open at
same time however member has only been working in a permanent
role for some time
preceded by fixed term contracts.
The Trustee submitted that these emails were based on a misunderstanding of
the situation as it applied to the Complainant. The Tribunal
although these internal emails suggested that the Complainant might be entitled
to insurance cover as a result of her
change of employment status, this was
never communicated to her. The Complainant was not misled by the Trustee as to
her entitlements
such as to make the Trustee’s decision to decline to
provide that cover to her unfair or unreasonable.
In response to a
request from the Tribunal for any section in the Policy dealing with the
situation when a member moves from casual
employment (Category 2 & 3 under
the Policy) to permanent (Category 1), the Trustee responded that eligibility
criteria for insurance
cover is based on when a member first joins the Fund.
The Trustee further advised that the Policy does not outline that a reassessment
of a member’s eligibility for default levels of insurance cover is to be
undertaken when a member changes from casual to non-casual
employment with the
same participating employer. Accordingly, there was no entitlement to automatic
insurance under the Policy that
the Complainant did not receive.
The Insurer’s decision
relation to the Insurer’s decision to agree with the Trustee, in the
Tribunal’s view the decision was fair and reasonable
in the circumstances
because there are no provisions in the Policy which require the Insurer to
provide cover to a member whose employment
status changes. Further, the Insurer
has not provided any inaccurate disclosures to the Complainant.
the Tribunal notes the Complainant’s recent submission that the Trustee
appears to have changed its policy in relation
to members who change their
employment status without changing employers. This may address perceived
harshness of the Policy. In
the Tribunal’s view this action does not
affect the fairness and reasonableness of the Trustee’s and
decisions in relation to the Complainant.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decisions under review
if it is satisfied that the decisions, in their
operation in relation to the
Complainant, were fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons
stated above the Tribunal
is so satisfied.
Tribunal affirms the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer.
Jocelyn Furlan, Presiding Member
Date of Tribunal signature: 26 November 2020
RTF format (346 KB)
Signed PDF/A format