Wojewodzka & Ibrahimov (No 2) [2025] FedCFamC1A 192 (27 October 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Wojewodzka & Ibrahimov (No 2)
FedCFamC1A 192
Appeal from:
Wojewodzka & Ibrahimov
[2025] FCWA 119
Appeal number:
NAA 297 of 2025
File number:
PTW 1292 of 2018
Judgment of:
CAMPTON, CHRISTIE & SCHONELL JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PRACTICE AND
PROCEDURE – Where the appellant filed a Notice of a Constitutional Matter
pursuant to
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) the afternoon before
the hearing of the appeal – Where the appellant made an oral application
for an adjournment pending
notice being served on the
Attorneys-General – Where there is no matter involving the application or
interpretation of the
Constitution
raised in the appeal – Oral application
for an adjournment dismissed.
AND PROCEDURE – Where the appellant made an oral application to adduce
further affidavit evidence on appeal –
Where the further evidence does not
have any impact on the appeal – Oral application to adduce further
evidence on appeal dismissed.
PARENTING – Where the grounds of appeal are repetitive and conflate
disparate categories of asserted
error – Where masking dissatisfaction
with determinations as actual and apprehended bias has no value on appeal
complaints as to a failure to afford procedural fairness are
forlorn in circumstances where the appellant left the court shortly
trial commenced – Where the appellant complains that principles of res
judicata and issue estoppel on a determination
of an application for a Family
Violence Restraining Order in the Magistrates Court equate to findings in Pt VII
proceedings as to
an absence of family violence – Where asserted factual
errors are in reality a different view of the evidence – Where
complaint on appeal has merit – Appeal dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law Rules) 2021
(Cth) r 2.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Abduction
Judiciary Act
Cases cited:
Amrit Lai Narain v Parnell
[1986] FCA 89
(1986) 9 FCR
(1986) 20 A Crim R 417
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v C G Berbatis Holdings
(1999) 167 ALR 303
[1999] FCA 1151
Bennett and Bennett
(1991) FLC 92-191
[1990] FamCA 148
Caddy & Miller
(1986) FLC 91-720;
[1986] FamCA 36
(1998) 197 CLR 172;
[1998] HCA 67
Charisteas v Charisteas
(2021) 273 CLR 289
[2021] HCA 29
Cizek & Mihov
(2024) FLC 94-206
[2024] FedCFamC1A 151
Concrete Pty Ltd v Parramatta Design and Developments Pty Ltd
229 CLR 577
[2006] HCA 55
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Edwards v Noble
(1971) 125 CLR 296
[1971] HCA 54
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Kioa v West
(1985) 159 CLR 550
[1985] HCA 81
Line & Line
(1997) FLC 92-729
[1996] FamCA 145
Luck v Secretary, Dept of Human Services
[2017] FCA 540
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507;
[2001] HCA 17
Newett and Newett (No 2)
(2021) FLC 94-051
[2021] FedCFamC1A
Re Culleton
(2017) 340 ALR 550
[2017] HCA 3
Re Finlayson; Ex parte Finlayson
(1997) 72 ALJR 73
Robinson Helicopter Company Inc v McDermott
(2016) 331 ALR 550
[2016] HCA 22
Sun Alliance Insurance Ltd v Massoud
[1989] VicRp 2
[1989] VR 8
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
(2006) 228 CLR 152
[2006] HCA 63
Vakauta v Kelly
(1989) 167 CLR 568
[1989] HCA 44
Wojewodzka & Ibrahimov
[2025] FedCFamC1A 173
Xuarez and Vitela
[2017] FamCAFC 139
Yarrow & Yarrow
[2022] FedCFamC1A 135
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Heard in Perth, delivered in Sydney
The Applicant:
Litigant in person
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Ms Korzeniecka, Platinum Legal
Counsel for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Solicitor for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
PTW 1292 of 2018
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
MR WOJEWODZKA
MS IBRAHIMOV
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER
CAMPTON, CHRISTIE & SCHONELL JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
oral application of the appellant to adduce further evidence on the appeal is
appeal is dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Wojewodzka & Ibrahimov
has been approved pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
CAMPTON, CHRISTIE & SCHONELL JJ
way of a Notice of Appeal filed on 26 June 2025 as amended on 5 August 2025, Mr
Wojewodzka (“the father”) appeals from
final orders made by a judge
of the Family Court of Western Australia on 29 May 2025 regulating the parenting
of X born early 2017
(“the child”). Ms Ibrahimov (“the
mother”) and the Independent Children’s Lawyer (“the
oppose the appeal.
orders subject to challenge provide for the mother to have sole parental
responsibility for the child, for the child to live with
the mother and spend no
time or communicate with the father save for the provision of gifts and cards on
identified special occasions.
Injunctive orders were made restraining the father
from being within 50 metres of where the child lives or is educated. The mother
is permitted to travel with the child outside Australia without the
father’s consent. The child’s name was removed from
the Family Law
the reasons that follow, the appeal is dismissed.
A PRELIMINARY ISSUE
The father’s application for an adjournment of the
5 August 2025, the appeal was listed for hearing on 1 October 2025. On 19
September 2025, Austin J dismissed the father’s
oral application made that
day to adjourn the appeal (
Wojewodzka & Ibrahimov
[2025] FedCFamC1A
the hearing of the appeal, the father made a further oral application to adjourn
the appeal consequent to him filing on the prior
afternoon, 30 September 2025 at
3.57 pm AEST, a Notice of a Constitutional Matter pursuant to
Judiciary Act
(Cth) (“the
”). The father said that the
notice had not been served on the
Attorneys-General of the Commonwealth or any of the States or Territories. The
mother and the ICL
opposed the adjournment application.
enquiry of the father as to why he did not disclose his intention to file the
notice during the hearing of his prior adjournment
application, he said,
“there was no necessity [to do so] at the time”. He proffered no
explanation as to the reason he
chose to file it on the afternoon prior to the
hearing of the appeal.
father submitted that r 2.13 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Family Law Rules) 2021
(Cth) (“the Rules”) prescribed
that the filing of the s 78B notice directed that the hearing of the appeal
not proceed”. That submission is not accepted. The rule is
directed to the provision of written notice of the matter arising
Constitution
or involving its interpretation within the meaning of
Judiciary Act
being given to specified Attorneys-General. Engaging with the
legislation,
Judiciary Act
(1) Where a cause pending in a federal court including the High Court or in a
court of a State or Territory involves a matter arising
Constitution
or involving its interpretation, it is the duty of the court not to proceed in
the cause unless and until the court is satisfied
that notice of the cause,
specifying the nature of the matter has been given to the
Attorneys‑General of the Commonwealth and
of the States, and a reasonable
time has elapsed since the giving of the notice for consideration by the
Attorneys‑General,
of the question of intervention in the proceedings or
removal of the cause to the High Court.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), a court in which a cause referred to
in that subsection is pending:
(a) may adjourn the proceedings in the cause for such time as it thinks
necessary and may make such order as to costs in relation
to such an adjournment
as it thinks fit;
(b) may direct a party to give notice in accordance with that subsection;
(c) may continue to hear evidence and argument concerning matters severable
from any matter arising under the
Constitution
or involving its interpretation.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (1), a notice in respect of a cause:
(a) shall be taken to have been given to an Attorney‑General if steps
have been taken that, in the opinion of the court,
could reasonably be expected
to cause the matters to be notified to be brought to the attention of that
Attorney‑General; and
(b) is not required to be given to the Attorney‑General of the
Commonwealth if he or she or the Commonwealth is a party to
the cause and is not
required to be given to the Attorney‑General of a State if he or she or
the State is a party to the cause.
(4) The Attorney‑General may authorise the payment by the Commonwealth
to a party of an amount in respect of costs arising
out of the adjournment of a
cause by reason of this section.
(5) Nothing in subsection (1) prevents a court from proceeding without delay
to hear and determine proceedings, so far as they
relate to the grant of urgent
relief of an interlocutory nature, where the court thinks it necessary in the
interests of justice
s 78B notice filed by the father records complaints as to a denial of procedural
fairness; conspiracies involving delegated judicial
officers and others removing
documents from court files, judicial officers being aware and relying on
fabricated evidence in turn
being linked to judicial misbehaviour, compromised
information sharing between Family Violence and Child Protection systems, legal
representatives concealing and fabricating material tendered into evidence in
the primary proceeding, racial discrimination, and
a consideration as to whether
the principle of ‘res judicata’ has application for s 69ZX of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”), as it then was.
enquiry as to the essential constitutional ingredient raised in the appeal, the
father could not identify the section or part of
Constitution
enlivened by
the notice in the appeal. He later said that “Chapter III” and
” were relevant, without linking that part or section of the
Constitution
, or their interpretation, to the appeal. He said that it was
procedurally unfair and racially discriminatory for the appeal to proceed
because “all judicial officers must be impartial”. He also said,
albeit in less than unequivocal terms, that if he obtained
leave to adduce
further evidence on appeal by way of his affidavit filed on 17 September 2025,
alleged to have been removed from
the online court file, he may withdraw the s
78B notice.
Xuarez and Vitela
[2017] FamCAFC 139
the Full Court cited with approval
the decision of French J in
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v
C G Berbatis Holdings Pty Ltd
[1999] FCA 1151
(1999) 167 ALR 303:
...Concerning the obligation to adjourn, French J said:
78B does not impose on the court a duty not to proceed pending the issue of a
notice no matter how trivial, unarguable or
concluded the constitutional point
may be. If the asserted constitutional point is frivolous or vexatious or raised
as an abuse of
process, it will not attach to the matter in which it is raised
the character of a matter arising under the
Constitution
or involving its
interpretation:
Nikolic v MGIC Ltd
[1999] FCA 849
Securities and Investments Commission v White
(Fed C of A,
Drummond J, 16 July 1998, unreported).
father is not entitled to an adjournment merely because he asserted the
existence of a matter arising under the
Constitution
or involving its
interpretation (see Burchett J in
Amrit Lai Narain v Parnell
[1986] FCA 89
(1986) 9 FCR
Re Culleton
[2017] HCA 3
(2017) 340 ALR 550
per Gaegler J;
Finlayson; Ex parte Finlayson
(1997) 72 ALJR 73
per Toohey J at 74 and
Luck v Secretary, Dept of Human Services
[2017] FCA 540
assertion as to a constitutional question by mentioning a chapter or section of
Constitution
is not determinative of the character of the matter. The father
did not explain how or why his complaints engage with that as prescribed
Judiciary Act
is no matter involving the application or interpretation of the
Constitution
raised in this appeal. His application for an adjournment served no utility.
Accordingly, the adjournment was refused.
parents are of African heritage. The father was born in 1972 in Country B. The
mother was born in 1981 in Country C. Although
they married in mid-2014, they
did not commence living together until early 2016 when the mother migrated from
Country C to Australia.
They separated on a final basis in early 2018, the
mother obtaining support from a women’s refuge providing temporary
accommodation
for she and the child until rental accommodation was available.
separation to date the child has lived with the mother and spent sporadic
periods of supervised time with the father.
father filed his Initiating Application on 19 February 2018. The parents have
been engaged in this litigation from the time the
child had just turned one year
early 2018, the first interim Family Violence Restraining Order
(“FVRO”) was made for the protection of the mother.
That proceeding
was resolved by way of mutual undertakings in May 2018.
mother contended that the father breached the first FVRO undertaking. A second
interim FVRO was made for her protection in late
2018. Following the conclusion
of the hearing commencing in March 2019 and concluding in November 2019 in the
Perth Magistrates Court,
the presiding Magistrate declined to make the second
interim FVRO into a final order. The interim order was cancelled and that
was finalised.
6 May 2019, interim orders were made for the father to spend supervised time
with the child facilitated through E organisation
for a minimum of two hours
each fortnight. The child did not commence spending time with the father until
28 November 2019.
mid-2019, an order for divorce was made.
interim orders were made on 23 October 2019 engaging the services of other
community supervision agencies. F service supervised
five visits between the
child and the father from 29 November 2019 and 24 January 2020. G service
commenced supervising visits on
9 February 2020. Eight visits were scheduled
from that date to 24 May 2020. The father was late for three visits, two visits
early due to the child falling asleep or being unwell, and one visit was
cancelled due to the child being unwell.
28 August 2020, time between the father and the child was scheduled to be
supervised by F service at Suburb H. The father conceded
that he breached
F’s service agreement by attending the handover location between the
mother and the supervisor. F service
ceased supervising time between the father
and the child (at [64]). The police issued a 72-hour restraining order for the
protection. In mid 2020, a third interim FVRO was issued in
response to the mother’s complaint. The mother said that the father
his car to prevent her from leaving, and that when she drove away, he followed
her and swerved in front of her car. She formed
the view he was trying “to
run her off the road”. This was denied by the father. The third interim
FVRO was subsequently
resolved by way of a mutual undertaking.
21 July 2021, orders were made that time spent between the father and the child
remain supervised.
child did not spend time with the father from 28 August 2020 until 20 November
2022. For some of that period the father was in
Africa and could not travel
because of COVID-19 restrictions.
mid-2021, the father married Ms J. In August 2023, the father and Ms J adopted
two children, then aged 14 and 10.
mother now has a three-year-old daughter.
service recommenced supervision of fortnightly visits. Between 20 November 2022
and 9 April 2023, 12 visits were scheduled to take
place, 10 of which occurred.
child did not spend any further supervised time with the father from 9 April
2023 until trial, except when he attended the child’s
sport games, without
notice, on some occasions from late 2023 or early 2024 until 24 April
father relied upon a volume of trial material, albeit some of it late, including
his own affidavit of 152 pages and an affidavit
of his niece. He had prepared an
Exhibit Book containing more than 300 pages. As will be explained, he did not
tender the documents
contained in the Exhibit Book into evidence.
10 April 2025, the primary judge heard a Notice of Objection filed by the mother
to a subpoena filed by the ICL directed to the
Department of Education. An
ex-tempore judgment was delivered. Orders were made allowing for the redaction
of produced material identifying
particulars of the child’s school and
limiting the parties’ communication with the ICL.
28 April 2025, being the first day of the final trial, the father:
(a) Filed a Notice of Appeal from the 10 April 2025 judgment. That appeal was
summarily dismissed on 10 June 2025; and
(b) By way of an Application in a Proceeding, supported by an affidavit, sought
to vacate the trial pending the determination of
the appeal.
his submissions in support of his application to vacate the trial, and prior to
the submissions of the mother or the ICL
in response, the father left the
courtroom, advising that he would not be returning. The mother and the ICL
opposed the application
to vacate the trial. After receiving submissions from
each in the father’s absence, the matter, including the father’s
application to vacate the trial, was adjourned to the following day, 29 April
father attended the Court on 29 April 2025. He made further submissions in
support of his application to vacate the trial. He
then said he would again
leave. The primary judge cautioned that if he did leave the Court, the trial may
proceed in his absence.
The father firmly expressed his position, elected to
leave the Court, and did not return (at [14] and [89]). The primary judge
judgment dismissing the father’s application to vacate the
primary judge found, unchallenged on appeal, that the father was fully aware
that the trial would proceed if his application to
vacate it was unsuccessful.
is against this background that the trial proceeded without the father’s
further participation.
mother relied on her trial affidavit. She and the ICL tendered a quantity of
documents into evidence. The mother was briefly cross-examined
by the ICL. The
mother and the ICL agreed by the end of the trial to a minute of final orders
sought that largely aligned with that
as initially sought by the mother (at
The primary judge’s reasons
reasons particularise the vulnerabilities and isolating challenges lived with by
the mother, including that she is an immigrant
to Australia and English not
being her first language, caring for two children while not engaged in
employment, and having limited
social support. Findings were made as to:
(a) The father’s conduct directed to the mother meeting the broad
definition of family violence in s 4AB of the Act grounded
from his denigration
of the mother and his threats made during the relationship, including to cancel
her visa as a means to coerce
her to comply or acquiesce with his demands (at
(b) The father promoting a negative narrative against the mother following
separation within their church community. The mother then
became further
isolated by withdrawing from that community for two years (at [87]).
reasons record:
incident at [Suburb H] clearly had a profound and enduring impact on [the
mother]. She described feeling very scared by what occurred
and expressed
ongoing anxiety about [the father]’s capacity for anger - remarking, in
substance, "he could do anything". Upon
closer reflection of her evidence, I am
left with the firm impression that what scares her the most is his inability to
contain himself
in a public setting, which prior to the [Suburb H] incident, had
previously provided her with a sense of safety. [The father]’s
inability to regulate himself
towards a court appointed supervisor, with
[the child] present, has
left her with little confidence that even public
settings offer any protection against escalation
fear has since been compounded by what she has come to learn about [the
father]’s conduct towards others. In her oral evidence,
she expressed
concern about
his heightened and confrontational behaviour
during his two
brief appearances at trial. As noted by counsel, even in the formal setting of a
courtroom, he struggled to contain
himself. He insulted the ICL’s counsel,
raised his voice, interrupted, repeated himself, and disregarded directions from
he cannot exercise restraint in a forum where judicial authority should carry
some weight, [the mother] is, in my view, entirely
justified in questioning how
much confidence she can have in his ability or willingness to do so elsewhere,
particularly in everyday
situations where neither she nor [the child] hold
comparable authority.
father] appears to operate under the mistaken belief that his attendance at
[sport games] did not breach existing Court Orders.
He asserts that, having
completed supervised visits, he had effectively been “cleared for
unsupervised” time. While he
is self-represented, I do not accept this
explanation. [The father] was well aware that supervision remained a requirement
formally discharged by the Court.
is apparent from a draft Minute of Consent Orders circulated by him in May 2023,
which proposed a progression to unsupervised
time - a proposal not agreed to by
either [the mother] or the ICL, much to his frustration. On the evidence, I find
it more plausible
that, having learned [the child] was participating in [sport],
[the father] knowingly chose to attend, notwithstanding that it placed him in
breach of the Orders
regard to his vast experience as a litigant, I consider that [the father] was
aware that he could have filed an application
to vary the Orders, but
consciously chose not to. I consider it likely that this is rooted in his
deep-seated distrust of the judiciary,
which he views as biased and corrupt. I
anticipate that given this conviction, he concluded that any such application
would inevitably
fail. Therefore, rather than pursuing the lawful course
available to him, he chose instead to act unilaterally, placing [the mother]
a position where she would be tested - to see what, if anything, would eventuate
from his contraventions.
do not regard those contraventions as benign
. In my opinion, the Orders for
supervised time were imposed by the Court for good reason. Whatever his view
[the father] is bound to operate within its
framework. If [the mother] and the ICL did not agree to his proposed progression
to unsupervised
time, it was open to him to bring an application to vary the
Orders, which he did not.
the positive supervision reports, it is reasonable to conclude that any such
application for unsupervised time, had it been
made, would likely have been
received favourably by the Court. While [the father]’s mistrust of the
judiciary may have contributed
to his decision not to proceed in that manner, I
am not persuaded that it was the sole determinative factor. On the evidence
me, it is open to infer that other motivations may have been at play.
(Footnotes omitted) (Emphasis added)
primary judge went on to find (at [100]) that the father’s communications
when pursuing litigation in multiple National
and Western Australia
“largely characterised by insults,
threats and complaint[s]”
my view, this conduct not only distracted him from constructive engagement with
the parenting proceedings, and more critically,
from opportunities to spend time
with [the child], but also suggests a reluctance to see these proceedings
brought to a close. That
impression has been reinforced by [the father]’s
decision not to participate in the trial, electing to await my determination
with a view to pursuing a foreshadowed appeal.
The impression left is that
[the father]’s primary focus lies not with rebuilding his relationship
with [the child], but in
perpetuating his conflict with others and seeking
vindication of his own perceived grievances. That pursuit, regrettably, appears
to have taken precedence over [the child]’s need for stability and his
emotional wellbeing – an issue which, as reflected
elsewhere, is a concern
of [the child]’s with which I share.
(Emphasis added)
primary judge found (at [102]) that the father’s “conduct in his
dealings with others, the unyielding strength of
his convictions, and his
approach to conflict resolution; all of which are closely linked, each shaping
and amplifying the others”.
This evidence was generated by the father
himself revealing:
consistent pattern of behaviour marked by intimidation and threatening
. This includes but is by no means limited to:
a) accusations of incompetence, racism, corruption and infringement upon his
b) threats to report individuals to regulatory bodies, or the Crime and
Corruption Commission;
c) reference to litigation he has brought against others;
d) threats of damaging people’s reputations and careers; and
e) attempts to justify his conduct by minimising his actions, caveating his
behaviour with self-serving declarations that his conduct
is "not a threat"
and/or by asserting that people bait him.
father]’s conduct appears to be
largely reactive, often escalating
when he feels wronged, especially when others do not support his preferences or
when outcomes differ from his expectations. The patterns
of behaviour described
in the preceding paragraph are borne out in the communications set out in the
body of [the mother]’s
trial affidavit: 27 pages of which consist almost
solely of communications with [the mother], her lawyer, the ICL and the Court.
These communications
demonstrate that such conduct is not isolated but has
recurred persistently over many years, reinforcing the conclusion that it forms
part of an established pattern rather than a series of discrete
(Footnotes omitted) (Emphasis added)
father’s attendance at the child’s sport games contrary to orders
was found to be genuinely perceived by the mother
as an intrusion into a safe
space where she could connect with the community, and specifically other mothers
from Country C. The
mother feared the father’s reaction if she responded
in any way to his attendance at the child’s games or his interactions
the child at those times.
primary judge found (at [110]) that the father evaluates his assessment of
matters relevant to his parenting of the child through
a single narrative
“namely, that any interaction which does not align with him must be
attributed to racism, incompetence and
corruption”. Tendered into evidence
was Exhibit R6 being a compiled list of the father’s 50 known litigation
In mid-2022, he was the subject of a vexatious proceedings order in
the Federal Court. The primary judge’s reasons then record:
overall impression left is that no individual or institution is immune from [the
father]’s criticism or complaint. When
he takes issue with a person, the
persistence and intensity of his response is such that, in my view, it is not
unreasonable to conclude
that even a resilient recipient may be left feeling
intimidated, overwhelmed, or worn-down by the experience.
is important to make this clear: these proceedings are not about [the
father]’s various complaints or his other litigation.
He is entitled to
pursue those matters as he sees fit. However, they are relevant to my
determination for numerous reasons, which
I will return to when addressing the
legislative criteria.
present purposes, it is sufficient to note that
[the mother]’s
apprehension about the future is, in my view, entirely justified.
conclusion of these proceedings, she will no longer have the protection of legal
representation or the Court’s oversight.
In that context, her uncertainty
- and indeed fear - about managing [the father]’s conduct is
understandable.
She is particularly concerned about being cast by him as an
antagonist and the consequences that may follow.
From her perspective, being
able to refer to Court Orders provides a measure of safety, rightly placing
responsibility for [the child]’s
relationship with his father, and what
that looks like, with the Court rather than herself.
asked about her concerns, [the mother] explained that witnessing [the father]
become angry, such as he was in the courtroom,
causes her to fear the worst. By
way of example, she described worrying that he might run at and jump on her.
While acknowledging
he had never done so before, her response must be understood
in the broader context, including:
a) her awareness of information contained in police Incident Reports in which
[the father] is recorded as having threatened physical
harm to third parties;
b) her own observations of his conduct towards her solicitors and the ICL;
c) threats he has made to "crush her" and "mess up her life" [40]. I note that
these threats are consistent in tone with those he
has directed at professionals
involved in these proceedings, reinforcing their plausibility; and
d) his volatile and unpredictable behaviour.
(Footnotes omitted) (Emphasis added)
primary judge found (at [126]) that the mother’s genuinely held fears
inform her ongoing fear of the father for both her
own safety and the
child’s. The primary judge accepted (at [130]) the mother’s deep
anxiety of the emotional burdens
that would confront the child if he was exposed
to the father’s behaviour, in that he would perceive the world as
adversarial and adopt a style of engagement shaped by perpetual
primary judge assessed the risk to the safety of the mother and the child
cumulatively, by way of the totality of the evidence,
concluding that the
“principal risk that” the father “poses” to the child
“is emotional and psychological
in nature” (at [150]). The reasons
my view, the evidence supports a clear finding that [the father] is prone to
emotional volatility and unpredictability, particularly
when his beliefs and
convictions are challenged or where he perceives himself as being wronged or
treated unjustly. More concerning
still is the established pattern: when faced
with opposition or dissent, he appears to resort to intimidatory, threatening or
behaviour, seemingly aimed at asserting control over others.
satisfied that such behaviour places [the child]’s emotional and
psychological safety at risk, and that the potential for
physical harm cannot be
Whilst not exhaustive, I have reached this conclusion for several
there is nothing in [the father]’s material, nor in the various
submissions he has made to the Court, that demonstrates any
insight about the
impact of his behaviour on others. His worldview is fixed - one in which he is
the perennial victim, ensnared in
what he perceives to be a vast network of
racism, collusion and institutional corruption. This lens now defines his
interactions
and interpretations, and in my assessment, has evolved into a
self-reinforcing narrative.
accept without hesitation that these beliefs are genuinely held and informed by
experiences of both direct and systemic racism throughout
his lifetime. That
reality warrants acknowledgement and empathy. However, empathy cannot excuse
The concern lies in the extent of his distorted perceptions, the
disproportionate nature of his responses, and his disregard for normative
boundaries when faced with perceived injustice or a denial of his rights. It is
this mode of operating that presents a risk to [the
child], not only
emotionally, but potentially in more tangible ways, particularly in moments of
heightened agitation or loss of restraint.
agree with the thrust of the submissions advanced by both counsel for [the
mother] and the ICL:
it cannot be in [the child]’s best interests to be
exposed to his father’s belief systems and associated behaviours,
times verge on the extreme and, at points, the paranoid. Of particular concern
is [the father]’s entrenched hostility
towards institutions
namely, the police, the government, the judiciary, and broader social structures
and his persistent portrayal of [the mother] as a pathological liar
(and other disparaging terms)
Ultimately,
I am not satisfied that [the father] could or would shield [the child] from
these views if permitted unsupervised time,
particularly when confronted with
situations he perceives as unprofessional, unjust or corrupt. While fostering
critical thinking
in a child is important, exposing [the child] to a worldview
that may fundamentally undermine his trust in societal institutions,
critically, his mother, is unlikely to promote his emotional stability or
psychological wellbeing. [The child] presents
as a quiet, sensitive and
thoughtful child. In that context, it is not unreasonable to infer that he may
also find his father’s
perspectives confronting, even frightening.
this stage of development, [the child] is still learning how to interpret the
world around him and depends profoundly on adult
role models to shape his
understanding of appropriate behaviour.
The evidence before the Court
indicates that [the father] has little capacity to role model constructive
conflict resolution, perspective-taking,
empathy, and accountability when his
beliefs are challenged, or he feels his rights are constrained. These capacities
are foundational
to fostering respectful relationships across all domains of
[the child]’s life. I am concerned that exposure to his father’s
worldview and behaviour risks [the child] developing a distorted understanding:
that intimidation, threats and coercive practices
are an acceptable means of
asserting control or navigating disagreement.
given the absence of any meaningful behavioural change, which, on the evidence,
appears improbable, I find there to be a genuine
risk that [the child] may find
himself subject to the same types of behaviours [the mother] and others have
experienced. I accept
counsel for the ICL’s submission that this risk is
heightened should [the child] attempt to assert differing views, question
father’s authority, or resist compliance. While the prospect of physical
harm cannot be discounted, I regard it as less
likely than the risk of sustained
psychological pressure. My greater concern lies in the likelihood that [the
father] would exert
ongoing, unrelenting influence on [the child] until he
capitulates and aligns with his views. Such conduct would not only compromise
[the child]’s emotional and psychological wellbeing but may also impede
the development of his autonomy and critical reasoning
- both of which are
essential to his healthy development.
I do not consider [the father] capable of placing [the child]’s best
interests above his own needs. By way of illustration,
he has repeatedly failed
to attend supervised visits on time, an expectation one might reasonably assume
he would prioritise given
the limited nature of their time together. He has also
demonstrated prolonged periods of no contact, including an instance where
than two years passed without any contact with [the child]. Further, despite
knowing he was prohibited from having contact with
[the child] outside the terms
of the Court Orders, he not only attended [the sport games] but continued to do
so even after being
made aware his presence was causing [the mother] to consider
withdrawing [the child] altogether. Of further concern is his decision
[the child] in a private conversation to elicit information about his school,
despite him being acutely aware of the Court’s
position that he should not
be privy to that information pending trial. These actions again reflect a
pattern of behaviour that prioritises
his own needs and objectives over [the
child]’s wellbeing.
I am not satisfied [the father] has considered, let alone understands, the
impact of his conduct on [the mother], or how that, in
turn, may affect her
ability to parent [the child] and his sister.
It is plainly contrary to [the
child]’s best interests for his primary caregiver to be functioning under
persistent anxiety
and hypervigilance, driven by fear of [the father]’s
potential actions, not just towards her and [the child] but also towards
who may be involved with [the child], such as school staff and extra-curricular
activity providers. As reflected in my assessment
of [the mother]’s
evidence, I accept that she is genuinely frightened, and feels overwhelmed and
powerless in the face of his
behaviour. A parent functioning under such
conditions is unlikely to consistently provide optimal care, even when their
parenting capacity is otherwise strong.
I am more than satisfied [the mother] is a capable and committed parent, I am
not persuaded that she is in a position to offer
any resistance to [the
father]’s behaviour, for reasons already outlined. This dynamic gives rise
to a genuine concern that,
in her efforts to protect herself, [the child], and
her daughter, she may feel that her only option is to withdraw from her
or disrupt [the child]’s schooling and participation in
extra-curricular activities. Though such actions would no doubt be
good intent, they risk compounding her own vulnerability, and more
significantly, depriving the children of important
social and cultural
connections that support their development, sense of security and
what makes this matter particularly difficult - and undeniably sad - is that
[the father] has, at times, demonstrated a genuine
capacity to engage positively
with [the child], as reflected in the supervision reports, which document
appropriate affection and
interaction. However, while he can clearly regulate
his behaviour in structured environments or where it serves his interests, such
as at [the sport games], I have no confidence that this self-regulation would be
sustained in the context of everyday life, particularly
once he is no longer
subject to the oversight of the Court.
the contrary,
I consider there to be a real risk that an otherwise enjoyable
interaction or outing could quickly deteriorate if he perceives offence
injustice. I do not believe [the child]’s presence would moderate [the
father]’s reaction. Rather, I consider it entirely
plausible that he may
draw [the child] into the situation, seeking to use it as a lesson about racism
and defending one’s rights,
which he feels very strongly about. My concern
is that such moments could escalate beyond rhetoric; while [the father] may
with words, the response they provoke could be met with aggression or
violence, with potentially devastating consequences for [the
(Footnotes omitted) (Italic emphasis removed) (Bold emphasis added)
findings were made:
intend to make an order conferring sole parental responsibility on [the mother]
for three principal reasons. First, the evidence
does not support any finding
that the parties are capable of communicating constructively about major issues
concerning [The child],
particularly in the face of disagreement. Second, I do
not consider it to be in the best interests of [the child] or [the mother]
place her in a position where she may be exposed to further verbal abuse or
coercive conduct from [the father] should a dispute
arise. Third, an order for
sole parental responsibility is the only logical and necessary consequence of my
findings in relation
to [the child]’s care arrangements.
I have observed earlier, I consider [the mother] to be a competent and committed
parent, capable of providing for all of [the child]’s
needs to a high
standard. My only reservation relates not to her capacity, but to the risk of
its erosion in the absence of clear
and protective Orders that shield her from
exposure to [the father] and his conduct.
(Emphasis removed)
primary judge found (at [179]) that the father’s relationship with the
child is superficial and cannot presently be characterised
as either meaningful
or beneficial, and that the child is unlikely to experience a substantial
disruption or loss should the orders
be made as sought by the mother and the
possibility of ongoing supervised time in light of the positive supervision
reports was considered but the primary judge “ruled
it out for four key
in my view, any such arrangement would require indefinite, long-term
supervision, facilitated by a service[...], whose staff
receive a high level of
training and support. I am not satisfied that private supervision would offer
sufficient safeguards in this
case, particularly given [the father]’s
conduct towards the [F service] supervisor, his persistence in the pursuit of
his agenda,
his tendency to exert influence, and his demonstrated disregard for
Court Orders.
I am not satisfied that long-term, centre-based supervision would ultimately be
a positive experience for an active young
child like [the child]. It is
reasonable to infer that, over time, he may become bored or frustrated with the
constraints of the
setting and begin to express a preference for visits to occur
elsewhere, which could not be accommodated for reasons he is too young
understand. It would be inappropriate to place either parent, the supervisory
service, and most critically [the child], in a position
where such expectations
cannot be met. Further, most supervision services do not facilitate indefinite
arrangements, and I am concerned
commencing a process that may ultimately prove unsustainable.
while there is no evidence of inappropriate behaviour by [the father] towards [G
service] staff, aside from one grievance he
raised, I am not satisfied that this
level of cooperation would be sustained over an extended period of supervision.
This concern
is heightened by his prior conduct towards the [F service] contact
supervisor, which was belligerent and abusive. In my view, it
is unlikely [the
father] would continue to engage appropriately when subject to the ongoing
constraints and accountability that long-term
supervised contact requires.
I am not satisfied that indefinite, long-term supervision is financially viable
for either party. [The father] does not contribute
child support or provide any
other form of financial assistance to [the mother] for [the child]. She, in
turn, relies on government
benefits to support herself and the
(Emphasis removed)
primary judge in this matter exercised a broad discretion in making orders
regulating the parenting of the child pursuant to Pt
VII of the Act. It is well
established that except as to grounds asserting procedural error, for an
appellant to succeed in an appeal
from an exercise of that discretion, they must
bring their appeal within one of the recognised categories of appellate
intervention
identified by the High Court in
House v The King
Namely that the primary judge’s discretion miscarried
(a) Making an error in approach or principle;
(b) Failing to consider a relevant circumstance and/or considering an irrelevant
circumstance;
(c) Making an error in the findings of fact such that the finding is unsupported
by the evidence; or
(d) Making orders that fall so outside a reasonable exercise of discretion that
the orders were "unreasonable or plainly unjust".
weight or importance given to evidence in the exercise of discretion in making
parenting orders that promote the best interests
of the child is a matter
quintessentially for the primary judge. That an appellate court might have
arrived at a different outcome
by virtue of affording different weight to
various matters does not justify the reversal of the decision of the primary
obligation rests with an appellant to succinctly identify and particularise in
clear terms the errors alleged in the judgment under
challenge. While allowance
is made for the father being without legal representation, he is bound by the
same principles and obligations
as any other litigant, in that the appeal is
confined to the metes and bounds of the subject matters of his grounds of
appeal. The
father’s 13 grounds of appeal, conflating disparate categories
of asserted error, are:
1. Jurisdictional Error – Reliance on Fraudulent Evidence
The primary judge erred in law and fact by relying on subpoenaed material from
Western Australia Police... (Exhibit ICL4), which
was improperly redacted
without judicial authority and contained false and misleading allegations
unrelated to the Appellant’s
criminal history. The correct file was...
Reliance on this false material constituted a fraud on the Court, breached
procedural fairness,
and resulted in a jurisdictional error directly affecting
Orders 2 and 3.
of Procedural Fairness – Proceeding Despite Fundamental Irregularities
The primary judge denied the Appellant procedural fairness and committed a
orders notwithstanding the
Appellant’s legitimate and well-founded objections regarding the
Court’s reliance on irrelevant
documents and a breach of the doctrine of
res judicata. The Appellant’s non-attendance was a principled response to
a fundamentally
flawed and unfair process, not abandonment, and was
mischaracterised at [101] of the reasons.
Error- Unlawful Travel/Relocation and Discharge of Watchlist Order
The primary judge erred in law and committed a jurisdictional error by granting
Orders 5 and 6 permitting the Respondent to remove
the child to [Country C], a
non-Hague Convention country, and discharging the Family Law Watchlist Order,
despite the absence of
any evidentiary foundation, or any proper legal basis,
and in circumstances where the Court expressly acknowledged at [189]–[190]
of the reasons, that Australia would have no power to secure the child’s
return if the Respondent remained overseas and the
credibility concerns recorded
at [117]–[119] in the reasons for judgment.
4. Failure to Discharge Duty to Protect Judicial Integrity
The primary judge failed to discharge the judicial duty to ensure the integrity
of the proceedings and committed a jurisdictional
error by failing to require
the parties to address the authenticity, stay the proceedings, or refer the
matter for investigation,
given the unmistakable falsity of the subpoenaed
material bearing the incorrect [file number], this failure constitutes a breach
of natural justice and jurisdictional error.
5. Error of law – Unreasonable Injunctive Orders
The primary judge erred in law and fact in making injunctive Order 5,
restraining the Appellant from approaching within 50 metres
of, or communicating
with, the child, in the complete absence of any finding of family violence, any
admissible evidence establishing
a risk of harm, or any reasonable factual basis
to justify such an order, contrary to the child’s best interests under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth).The professional recommendations
in the supervision reports (at [50]–[55], and [99]–[101] in the
reasons for judgment)
6. Discretionary Error - Mischaracterisation of Alleged Contraventions
The primary judge erred in fact and in the exercise of discretion by
mischaracterising brief, incidental, and child-initiated contact
between the
Appellant and the child as deliberate contraventions of parenting orders,
failing to consider the full context, including
the Respondent’s and the
Independent Children’s Lawyer’s failure to progress contact
arrangements as previously
ordered, and the absence of any risk, harm, or intent
to breach is a misapplication of
, Division 13A of the
Family Law Act
(Cth) in stating at [98] of the reason for decision that “
not regard those contraventions as benign
7. Jurisdictional Error – Contravention of Res Judicata
The primary judge erred in law and committed a jurisdictional error by failing
to give legal effect to the cancellation of the interim
FVRO by the Magistrates
Court under s 49 of the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA), improperly
treating as live issues allegations which had already been finally determined on
the merits at [40] –[ 49]
and [56]-[63] in the reasons for judgment. The
decision attracted a statutory right of appeal under s 64 of the
Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(WA), which was not exercised. Reliance on those same
allegations in parenting proceedings was legally impermissible absent any
change in circumstances, given that both parties are divorced and
should have led to the adjournment of the trial for the Respondent
their affidavit as sought in the (Form 2 Orders seeking to vacate trial) on 28
April 2025: [...]
8. Jurisdictional Error – Improper Re-litigation of Resolved
Allegations
The primary judge erred in law by admitting, relying upon, and giving weight to
the Respondent’s affidavit sworn on 20 December
2024 and Exhibits R1, R2,
R3, and ICL5, which improperly sought to re-litigate allegations previously
dismissed by the Magistrates
Court. The doctrine of res judicata did not affect
the right given by 69ZX(3)(b) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to adopt
and give effect to the Magistrates Court’s uncontested findings that there
was no family violence However it
did affected the ability of the party to
prosecute that right again in the absence of any material change in
circumstances leading
to a miscarriage of justice when statutory powers were
exercised incorrectly.
9. Procedural Fairness Denied – Apprehended and Actual Bias
The primary judge denied procedural fairness by:
Ignoring the
Appellant’s
Notice to Admit Facts
filed on 21 March 2025, which is
the basis on which the Book of Documents was compiled, was within her
suppression orders (Order 13) against the Appellant while enabling the
Respondent to disseminate defamatory materials (Order
12) to public bodies;
Defending the
ICL at [13], despite knowing of her misconduct and non-compliance with the
2024 Guidelines for Independent Children’s Lawyers
Giving undue
weight to the Respondent’s Solicitor and ICL despite clear credibility
concerns proven at [257] to [260] of the
Appellant’s affidavit sworn on 6
April 2025;
Refusing to
adjourn the trial notwithstanding the merit of the “Application in a
Case” heard on 28 April 2025;
Acting with the
Principal Registrar to remove relevant documents from the court file without
reasonable cause and allowing inadmissible
and misleading evidence;
“Describing
as an ‘ex tempore decision,’ written reasons delivered on 28 April
2025, 18 days after the hearing
on 10 April 2025, after an appeal was
The decision
[...] was removed from the court file, and replaced only after the Appellant
listed it in the Appeal Book Index;
circumstances and others establish both apprehended and actual bias.
10. Failure to Apply Correct Legal Principles - Inadequate Reasons
The primary judge erred in law by failing to give adequate reasons for the
finding that it was in the child’s best interests
to live with the mother
with sole parental responsibility and no contact with the father, contrary to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), and contrary to the
common law requirement to give proper reasons, including failure to engage with
the child’s cultural
identity, the absence of any history of family
violence, the positive supervision reports, and the Appellant’s right to a
relationship with his child. The failure to properly apply
(2A), and 69ZX(3)(b) of the
Family Law Act 1975
renders the decision manifestly unreasonable and unjust.
11. Discretionary Error – Irrelevant and Improper Considerations
The primary judge’s exercise of discretion was fundamentally flawed and
infected by jurisdictional error by giving weight to
inadmissible, irrelevant,
and false materials, failing to consider highly relevant evidence including the
Appellant’s affidavits,
the Notice to Admit Facts, and the positive
supervision reports, and by failing to properly consider the serious credibility
surrounding the Respondent, as acknowledged in the reasons for judgment
at [117]–[119] and [189]–[190], resulting in
a miscarriage of
12. Jurisdictional Error – Taking into Account an Irrelevant
Consideration
The primary judge erred in law and fell into jurisdictional error in relying on
an irrelevant consideration in determining the parenting
orders, namely that the
Appellant had commenced or engaged in litigations in multiple jurisdictions in
Australia, as recorded at
[100]– [101] and [112]-[113] in the reasons for
judgment. The judge wrongly treated the exercise of the Appellant’s lawful
right to pursue legal remedies as indicative of diminished parental capacity or
reduced focus on the child, in circumstances where
that conduct bore no rational
connection to any relevant consideration under
sections 60CA
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). This constituted a failure to exercise
improperly infringed the Appellant’s fundamental right to access the
courts and to seek redress through lawful legal processes.
The Appellant is not
a vexatious litigant, contrary to the implication advanced in the proceedings.
The order under
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) was improperly procured based on a false affidavit sworn by [...] on 25
January 2022, which may have led to her being ousted
by her fellow Partners
[...] when it became public.
13. Jurisdictional Error – Failure to Address False Notice Disputing
The primary judge erred in law and fell into jurisdictional error by failing to
address the Appellant’s allegation that the
Respondent and their solicitor
filed a false Notice Disputing Facts on 3 April 2025, in response to the
Appellant’s Notice
to Admit Facts filed on 21 March 2025, notwithstanding
the Book of Documents filed on 26 March 2025. The Notice Disputing Facts
false and misleading denials of objectively provable facts, as
established in paragraphs [257] to [260] of the Appellant’s
sworn on 6 April 2025. This failure undermined the integrity of the fact-finding
process and infected the proceeding with
failure to address the false Notice Disputing Facts materially affected the
outcome, constituted
a failure to exercise jurisdiction according to law, and
resulted in the denial of procedural fairness to the Appellant.
(As per the original)
will be seen, the father’s grounds of appeal as to the discretionary
determination focus on particular pieces of evidence,
some being either not
tendered at trial due to elections he made, or not being material to the
determinations of the primary judge.
ANOTHER PRELIMINARY ISSUE
The father’s oral application to adduce further evidence
the hearing of the appeal, the father made an oral application for leave to
adduce further evidence by way of his affidavits
filed on 17 September 2025 and
26 September 2025. The father directed complaints as to conspiracy and
misconduct by delegated judicial
officers because the filing of those affidavits
had initially been voided from the court portal in circumstances where he had
filed an Application in an Appeal. The affidavits are recorded on the court
record as filed and sealed on those days. The oral application,
opposed by the
mother and the ICL, is determined as part of the substantive appeal.
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
gives an unfettered discretion to admit further evidence on appeal.
High Court in
(1998) 197 CLR 172 noted that the section’s
“principal purpose is to give to the Full Court a discretionary power to
admit further evidence where that evidence, if accepted, would demonstrate that
the order under appeal is erroneous”. Although
there is no fixed rule with
respect to applications to adduce further evidence on appeal, the High Court
said (at [116]) that “where
the evidence has been deliberately withheld,
the failure to call it will ordinarily weigh heavily in the exercise of the
discretion”.
Other relevant considerations include whether the evidence
could have been obtained with reasonable diligence, the weight of the
evidence and whether it would have been likely to affect the outcome of the
father submitted that the proposed further evidence was relevant to Grounds 1, 4
and 5 and “maybe” Ground 11 of his
Amended Notice of Appeal. His
affidavits filed on 17 September 2025 (“the first affidavit”) and 26
September 2025 (“the
second affidavit”) are said to establish that
the “primary judge’s decision was reached upon incomplete and, in
material respects, inaccurate evidentiary foundation”. He asserts that
since judgment delivery he has “obtained further
evidence that goes
directly to the authenticity of documents and the collusion of the
Respondents’ Solicitor and Counsel, the
Independent Children[’s]
Lawyer and her Counsel, the Principal Registrar and the Trial Judge”.
first affidavit exhibited two categories of documents, being:
(a) 12 pages of photographs said to be sourced from the Family Court of Western
Australia Perth registry taken of a screen displaying
non-chronological redacted
documents produced by Western Australia police recording dates between 13
November 2010 and 26 October
(b) ICL4, being the documents produced on subpoena by Western Australia police.
father did not explain what information in the 12 photographs is not part of
ICL4, nor the information in ICL4 that is not in
the 12 photographs. Save as to
asserting he has it, the father did not identify the contended “further
evidence” sought
to be adduced.
affidavits record the father sending communications to government and regulatory
bodies asserting that material “establish[es]
a case of fraud”. He
further said in the second affidavit:
Furthermore,
the Western Australia Police Force (“WAPOL”) Public Access
(“WAPOLPA”) Manager has repeatedly
delayed the production of my
criminal record and has stated that her email correspondence to me was returned
as undeliverable on
several occasions, which I regard as unusual. I contend that
these deliberate delays are connected to the disappearance of my affidavit
the court file.
father did not explain how either exhibit sought to be adduced had been withheld
or concealed by the mother or “third parties”
at the time of the
trial and hence not available to him at that time. A broad comparison of the
documents in each exhibit does not
suggest they are materially dissimilar. The
father did not explain how each set of documents substantiated his claims or
demonstrated
his specified grounds. His assertions, absent more, are not
“further evidence” sought to be adduced by way of the first and
second affidavits do not fall into the category of
that identified by the
High Court in
We are not satisfied that this further
evidence has any impact on the appeal and thus does not meet the requirements
identified by
the High Court, namely that it is necessary to receive it to avoid
an error “which cannot be otherwise remedied by the application
conventional appellate principles” (
father’s oral Application in an Appeal to adduce further evidence will be
CONSIDERATION
give some semblance of structure to these reasons, given the father’s
grounds of appeal mix errors of procedure and errors
of law with allegations of
the improper exercise of discretion, we will adopt the approach of grouping the
categories of complaint
made in his appellate challenges, as best as we can
understand them. To do otherwise by addressing each individual complaint in each
ground of appeal would occasion a waste of judicial resources, highlighted by
the failure of the father to make elucidated submissions
providing clarity to
the grounds.
with authority, an appellate court must consider the contentions which relate to
bias and a denial of procedural fairness
before considering the remaining
Concrete Pty Ltd v Parramatta Design and Developments Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA 55
(2006) 229 CLR 577).
Bias – Ground 9
father’s Summary of Argument contends both actual and apprehended bias.
Each is a serious contention established from different
principles and factual
environments.
test for actual bias requires the father to demonstrate that the primary
judge’s mind is “so committed to a conclusion
already formed as to
be incapable of alteration, whatever evidence or arguments may be
presented” (
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia
(2001) 205 CLR 507). As best as we can decipher, the particulars of
Ground 9 could not be directed to actual bias. In any event,
as no evidence, let
alone cogent evidence, of actual bias was adduced, the complaint as to actual
bias could not be established.
test for apprehended bias is whether “a fair‑minded lay observer
might reasonably apprehend that the judge might not
bring an impartial mind to
the resolution of the question the judge is required to decide” (
v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Charisteas v Charisteas
[2021] HCA 29
is well established, application of the doctrine of apprehended judicial bias
involves two steps (
at 345). First, the father must identify what
it is said might lead a judge to decide a case other than on its legal and
factual merits.
Second, he must articulate a logical connection between the
identified conduct and the feared deviation from impartiality.
father did not identify any part of the transcript to suggest there was an
apprehension of bias during the hearing. He did not
make an application at the
hearing for the primary judge’s disqualification, suggesting no
apprehension of bias then existed.
Even if the father considered such an
application was then legitimately available, he waived the opportunity to make
at 344, 357 and 360;
Vakauta v Kelly
[1989] HCA 44
(1989) 167 CLR 568
at 577–579 and 586–588).
complaint as to an apprehension of bias was first made by way of the appeal.
While failure to raise a claim of bias at trial will
not inevitably preclude its
agitation on appeal, here the father did not identify how the complaint was
clarified by the reasons
as opposed to being apparent at the time. No complaint
of apprehended bias can be competently asserted from merely dissatisfaction
the ultimate result (
Newett and Newett (No 2)
[2021] FedCFamC1A 11
(2021) FLC 94-051
–[80]). It is an unexceptional incident of judicial function to make
determinations throughout pre-trial processes and during
a trial. The father did
not identify any facts or matters which might be said to have led the primary
judge to decide the case other
than on its legal and factual merits. Masking
dissatisfaction with intermediate determinations and an ultimate discretionary
determination
as an apprehended bias complaint has no value on appeal. The
complaints as to bias are rejected.
Failures to afford the father procedural fairness –
Grounds 1, 2 and 9
father incorporates into these grounds complaints as to conspiracies;
perversions of justice; fabrications of evidence and the
destruction of evidence
as to police material; the use of the Magistrates Court’s transcripts and
reasons for judgment; and
repeating his bias complaints, each individually and
cumulatively, as failures to afford him procedural fairness.
a concept, procedural fairness is concerned only with the fairness of the
hearing; not the fairness of the outcome (
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2006) 228 CLR 152
fairness requires each party to be given an adequate opportunity to be heard and
present their case (
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550).
It is only the
opportunity to present evidence and argument which the interest of justice
requires, not the actuality of it.
father had ample opportunity to present his case. He elected to leave the trial,
knowing that it may be determined without his
further participation.
his Summary of Argument, the father said that his “non-attendance was a
principled response to a fundamentally flawed and
unfair process”. At the
hearing of the appeal, he confirmed his election for the trial to continue in
his absence was “based
on a ground of principle”.
Notwithstanding
the father electing to terminate his participation in the trial, the primary
judge read and considered all his affidavit
evidence relied upon for trial (at
[15]–[17]). The father elected not to tender into evidence his 300 plus
page Exhibit Book,
or to cross-examine any witness. He cannot now make
complaints as to either circumstance on appeal.
father has not made out any failure to afford him procedural fairness. The
complaints as to a failure to afford procedural fairness
Reliance on fraudulent evidence – Grounds 1 and 4
father conceded at the hearing of the appeal that this complaint only achieves
traction if he can establish an improper redaction
of material produced by the
Western Australia police, or that the material produced was fabricated or
otherwise tainted. The complaints
as to false or fabricated evidence were always
misconceived. He elected not to test the evidence tendered at trial produced by
Western Australia police on subpoena. He did not identify any document in
the Appeal Book, or the transcript, to support these complaints.
They are not
established.
re-litigation of resolved allegations, and error and reliance on fraudulent
evidence – Grounds 1, 2, 4, 7 and 8
is the authority to decide a proceeding. As we understand it, the father does
not contend a want of jurisdiction by way
of these complaints but asserts a
fundamental defect in pre-trial and/or trial processes, findings, and
determinations, making the
judgment under challenge unsafe.
first limb of the father’s complaints centres upon a “breach of the
doctrine of res judicata” and/or issue estoppel,
referring to the Full
Court determination of
Caddy & Miller
(1986) FLC 91-720. The
complaints are cast as “failing to give legal effect to the cancellation
of the interim FVRO by the
Magistrates Court... improperly treating as live
issues allegations which had already been... determined on the
father’s complaints as to an “improper re-litigation of resolved
allegations” have no merit because:
(a) Firstly, his submission that the fact that the second FVRO was not made
final equates to a determination as to an absence of
family violence is
specious. It is a mistake to think that the same considerations as to findings
of family violence as defined in
s 4AB of the Act in
proceedings apply in
the Magistrates Court, that forum exercising a different jurisdiction to warrant
the making of a final FVRO.
(b) Secondly, by way of s 69ZX(3)(b) of the Act (as it then was), the father
tendered into evidence the transcript of the Magistrates
Court proceedings and
the reasons for judgment. His submission that the Court ought to do no more than
simply draw its own conclusions
from that evidence “instead of re-opening
the issues” has no merit in the circumstances of the judgment under
Pivotally, the reasons record:
mother] contends that [the father] breached the undertaking [given to resolve
the first FRVO], which he denies.
The resolution of this factual dispute is
unnecessary for my purposes.
However, as a result of whatever transpired,
she applied for and was granted a further interim FVRO in [late] 2018.
outlined in my Reasons for Decision delivered 28 April 2025, [the father] is
strongly of the view the doctrine of
Res Judicata
applies to the family
violence allegations raised during those proceedings. For the Reasons previously
provided, I take a different
view to him in respect to that matter.
otherwise note that pursuant to s 69ZX(3) of the
Family Law Act 1975
), the Court may receive into evidence the transcript of
evidence in any other proceedings before another court and draw conclusions
fact from that transcript that it thinks proper. It can also adopt any
recommendation, finding, decision or judgment of any court.
Court was provided only with a partial transcript, specifically from the
proceedings of [...] 2019. At trial, counsel for [the
mother] and the ICL
invited the Court to conclude that [the father]’s disclosure appeared
selective, as it only included transcript
covering his cross-examination of [the
mother] and her witnesses, along with the presiding Magistrate’s
ex-tempore reasons,
but omitted the transcript of his own
cross-examination.
the absence of the full transcript, I am not in a position to properly exercise
that discretion conferred by the Act or meaningfully
engage with the argument
advanced by [the father] about the doctrine of
Res Judicata
particularly so given that I do not know what specific findings of fact or
assessments of credit were made.
that I can reliably record is that, for reasons unknown to me, the presiding
Magistrate was not satisfied that [the mother] had
established, to the requisite
standard, the conditions under the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
permitting the making of an FVRO.
Ultimately,
however, the
Res Judicata
argument does not affect my determination. For
reasons that will become apparent, I am satisfied that it is
unnecessary for
me to make findings of fact in relation to family violence allegations that
pre-date the second FVRO.
reflected elsewhere, it is
unnecessary for me to make findings of fact about
those matters canvassed in the second FVRO proceedings,
particularly her
allegations of sexual abuse. Excluding those matters, I otherwise accept [the
mother]’s evidence about his
conduct towards her, which I am satisfied, on
the balance of probabilities, meets the definition of family violence as defined
(Footnotes omitted) (Bold emphasis added)
father did not engage on appeal with the primary judge expressly concluding that
the determination as to orders that promoted
the best interests of the child did
not turn on re-litigating the allegations in the FVROs but was concluded from
other relevant
s 60CC factors.
second limb of the father’s complaint is an objection to the reliance on
“irrelevant documents” tendered into
evidence produced on subpoena
by the Western Australia police (Exhibit ICL4). Leaving aside his allegations as
to judicial impropriety
being scandalous, this limb fails for the same reasons
recorded earlier. His complaint as to any irregularity in the material produced
by the Western Australia police and tendered into evidence in his absence has no
Unlawful travel and discharge of the Family Law Watchlist order
ground makes complaint as to a failure to consider relevant matters identified
by the Full Court in
Line & Line
[1996] FamCA 145
(1997) FLC 92-729
and that the
travel orders were absent “evidentiary foundation”.
complaint fails to engage with the express considerations and findings in the
reasons (at [185]–[190]). The reasons spell
out the desire of the mother
to travel with the child to Country C to see her family, specifically her
parents; that the last time
she visited was in 2018; that her emotional and
psychological wellbeing would be supported by travelling to see her family; the
of the child engaging with his African heritage, thereby supporting his
connection to his culture which is integral to his and his
identity; and the finding as to the value of those opportunities afforded to
both the mother and the child being significant.
reasons (at [189]) carefully weigh Country C not being a signatory to the
Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Abduction
The primary judge concluded save for this consideration, that there was no other
risk or disadvantage from discharging the
Family Law Watchlist order and making
other travel orders. Findings were made as to the mother presenting as a
responsible and thoughtful
parent, demonstrating a high level of care for the
child, and that not making the order sought would compromise their wellbeing.
finding was made that there was nothing to suggest the mother poses a flight
risk or has any intention to permanently relocate
from Australia in
circumstances where she has become an Australian citizen and has a settled life
in Perth. The primary judge found
travel would be for holiday purposes only.
ground is and always was baseless. It is rejected.
Mischaracterisation of alleged contraventions – Ground
ground and the father’s Summary of Argument direct complaint to the
findings made as to the father’s attendance at
the child’s sport
games (at [95]–[98], as recorded earlier in these reasons) and
specifically the finding “I do
not regard those contraventions as
benign” (at [98]). The father contends that the finding under challenge
mischaracterises
“brief, incidental, and child-initiated contact between
[the father] and the child”.
succeed with this complaint the father must demonstrate that the findings made
subject to challenge were not reasonably open (
Edwards v Noble
Simply because other findings may also have been open on the evidence
does not demonstrate that a finding of fact complained of was
thus not open or
available. Findings of fact are not wrong merely because an appellant can point
to some countervailing evidence
Cizek & Mihov
[2024] FedCFamC1A 151
(2024) FLC 94-206)
may establish a differing view (
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
To establish an error of fact, it is necessary for an appellant to establish
that the impugned finding of fact was either
demonstrably wrong by
incontrovertible facts or uncontested testimony, glaringly improbable, or
contrary to compelling inferences
Robinson Helicopter Company Inc v
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 331 ALR 550).
father did not identify any evidence in the Appeal Book, or in the transcript,
to establish that the finding under challenge was
not open on the evidence or
was demonstrably wrong by incontrovertible facts, glaringly improbable, or
contrary to compelling inferences.
His complaints are nothing more than his view
that the primary judge ought to have reached a different conclusion and hence
are rejected.
Injunctions – Ground 5
primary complaint of the father is a failure to consider the contents of the
supervision of time spent reports. That evidence
was expressly considered (at
[50]–[55] and [71]). As recorded earlier in these reasons, his complaint
as to an absence of any
finding of family violence within the meaning of s 4AB
of the Act or a risk to the safety of the child is hollow.
were made (at [191]–[198]) as to the father’s failure to abide by
court orders, his flagrant disregard for authority
including by way of court
orders, his continued attendance at sport games in contravention of court
orders, his removal of the child
from the sports pitch on two occasions, he
eliciting the name of the child’s school from the child when ordered not
the mother feeling immobilised and powerless with legitimate fear of
repercussions if she confronts the father, and the father’s
insight into the inappropriateness of his conduct at the child’s sport
games. The primary judge’s finding that
failing to grant the injunctions
would heighten the mother’s anxiety and fears as to the child’s
safety was open on the
evidence. The complaints by way of Ground 5 are
Inadequate reasons – Ground 10
father’s complaint as to inadequate reasons cloaks:
(a) Discretionary complaints as to failures to “properly address”
specified subject matters, being the child’s
cultural identity, the
absence of any history of family violence, the positive supervision reports, and
his “right to a meaningful
relationship with his child”; and
(b) A contended failure to consider the matters identified in ss 60B, 60CA and
60CC of the Act, and by way of a tangent, the provisions
of s 69ZX(3)(b) (as it
will be inadequate if the appellate court is unable to ascertain those reasons
for the decision and if justice is not seen
to be done (see test by Gray J in
Sun Alliance Insurance Ltd v Massoud
[1989] VicRp 2
[1989] VR 8
at 18 approved by the
Full Court in
Bennett and Bennett
[1990] FamCA 148
(1991) FLC 92-191
[2022] FedCFamC1A 135
Dissatisfaction
with the reasons for the determination does not equate to reasons being
inadequate. Contrary to that as asserted by
the father, the reasons identify
relevant legislation and principles (at [137]–[142]) and expressly record
the weighing of
considerations asserted by the father not to be canvassed by the
primary judge, being as to cultural identity (at [169]), positive
supervision
reports (at [162] and [164]), family violence, and the benefits of a meaningful
relationship between the father and the
child (at [172]–[179] and
[201]–[202]). The reasons then apply the legislation and principles (at
[144]–[184] and
[199]–[205]) before concluding as to the regime of
orders that promote the child’s best interests. The complaint as to
inadequate reasons fails.
Irrelevant and improper considerations – Ground 11
is an error in the construction of this ground. As prosecuted, the ground is
directed to contended failures to consider relevant
matters. The complaints in
any event are wholly without merit.
primary judge specifically read and considered the evidence in the
father’s affidavits (at [15] and [22]) and the supervision
reports (at
[50]–[55] and [71]). His contention as to a failure to consider
“credibility issues surrounding the [mother]”
is self-defeating, in
that his Summary of Argument acknowledged that the reasons directly engaged with
that topic (at [117]–[119]
and [189]–[190]). The complaints by way
of the ground fail.
Ground 12 and Ground 13
father’s Summary of Argument was not directed to either of these grounds.
He did not make any submissions directed to them
at the hearing of the appeal.
They are rejected.
ground or complaint on appeal was successful. The appeal, as amended, fails and
will be dismissed. Neither the mother nor the ICL
sought costs.
I certify that the preceding ninety-seven (97)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Campton, Christie &
Dated: 27 October 2025
RTF format (731 KB)
Signed PDF/A format