CD v The Commonwealth of Australia; CD v Director of Public Prosecutions (SA) [2025] HCA 37 (8 October 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, STEWARD, GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH‑JONES JJ
Matter No A2/2025
ANOR PLAINTIFFS
THE COMMONWEALTH OF
AUSTRALIA DEFENDANT
Matter No A24/2024
ANOR APPELLANTS
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS (SA)
ANOR RESPONDENTS
CD v The Commonwealth of Australia
CD v Director
of Public Prosecutions (SA)
[2025] HCA 37
Date of Hearing: 13 May
Date of Judgment: 8 October 2025
Matter No A2/2025
The questions stated for the opinion of the Full Court in the special
case filed on 14 March 2025 be answered as follows:
Question (1): Is the
Surveillance Legislation (Confirmation of
Application) Act 2024
(Cth) invalid, either in whole or in part,
(a) it is an impermissible exercise by the Parliament of the judicial power
of the Commonwealth; or
(b) it impermissibly interferes with and undermines the institutional
integrity of courts vested with federal jurisdiction?
Answer: No.
Question (2): Who should pay the costs of the Special Case?
Answer: The plaintiffs.
Matter No A24/2024
Special leave to appeal is revoked.
On appeal from the
Supreme Court of South Australia (A24/2024
Representation
B W Walker SC with D F O'Leary SC
and S Palaniappan for the plaintiffs in A2/2025 and the appellants in A24/2024
(instructed by Agresta
Moran Barristers & Solicitors)
S P Donaghue
KC, Solicitor-General of the Commonwealth, with M R Salinger and M P A
Maynard for the defendant in A2/2025 (instructed
by Australian Government
M G Hinton KC with A F Cairney and W M Scobie for the Director
of Public Prosecutions (SA), intervening in A2/2025, and for the first
respondent in A24/2024 (instructed by Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (SA))
T M Begbie KC with P J Melican and M R Salinger for
the second respondent in A24/2024 (instructed by Australian Government
C S Bydder SC, Solicitor-General for the State of Western
Australia, with A K Miller for the Attorney-General for the State of
Australia and the Attorney-General for the State of Victoria,
intervening in A2/2025 (instructed by State Solicitor's Office (WA)
Victorian Government Solicitor)
S Robertson SC with L A Coleman for the Attorney-General for the State of
New South Wales, intervening in A2/2025 (instructed by Crown
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
CD v The Commonwealth of Australia
Director of Public Prosecutions (SA)
Constitutional law (Cth) –
Judicial power of Commonwealth – Admissibility of evidence – Where
information and records
obtained pursuant to warrants – Where
Surveillance Legislation (Confirmation of Application) Act 2024
("Confirmation of Application Act") deems information and records obtained under
specified warrants to have been lawfully obtained
Confirmation
of Application Act
invalid – Whether
Confirmation of Application Act
impermissible exercise by Parliament of judicial power of Commonwealth –
Confirmation of Application Act
impermissibly interferes with and
undermines institutional integrity of courts vested with federal jurisdiction.
Words and phrases – "admissible", "communication", "criminal
proceedings", "evidence", "exercise of judicial power", "illegally
"inadmissible", "intercepting a communication", "interfere with the integrity of
courts", "judicial power", "legislative
power", "statutory concept",
"telecommunications system", "undue impairment of judicial power", "unlawfully
intercepted", "usurpation
of judicial power",
Constitution
Surveillance Legislation
(Confirmation of Application) Act 2024
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
GAGELER CJ, GORDON, STEWARD, GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH-JONES JJ.
The determinative questions of law in context
the Court is a special case in a proceeding commenced by writ of summons in
which the plaintiffs, CD and TB, seek a declaration
Surveillance
Legislation (Confirmation of Application) Act 2024
(Cth) ("the
Confirmation
of Application Act
") is invalid. Before the Court is also an application for
revocation of special leave granted to CD and TB to appeal from a decision
the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of South Australia which answered
questions of law concerning the application of the
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
(Cth) ("the
") before the
enactment of the
Confirmation of Application Act
questions of law stated by the parties for the opinion of the Full Court in the
special case are as follows, CD and TB correctly
accepting that
question 1(b) could not succeed independently from
question 1(a):
Surveillance Legislation (Confirmation of Application) Act
(Cth) invalid, either in whole or in part, because:
(a) it is an impermissible exercise by the Parliament of the judicial power of
the Commonwealth; or
(b) it impermissibly interferes with and undermines the institutional integrity
of courts vested with federal jurisdiction?
2. Who should pay the costs of the Special Case?"
questions of law stated in the special case arise for determination
independently of the outcome of the appeal. Conversely, the
appeal would become
moot if those questions are answered in the negative. The parties accordingly
accept that the questions of law
stated in the special case are appropriate to
be considered and that special leave to appeal should be revoked if those
are answered in the negative.
context in which the determinative questions of law arise is recorded in the
special case. Both plaintiffs have been arrested
and charged and are being held
in custody. The information filed in the criminal jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court of South Australia
alleges that the plaintiffs participated in a "criminal
organisation" as defined in
Criminal Law Consolidation
(SA) and, in contravention of that Act, stored and controlled
access to a utility vehicle containing unlawful firearms and, in contravention
Firearms Act 2015
(SA), possessed prohibited items, either a
firearm or a sound moderator or parts of a firearm.
Director of Public Prosecutions (SA) ("the SA Director") seeks to prove the
charges, in whole or in part, by using electronic
communications sent and
received using an application on mobile phones known as "AN0M" and an associated
telecommunications platform
known as the AN0M platform. Unbeknown to the users
of the AN0M application, and without their consent, communications sent from
AN0M-enabled
devices were copied and sent to servers able to be accessed by the
Australian Federal Police ("the AFP"). The AFP gained access to
communications under two surveillance device warrants and five computer access
warrants issued pursuant to the
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
AFP also gained access to data relating to the AN0M communications under four
Crimes Act 1914
Relevantly, the AFP did not obtain warrants under the
and TB filed an interlocutory application in the criminal proceedings seeking,
amongst other things, an order for the exclusion
of the AN0M communications on
which the SA Director would otherwise rely as evidence on the ground that the
AN0M communications were
unlawfully intercepted in contravention of
, and were therefore inadmissible under
ss 63(1)(a)
(1)(a) of that Act.
trial judge dismissed that application on the basis that the AN0M communications
were not unlawfully intercepted as
The trial judge
then stated for the consideration of the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of
South Australia questions of law
(1) Did the
AN0M application and system (together the AN0M platform) involve an interception
of a communication passing over a telecommunications
system contrary to
; and (2) If the answer to question one is "Yes",
is the information and records obtained as a result of that interception
inadmissible
at trial. The Court of Appeal answered question one "No" and
question two "Does not
the meantime, CD filed two further interlocutory applications in the criminal
proceedings seeking orders for the exclusion of
the AN0M communications on which
the SA Director would otherwise rely as evidence on the ground that the various
warrants (described
above) were invalid. The trial judge has heard but not
determined those applications.
and TB filed an application for and obtained a grant of special leave to appeal
to this Court against the Court of Appeal's answers
to the questions of
Confirmation of Application Act
was enacted after the grant of special leave to
appeal by this Court.
of that Act contains definitions.
Relevantly, "
intercepting a communication passing over a
telecommunications system
has the same meaning as in the"
intercepted while passing over a telecommunications system
corresponding meaning". The definition of "relevant warrant" identifies each of
the surveillance device warrants, the computer
access warrants, and the search
warrants by which the AFP obtained access to the AN0M communications and the
data related to them.
Confirmation of Application Act
is in these terms:
"(1) Information, or a record obtained under, or purportedly under, a relevant
warrant, is taken for all purposes:
(a) not to have been, and always not to have been, intercepted while passing
over a telecommunications system; and
(b) not to have been, and always not to have been, information or a record
obtained by intercepting a communication passing over
a telecommunications
(2) To avoid doubt, anything done, or anything purported to have been done, by a
person that would have been wholly, or partly, invalid
or unlawful except for
subsection (1) is taken for all purposes to be valid and lawful and to have
always been valid and lawful,
despite any effect that may have on the accrued
rights of any person.
(3) Without limiting subsection (1) or (2), evidence that, except for
subsection (1), would have been wholly, or partly, obtained:
(a) in contravention of an Australian law or in consequence of a contravention
of an Australian law; or
(b) improperly or in consequence of an impropriety;
is taken for all purposes not to have been, and always not to have been,
(c) in contravention of an Australian law or in consequence of a contravention
of an Australian law; or
(d) improperly or in consequence of an impropriety."
contains related provisions the effect of which is that: information, or a
record, obtained in reliance, or purported reliance, on
a "relevant warrant" is
taken for all purposes to have been, and to always have been, obtained under a
warrant granted under the
applicable Act
; anything done, or
anything purported to have been done, by a person that would have been wholly,
or partly, invalid or unlawful
is taken for all purposes
to be valid and lawful and to have always been valid and lawful, despite any
effect that may have on the
accrued rights of any person
evidence that, except for
, would have been wholly, or partly,
obtained in contravention of an Australian law or in consequence of a
contravention of an Australian
law, or improperly or in consequence of an
impropriety, is taken for all purposes not to have been, and always not to have
so obtained
Confirmation of Application Act
applies to civil and
criminal proceedings instituted: on or after the commencement of the Act; and
before commencement of the Act
if the proceedings are concluded before, on or
after such commencement.
will be explained, consistent with the submissions of the Solicitor-General of
the Commonwealth (supported by interveners, the
Attorneys-General for Western
Australia, Victoria and New South Wales and, by leave, the SA Director),
Confirmation of Application Act
do not infringe the
judicial power of the Commonwealth or impermissibly interfere with the integrity
of courts whether exercising
federal jurisdiction or otherwise. Those provisions
do no more than reflect the law as established in several cases including
Nicholas v The Queen
Duncan v Independent Commission Against
distinction on which CD and TB relied, between a law which attaches new legal
consequences to facts (accepted by CD and TB to
involve legislative power) and a
law which purports to establish new facts and to attach legal consequences to
those new facts (alleged
by CD and TB to involve a purported exercise of
judicial power), is neither as clear-cut as the plaintiffs' submissions would
it, nor, to the extent the distinction exists, engaged by the provisions of
the impugned legislation.
The principles
essential principle is that stated by Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ in
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic
Constitution
is structured upon, and incorporates, the doctrine of the
separation of judicial from executive and legislative powers. Chapter III
gives effect to that doctrine in so far as the vesting of judicial power is
concerned. Its provisions constitute 'an exhaustive statement
of the manner in
which the judicial power of the Commonwealth is or may be vested ... No part of
the judicial power can be conferred
in virtue of any other authority or
otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of Chap III' ... [T]he
grants of legislative
power contained in
Constitution
are expressly 'subject to' the provisions of the
Constitution
as a whole, do not
... extend to the making of a law which requires or authorizes the courts in
which the judicial power of the Commonwealth
is exclusively vested to exercise
judicial power in a manner which is inconsistent with the essential character of
a court or with
the nature of judicial power".
it defies exhaustive definition, judicial power has been described as "the
[final and authoritative] quelling of ... controversies
[involving rights and
liabilities] by ascertainment of the facts, by application of the law and by
exercise, where appropriate, of
discretion".
The adjudgment
and punishment of criminal guilt is an exclusively judicial
Fact finding as
part of a determination of criminal guilt is an incident of that exclusively
judicial function and is therefore inherently
an exercise of judicial
but a provision
which merely "facilitates the admission of evidence of material facts in aid of
correct fact finding"
involves neither the exercise of judicial power nor an impermissible legislative
intrusion into the exercise of that power. Further,
insofar as it has been said
that fact finding is an attribute of judicial power, it is well-established that
the "Commonwealth Parliament
can regulate aspects of judicial
fact-finding".
is not possible to state any formula of words against which future legislation
may be tested to ascertain if it involves an exercise
of or an impermissible
constraint on the exercise of judicial power. Usurpation of judicial power is "a
concept which is not susceptible
of precise and comprehensive
definition".
The precise
terms of any impugned legislation must be construed and considered in terms of
its legal and practical operation. Precedent
and history matter. This is why,
for example, in considering
Liyanage v The
Dawson and McHugh JJ said no more than that "legislation may amount to a
usurpation of judicial power, particularly in
a criminal case, if it prejudges
an issue with respect to a particular individual and requires a court to
exercise its function
accordingly".
, the impugned legislation was directed specifically to certain
persons charged and held in custody but the Privy Council was "not
prepared to
hold that every enactment in this field which can be described as ad hominem and
ex post facto must inevitably usurp
or infringe the judicial power" and
expressly refused to "attempt the almost impossible task of tracing where the
line is to be drawn
between what will and what will not constitute such an
interference", observing (as remains the case) that "[e]ach case must be decided
in the light of its own facts and
circumstances".
applicable facts and circumstances in
the Privy Council accepted
the characterisation of the legislation as "a legislative plan ex post facto to
secure the conviction
and enhance the punishment of ... particular individuals"
taking colour from the ultimate legislative objective of securing those
individuals' punishment by compelling them to be sentenced on conviction to not
less than ten years' imprisonment and confiscation
That attempt
involved an impermissible exercise of and intrusion into judicial power.
contrast to
, described as an example of a "'legislative
judgment' directed against specific individuals" which clearly usurped the
exclusively
judicial function of adjudging and punishing criminal
Gummow J in
described the legislation considered in
Polyukhovich v The
Commonwealth (War
retrospectively created a criminal offence, as a valid exercise of legislative
power as it left "for determination by a court
the issues which would arise at a
trial under the law in
demonstrates, however, not all issues relevant to a
determination of criminal guilt are outside legislative power. In
a law regulating the exercise of the discretion to exclude
illegally obtained evidence, despite the importance of that discretion
common law, was characterised, on its true construction, as
"evidentiary",
a law which "deem[ed] to exist, or to have been proved to the satisfaction of
the tribunal of fact, any ultimate fact,
being an element of the offences with
which the accused is
and "leav[ing]
untouched the elements of the crimes for which the accused is to be
As such, the law
did not impermissibly infringe judicial power.
which provided that anything done or purporting to have been done by the
Commission before a decision of this Court about the
meaning of the statutory
criterion of "corrupt
that would have
been validly done if "corrupt conduct" included specified "relevant conduct" was
taken to have been, and always to
have been, validly done was held neither to
trespass on nor to be incompatible with judicial power, it being "well settled
is open to the legislature to select the fact that ... occurred as the
ground for attaching such legal consequences as it may
construed, the law did no more than "effect[] an alteration in the substantive
law as to what constitutes corrupt
and did not
involve "an impermissible direction to the
judicature".
Kable v Director of Public Prosecutions
starting point the principles applicable to courts created by the [Commonwealth]
Parliament under s 71 [of the
Constitution
] and to the exercise by
them of the judicial power of the Commonwealth under Ch III", it follows
that if a law would not involve
an exercise of or impermissibly confine judicial
power as a law of the Commonwealth it would not do so as a law of a State or
impugned law
Confirmation of Application Act
is properly characterised as
indistinguishable from those laws held to be valid in
. The operation of the impugned law may be said to be directed to
criminal or civil proceedings in which information or records obtained
two surveillance device warrants, five computer access warrants, and four search
warrants defined as a "relevant warrant"
Confirmation of
Application Act
will or may be relevant. In that sense, the law is not general
in application, but nor is it confined to or directed specifically
plaintiffs.
the extent the impugned law operates on pending litigation concerning the
admissibility in the criminal proceedings against the
plaintiffs of information
or records obtained under the "relevant warrants", that fact does not indicate
that the law involves an
exercise of or impermissible trespass onto judicial
The existence of a
controversy capable of being quelled by an exercise of judicial power – in
the present case, the admissibility
in the criminal proceedings against the
plaintiffs of information or records obtained under the "relevant warrants"
not mean that the Commonwealth is incapable in the exercise of
legislative power of regulating the admissibility of evidence by any
one or more
available drafting techniques. That legislative power is not diminished merely
because an issue in controversy in the
criminal proceedings is the admissibility
of the information or records under the "relevant warrants". Chapter III of
Constitution
"contains no prohibition, express or implied, that
rights in issue in legal proceedings shall not be the subject of legislative
declaration
example on which the plaintiffs relied, that of Isaacs J in
Williamson v
"one thing to say, for instance, in an Act of Parliament, that a man found in
possession of stolen goods shall be conclusively
deemed to have stolen them, and
quite another to say that he shall be deemed to have stolen them unless he
personally proves that
he got them honestly", does not assist them. In the
present case, the analogy would be if the impugned law deemed the plaintiffs
be guilty of the offences with which they have been charged. The impugned law
does no such thing. In the context of the criminal
proceedings within which the
guilt of the plaintiffs will be determined according to law, the impugned law
merely facilitates the
admission into evidence in those proceedings of the
information and records obtained under the "relevant warrants" in circumstances
where s 7(1) and related provisions of the
may have operated to
exclude such evidence.
is the criminal and civil proceedings to which the
Confirmation of Application
applies or will apply by
of that Act which determine the scope and
essential characteristics of the judicial power affected by that Act. In the
those existing and future proceedings, the operation and effect of
Confirmation of Application Act
is and can only be to preclude
the exclusion of the AN0M communications as relevant evidence on the ground that
such evidence was
illegally obtained in contravention of
. That operation and effect is properly characterised as merely evidentiary.
construed, therefore, the impugned law in all its potential operations does not
trespass on the exclusively judicial function
of adjudging and punishing
criminal guilt. Rather, the impugned law facilitates the admission of evidence
which might otherwise be
excluded by either
of the Uniform Evidence Law legislation (as enacted by Commonwealth,
State or Territory law), or the common law discretion to exclude
obtained evidence.
impugned law does not involve a "legislative judgment" of criminal guilt or
civil liability. It does not deem any fact which
establishes or precludes the
establishment of an element of any offence or cause of action to exist or not to
exist. It leaves untouched
the elements of the offences with which the
plaintiffs have been charged and, indeed, the elements of any offences with
which a person
may be charged and in respect of which information obtained under
the "relevant warrants" may be probative. It leaves untouched the
elements of
causes of action in a civil proceeding. The impugned legislation merely selects
a fact – being the obtaining of
information or a record under a "relevant
warrant" as referred to in
– and attaches to that fact new
legal consequences or, better yet, a new legal character in criminal and civil
proceedings.
The new legal character is that the obtaining of information or a
record under a "relevant warrant" as referred to in
is taken for all
purposes to not have the legal consequences referred to in each of
(not to have been, and always not to have been, intercepted while
passing over a telecommunications system) and
(not to have been,
and always not to have been, information or a record obtained by intercepting a
communication passing over a telecommunications
best characterisation of
and (b), therefore, is that advanced by
the Solicitor-General of the Commonwealth that these provisions specify "how
certain facts
should be characterised against a 'statutory concept' (being a
legal characterisation that would otherwise have turned upon how various
terms and deeming provisions in the [TIA] Act applied in light of the facts as
found)". That is, the provisions deem "certain
facts not to answer, and never to
have answered, a particular statutory
description".
evidentiary character of
and (b) – their operation to
merely facilitate the admission of relevant evidence which might otherwise be
excluded by either
of the Uniform
Evidence Law legislation (as enacted by Commonwealth, State or Territory law),
or the common law discretion to exclude
illegally obtained
leaves unaffected other statutory and common law discretions to exclude
otherwise relevant evidence unrelated to the
discretion to exclude illegally
obtained evidence. Accordingly, there is no principled distinction between that
operation of the
impugned law and the law challenged in
the impugned law involves no exercise of or impermissible trespass onto judicial
power also emerges from consideration of the
terms of the provision,
, in respect of which
and (b) operate.
Section 7(1)
creates a statutory prohibition (interception of a
communication passing over a telecommunications system), contravention of which
has statutory consequences including those in
It was always open to the Commonwealth in the exercise of its legislative power
to define facts within and outside of the scope
of the statutory prohibition.
The Commonwealth did so in several ways in the
including, for example,
(1) "does not apply to or in relation to" the facts in
paras (a)-(d)) and 7(4)
"does not apply to, or in relation to" the
facts in paras (a)-(c)). Further, when giving meaning to certain key concepts in
uses several drafting techniques including
and (b), "is taken to"), conditional application
(1), "if" ... then), and defining
, "... consists
of"). It would have been within legislative power for the Commonwealth, at the
time of enactment of the
not to apply to certain
information and records (such as information and records obtained under
specified warrants). It therefore
follows that it is within the legislative
power of the Commonwealth, after the enactment of the
not to apply to certain information and records either by amendment
or by another Act. That the Commonwealth has achieved the same
effect by a different drafting technique in the impugned law does
not take the
impugned law outside of the Commonwealth's legislative power.
argument focused on
, no independent argument was put with respect to
Accordingly, these conclusions apply with equal force to
Confirmation of Application Act
Conclusion and
these reasons, the questions of law stated in the special case are to be
answered in the negative. The plaintiffs should pay
the defendant's costs of the
special case. It also follows that the grant of special leave to appeal must be
A cunning plan, a legal issue, and a challenge to a legislative fix
October 2018 and June 2021, the Australian Federal Police ("the AFP")
conducted a large-scale operation. The operation, named
"Operation Ironside",
was conducted alongside operations by the Federal Bureau of Investigations in
the United States and, later,
also by State police in Australia. The genesis of
Operation Ironside was the discovery by the AFP that an end-to-end encryption
application
called AN0M was being privately developed. The AFP obtained control
of that development process and installed the AN0M application
on mobile phones
which had their usual telephone and messaging features disabled. The AFP caused
921 of the mobile phones with AN0M
installed to be distributed to 21 people
across Australia in circumstances where it was anticipated that they would be
used by people
engaged in criminal activities.
Ironside had one ingenious feature. Unknown to the users of the AN0M
application, clicking the "send" icon for any message
(including those with
photo or voice memo attachments) composed on an AN0M-enabled device would
trigger the creation of a second
message in the AN0M application which was a
copy of the user's message together with some additional data from the user's
The secretly copied message and data were sent at the same time as the
user's message, via the same server, to a server described
as the iBot server
from which it was re-transmitted to servers in Sydney that the AFP could access
through retrieval software. The
AFP received copies of approximately
28 million messages from the AN0M application as part of Operation
Ironside led to the arrest of more than 390 people and many prosecutions in
Australia. The appellants in the appeal before
this Court, who are also the
plaintiffs in the special case before this Court, were among those who were
arrested and charged with
offences including participating in a criminal
organisation
possession of prohibited items, including
The prosecution
case against each appellant includes evidence that each of them possessed and
used an AN0M device to send or transmit
communications which disclosed the
AFP obtained the copies of the AN0M communications under two surveillance device
warrants and five computer access warrants issued
pursuant to the
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
(Cth). The AFP also accessed a second
set of data relating to the AN0M communications under four search warrants
issued pursuant to
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth). But the
AFP made a considered decision not to seek a warrant under the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
(Cth) ("the
"), due to an assumption that the
did not apply to the information obtained by the AFP.
the prosecutions of the appellants, the assumption that the
apply to the AN0M communications was challenged. One basis upon which the
appellants sought to exclude evidence of, and evidence
related to, those
communications from the prosecutions was that in the absence of a warrant under
, those communications were unlawfully intercepted, contrary to
, and were inadmissible under
ss 63(1)(a)
(1)(a) of the
. The appellants' challenge failed before the primary
judge. The appellants' challenge also failed on one of the questions of law
reserved for the determination of the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of
South Australia
concerned this issue.
7 November 2024, special leave to appeal from the Court of Appeal was
granted by this Court.
a fortnight after the grant of special leave to appeal, the Attorney-General of
the Commonwealth introduced the
Surveillance Legislation (Confirmation of
Application) Bill 2024
(Cth) into the House of Representatives. As the
Attorney-General explained in his Second Reading Speech for the Bill that became
Confirmation Act",
the Confirmation Act was designed to "clarify that information collected by the
Australian Federal Police during Operation Ironside
was lawfully obtained ...
consistent with the decisions of the Supreme Court of South Australia and the
South Australian Court of
The Confirmation
Act commenced on 11 December
The appellants, as
plaintiffs, challenged the validity of the Confirmation Act.
a special case, the plaintiffs and the Commonwealth agreed to state questions
for the opinion of this Court asking whether the
Confirmation Act is invalid, in
whole or in part, because: (i) it is an impermissible exercise by the
Commonwealth Parliament of
the judicial power of the Commonwealth; or
(ii) it impermissibly interferes with and undermines the institutional
integrity of courts
vested with federal jurisdiction.
special case was listed for hearing concurrently with the appeal. The questions
raised by the special case are anterior to the
issues raised by the appeal. If
valid, the Confirmation Act would have the effect that the issues concerning the
interpretation of
would be moot in this case. The
plaintiffs accepted that if the Confirmation Act is valid then special leave to
appeal should be
revoked. Oral submissions concerning the appeal were therefore
deferred until the resolution of the anterior questions raised by
the special
case. For the reasons below, those anterior questions concerning the validity of
the Confirmation Act should be answered
adversely to the plaintiffs. Special
leave to appeal should be revoked.
The legal proceedings prior to
the special case
Section 7(1)(c)
provides that "[a] person shall not ... do any act or thing that
will enable him or her or another person to intercept ... a communication
passing over a telecommunications system".
Section 6(1)
relevantly provides that "interception of a communication passing over a
telecommunications system consists of listening to or recording,
by any means,
such a communication in its passage over that telecommunications system without
the knowledge of the person making
the communication".
provides that "a communication ... is taken to start passing over a
telecommunications system when it is sent or transmitted by the
person sending
the communication" and "is taken to continue to pass over the system until it
becomes accessible to the intended recipient
of the communication".
Section 5G(a)
relevantly provides that "if the communication
is addressed to an individual" then "the intended recipient of [the]
communication"
is the individual.
The appellants brought an interlocutory application challenging the
admissibility of the AN0M communications on the basis that they
were unlawfully
intercepted contrary to
. The primary judge dismissed
the appellants' interlocutory application. The primary judge reasoned that
although the mobile phones
were part of the telecommunications system, the AN0M
application installed on those phones was
The primary judge
also held that the word "sent", read in the context of the word "transmitted",
requires more than the pressing
of a button on a mobile phone. The primary judge
then reasoned that the copies of the AN0M communications were created before
and before the message passed to the operating system of the mobile
phone so that there was no "interception" contrary to
primary judge subsequently stated two questions of law for the consideration of
the Court of Appeal. In broad terms, those questions
asked: (i) whether the AN0M application and system involved an
interception of a communication passing over a telecommunications
contrary to
; and (ii) if so, whether the
information and records obtained as a result of that interception were
admissible at the appellants'
Court of Appeal held that the mobile phones and the AN0M application installed
on those phones were part of the telecommunications
But the Court of
Appeal did not accept that the AN0M communications had been copied and the
additional data added while the communications
were "passing over" the
telecommunications system (having been "sent or transmitted"). The Court of
Appeal accepted that its conclusion
might be thought by some to "lack intuitive
appeal" and accepted that the creation of a copy of the original message, and
the additional
data added to the copy, by the AN0M application processes
occurred after the user clicked "send". But the Court of Appeal held that
when the mobile phone was connected to the internet: (i) those processes
took place while the data representing the original
message was still being
processed by the AN0M application as a preparatory step before sending; and
(ii) the process of encryption
of the original message and the copy was
also a step preparatory to the message being
appellants obtained a grant of special leave to appeal to this Court from the
decision of the Court of Appeal. The notices of
appeal and contention before
this Court raise the same issues as in the courts below, including whether the
processes of copying
the AN0M communications and adding additional data involved
an interception of a communication passing over a telecommunications
contrary to
. But this appeal is not concerned with
other exclusion applications brought in the Supreme Court of South Australia,
including by
one of the appellants seeking the exclusion of some or all of the
evidence of the AN0M communications on the basis of the invalidity
all of the warrants obtained under the
Surveillance Devices Act
Confirmation Act, with which the special case is concerned, was enacted against
this background and while the present appeal
was pending before this
The Confirmation Act and the questions in the special
Bill that became the Confirmation Act was said to be "targeted in its scope and
will only apply to information or records obtained
under a specified range of
warrants issued in connection with Operation
In the Revised
Explanatory Memorandum, it was explained that, once in force, the Confirmation
"clarify that information or a record obtained under specified warrants issued
to the Australian Federal Police under the
Crimes Act 1914
(Crimes Act)
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
(SD Act) was not intercepted while
passing over a telecommunications system and was lawfully obtained under those
warrants, consistent
with the Parliament's intention".
submissions of the plaintiffs focused primarily upon s 5 of the
Confirmation Act; the plaintiffs accepted that if s 5 is valid
was no independent argument by which s 6 could be invalid.
5 of the Confirmation Act is set out in full in the joint reasons.
Section 5 (when read with the definitions in s 4) is confined
operation to information and records obtained pursuant to the seven warrants
issued under the
Surveillance Devices Act
and the four warrants issued
. Section 5(1) provides that the information and
records are "taken for all purposes" not to have been (and always not to have
(i) "intercepted while passing over a telecommunications system"; or
(ii) "obtained by intercepting a communication passing over
telecommunications system" (within the meaning of the
Section 5(2)
then provides that "[t]o avoid doubt, anything done, or anything purported to
have been done, by a person that would have been wholly,
or partly, invalid or
unlawful except for subsection (1) is taken for all purposes to be valid and
lawful and to have always been
valid and lawful, despite any effect that may
have on the accrued rights of any person".
Section 5(3)
further protects, as evidence, the information and records referred to in
by providing that they are "taken for all purposes" not to have been
(and always not to have been) obtained "in contravention of
an Australian law or
in consequence of a contravention of an Australian law; or ... improperly or in
consequence of an impropriety".
two substantive questions raised by the special case are overlapping but
distinct. The first question essentially asks whether
the Confirmation Act is a
purported, but invalid, exercise of judicial power by the Commonwealth
Parliament. In short, the first
question asks whether judicial power has been
usurped. The implication that Ch III of the
Constitution
exhaustively states the manner in which the judicial power of the
Commonwealth may be vested carries with it a prohibition upon judicial
being exercised by the Commonwealth
Parliament.
second, overlapping but distinct, question essentially asks whether the
Confirmation Act unduly interferes with, or
"infringe[s]",
exercise of judicial power by courts vested with federal jurisdiction. It is
well established that Ch III of the
Constitution
impliedly prohibits
"a law which requires or authorizes the courts in which the judicial power of
the Commonwealth is exclusively
vested to exercise judicial power in a manner
which is inconsistent with the essential character of a court or with the nature
judicial power".
implication was extended to apply also to State courts in
Kable v Director of
Public Prosecutions
plaintiffs submitted that s 5(1) of the Confirmation Act was a "legislative
declaration of fact in a pending controversy", being
the matter of fact (or at
least partly fact and partly law) of whether a communication has been unlawfully
intercepted under the
. The plaintiffs submitted that
judicial power by a legislative quelling of controversies by ascertaining facts
and applying the law to those facts. Alternatively,
the plaintiffs submitted
that s 5 of the Confirmation Act unduly impaired the institutional
integrity of courts vested with federal
These factors were said to establish that the Parliament had borrowed the
reputation of
the judiciary "to cloak their work in the neutral colors of
judicial action".
Is the Confirmation Act a usurpation of judicial power?
When will an Act of Parliament usurp judicial power?
concept of "usurpation" of judicial power is a common feature of discourse in
this area of constitutional law concerning the
exclusive power of the judiciary.
"Usurp" in this context has its ordinary meaning of impermissible appropriation
of judicial power,
although it is sometimes conflated with the overlapping
concept of undue interference with judicial power.
is a point at which an Act of a Parliament will cease to be properly
characterised as an exercise of legislative power and
be characterised as a
wrongful appropriation of judicial power. That point is notoriously difficult to
identify. The plaintiffs in
this special case pointed to cases where a purported
exercise of legislative power had been held to be properly characterised as
exercise of judicial power. The Commonwealth, supported by the Attorneys-General
for the States of Western Australia, Victoria,
and New South Wales and the
Director of Public Prosecutions for South Australia, pointed to cases where such
a characterisation was
denied. A consideration of those cases is illuminating
but they must be understood in the context of the underlying principle.
starting point is the trite observation that judicial power cannot be
exhaustively defined but that its identification depends
upon "consideration of
predominant characteristics" and "historic functions and processes of courts of
characteristics and historic functions are "at the very centre of judicial
marked by the
authoritative determination of "a question as to the existence of a right or
obligation, so that an exercise of the
power creates a new charter by reference
to which that question is in future to be decided as between [defined] persons
of persons".
Although it is neither an exhaustive definition nor even a complete description,
the essence of judicial power can thus generally
be described as the "quelling
of ... controversies by ascertainment of the facts, by application of the law
and by exercise, where
appropriate, of judicial
discretion".
By contrast
with legislative power, which usually creates generalised norms that apply
prospectively, judicial power generally creates
particular legal relations
between people by applying to facts the legal rules that existed at the time of
the controversy.
exercise of power by the legislature will often be easily characterised as
judicial where the
of Parliament is to perform a role that falls
within the core of judicial power by aiming to affect legal relations (rights,
liabilities) by resolving controversies between persons, or classes of
persons, based upon the application of a legal rule to reach
a legislative
conclusion about past facts. A famous example, repeatedly
of the exercise of
judicial power by Parliament was given by Isaacs J in
The example was an
Act of Parliament which did not merely reverse the onus of proof of receipt of
stolen goods but conclusively deemed
a person in possession of stolen goods to
have stolen them. Another example is from the famous case of
Liyanage v The
in which the
Privy Council described the "pith and substance" of the ad hominem
legislation of Ceylon in that case as "a legislative
plan ex post facto to
secure the conviction and enhance the punishment of ... particular
individuals".
the other hand, it is more difficult to characterise a legislative exercise of
power as judicial where it is only the
of a law that is said to
mimic the application of judicial power, such as where the incidental effect of
a law is substantively to
resolve a controversy. This will be so even where the
law operates in some similar ways to the exercise of judicial power. For
a retrospective, or even
retroactive,
the law by Parliament, which leaves to courts the ability to determine the
application of the law, is not usually sufficient
to amount to a usurpation of
judicial power
though one of the central attributes of judicial power is ascertaining the law
that existed at the time of the facts. Similarly,
an ad hominem law is not
necessarily an exercise of judicial power despite the particularised nature of
judicial power compared with
the usual role of legislative power in creating
generalised
v The Queen
focus of submissions concerning usurpation of judicial power was the decision of
this Court in
Nicholas v The
The background
was that a permanent stay had been ordered of the prosecution
of offences with which Mr Nicholas had been charged where evidence
for conviction was likely to be held inadmissible as a consequence of
the decision of this Court in
Ridgeway v The
Commonwealth Parliament subsequently enacted legislation intended to reverse the
effect of the decision in
. One provision of the
legislation
effectively
provided that, subject to certain conditions, the admissibility of evidence for
a prosecution of an offence of the relevant
nature was to be determined by
"disregard[ing]" the fact that a law enforcement officer committed an offence in
importing narcotic
goods. Mr Nicholas challenged the constitutional
validity of that provision in various
but perhaps the
best way of expressing his challenge was that the provision either usurped or
impermissibly intruded upon ("infringed")
A majority of this
Court held that the provision was valid. In dissent, McHugh
noted the relevance of
the extent of the impairment of judicial power when determining invalidity,
given the rationale for the exclusionary
(namely, to
preserve "the public interest in maintaining the integrity of the
argument was made in the present special case.
central matters upon which the members of the majority relied were: (i) the
evidentiary nature of the provision (and consequently
the absence of any
adjudication by Parliament of any ultimate fact); and (ii) that it was not
the purpose of the legislation to target
an individual or a particular category
of people. Brennan CJ said that a "law prescribing a rule of evidence does
not impair the
curial function of finding facts, applying the law or exercising
any available
discretion".
application of the provision was not limited to cases "in which prosecutions
were pending"
provision simply "enlarged the evidentiary material available to a
Toohey J held
that as an evidentiary provision, the provision neither determined whether the
charge would succeed or fail nor singled
out any individual or category of
held that the provision did no more than exclude illegality on the part of law
enforcement officers from consideration
in the exercise of the discretion
recognised in
and did not infringe the requirements of equal
reiterated that "the section does not deem any ultimate fact to exist, or to
have been proved"
held that the identity of those affected by the provision might not be
established for some time after the legislation came into
And Hayne J held
that, as a matter of substance, the provision did not deal with questions of
guilt or innocence and was concerned
"not with a single identified, or
identifiable, prosecution but with several prosecutions (albeit prosecutions
which ... can be identified
and are relatively
Confirmation Act does not usurp judicial power
plaintiffs submitted that the difference between
circumstances of this special case is that the Commonwealth Parliament made a
"legislative declaration of fact" in s 5(1)
of the Confirmation Act when it
provided, relevantly, that the information and records were "taken for all
purposes" not to have
been "obtained by intercepting a communication passing
over a telecommunications system" within the meaning of the
words, even if a communication fell within the meaning of "passing over a
telecommunications system" by being sent or transmitted
by the person sending
the communication, as defined in
, the communication
would be deemed not to have been passing over a telecommunications system.
relevant expressions in
, "sen[ding]" or "transmitt[ing]" a
communication, do not invite legal characterisations of facts like
"contracting", "assaulting",
or "stealing". They are ordinary English
expressions which, properly interpreted as a matter of law, require processes of
characterisation
of primary facts. The facts of a person being seen in a bathing
suit in a pool, moving by self-propulsion, might be characterised
as a person
"swimming". That remains a question of fact. But a legal question is asked as
soon as it is necessary to ask whether
that factual characterisation satisfies a
legal rule. Thus, a question of whether the factual characterisation of
"swimming" falls
within a regulation at the pool that creates a rule of "no
swimming" on a particular day is a question of law. For these reasons,
simplistic to say even of a statutory expression involving ordinary concepts of
fact that meaning is a question of fact
and interpretation is a question of
too, the factual characterisations of "sending" or "transmitting" become
questions of law when it is asked whether those characterisations
fall within a
legislative provision. To apply the analogy above to the Confirmation Act,
s 5(1) operates at the level of the "no
swimming" rule. It changes the
legal effect of
relevantly by denying that a
communication which fell within the meaning of
was "obtained by
intercepting a communication passing over a telecommunications system". This
level of operation of s 5(1) of the
Confirmation Act is clear from the
provision in s 5(2), "[t]o avoid doubt", that the effect of s 5(1) is
to make the relevant acts
"valid and lawful" at all times. It is also confirmed
by the complementary provision in s 5(3), which provides that the evidence
comprised of the relevant information and records obtained "in contravention of
an Australian law or in consequence of a contravention
of an Australian law; or
... improperly or in consequence of an impropriety" is "taken for all purposes"
not to have been so obtained.
short, s 5 of the Confirmation Act alters the legal application of
and the rules of evidence to the extent that they
would exclude from evidence in any proceeding the information and records
under the warrants obtained in Operation Ironside. But the Confirmation
Act does not have the purpose of being a legislative declaration
of facts. Nor
does it have the purpose of ultimately resolving the criminal proceedings
against the plaintiffs or a class of persons
including the plaintiffs. Further,
although the Confirmation Act operates retrospectively, it does not operate at
the level of finding
facts. The Confirmation Act simply removes the need for a
judicial finding of the time at which the relevant communication had been
or "transmitted". The Confirmation Act does not usurp judicial power.
Undue impairment of judicial power
concept of an undue impairment of judicial power can overlap with the concept of
a usurpation of judicial power. An example is
a law of Congress or Parliament
that directed that in "Smith v Jones", "Smith
Whether the
litigation was pending or had been resolved in favour of Jones, the law would be
invalid. As Hamilton wrote, "[a] legislature,
without exceeding its province,
cannot reverse a determination once made, in a particular
Such a law,
directing the result that courts must reach or should have reached to resolve a
controversy, could be seen either as
an extreme form of impairment of judicial
power or as a usurpation of judicial power by
Parliament.
undue impairment of judicial power can arise from interferences falling short of
directions to the judiciary about the result
that must be reached or should have
been reached. An example is legislation that requires courts to re-open final
judgments entered
on a particular basis before the legislation was
Other examples
are legislation that deprives a court of one of its defining characteristics
(such as decisional independence or
impartiality),
substantially impairs one of those defining characteristics (such as legislation
that requires a court to act in a procedurally
unfair way), which cannot be
justified as reasonably necessary for a legitimate legislative
The categories
of case that can amount to an undue impairment of judicial power are not closed.
In every case, close attention should
be given to both the purpose and the
effect of the impugned legislation.
authority which must be approached with care is
Australian Building
Construction Employees' and Builders Labourers' Federation v The
Commonwealth
passage from that authority relied upon in this case by the Commonwealth, this
Court said of an argument that the legislation
in that case had interfered with
judicial power that "[i]t matters not that the motive or purpose of the
Minister, the Government
and the Parliament in enacting the statute was to
circumvent the proceedings and forestall any decision which might be given in
proceedings".
However, that statement was prefaced by an emphasis that the relevant
legislation "does not deal with any aspect of the judicial
process" and by a
contrast with circumstances where the legislation "interferes with the judicial
process itself".
purpose of Parliament in enacting a law cannot create an undue interference with
judicial power if there is no interference with
any aspect of the judicial
process but merely a consequential or incidental effect upon the rights that
have been, or will be, adjudicated
by a court. But the purpose of Parliament is
important where legislation does interfere with the judicial
Duncan v Independent Commission Against
authority concerning undue impairment of judicial power which was the focus of
submissions in this case is
Duncan v Independent Commission Against
background to
was the decision of this Court in
Independent
Commission Against Corruption v
the meaning of "corrupt conduct" in
Independent Commission
Against Corruption Act 1988
(NSW), conferring investigative
compromise the probity of public
administration. Mr Duncan could have
successfully relied upon the decision in
in his application for
leave to appeal from a decision which refused his challenge to findings of
corrupt conduct made against him
by the Commission. But while Mr Duncan's
application for leave to appeal was pending, the Parliament of New South Wales
enacted validating
legislation to ensure the validity of the Commission's
activities despite the decision in
Mr Duncan challenged the validity of that validating legislation.
Mr Duncan asserted that the validating legislation unduly impaired
institutional integrity of the Supreme Court of New South Wales by directing the
Court to treat acts as valid when those acts
unanimously rejected Mr Duncan's claim.
joint judgment of French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ held that the
validating legislation merely amended the
Independent Commission Against
Corruption Act
Although that amendment retrospectively changed the legal position of the
Commission and may have affected Mr Duncan's rights, including
reputation, it was open to the legislature to attach new legal consequences to
events which occurred prior to the date specified
in the validating legislation
(being the date of judgment delivery in
of the Confirmation Act is not an undue impairment of judicial power
of the Confirmation Act does, and is intended to, interfere with the judicial
process. Section 5 is properly characterised
as a law that changes the
manner in which a select, but undetermined, group of cases are to be decided in
the future. But the mere
interference with the judicial process, particularly by
laws concerned with the rules of procedure or evidence, will not, without
be an undue impairment of judicial power. The plaintiffs properly did not
suggest otherwise.
from their assertion that s 5 of the Confirmation Act was an exercise of
judicial power, addressed separately above, the plaintiffs
relied upon two
matters in support of their submission that s 5 was an undue interference
with judicial power. The first was that
s 5 applied only to a select cohort
of cases, thus establishing two separate regimes for the application of
. The second was that any application for the exclusion of
evidence obtained under the relevant warrants was rendered futile.
to the first matter, the plaintiffs are correct that s 5 of the
Confirmation Act applies only to a select cohort of cases. But
that cohort are
not necessarily identified people. Section 5 is not confined in its
application to the 390 people who are presently
charged; it could apply to
others if further charges are laid as a result of information obtained under the
relevant Operation Ironside
warrants. Further, s 5 operates in the same
usual manner as legislative amendments to the rules of evidence or procedure; in
the manner in which the affected group of cases are to be decided, the
section does not operate
retroactively
it will prescribe the manner in which something may or must be done in the
future, even if what is to be done relates to,
or is based upon, past
creation of two different procedures for the future judicial application of a
statutory rule, based on different factual
circumstances, is not uncommon and
entirely within the province of Parliament.
to the second matter, there are three reasons that the redundancy of any
application for the exclusion of evidence, within the
select cohort of people to
whom s 5 applies, does not establish an undue interference with judicial
power. First, it was not suggested
that in every case the admission of the
relevant evidence was intended to, or would necessarily, have the effect that
the accused
person would be found guilty. The interference by s 5 with the
judicial process leaves intact the court's ultimate decisional independence.
Secondly, s 5 does not address the requirement for the Crown to prove that
the AN0M communications were sent by the relevant accused
persons. Thirdly,
there remain other important judicial discretions to exclude the relevant
evidence on grounds such as: (i) the
prejudicial effect of the evidence
exceeding its probative
or (ii) the
effect that the evidence would have on the fairness of the trial independently
of the legality of the warrants under
which the evidence was
of the Confirmation Act does not unduly impair judicial
questions in the special case should be answered as follows:
Question 1(a):
Surveillance Legislation (Confirmation of
Application) Act 2024
(Cth) invalid, either in whole or in part, because it
is an impermissible exercise by the Parliament of the judicial power of the
Commonwealth?
Question 1(b):
Surveillance Legislation (Confirmation of
Application) Act 2024
(Cth) invalid, either in whole or in part, because it
impermissibly interferes with and undermines the institutional integrity of
courts vested with federal jurisdiction?
Question 2:
Who should pay the costs of the special case?
The plaintiffs.
effect of these answers is that the issues raised in the appeal concerning the
interpretation and application of
consequences for the parties to the appeal other than with respect to costs. Of
course, by leaving without final resolution
by this Court the important issues
concerning the interpretation and application of
there will remain
residual uncertainty for an applicant seeking a warrant in related circumstances
in the future. Nevertheless, and
in light of the proper concession made by the
plaintiffs, special leave to appeal should be revoked.
"person shall not: (a) intercept ... a communication passing over a
telecommunications system", where: "communication" is defined
communication passing over a telecommunications system" is given meaning by
; and "interception of a communication passing over a
telecommunications system" is given meaning by
, "a person shall not ... communicate to another person, make use of,
or make a record of ... lawfully intercepted information or
information obtained
by intercepting a communication in contravention of
subsection 7(1)".
, such information or record is not admissible in
evidence subject to immaterial exceptions.
(2023) 413 ALR
Criminal Procedure Act
Questions of Law Reserved (Nos
1 and 2 of 2023)
(2024) 388 FLR 118.
CD v Director of Public
Prosecutions (SA)
[2024] HCASL 297.
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173.
[2015] HCA 32
; (2015) 256 CLR 83. See also, eg,
Nelungaloo Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
(1948) 75 CLR 495;
R v Humby; Ex
parte Rooney
(1973) 129 CLR 231;
Australian Education Union v General
Manager of Fair Work Australia
[2012] HCA 19
; (2012) 246 CLR 117.
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at 26-27, quoting
R v Kirby; Ex parte Boilermakers' Society of Australia
[1956] HCA 10
; (1956) 94 CLR 254
at 270 and referring to, eg,
Polyukhovich v The Commonwealth (War Crimes Act
[1991] HCA 32
; (1991) 172 CLR 501 at 607, 689, 703-704.
Fencott v Muller
CLR 570 at 608, referring to
Huddart, Parker & Co Pty Ltd v Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
; (1909) 8 CLR 330 at 357.
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for
Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at 27.
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 187-188
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 188
Graham v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 33
; (2017) 263 CLR 1 at 22
R v Humby; Ex parte
(1973) 129 CLR 231 at 249-250.
[1967] 1 AC 259.
Leeth v The Commonwealth
(1992) 174 CLR 455 at 469-470.
[1967] 1 AC 259 at 289-290.
[1967] 1 AC 259 at 290-291.
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 221
[1991] HCA 32
; (1991) 172 CLR 501.
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 234
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 234
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 236
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 238
[2015] HCA 32
; (2015) 256 CLR 83.
Independent Commission
Against Corruption (NSW) v Cunneen
(2015) 256 CLR 1.
[2015] HCA 32
; (2015) 256 CLR 83 at 95
referring to
Baker v The Queen
[2004] HCA 45
; (2004) 223 CLR 513 at 532
Re Macks; Ex parte Saint
(2000) 204 CLR 158 at 178 [25], 187-188
[59]-[60], 200 [107], 232-233 [208], 280 [347].
[2015] HCA 32
; (2015) 256 CLR 83 at 99
[2015] HCA 32
; (2015) 256 CLR 83 at 99
[1996] HCA 24
; (1996) 189 CLR 51.
H A Bachrach Pty Ltd v
[1998] HCA 54
; (1998) 195 CLR 547 at 561-562
Australian Building
Construction Employees' and Builders Labourers' Federation v The
Commonwealth
[1986] HCA 47
; (1986) 161 CLR 88.
R v Humby; Ex parte
(1973) 129 CLR 231 at 250.
[1926] HCA 46
; (1926) 39 CLR 95 at 108.
Ridgeway v The Queen
(1995) 184 CLR 19.
Lazarus v Independent
Commission Against Corruption
[2017] NSWCA 37
; (2017) 94 NSWLR 36.
Ridgeway v The Queen
(1995) 184 CLR 19.
Criminal Law Consolidation
Firearms Act
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
Questions of Law Reserved
(Nos 1 and 2 of 2023)
(2024) 388 FLR 118 at 202 [379].
Surveillance Legislation
(Confirmation of Application) Act 2024
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 21 November 2024
Surveillance Legislation
(Confirmation of Application)
(2023) 413 ALR
514 at 536-537 [101]-[102].
(2023) 413 ALR
514 at 537-538 [105]-[109].
Questions of Law Reserved
(Nos 1 and 2 of 2023)
(2024) 388 FLR 118 at 156 [178].
Questions of Law Reserved
(Nos 1 and 2 of 2023)
(2024) 388 FLR 118 at 159-166 [193]-[216].
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 21 November 2024
Australia, Senate,
Surveillance Legislation (Confirmation of Application) Bill 2024
Explanatory Memorandum at 2 [1].
Surveillance Legislation
(Confirmation of Application) Act 2024
(definition of
"intercepting a communication passing over a telecommunications system").
R v Kirby; Ex parte
Boilermakers' Society of Australia
[1956] HCA 10
; (1956) 94 CLR 254 at 270;
Lim v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
176 CLR 1 at 26-27.
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 220
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for
Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at 27,
Polyukhovich v The Commonwealth
[1991] HCA 32
; (1991) 172 CLR 501 at 607, 689,
[1996] HCA 24
; (1996) 189 CLR 51.
Mistretta v United
[1989] USSC 9
; (1989) 488 US 361 at 407.
R v Trade Practices
Tribunal; Ex parte Tasmanian Breweries Pty Ltd
[1970] HCA 8
; (1970) 123 CLR 361 at
R v Kirby; Ex parte
Boilermakers' Society of Australia
[1956] HCA 10
; (1956) 94 CLR 254 at 307.
R v Trade Practices
Tribunal; Ex parte Tasmanian Breweries Pty Ltd
[1970] HCA 8
; (1970) 123 CLR 361 at 374,
R v Ludeke; Ex parte Australian Building Construction Employees'
and Builders Labourers' Federation
[1985] HCA 84
; (1985) 159 CLR 636 at 655.
Fencott v Muller
152 CLR 570 at 608. See also
Huddart, Parker & Co Pty Ltd v Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
; (1909) 8 CLR 330 at 357;
Wilson v Minister for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Affairs
[1996] HCA 18
; (1996) 189 CLR 1 at 11.
Bell Lawyers Pty Ltd v
[2019] HCA 29
; (2019) 269 CLR 333 at 368
, discussing
Ha v New South Wales
[1997] HCA 34
; (1997) 189 CLR 465 at 504, 515.
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 190
Silbert v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2002] WASCA 12
; (2002) 25 WAR 330 at 335
, 347 [81];
Commissioner of Taxation v
[2006] QCA 108
; [2006] 2 Qd R 316 at 333
Police v Dunstall
[2015] HCA 26
; (2015) 256 CLR 403 at 420
Williamson v Ah On
[1926] HCA 46
; (1926) 39 CLR 95 at 108.
[1967] 1 AC 259 at 290.
Stephens v The Queen
[2022] HCA 31
; (2022) 273 CLR 635 at 651
Polyukhovich v The
Commonwealth
[1991] HCA 32
; (1991) 172 CLR 501.
Mineralogy Pty Ltd v Western
[2021] HCA 30
; (2021) 274 CLR 219 at 281
United States v
[1946] USSC 104
; (1946) 328 US 303 at 315-318;
Bank Markazi v Peterson
578 US 212 at 233-234.
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173.
(1995) 184 CLR 19.
Crimes Amendment (Controlled
Operations) Act 1996
, Sch 1, item 2, inserting
s 15X into the
Crimes Act 1914
Nicholas v The
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 185
, 200 [49].
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 218
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 226
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 265
Ridgeway v The Queen
(1995) 184 CLR 19 at 41.
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 189
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 192
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 191
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 202
, 203 [57].
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 210-211
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 212
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 238
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 238-239
Nicholas v The Queen
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 277
. See also at 278 [250]-[252].
Collector of Customs v
Agfa-Gevaert Ltd
[1996] HCA 36
; (1996) 186 CLR 389
at 396-397.
Bank Markazi v Peterson
(2016) 578 US 212 at 231. See also at 237.
The Federalist
The Federalist, on the New
Constitution
(1802), vol 2 at
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister
for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at 27,
Polyukhovich v The Commonwealth
[1991] HCA 32
; (1991) 172 CLR 501 at 607;
Leeth v The Commonwealth
(1992) 174 CLR 455 at 469-470;
Nicholas v The
[1998] HCA 9
; (1998) 193 CLR 173 at 188
See, for instance,
Spendthrift Farm Inc
[1995] USSC 32
; (1995) 514 US 211.
Condon v Pompano Pty Ltd
(2013) 252 CLR 38 at 71 [67].
SDCV v Director-General
of Security
[2022] HCA 32
; (2022) 277 CLR 241 at 293-294
, 307 [176], 326 [231]. See
Minister for Home Affairs v Benbrika
[2021] HCA 4
; (2021) 272 CLR 68 at 167-170
MJZP v Director-General of Security
(2025) 99 ALJR 1108 at
1122 [63]; 423 ALR 378 at 395.
[1986] HCA 47
; (1986) 161 CLR 88.
Australian Building
Construction Employees' and Builders Labourers' Federation v The
Commonwealth
[1986] HCA 47
; (1986) 161 CLR 88 at 96-97.
Australian Building
Construction Employees' and Builders Labourers' Federation v The
Commonwealth
[1986] HCA 47
; (1986) 161 CLR 88 at 96.
[2015] HCA 32
; (2015) 256 CLR 83.
(2015) 256 CLR 1.
Independent Commission
Against Corruption Amendment (Validation) Act 2015
Duncan v Independent
Commission Against Corruption
[2015] HCA 32
; (2015) 256 CLR 83 at 93
Duncan v Independent
Commission Against Corruption
[2015] HCA 32
; (2015) 256 CLR 83 at 94
Duncan v Independent
Commission Against Corruption
[2015] HCA 32
; (2015) 256 CLR 83 at 94-95
Independent Commission Against Corruption Amendment (Validation) Act 2015
(NSW), Sch 1, inserting Sch 4,
, cll 34-35 into the
Independent Commission Against Corruption Act 1988
Stephens v The Queen
[2022] HCA 31
; (2022) 273 CLR 635 at 651
Rodway v The Queen
[1990] HCA 19
; (1990) 169 CLR 515 at 518.
R v Christie
[1914] UKLawRpAC 20
Driscoll v The Queen
[1977] HCA 43
; (1977) 137 CLR 517 at 541;
R v Swaffield
(1998) 192 CLR 159 at 191-193 [62]-[64].
[1950] HCA 25
; (1950) 82 CLR
133 at 159;
R v Swaffield
(1998) 192 CLR 159 at 189-190 [53]-[54];
Police v Dunstall
[2015] HCA 26
; (2015) 256 CLR 403.
RTF format (448 KB)
Signed PDF/A format