Shaw v University of Queensland (includes corrigendum dated 2 September 1999) [1999] IRCA 5 (20 August 1999)
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DISTRICT REGISTRY
ON APPEAL FROM A JUDGE OF THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
OF QUEENSLAND
CJ, MOORE and MARSHALL JJ
AUGUST 1999
CORRIGENDUM
Please replace the front page of the judgment in the abovementioned matter with
the attached page herewith.
The words "FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA" and the citation at the top of the page
has been amended to read:
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Shaw v University of Queensland
[1999] IRCA 5
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Shaw v University of Queensland
[1999] IRCA 5
INDUSTRIAL LAW - Termination of employment - Alleged unlawful termination -
Award provision enabling employer to require an employee
whose capacity to
perform her duties was in doubt to attend a medical examination - Presumption
of incapacity upon failure to attend
- Employee failed to attend for
psychiatric examination - Presumption used as basis for termination - Whether
termination was for
a valid reason - Whether employee accorded procedural
Industrial Relations Act
, ss170DC and 170DE
Murdoch University v Mainsbridge
(1988) 155 ALR 357
ROSLYN MARY SHAW v UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
Q146 of 1999
WILCOX CJ, MOORE and MARSHALL JJ
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Shaw v University of Queensland
[1999] IRCA 5
INDUSTRIAL LAW - Termination of employment - Alleged unlawful termination -
Award provision enabling employer to require an employee
whose capacity to
perform her duties was in doubt to attend a medical examination - Presumption
of incapacity upon failure to attend
- Employee failed to attend for
psychiatric examination - Presumption used as basis for termination - Whether
termination was for
a valid reason - Whether employee accorded procedural
Industrial Relations Act
, ss170DC and 170DE
Murdoch University v Mainsbridge
(1988) 155 ALR 357
ROSLYN MARY SHAW v UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
Q146 of 1999
WILCOX CJ, MOORE and MARSHALL JJ
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DISTRICT REGISTRY
ON APPEAL FROM A JUDGE OF THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
OF QUEENSLAND
CJ, MOORE and MARSHALL JJ
AUGUST 1999
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The appeal be dismissed.
Note: Settlement and entry of orders is dealt with in Order 36 of the
Industrial Relations Court Rules.
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DISTRICT REGISTRY
ON APPEAL FROM A JUDGE OF THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
OF QUEENSLAND
CJ, MOORE and MARSHALL JJ
AUGUST 1999
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
1 WILCOX CJ and MARSHALL J:
This is an appeal by Dr Roslyn Shaw from a
judgment of Ryan J dismissing an application made pursuant to s170EA of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
(Cth) ("the Act"). His Honour rejected Dr
Shaw's contentions that ss170DC and 170DE of the Act had been breached by the
respondent,
University of Queensland ("the University"). The facts are fully
set out in the primary judge's reasons for judgment. They need
2 At the hearing before Ryan J the parties focused on a particular clause in
the relevant award and the question as to whether the
University had complied
with it in terminating Dr Shaw's employment. It is important to observe that
mere compliance with an award
provision does not guarantee against
contravention of s170DC or s170DE of the Act. The converse is also true.
There may be cases
where there is a contravention of an award provision, for
example, one relating to procedure, without there being a contravention
Act. However in this case the parties were content to litigate the statutory
issues by reference to the question of whether
or not the University had
complied with the award.
3 Ryan J held that the appellant's employment had been terminated for a valid
reason based on her incapacity to perform her duties
as a lecturer in the
Department of Dentistry. His Honour's ultimate conclusion on this issue was
expressed as follows:
"In my view, therefore, the University had, in the absence of
any explanation by the applicant, evidence from which it could reasonably
apprehend that the applicant's capacity to perform her duties had been
significantly diminished."
4 We agree with Ryan J in these conclusions, especially having regard to the
appellant's failure to attend a medical examination as
required by the
University in reliance upon the relevant award provision. That examination had
been required by the Vice Chancellor
after consideration of reports of Dr
Shaw's disruptive behaviour and after receiving advice from two members of the
University staff
with psychiatric qualifications. As Ryan J found, the
material before the Vice Chancellor was such as to make it open to him to
a doubt as to Dr Shaw's capacity to perform her duties.
5 We have one reservation about the reasoning process engaged in by his Honour
in coming to that conclusion. At pars 42 and 43
"In my view a valid reason for termination of employment
`connected with the employee's capacity' is established
if the employer can
show a reasonably held belief
upon the evidence available at the time of
the termination of employment, that the employee's capacity to perform the
duties required
pursuant to the contract of employment had been diminished to
such an extent that the employee was no longer able to perform those
required of him or her pursuant to the contract of employment.
The expression `employee's capacity' as used in s170DE(1) comprehends the
employee's capacity to perform, in the future, the duties
required pursuant to
the contract of employment. If an employer has a reasonably held view that an
employee's state of health has
significantly diminished that employee's
capacity to perform his or her duties pursuant to the contract of employment,
then the employer
has a valid reason for termination under s170DE(1) of the
This analysis seems to conflict with what a Full Court of this Court said in
Murdoch University v Mainsbridge
(1998) 155 ALR 357
not possible to conclude that the employer will
establish a valid reason solely by reference to the employer's honest belief on
formed after sufficient inquiry that the employee was
guilty of misconduct. The court must balance that factor in the scales with
all the other circumstances of the case. In some cases, the employer's belief
will, when placed in the balance, prove influential
in establishing a valid
reason. In others, it will not. Of course, minds will differ as to the
importance of the relative significance
of the inquiry made by the employer as
against the innocence of the employee in a particular case. In the light of
our construction
of s170DE(1), it would be wrong to lay down a rule to be
applied by the court, in every case, that an honest belief held by an employer
based on reasonable grounds after sufficient inquiry will or will not
constitute a valid reason for termination. As we have said,
the answer to that
question is a matter of broad judgment in each case."
However, it is clear from his subsequent reasoning that Ryan J's approach
did not affect his ultimate conclusion concerning s170DE(1)
of the Act.
6 On the issue of compliance with s170DC of the Act, we agree for the reasons
expressed by Ryan J that no breach of that section
has been established. Dr
Shaw knew for almost four months that there was a concern held by the
University in relation to her capacity
to adequately perform her duties due to
possible mental illness and the effects of her disruptive behaviour on other
staff members.
She failed to attend an appointment made with an independent
psychiatrist and failed to make a further appointment when so requested.
no time did Dr Shaw give an explanation to the University for those omissions.
In this situation, we agree with Ryan J that
it was open to the Vice-Chancellor
of the University, in the absence of any material to the contrary, to act as he
did. Contrary
to submissions advanced on behalf of Dr Shaw on the appeal, it
was not incumbent upon the Vice-Chancellor to allow her further time
her own psychiatric report.
7 To the extent that the Vice-Chancellor took into account disruption caused by
the appellant in the Dentistry Faculty of the University,
we are satisfied that
the University effectively brought that matter to Dr Shaw's attention and gave
her an opportunity to be heard
correspondence to Dr Shaw from the University on 23 August 1995 that continued
disruption would
put her job at risk. The disruption referred to was in the
context of the allegation that she suffered from mental illness putting
capacity to perform her tasks in question.
8 Reference was made in argument to the evidence of the Vice-Chancellor and Mr
Feeney regarding the reasons for the termination.
They both denied having
formed an opinion that Dr Shaw was suffering from mental illness but relied on
the presumption included
in sub-cl 14(i) of the relevant award which provided
"(i) A Chief Executive Officer may construe a failure by a
staff member to undergo a medical examination in accordance with these
procedures within 3 months of a written notification to do so as prima facie
evidence that such a medical examination would have
found that the staff member
is unable to perform his or her duties and is unlikely to be able to resume
them within 12 months, and
may act accordingly; provided that such a refusal by
a staff member in these circumstances shall not constitute misconduct nor lead
to any greater penalty or loss of entitlements than would have resulted from an
adverse medical report."
9 Contrary to the submissions of counsel for Dr Shaw we are not of the view
that the Vice-Chancellor made his decision to terminate
the appellant's
employment because of Dr Shaw's disruptive behaviour. Rather we consider that
this was a factor influencing the
exercise of his discretion as to whether he
would act on the basis of the presumption provided by cl 14(i) of the award.
10 We think the appeal should be dismissed.
certify that the preceding ten (10) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment herein of the Honourable Chief
Justice Wilcox and Justice
Dated: 20 August 1999
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DISTRICT REGISTRY
Q 146 OF 1999
OF QUEENSLAND
CJ, MOORE & MARSHALL JJ
AUGUST 1999
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
: I have read the reasons of Wilcox CJ and Marshall J in a
draft form. I agree that the appeal should be dismissed. However my
for concluding that s 170DC has not been contravened are different. I do not
repeat the factual background set out in the
reasons for judgment of the
learned primary judge.
12 Section 170DC provides:
An employer must not terminate an employee's employment for
reasons related to the employee's conduct or performance unless:
the employee has been given the opportunity to defend himself or
herself against the allegations made; or
the employer could not reasonably be expected to give the employee
that opportunity.
13 The purpose of s 170DC has recently been considered by a Full Court in
Shields v Carlton United Breweries Ltd
[1998] FCA 377
in the following
As Moore J said in
Perrin v Des Taylor Pty Ltd
A second purpose of s170DC is that an employee with whom an allegation has been
raised may be able to persuade the employer that,
while the allegation is of
substance, there are factors that should persuade the employer not to terminate
the employment. They may
be extenuating personal circumstances or they may
involve undertakings about future conduct. The rights of an employee to be
before dismissal now embodied in s170DC are not novel: see Gregory v
Philip Morris Ltd (1988) 24 IR 397 at 415; Wheeler v Philip
at 346; Bostik (Australia) Pty Ltd v Gorgevski (No 1)
[1992] FCA 209
(1992) 36 FCR
at 35; 41 IR 452 at 466 and Byrne v Australian Airlines Ltd
[1994] FCA 888
(1994) 47 FCR
; 52 IR 10 and in the United Kingdom: see Spencer v Paragon Wallpapers
[1976] IRLR 373
; Williamson v Alcan (UK) Ltd
[1978] ICR 104
; W Weddel & Co
Ltd v Tepper
[1980] ICR 286.
In Bostik, Gray J, when discussing a requirement
of an award that a dismissal not be harsh, unjust or unreasonable said at 35;
'Although the procedural requirements of the clause will vary according to the
circumstances, they are intended to be real. An employer
investigating an allegation of misconduct or neglect of duty, or some other act
or omission which might provide a ground
for dismissal, is required to carry
out a proper investigation, and not merely to go through the motions. The
employer is required
to ascertain whether there are any mitigating factors,
either associated with the alleged ground for dismissal, or arising from the
employee's past record and future prospects. It is not intended that an
employer should be able to substitute a court proceedings
for its own
investigation, ie, to overcome procedural deficiencies by the establishing to
the satisfaction of the court that the
dismissal concerned would not be harsh,
unjust or unreasonable on substantive grounds.'
See also Walton v Mermaid Dry Cleaners Pty Ltd
(1996) 142 ALR 681.
Although it is no longer open to an applicant under
of the Act to
complain that the termination of his or her employment has been harsh, unjust
or unreasonable, we consider that considerations
of procedural fairness similar
to those indicated by Gray J in Bostik inform the requirement in s170DC of the
Act that the employee
be given "the opportunity to defend himself or herself
against the allegations made". This view was not shared by the learned primary
judge as in his reasons, immediately after the passage last quoted, his Honour
The other response to my concern, which is perhaps more pertinent, is that
s 170DC did not require an employer to give an employee
an opportunity to
argue the case against dismissal. What the employer must do was specifically
stated. The employer must give the
employee "the opportunity to defend himself
against the allegations made"; that is, to meet those specific allegations. No
when this occurs, employees often offer reasons why, even if the
allegations are made out, they should not be dismissed. However,
think an employer's failure specifically to invite that type of submission
amounts to a contravention of s 170DC.
With respect to his Honour, whether or not it needs to be given by specific
invitation, the opportunity of which s170DC speaks,
as explained by Moore J in
Perrin entails more than a chance to rebut the specific allegations of
misconduct by the employer. It
extends to an opportunity to put before the
employer all those matters on which the employee may reasonably wish to rely as
extenuating
circumstances or as otherwise mitigating the consequences which
might attach to the alleged misconduct if proved. So much, in our
opinion, is
comprehended by the word "defend".
14 The evidence of both Professor Wilson, the Vice Chancellor of the University
of Queensland and Mr Feeney the Director of Personnel
Services when giving
evidence before the Judicial Registrar (which became the evidence before the
learned primary judge) identified
the reason for terminating Dr Shaw's
employment. Professor Wilson said:
[identified extracts from an affidavit of Dr Shaw]
follow a reference to you making a decision electing to treat her failure to
attend and be examined by a psychiatrist as such prima
facie evidence that she
was suffering from a psychiatric illness. Do you agree with the way that is
described? -- No, not at all.
That happens in three or four places through
the text. The prima facie evidence is simply that she would be unable to
perform her
duties. It's the phrase from the award. I'm no expert to say
whether there is a possible psychiatric illness or not.
And you have said that it occurs in other places. Can I direct your
attention to paragraph 6 which is on page 5. It says there in
`I was dismissed because the Vice-Chancellor determined that there was prima
facie evidence that I was mentally ill.'
Did you make such a determination? -- No.
And a little later Professor Wilson said:
Well, what factors did you take into account in determining to
Well, Professor, could you tell us what factors you took into account, if
you can do that from the - from memory? - Well, I think
that the - the most
important element in it was the fact that Dr Shaw had indicated previously that
she was happy to - to follow
the direction to see the external psychiatrist.
And I was really taken aback to learn at the beginning of November that she had
kept that appointment, and as you're aware, I wrote to her advising her
that time was running out and extending the time in order
that she would take
seriously the implications, because, of course, the - the paragraph that is
here was in - was in that letter.
And my view was that if she - if I did not
take this action, the University would be left in a - in a position where it -
hardly resume the whole action again, and consequently the - the
attempt to alleviate the distress within - within the department
would fail,
and really there was nowhere else to go.
That is the extent of what you took into account? ... Well, as I said, that
was the - that was the - the major - the major element,
but I - I think I can -
I can say that I took into account the fact that at no time did I have any
evidence that Dr Shaw intended
to reverse her - her tactics within the
department and the best thing for - for all of us what to - was to separate.
What I have
attempted to do through the - through the meeting of solicitors was
to see whether there was a way in which we could facilitate that
other than simply six months notice and that be a matter that was on the
record. I think that's all I can say.
Mr Feeney said:
[a paragraph in Dr Shaw's affidavit]
`I was dismissed from employment on 20 December 1995 by the university by
giving six months notice following a decision by the Vice-Chancellor
to treat my failure to attend and be examined by a psychiatrist as prima facie
evidence that I was suffering from a psychiatric
You were involved in the process at the university dealing with this
termination. That is the case? -- Yes.
Do you understand it, the reason advanced there, ie prima facie evidence that
"I was suffering from a psychiatric illness was the
-- ? -- No, that's not my
understanding. I think the prima facie points me in the direction of a
subclause of clause 16 of the
award and that says that if the person does not
undertake the examination within the stipulated period, the failure to do so
be taken as prima facie evidence that the person is not fit or capable of
carrying out their duties.
Yes? -- And there was no question, as I understood the process, that any
judgment or determination had been made about any psychiatric
illness. It was
a matter that the procedures hadn't been followed under clause 16 and that
subclause was being invoked to say that
the failure to attend was a prima facie
evidence of not being able to satisfactorily carry out the duties.
15 Clause 14 of the Universities and Post Compulsory Academic Conditions Award
1995 ("the Award") created a presumption of incapacity
in certain circumstances
which arose in the present case. That is, by failing to attend the two medical
examinations, Dr Shaw could,
for the purposes of clause 14, be treated as
presumptively unable to perform her duties for at least twelve months and the
Vice Chancellor
could act accordingly. This included acting by terminating Dr
Shaw's employment. By relying on that presumed state of affairs,
Wilson was able to terminate Dr Shaw's employment in a way provided for in the
Award and not in breach of the Award. Had
Professor Wilson not acted under
clause 14 he would have been bound to give effect to other provisions
concerning disciplinary procedures
and termination. Without the Award
operating to raise the presumption in this way Professor Wilson, by his own
admission, was not
in a position to conclude that Dr Shaw was mentally ill and,
on that basis, terminate her employment.
16 The evidence earlier set out establishes, in my opinion, that the
fundamental reason of Professor Wilson for the termination
of Dr Shaw's
employment was her prior disruptive conduct and the concern Professor Wilson
had that it might continue. That is, he
was concerned she lacked the capacity
in the future to discharge her duties in a way that was not disruptive of the
functioning of
the Faculty of Dentistry. It is clear that the appellant had
her attention drawn to this conduct in the letter to her from Professor
of 23 August 1995. It read, in part:
Following my review of your file and extended consultation with
relevant officers of the University, I have reached the conclusion
"capacity to perform the duties of [your] office is in doubt" (Clause 14(a)).
Specifically, I am concerned that your continuing disruptive behaviour is
evidence of disturbance in your mental state, of a kind
that compromises the
effective performance of your duties.
I therefore require you, in accordance with Clause 14(b), to undertake a
medical examination at the University's expense to assess
whether you are able
to perform your duties. Please contact Dr Tony Arklay at the University Health
Service (extension 56212) in
the first instance. Dr Arklay will refer you to
the appropriate specialist(s) for consultation. Under the terms of the award I
am required to give you two months' notice in relation to the date of this
consultation. Dr Arklay will endeavour to arrange an
initial appointment with
the specialist two months from the date of this letter. The specialist(s) will
make available to you, and
to me, the resulting report(s) in accordance with
Clause 14(d).
I draw your attention to the options available to you under the Award.
Clause 14(b) provides for you to apply to your superannuation
fund for ill
health retirement or temporary disability benefit. In this case SSAU will
require a medical examination by specialists
whom they nominate. I have
confirmed that you are eligible to apply to SSAU for either ill health
retirement or temporary disability
In the circumstances, I believe it is in the best interests of your health
and welfare for you to be relieved of your departmental
duties until the
necessary medical consultations have been completed. Accordingly, you are
hereby relieved of the performance of
your duties pending the outcome of the
medical examinations. Your salary will continue to be paid as normal.
(Emphasis added)
17 It was conduct that Professor Wilson had earlier discussed with Dr Shaw at a
meeting on 1 June 1995. However this conduct was
referred to in the
letter, not explicitly in the context of dismissal but in the context of the
conduct providing the grounds for
the investigation of whether Dr Shaw was
suffering a mental illness. On one view, while that further investigation may
to her dismissal, it would have been dismissal because of an inability
to perform her duties because of mental illness. From the
time the letter of
25 August 1995 was sent the focus of both those acting on behalf of the
University and those representing Dr Shaw
was on carrying through the
procedures established by clause 14 to facilitate the investigation of Dr
Shaw's alleged illness on the
one hand and resisting and probably frustrating
these procedures on the other. The critical question, in my opinion, is
it was made clear to Dr Shaw or to those representing her that her
earlier conduct and the apprehension it could continue might lead
dismissal, apart from the question of whether she was incapacitated by mental
illness. I am satisfied it was. Her earlier
conduct had been raised with her
on several occasions and discussed with her at the meeting with Professor
Wilson on 1 June 1995.
She was then, as she had on other occasions, given an
opportunity to explain her conduct or contest the account of it given by
She would have known it was a matter of real concern to Professor
Wilson who was wishing to resolve the problems in the Faculty
associated with
her past conduct. Dr Shaw would have known or should have appreciated that
when the opportunity arose for Professor
Wilson to terminate her employment
when she twice failed to attend the medical examinations, the opportunity might
be taken. It
would be taken as a means of resolving the problems in the
Faculty which had been of concern to Professor Wilson. Prior to her dismissal
Dr Shaw had the opportunity, independently of the procedure put in train under
clause 14, to defend herself against the allegations
concerning her prior
conduct and the concern about her future capacity to perform her duties without
disrupting the Faculty. Accordingly,
no contravention of s 170DC is established.
certify that the preceding ten (10) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment herein of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 20 August 1999
for the Applicant:
D C Langmead
for the Applicant:
for the Respondent:
J E Murdoch
for the Respondent:
Chambers Westgarth
of Hearing:
August 1999
of Judgment:
August 1999
No downloadable files available