Bertrand & Bertrand [2025] FedCFamC2F 1121 (31 July 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Bertrand & Bertrand
FedCFamC2F 1121
File number(s):
DGC 4548 of 2024
Judgment of:
JUDGE O'SHANNESSY
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Contested divorce
application – where the parties disagree when the marital relationship
ended – where this is
one child of the relationship – where an
occasional sexual relationship continued after either parties date of the end of
relationship – where the parties continue to live under one roof
– where one party had frequently attempted to have the
other removed from
the house by calling the police – determined that the parties had been
separated for more than 12 months
at the time of the divorce application –
divorce granted.
Legislation:
Family Law Act
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The Applicant:
The Respondent:
DGC 4548 of 2024
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MR BERTRAND
MS BERTRAND
JUDGE O'SHANNESSY
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT FINDS:
marriages is proved.
BERTRAND was at all material times an Australian Citizen.
ground for the application for a divorce order – namely that the marriage
has broken down irretrievably – is proved.
THE COURT, BY
ORDER, DECLARES THAT IT IS SATISFIED THAT:
only child of the marriage, as at the expression is defined in section 55(A)(3),
who has not attained the age of eighteen years
is the child:
X born in 2017.
Court by order declared that it was satisfied that the only child of the
marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years is
the child specified in the
order and that proper arrangements in all the circumstances have been made for
the care, welfare and development
of the child.
divorce order be made in the marriage of MR BERTRAND and MS BERTRAND, such
divorce to take effect and thereby terminate that marriage
one month and one day
from the date of these orders.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE O’SHANNESSY
are the settled reasons of a judgment delivered
reasons were delivered orally. These settled reasons have been corrected from
the transcript where appropriate to correct
grammatical errors, to add
citations, passages of authorities and evidence, and to attempt to make the
orally delivered reasons easier
to read. The substance is unchanged.
matter of Bertrand comes before me in regard to Mr Bertrand’s (‘Mr
Bertrand’) application for divorce, which
is resisted by Ms Bertrand
(‘Ms Bertrand’) by the filing of a response on 19 February
2025. I have heard submissions,
and each of the parties have relied on
affidavits filed, and each of them have been cross-examined by the other. I am
that both of the parties may attach more importance to the
consequences of this divorce than is realistic. That is not to say that
consequences of this divorce are irrelevant, but questions of sole use and
occupation of a home, or joint use of occupation of
a home, or being restrained
from committing family violence, or the living arrangements for their child X
born in 2017 (‘X’)
are not directly related to whether or not there
is a divorce, or the date of separation.
this case, Ms Bertrand, the respondent to the application, alleges that
separation, that is the end of the marriage relationship,
occurred in March
2023, and it is common ground that the parties attended mediation in early March
in relation to X's living arrangements,
and that an agreement was reached about
arrangements that were agreed in regard to X were described as an interim
parenting plan, not a final one, and were to be revisited.
One issue in the
case is attempting to nail down what Ms Bertrand regards as a separation. I am
satisfied that in Ms Bertrand's
mind, the separation was intended by her to be
temporary. Therefore she says it was not a permanent separation.
Divorce Application
an ordinary, everyday common or garden divorce, to the extent there is such a
thing, the matter of separation requires the breakdown
of what is called the
consortium vitae
or the marriage relationship. There are many aspects to a
marriage relationship and they differ from marriage to marriage. However,
upon a time when personal relationships were at least publicly regarded as more
cut and dried however they were privately, separation
required a physical
separation or at least an end of physical aspects of a marriage relationship and
the communication by one party
to the other of an intention to sever that
relationship. It has not been the law for many years and it is not the law now
be separated both parties must agree on the same aspect. No one aspect
of separation or physical separation is a determining factor.
this case, there are a number of common ground matters that assist me in
determining whether or not the parties were separated.
I note that it became
common ground during the hearing the date on which the parties were married.
The parties were married in
2017 and their marriage was registered on the date
on the marriage certificate, being 2017. The parties have one son, X. Mr
application for divorce alleged that the parties had separated
on 14 March 2023, and separated finally on that day.
Bertrand alleges that as far as she regarded it, it was only a temporary
separation because the parties had been separated before
and reconciled, and
because of the importance in her life of her connection, and spending time, with
X. Each of the parties had
deposed in affidavits that Ms Bertrand had left the
former matrimonial home on 8 April 2023.
Reliability of parties
Any statement
as to a particular date made by Ms Bertrand, I am satisfied is made in good
faith, but is made from the circumstance
of a hazy recollection. Hence, dates,
as used by Ms Bertrand should always have the words attached, "On or about as
best I can tell
or recall". Mr Bertrand has a propensity to keep more records
and a sharper track of particular dates.
case, I am satisfied I have two very good and decent people before me who have
had the misfortune to suffer a disintegration
of their marriage relationship.
Accommodation
is common ground that the parties resided in separate residences for most of the
time after March 2023 until mid-2024 (the time
of Ms Bertrand’s surgery).
What is unusual is that for this couple, notwithstanding that they lived in
separate residences,
they had, from time to time, consensual sexual relations.
This is a case where the existence, or lack, of sexual activity between
couple has less significance than it would for many other couples.
issue is, did Mr Bertrand regard the separation that occurred in March/April as
a final separation or merely a temporary one.
It is common ground that on many
occasions Mr Bertrand had called the police as a means to have Ms Bertrand
leave the matrimonial
importance that the home at B Street, Suburb C is registered in his sole name.
It is common ground that Ms Bertrand has two other properties, one in Suburb D
and one in Suburb E, registered in her sole name.
Ms Bertrand’s injury
is alleged by Ms Bertrand that in, or about, mid-2024 she had further surgery,
and whilst conversations around that surgery and
what each intended is
controversial, I do not intend to resolve all of those controversies. It is
clear that at the time of that
surgery one way or another, Ms Bertrand
communicated to Mr Bertrand and/or he observed and made his own observation that
Ms Bertrand,
as a result of the surgery, was struggling to live separately and
apart (whether permanently or temporarily) from Mr Bertrand and
that Mr Bertrand
invited her back to the home so that he could assist her in her care and her
recovery, as well as enabling her to
spend time with their son X.
Care arrangement for X
note that on or about the week before 6 March 2023 following formal mediation,
the parties had reached agreement about interim,
or for the time being,
parenting arrangements. The substance of that agreement was that X would
live with his mother on each and
every weekend, over the weekend and likely over
three nights or seeing X on four days. Otherwise, from Monday to Friday X was
live with his father. That is four nights, but where the father would have
time with X on five different days, that being the Monday
through to the Friday.
This was roughly a shared care arrangement.
was a formal agreement, but it is unclear whether or not that would meet the
requirements of being a parenting plan. It is undisputed
that the agreement was
in writing and arose from the mediation and that it was intended that both
parties would sign it. Mr Bertrand
signed the document, and that is undisputed.
Mr Bertrand is not aware whether or not Ms Bertrand ever signed the agreement
Bertrand does not recall whether she did or she did not. But for some
time thereafter, X lived as had been agreed between the parties.
That mediation
and the interim agreement was both formal
an indication of the
state of the marital relationship between the parties.
Moving of Ms Bertrand’s bed
circumstance that Ms Bertrand removed at least temporarily (or on Mr Bertrand's
part permanently) the special bed that was necessary
for Ms Bertrand because of
her medical issues on around 14 March 2023, or perhaps as late as 8 April 2023,
is another indication
of the end of the parties' marital relationship.
Numerous separations
Bertrand places some weight on the fact of the number of times that the parties
had separated and got back together. It is unnecessary
that I decide the
circumstances of those separations, but it is common ground that there was at
least one separation of the parties
and it is unnecessary for me to determine
whether that was final or temporary or what the parties intended at the time.
the circumstances that there have been one or a number of prior
separations does not mean that sooner or later there was a final
between the parties.
it needs to be made clear that for a separation to occur only one party needs to
wish that as an event or fact. Whether
that is a good or a bad thing, right or
wrong, that is the law of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Ms Bertrand’s return to the former matrimonial
parties are then in intense dispute as to how long Ms Bertrand remained in the
in the circumstances of her
recent surgery.
Bertrand asserts the invitation was for a couple of weeks, but that Ms Bertrand
stayed for longer, Ms Bertrand does not agree with
those time periods. Ms
Bertrand alleges that she spent further time or times and short periods staying
or living at B Street between
being invited back in mid-2024 and the significant
events of 23 October 2024.
is unclear to me whether it was the 23 October 2024 or 24 October 2024, and it
is unnecessary that I decide whether the police
attended on both those days or
only on one of those days. But it is clear enough that on 24 October 2024, Ms
Bertrand had, without
telling Mr Bertrand beforehand, moved her special bed that
had previously been in her own premises of Suburb D where she had been
living, or staying temporarily, back into the former matrimonial home. Further,
it is clear that Mr Bertrand sought to prevent
her so moving herself and the
bed. It is not disputed that he asked her to leave and it is not disputed that
he called the police
and attempted to have the police remove Ms Bertrand.
Bertrand's position is that that was her home (and the matrimonial home) and she
never intended to leave it permanently. Her position
is that she was entitled
to return to that home whenever she felt like it. Legally, she may have been.
It is common ground that
the police took the view that it was not a matter for
the police, but rather a family law matter. Neither party made any
application
to any court at that time. However, from 24 October 2024 both Ms
Bertrand and her special bed were in the home at B Street.
Thereafter,
between then and the middle of November 2024, it is clear enough that there were
frequent times when the parties slept
in the same bed and, whether or not they
slept in the same bed, were sexually intimate. It is unnecessary that I
determine whether
or not, or on how many occasions, Mr Bertrand went to bed
alone in his bed and Ms Bertrand then joined him in what he regarded as
as opposed to what he regarded as her bed, being the special bed. But that
occurred, that is, both of them in the same
bed, occurred on a number of
occasions where, unsurprisingly, consensual intercourse occurred.
is unnecessary for me to determine the precise extent of the sexual contact and
who initiated it and acquiesced in it. But they
had sexual contact, and it was
consensual sexual contact. Again, I repeat, in this case, the significance of
sexual relations between
the parties has less significance than it might in
other cases. But it is clear and unequivocal that Mr Bertrand's request at that
time was that Ms Bertrand not live at B Street, Suburb C and that the police
attended and that the police passed on to Ms Bertrand
his request that she be
removed. She stayed
is also alleged that on other occasions after the surgery in mid-2024, that Mr
Bertrand attempted to prevent Ms Bertrand from attending
the home. Whether or
not Mr Bertrand was entitled to do that as a matter of law, or whether or not he
should have done that, it
is undisputed that that is what he did. The fact that
he did that is a clear indication of the breakdown of the consortium vitae,
the continued breakdown of the
consortium vitae
, or marriage
relationship.
Has there been a resumption of cohabitation
the police were not prepared on Mr Bertrand's request to remove Ms Bertrand from
the home after 24 October 2024, and it being
common ground that Ms Bertrand
continues to stay or live in that same home at B Street, Suburb C, it becomes
necessary to consider
whether or not there was any resumption of cohabitation.
Family Law Act
(Cth) (‘the Act’)
and the relevant section that provides a resumption of cohabitation for three
months will not disqualify
or count against the 12 month period of separation.
Effect of resumption of cohabitation
(1) For the purposes of proceedings for a divorce order, where, after the
parties to the marriage separated, they resumed cohabitation
on one occasion
but, within a period of 3 months after the resumption of cohabitation, they
again separated and thereafter lived
separately and apart up to the date of the
filing of the application, the periods of living separately and apart before and
the period of cohabitation may be aggregated as if they were one
continuous period, but the period of cohabitation shall not be deemed
of the period of living separately and apart.
any event, whether or not the parties could be regarded as cohabiting, as
partners or in a marriage relationship after 24 October
2024, or whether they
were living in the same home for the sake of maintaining their relationship with
X and/or as a matter of practical
convenience, it is significant that there is
no evidence that Mr Bertrand ever retracted or apologised for his action in
the police to prevent Ms Bertrand moving her bed into the
Intervention order against Mr Bertrand
late 2024 or around about, Ms Bertrand applied for a crimes family violence
order in the state court. As a result of that application,
and notwithstanding
that the parties lived in the same home or were alleged to live in the same
application, an interim intervention
order was made in late 2024 where Mr Bertrand was not served with a copy of the
application,
was not at court, and did not agree to the order being made. This
is what lawyers regard as an
application.
would appear that Ms Bertrand had made representations of fact to the
Magistrates' Court that warranted such a drastic step of
an ex parte order being
made against a person. That of itself, that application, is a significant (but
not itself conclusive) indicator
of the breakdown, or continued breakdown, of
consortium vitae
, or marriage relationship.
that application was for the protection of Ms Bertrand and the parties' son, X.
It was a limited order in that there was
no prohibition or restriction upon Mr
Bertrand as to where he would live or work or attend. Further, he was
prohibited from interfering
with or making any demands for Ms Bertrand’s
support workers to leave the home. That had been and continues to be highly
contentious
between the parties.
is Ms Bertrand's position that the support workers, essentially home help, are
essential to her because of the injuries that she
has suffered in various
incidents over the years. The fact that Ms Bertrand saw it as necessary to
obtain the assistance of the
Court to prevent Mr Bertrand from preventing the
attendance of persons that she regarded as essential to her wellbeing is a
indication of the breakdown of the
consortium vitae
police served that intervention order on Mr Bertrand the following day, and the
matter was returnable in court on the first occasion
in early 2025. The service
of that order is another matter that is consistent with the breakdown of the
matrimonial relationship.
2024 Christmas function
Bertrand alleges that on 25 December 2024 the parties attended a Christmas
function, and indeed they did, but they did not attend
together. They were each
invited separately, and the function related to school friends of X and the
parents of X’s friend.
It is not disputed that in regard to the Christmas
function, Mr Bertrand travelled to and from that function on his own. That is
further matter that is consistent with and indicates a breakdown or the end or
the non-functioning of the matrimonial relationship.
File for divorce
December 2024, Mr Bertrand filed his application for divorce. That is, shortly
after the Christmas party. Ms Bertrand sees that
application as merely being
done or motivated because of her application for an intervention order that was
served on him in late
his motivation, and his motivation in this case as to the timing of the
application is not significant. The filing of the
application is of itself
another indication of the breakdown of the
consortium vitae
, or to put it
in the bluntest terms, Mr Bertrand had done and continued to do, a lot of things
to demonstrate to Ms Bertrand his
unequivocal intention to end the matrimonial
relationship.
it is that the parties continued from time to time to have consensual sexual
relations, and the circumstance that they had consensual
sexual relations, and
the circumstance that Mr Bertrand had been prepared to assist in the care
of Ms Bertrand after her surgery
are matters that, to Ms Bertrand, were
confusing, or that she says were confusing to her, and I accept that.
What Ms Bertrand hoped for
am satisfied that Ms Bertrand hoped to have what would be to her a reasonable or
good enough marriage relationship, but that hope
does not proscribe or prevent
Mr Bertrand from having the intention that he always had. I am not satisfied
that Mr Bertrand's participation
in sexual activity with Ms Bertrand on the
occasions that they had sex, of itself, meant that there was a reconciliation of
the personal
relationship between the parties. There is other sexual activity
with parties or persons not party of the relationship that follows,
unnecessary in these reasons that I specify or discuss that. But it is common
ground. Again, in the circumstances of
this relationship, that aspect has less
weight than what it otherwise would.
The next pregnancy
any event, in 2025, Ms Bertrand perceived that she may well be pregnant, and she
communicated that to Mr Bertrand. It turns out
she was, so it appears that the
parties are going to be blessed with another child. The fact of having a child
together is ordinarily,
in most cases, an indication of ongoing matrimonial
relationship. In this case, the conception of the further child does not
that unequivocally, though in ordinary circumstances, it would be
consistent, or not inconvenient, with a marital relationship.
IVO application
First return
first return of the intervention order was in early 2025. The parties attended,
and the issue of the intervention order, whether
it should apply or not, was
disputed, but, again, attending court in early 2025 for an intervention order is
consistent with a separation.
Second return
parties attended the Court in early 2025 in regard to the intervention order
hearing, and, again, notwithstanding that they were
in the same home, that is
consistent with an end to the matrimonial relationship.
Third return
parties attended a third hearing in regard to the intervention order in early
2025, whereby the respondent withdrew her application
for an intervention order.
The withdrawal of the intervention order is a matter that is consistent with a
reconciliation or an ongoing
relationship. However, shortly before that third
event, there had been a further divorce directions hearing on 26 February
the course of those proceedings, Ms Bertrand swore an affidavit where she set
out her side of the story which included the statement
I had to nominate a date for the purposes of the divorce application I would say
the [early] 2025 as this is when I was served
with the divorce and realised that
he had the intention of ending the marriage.
evidence before me, Ms Bertrand admitted there was a separation in March 2023,
albeit with the qualification in her mind that she
regarded it as temporary and
had the hope of attending mediation so as to both repair the matrimonial
relationship and preserve it.
Such a determination to preserve the marriage
relationship can only be admired.
Bertrand sees things differently. He sees Ms Bertrand's position as attempting
to have him change his behaviour in aspects that
she finds unacceptable. His
position is that he has accommodated some of her demands over the years, but he
is not changing any
more. Hence, I have a man who says, "I am not changing
any more", and I have a woman who says, "There are many, many aspects of his
behaviour that are unacceptable to me".
that dispute is consistent with a breakdown of the matrimonial relationship. It
is unnecessary that I go into any more points.
However, I am:
(1) Satisfied the parties were married in 2017;
(2) Satisfied the parties separated on or about 14 March 2023, and
(3) I am not satisfied that the parties have resumed cohabitation in a marriage
relationship for longer than three months since then.
as at the date that Mr Bertrand filed his divorce application, I am satisfied
that the ground for a divorce had been made out.
Notwithstanding the joy of the
sexual relationship between the parties from time to time, I am not satisfied
that they have resumed
cohabitation.
I will make the divorce order this day.
am also satisfied under
section 55A
of the Act that satisfactory arrangements
have and will be made for X.
Section 55A
Divorce order where children
(1) A divorce order in relation to a marriage does not take effect unless the
court has, by order, declared that it is satisfied:
(a) that there are no children of the marriage who have not attained 18 years
(b) that the only children of the marriage who have not attained 18 years of
age are the children specified in the order and that:
proper arrangements in all the circumstances have been made for the
care, welfare and development of those children;
(ii) there are circumstances by reason of which the divorce order should take
effect even though the court is not satisfied that
such arrangements have been
(emphasis added)
am satisfied on the basis that I have two decent, caring parents who are very
much concerned with X's welfare, notwithstanding the
many matters they disagree
X's arrangements when
the parties separated in March 2023 was intended to be an
interim or for the time being arrangement and was to be reviewed at a later
are my reasons.
I certify that the preceding fifty (50)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment of Judge
O'Shannessy
Dated: 15 August 2025
RTF format (387 KB)
Signed PDF/A format