Application by Isentia Pty Limited [2020] ACopyT 2 (15 July 2020)
Application by Isentia Pty Limited
File numbers:
CT 2 of 201
CT 1 of 2018
CT 2 of 2018
The Tribunal:
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
Date of decision:
Legislation:
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Cases cited:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
CIC Insurance Limited v Bankstown Football Club Limited
Commissioner for Railways (NSW) v Agalianos
[1955] HCA 27
(1955) 92 CLR 390
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
250 CLR 503
K & S Lake City Freighters Pty Ltd v Gordon & Gotch Ltd
[1985] HCA 48
(1985) 157 CLR 309
Lacey v Attorney-General for the State of Queensland
[2011] HCA 10
(2011) 242 CLR
Mannai Investment Co Ltd v Eagle Star Life Assurance Co Ltd
[1997] UKHL 19
Mills v Meeking
[1990] HCA 6
(1990) 169 CLR 214
Momcilovic v The Queen
(2011) 245 CLR 1
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd v Copyright Tribunal
of Australia
(2019) 141 IPR 406
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
Salomon v A Salomon & Co Ltd
[1897] AC 22
Sloane v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
[1992] FCA 414
(1992) 37 FCR 429
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
Thiess v Collector of Customs
[2014] HCA 12
(2014) 250 CLR 664
Wilson v Anderson
(2002) 213 CLR 401
Zheng v Cai
[2009] HCA 52
(2010) 239 CLR 446
2000, Copyright Law Review Committee
Legislative Intention
MonashULawRw 1
(2015) 41(1) Monash University Law Review 1
, the Hon Justice
Stephen Gageler
Date of hearing:
Date of last submissions:
No Catchwords
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Applicant in CT 2 of 2017:
Ms F St John
Solicitor for the Applicant in CT 2 of 2017:
Baker McKenzie
Solicitor for the Applicant in CT 1 of 2018:
Corrs Chambers Westgarth
Counsel for the Applicant in CT 1 of 2018 and CT 2 of 2018:
Mr P Brereton SC and Ms L Thomas
Solicitor for the Applicant in CT 2 of 2018:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for the Respondent in all matters:
Mr C Dimitriadis SC and Ms E Whitby
Solicitor for the Respondent in all matters:
MinterEllison
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 2 of 2017
APPLICATION BY:
MELTWATER AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (ACN 121 849 769)
MELTWATER AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (ACN 121 849 769)
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES THAT:
answer to Question 1 is the answer set out at [157] of the Determination having
particular regard to the observations at [146](1)
to (18) of the Reasons for
Determination and the discussion contained in the Reasons more generally.
answer to Question 2 is the answer set out at [158] to [163] of the
Determination having regard to the discussion in the Confidential
Schedule under
the headings “The Characterisation of the Clauses of the CA
Licence”, “Annexure D: Downstream Licence
“Other Annexures”, and the discussion in the Reasons more
answer to Question 3 is the answer set out at [164] of the Determination and the
discussion contained in the Reasons more generally.
answer to Question 4 is the answer set out at [165] and [166] of the
Determination having regard to the discussion in the Confidential
Schedule under
the heading “Characterisation of the Question 4 Items” and the
discussion in the Reasons more generally.
answer to Question 5 is the answer set out at [167] of the Determination having
regard to the discussion contained in the Reasons
more generally.
answer to Question 6 is the answer set out at [168] of the Determination having
regard to the discussion contained in the Reasons
COMMONWEALTH OF
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 1 of 2018
APPLICATION BY:
STREEM PTY LIMITED (ACN 600 621 627)
STREEM PTY LIMITED (ACN 600 621 627)
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES THAT:
answers to the six questions referred to the Tribunal for determination in this
proceeding are the answers set out in the Determination
and the Reasons for
Determination in CT 2 of 2017.
COMMONWEALTH OF
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 2 of 2018
APPLICATION BY:
ISENTIA PTY LIMITED (ACN 002 533 851)
ISENTIA PTY LIMITED
(ACN 002 533 851)
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES THAT:
answer to the six questions referred to the Tribunal for determination in this
proceeding are the answers set out in the Determination
and the Reasons for
Determination in CT 2 of 2017.
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT):
question to be determined by the Tribunal in these proceedings, as a preliminary
question, is whether the Tribunal has the power
(Cth) (the “Act”), assuming the
pre‑conditions to the exercise of the conferred power (whatever its reach
are made out, to order that each applicant be granted a licence to do,
or exercise, acts comprised in the copyright subsisting in
the relevant works
(or other subject matter), in the terms proposed by each applicant. It is a
fundamental question.
applicant seeks orders under
in the alternative but the principal
question is whether the Tribunal has the power to make orders that each
applicant be granted
a licence in the terms proposed by it.
applicants are Isentia Pty Limited (“Isentia”), Streem Pty Limited
(“Streem”) and Meltwater Australia
(“Meltwater”).
applicant has brought an application before the Tribunal under
the Act. Those applications (Isentia, CT2 of 2018; Streem, CT1 of 2018;
Meltwater, CT2 of 2017) are to be heard together as the
principal proceeding
from 12 October 2020 to 30 October 2020.
respondent to each proceeding is Copyright Agency Limited (“CA”).
present purposes, before examining the statutory provisions in some detail, it
is sufficient to note that
of the Act is an enabling facilitative
provision in the sense that it sets out circumstances in which a person
asserting particular
claims “may apply to the Tribunal” under
Section 157(3)
begs the question of, “apply for
what?”, and the answer to that question is to be found in
which provides, relevantly, so far as claims made under
concerned, that if the Tribunal is “satisfied” that the
applicant’s claim under
is “well‑founded”,
the Tribunal must either make an order under
s 157(6B)(a)
particular statutory factors, or order, under
s 157(6B)(b)
applicant be granted a licence in the terms proposed by the applicant or by the
licensor concerned or by another party
to the application.
statutory requirement in
that the power, and obligation, cast
upon the Tribunal to make an order of the kind described in either
subparagraphs (a) or (b)
if satisfied that the applicant’s claim is
well‑founded, requires careful focus upon the formulation of the
applicant’s
claim under
s 157(3)(a)
or (b) and the relationship
between that claim and
s 157(6B)(a)
or (b) under which an order is sought.
Section 157(3)
contemplates a person who claims that he or she “requires a
licence”, in “a case” to which a “licence
apply, and who claims that a “licensor” has
“refused or failed to grant the licence, or to procure the grant of
licence”, and that, in the circumstances, it is “unreasonable”
that “the licence” should not be
s 157(3)(a).
Section 157(3)
also contemplates a person who claims that he or she
requires a licence (in a case to which a licence scheme does not apply) and
person claims that a licensor “proposes that the licence should be
granted” subject to “the payment of charges,
or to conditions, that
are unreasonable”:
s 157(3)(b).
should be noted that the sub‑elements (a) and (b) of
should be read as “and claims” that etc, followed by the text of the
sub‑elements, engaging the words “may
apply to the Tribunal under
this section”.
is convenient to now set out
of the Act although particular
subsections relevant to the later discussion are repeated later in these
Subdivision H – References and applications
relating to licences and licence schemes
157 Application to Tribunal in relation to
Refusal or failure to grant licence under
licence scheme
(1) A person who claims, in a case to which a licence scheme applies, that the
licensor operating the scheme has refused or failed
to grant him or her a
licence in accordance with the scheme, or to procure the grant to him or her of
such a licence, may apply to
the Tribunal under this section.
Licence scheme sets unreasonable charges or conditions for case
(2) A person who claims, in a case to which a licence scheme applies, that he or
she requires a licence but that the grant of a licence
in accordance with the
scheme would, in that case, be subject to the payment of charges, or to
conditions, that are not reasonable
in the circumstances of the case may apply
to the Tribunal under this section.
No licence scheme and licensor refuses or fails to grant reasonable
(3) A person who claims that he or she requires a licence in a case to which a
licence scheme does not apply (including a case where
a licence scheme has not
been formulated or is not in operation)
(a) that a licensor has refused
or failed to grant the licence, or to procure the grant of the licence, and that
in the circumstances
it is unreasonable that the licence should not be granted;
(b) that a licensor proposes that the licence should be granted subject to the
payment of charges or to conditions, that are unreasonable;
may apply to the Tribunal under this
(4) An organization that claims that it is
representative of persons requiring licences in cases to which a licence scheme
apply (including cases where a licence scheme has not been formulated
or is not in operation) and:
(a) that a licensor has refused
or failed to grant the licences, or to procure the grant of the licences, and
that in the circumstances
it is unreasonable that the licences should not be
granted; or
(b) that a licensor proposes that the licences should be granted subject to the
payment of charges, or to conditions, that are unreasonable;
may apply to the Tribunal under this section.
Other parties to application
(5) Where an organization (whether claiming to be representative of persons
requiring licences or not) or a person (whether requiring
a licence or not)
applies to the Tribunal to be made a party to an application under any of the
preceding subsections of this section,
and the Tribunal is satisfied that the
organization or person has a substantial interest in the matter in dispute, the
Tribunal may,
if it thinks fit, make that organisation or person a party to the
application.
Note: Under
section 157B
Tribunal may also make the Australia Competition and Consumer Commission a party
to the application.
Letting parties present their
(6) The Tribunal must give the applicant, the licensor concerned and each other
party (if any) to the application an opportunity
of presenting their cases.
Order dealing with application under subsection (1)
(6A) If the Tribunal is satisfied that the claim of an applicant under
subsection (1) is well‑founded, the Tribunal must
(a) make an order specifying, in
respect of the matters specified in the order, the charges, if any, and the
conditions, that the
Tribunal considers to be applicable in accordance with the
licence scheme in relation to the applicant; or
(b) order that the applicant be granted a licence in the terms proposed by the
applicant, the licensor concerned or another party
to the application.
Order dealing with application under
subsection (2) or (3)
(6B) If the Tribunal is satisfied that the claim of an applicant under
subsection (2) or (3) is well‑founded, the Tribunal
(a) make an order specifying, in
respect of the matters specified in the order, the charges, if any, and the
conditions, that the
Tribunal considers reasonable in the circumstances in
relation to the applicant; or
(b) order that the applicant be granted a licence in the terms proposed by the
applicant, the licensor concerned or another party
to the application.
Order dealing with application under
subsection (4)
(6C) If the Tribunal is satisfied that the claim of an applicant under
subsection (4) is well‑founded, the Tribunal must
(a) make an order specifying, in
respect of the matters specified in the order, the charges, if any, and the
conditions, that the
Tribunal considers reasonable in the circumstances in
relation to persons who:
(i) are specified in the order (whether by reference to a class or otherwise);
(ii) were represented by the applicant or were parties to the application;
(b) order that a licence be granted, in the terms proposed by the applicant, the
licensor concerned or another party to the application,
to each person who:
(i) is specified in the order (whether by reference to a class or otherwise);
(ii) was represented by the applicant or was a party to the
application.
Definition of refusal or failure to grant
(7) A reference in this section to a failure to grant a licence, or to procure
the grant of a licence, shall be read as a reference
to a failure to grant the
licence, or to procure the grant of the licence, as the case may be, within a
reasonable time after a request
should also be noted that, as the text reveals,
contemplates
applications to the Tribunal under subsection (1) concerning claims, in a
case to which a “licence scheme”
applies, where the licensor
operating the scheme has refused or failed to grant the applicant a licence in
accordance with the scheme,
or to procure the grant to the applicant of such a
licence. It also contemplates, under subsection (2), applications
claims, in a case to which a licence scheme applies, where the grant
of a licence would be subject to the payment of charges, or
to conditions, not
reasonable in the circumstances.
Section 157(6A)
confers power on, and an
obligation upon, the Tribunal to make an order of the kind described in
s 157(6A)(a)
or (b) if satisfied that a claim under
well‑founded.
Section 157(6B)
addresses claims made under
question of whether the Tribunal has the power to order that each applicant be
granted a licence in the terms proposed by each
of them has given rise to six
questions to be addressed by the Tribunal. The parties have reached agreement
those six questions although the applicants contend that it
is unnecessary to answer question 6. Obviously enough, I will return
those questions later in these reasons.
parties have also reached agreement about a statement of the facts relevant to
the determination of the six questions, the Statement
of Agreed Facts
(“SOAF”). I will turn to those facts shortly.
the central question which finds expression in the six questions gives rise to
important matters of statutory construction.
At this point, it should be noted
that the primary submissions for the applicants are made by counsel on behalf of
Isentia and Streem
jointly. Meltwater, by counsel, has adopted those
submissions and has raised an additional consideration going to the construction
of the relevant provisions.
turning to the issue of
attributing
relevant provisions of the Act as a matter of construction, the following
factual matters should be noted.
The relevant factual matters
of Isentia, Streem and Meltwater is a media monitoring organisation that offers
for sale and sells services that follow, monitor
and analyse media content
(including social media content) of specific interest to their customers. The
respondent, CA, is a company
limited by guarantee and duly incorporated. CA is
a body corporate which meets the conditions set out in the definition of the
“licensor” in
of the Act.
elements of that definition together with the terms “licence” and
“licence scheme” are set out below:
136 Interpretation
(1) In this Part, unless the contrary
intention appears:
means a licence granted by or on behalf of the owner or
prospective owner of the copyright in a work or other subject-matter to do
act comprised in the copyright.
licence scheme
means a scheme (including anything in the nature of
a scheme, whether called a scheme or tariff or called by any other name)
by a licensor or licensors and setting out the classes of cases in
which the licensor or each of the licensors is willing, or the
persons on whose
behalf the licensor or each of the licensors acts are willing, to grant licences
and the charges (if any) subject
to payment of which, and the conditions subject
to which, licences would be granted in those classes of cases.
means a body corporate for which both the following
conditions are met:
(a) the body is incorporated under a law in force in a State or Territory
relating to companies;
(b) the body’s constitution:
(i) entitles any owner of copyright, or any owner of copyright of a specified
kind, to become a member of the body; and
(ii) requires the body to protect the interests of its members connected with
(iii) provides that the main business of the body is granting licences; and
(iv) requires the body to distribute to its members the proceeds (after
deduction of the body’s administrative expenses) from
payments to the body
for licences; and
(v) prevents the body from paying dividends.
is a non‑exclusive licensor of certain
reproduction
communication
rights with respect to works, which it is authorised to
licence, contained in:
(a) a printed edition of a newspaper,
magazine or similar periodical; and
(b) an electronic edition of a newspaper, magazine, website or other electronic
news service (other than a journal).
works contained in the description at [18](a) and (b) of these reasons are
described as the “Licensed Works”. The
Licensed Works comprise
literary works
in which copyright subsists under the Act and thus the
source of the reproduction and communication right is to be found in
and (iv) of the Act. The copyright subsisting in those Licensed
Works is owned by “publishers”.
Pty Ltd (“CopyCo”) is an Australia proprietary company limited by
shares formed in 1999 to represent the interests
of its publisher members in
relation to the licensing of various specified works in which the publisher
members and/or their related
corporations own the copyright subsisting in those
works. The current shareholders of CopyCo are Fairfax Digital Pty Limited, News
Pty Limited, Bauer Media Pty Limited, Rural Press Pty Limited and APN Newspapers
is not a “licensor” within the meaning of that term as defined in
of the Act.
a document described as an “Agency Agreement” between CopyCo and CA,
CopyCo has appointed, by clause 2, CA to act
as its agent in granting
sub‑licences to, among other classes of users, media monitoring
organisations (“MMOs”),
including the applicants, to exercise
specified rights in the Licensed Works: see clauses 2 and 3 of the Agency
applicant requires the permission or consent or authority of the owner of the
(or parts of Licensed Works) and
to communicate those copies to its customers. Each applicant requires “a
licence” under
the Act for the purposes of
has offered to grant a licence to each applicant on the terms of a particular
licence set out at Tab 3 of the material supporting
the Agreed Statement of
Facts: referred to in that document as the “CAL Licence” but
referred to hereafter as the CA
Licence. CA is authorised by CopyCo to grant
the CA Licence offered to each applicant. As described earlier, each applicant
made an application to the Tribunal under
of the Act. By
their applications, each applicant claims that the CA Licence offered to them is
subject to the payment of charges
or to conditions that are unreasonable.
each application, each applicant has proposed a licence on different terms to
the CA Licence and each applicant seeks an order
by the Tribunal under
s 157(6B)(b)
of the Act that it be granted a licence in the terms proposed
by it (the “Proposed Licence”). In the alternative, as
earlier, each applicant seeks an order under
s 157(6B)(a)
specifying the charges, and the conditions, that the Tribunal considers
reasonable, in the circumstances, in relation
to each applicant. Each applicant
claims that its proposed use of the Licensed Works is in accordance with its
respective Proposed
Licence and claims that the charges and conditions in its
respective Proposed Licence are reasonable.
to the matters described at [24] and [25] of these reasons, CA says that it is
not in a position to verify the claim that each
applicant’s proposed use
of the Licensed Works is in accordance with the respective Proposed Licence of
each applicant, and
it denies the claim of each applicant that the charges and
conditions in each Proposed Licence are unreasonable.
acknowledges that the Tribunal is conferred with power to make an order under
s 157(6B)(a)
specifying “the charges, if any, and the
conditions” that the Tribunal considers reasonable, in the circumstances,
relation to each applicant.
to the scope of the rights, the following matters are the subject of the
Statement of Agreed Facts.
publisher members of CopyCo have granted
a non‑exclusive
licence to sub‑licence specified rights in certain copyright works from
time to time pursuant to documents
identified by CopyCo in a document described
“Summary of rights that publishers have granted CopyCo Pty Ltd the
right to sub‑licence”
, dated 18 February 2020 (otherwise
known as the “CopyCo Summary of Rights”): Tab 73. That summary,
commencing with
the grant of particular rights on 20 March 2000 by News
Limited and “Fairfax”, identifies 23 categories of rights granted
CopyCo by a range of publishers over a period to 11 April 2017. The
“grant” is the grant of a right to sub‑licence
the relevant
right. The point of the summary is to identify with some precision the scope of
the grant conferred by publishers on
under the Agency Agreement earlier
described has been varied from time to time pursuant to the documents identified
by CA in a document
described as
“Summary of rights Copyright Agency
Ltd is (or was) authorised by CopyCo Pty Ltd to sub‑licence as its agent
, dated 18 February 2020 (otherwise known as the
“CAL Summary of Rights”): Tab 82. That summary, commencing in
2000 by reference to the Agency Agreement, identifies 17 categories of
rights the subject of an “authority” conferred
by CopyCo on CA in
the sense of granting CA an authority to grant licences (properly understood as
sub‑licences) to persons
or entities including media monitoring
organisations to exercise particular rights falling within any one of those 17
categories.
The categories identify the precise description of the right, the
conferred and the
source of the authority. The point of the summary is to identify with some
precision the limits and boundaries
of the authority conferred by CopyCo on CA
(which may be a lesser conferral of authority than the authority conferred by
the publishers
on CopyCo).
earlier mentioned, each applicant, by its Proposed Licence, has sought a licence
from CA of particular rights subsisting in works
as described earlier. The
by each applicant pursuant to that licence that CA is
not authorised
to administer or sub‑licence as agent of CopyCo are
identified and summarised by CA in a document described as
rights sought by the MMOs that CA is not authorised to administer/sublicence as
agent of CopyCo”
, dated 13 May 2020 (otherwise known as the
“Unauthorised Rights Summary”): Tab 83. That summary
identifies the field
of rights recited in each licence proposed by each of
Isentia, Streem and Meltwater. The document is comprehensive and it seeks
three things.
, it lists particular rights sought by MMOs that
CopyCo has not authorised CA to administer or sub‑licence (as
agent) to media monitoring organisations.
identifies whether CopyCo is authorised to sub‑licence the rights sought
by each applicant and, if so, whether CopyCo was
willing to authorise CA to
sub‑licence those rights as its agent.
, it identifies the
rights comprised in the copyright (and incidents of those rights) relevant to
the licence.
is not authorised by CopyCo to grant the CAL Licence with:
(a) a term longer than
nevertheless CA does not dispute that the Tribunal may determine the term (that
is, the duration) of the CA Licence; and
(b) respect to the countries that comprise the
Isentia’s Proposed Licence other than on the terms of the CA Licence.
Proposed Licence of each applicant includes a licence of the following rights
(or terms) which fall into one of two categories.
The first is rights or terms
which CopyCo has
not authorised
CA to grant when entering into licences
with MMOs. The second is rights or terms that CopyCo does not have the
, from the publishers, to sub‑licence to MMOs. Those
rights, or terms, in either of those categories (subject to particular
qualifications), sought by the applicants, comprehend five categories of rights
or terms as follows.
the rights or terms sought pursuant to Isentia’s Proposed Licence includes
a right or term permitting it to communicate to
Licensed Work on a publisher’s website where the Licensed Work is located
behind a “paywall” (where, in the
ordinary course, access to the
article would only be available to a subscriber obtaining that access as an
element of the service
provided to subscribers paying the relevant fee),
enabling Isentia’s customer to view the Licensed Work even though the
has not separately subscribed to, or registered for, access to that
publisher’s website. The Proposed Licence contains a provision
obligation on CA to use its best endeavours to ensure that Isentia’s
customer will be able to view that Licensed
Work through the link and make a
copy of it even if the customer has not separately subscribed to, or registered
for, access to that
publisher’s website (the “
Isentia User
Copying Right
”). Similarly, the Proposed Licence of Streem and
Meltwater also contain a similar provision otherwise described as the
Streem and Meltwater Copying Right
to these matters, the parties agree that CopyCo is authorised to
sub‑licence the right to make a copy of a Licensed Work
to MMOs, but has
not authorised CA to sub‑licence this right to MMOs; and that CopyCo does
not have the right from its publishers
(or the technological capability) to
grant access to a work behind the respective paywalls of the publishers.
the rights or terms sought pursuant to each Proposed Licence include a right or
term to communicate to customers of the MMOs (by
making available through a
“Secure Portal” containing
copies of Licensed Works for up to 12
months from the date on which they were copied, communicated or
to these matters, CopyCo is authorised to sub‑licence this right to MMOs
in respect of certain Licensed Works, but has not
authorised CA to
sub‑licence this right to MMOs.
the rights or terms sought pursuant to each Proposed Licence includes a right or
term, under a downstream licence, to permit the
customers of MMOs to copy and
communicate to “Nominated Users”, “Portions of Scraped
Copies” of Licensed
Works and “Copies of Licensed Works”
(a) the term “communicate” has
the same meaning as it has in the Act (and thus the right in question is
otherwise described
Downstream Communication
(b) in relation to Streem and Meltwater, “Nominated Users”
“means each of your employees and directors and any
person retained to
provide services to you (for example, professional advisers) ...”, and MMO
customers are obliged to only
use Licensed Works for “internal
purposes” (otherwise known as the “External Sharing
(c) in relation to Isentia, the downstream licensee may store a Portion of a
Scraped Copy of a Licensed Work or a Copy of a Licensed
Work, without expressly
limiting it to storage as an email, on a database or Intranet and excluding any
storage in any other digital
form (the “Downstream Storage
(d) in relation to Streem and Meltwater, the Downstream Licensee may store a
Portion of a Scraped Copy of a Licensed Work or a Copy
of a Licensed Work as an
email or on a database or Intranet for longer than 12 months from the date the
licensee receives the Portion
of a Scraped Copy of the Licensed Work or the Copy
of a Licensed Work and until termination of the downstream licence (the
“Downstream
Unlimited Storage
parties agree: that as to the matters at [38](a), CopyCo is authorised to
sub‑licence the Downstream Communication Right
to MMO customers in respect
of certain Licensed Works but has not authorised CA to sub‑licence this
right to MMO customers;
that as to the matters at [38](b), CopyCo is authorised
to sub‑licence this right to MMO customers in respect of certain Licensed
Works but as at 27 February 2020, has not authorised CA to
sub‑licence the External Sharing Right to MMO customers (although
is prepared in principle to authorise CA to sub‑licence this right to MMO
customers as agent for CopyCo on an ad hoc
basis and only in respect of
certain persons retained by an MMO customer to provide services to that
customer, excluding public relations,
media and marketing companies); that as to
the matters at [38](c), CopyCo is only authorised to allow Downstream Storage as
on a database or Intranet for no more than 12 months; and that as to
the matters at [38](d), CopyCo is not authorised to sub‑licence
Downstream Unlimited Storage Right to MMOs.
the Isentia Proposed Licence contains a term that provides that the “Major
Mastheads” as set out in an annexure to the
Proposed Licence cannot cease
to be a Licensed Work during the operation of the licence, except where the
relevant Masthead ceases
to be published or where Isentia has given prior
written consent to exclude the relevant Mastheads (the “Excluded Works
As to this term, CA says that:
(a) the rights that publishers have granted
to CopyCo are on the basis that publishers can withdraw their publications from
(b) CopyCo does not control the withdrawal of publications by individual rights
holders; and
(c) CA’s “mandate” allows CopyCo to withdraw publications to
reflect any withdrawal of publications from CopyCo
publishers.
as to Streem and Meltwater, the Proposed Licence contains a term for the
provision of translations of Licensed Works or Portions
of Scraped Copies of
Licensed Works and/or a right to authorise such conduct (the “Adaptation
Right”). As to this matter,
the parties agree that CopyCo is not
authorised by the publishers to sub‑licence this right to MMOs.
matters at [33] to [41] represent a description of rights sought by each
applicant which fall into one of the two categories
described at [33] subject to
the qualifications described throughout those paragraphs.
to the licence proposed to each applicant by CA, otherwise described as the CA
Licence, the parties agree that the CA Licence does
not contain a number of
things sought by each applicant, as follows.
does not contain any
Adaptation Right
does not contain the
Isentia User Copying Right
Meltwater User Copying Right
does not contain a
, but does include a right to
store Copies of Licensed Works to create a searchable archive in a “Secure
Portal of Copies of
Licensed Works (and Portions of Scraped Copies of Licensed
Works)” for up to 12 months from the date on which they were first
or scraped; and to use that searchable archive for the purpose of displaying and
communicating to customers, in response to
keyword searches, particular Licensed
Works that the customer has previously received in full text as part of a
“Press Monitoring
Service” and so as to display and communicate to
customers Portions of Scraped Copies of Licensed Works accompanied by a link
the relevant Licensed Work on the relevant publisher’s website.
does not contain the
Excluded Works Term
and retains a right in CA to
exclude Licensed Works from the licence.
does not contain the
Downstream Communication Right
Sharing Right
Downstream Storage Right
Unlimited Storage Right
, but contains a form of
Downstream Licence
setting out the terms for copying and communicating Licensed Works to
Nominated Users where the term “communicate” means
work available in digital or other electronic machine‑readable form to
Nominated Users by means of the Licensee’s
Intranet or by email”,
but “does not include external emails, extranet posting or the act of
making a Licensed Work available
to the public on an internet webpage or via
publicly available documents”; where Nominated Users means “each
or director of the Licensee” and does not include any external
third parties; and where the licensee must not store a Licensed
Work or a Copy
of a Licensed Work as an email or on a database or Intranet, or in any digital
form, for longer than 12 calendar months.
parties also agree that particular matters concerning aspects of the Agency
Agreement as between CopyCo and CA are relevant to
the questions in issue.
These matters are described as confidential, and accordingly they are contained
in a Confidential Schedule
to these reasons.
should be noted that at the request of the Tribunal, CA sought an indication
from CopyCo, in respect of each instance in which
CopyCo, but not CA, was
authorised to sub‑licence a specified right to an MMO or an MMO customer,
of whether or not it would
be prepared to authorise CA to sub‑licence that
right. The CopyCo Board resolved on 2 March 2020 that it was prepared, on
an in‑principle basis, to authorise CA to sub‑licence a number of
additional rights to MMOs or to MMO customers as agent.
These rights are
described as the “Additional Rights” and elements of them are
mentioned earlier in these reasons.
The content of the Additional Rights are
set out in the Confidential Schedule on the assumption that the precise
formulation of the
Additional Rights is likely to be a confidential matter.
these Additional Rights have not been incorporated into the CA Licence as
currently proposed, CA accepts that the form of
the licence that may be the
subject of an order by the Tribunal under
would extend to the
Additional Rights, in addition to the rights otherwise covered by the CA
Licence, subject to the charges and
conditions the Tribunal determines to be
reasonable.
historically, each applicant has sought a licence on different terms, Isentia
has amended its Proposed Licence to take account
of recent developments in
relation to the scope of rights which CopyCo has resolved to authorise CA to
sub‑licence to MMOs
or to MMO customers as agent, and Streem and Meltwater
have indicated that they propose to adopt the amendments proposed by Isentia
elements of the licence proposed by them. Thus, the Tribunal proceeds on the
footing that all three applicants, as a matter of
substance, are seeking
Proposed Licences in the same terms.
should also be noted that the parties agree that the Tribunal should proceed on
the footing that the summaries set out at Tabs
73, 82 and 83 are correct
and, of course, the Tribunal acts on the footing of the Statement of Agreed
Facts: T, p 4, lns 35‑45;
lns 1‑11. CA also seeks to rely on the affidavit of Mr Suckling which
addresses some matters of contextual background.
I admit that affidavit and have
had the benefit of reading it.
Other provisions of the Act
remaining provisions of the Act that should be noted for the purposes of this
application are these:
136 Interpretation
(2) In this Part:
(a) a reference to conditions is
a reference to any conditions other than conditions relating to the payment of a
(c) a reference to a person who requires a licence of a particular kind includes
a reference to a person who holds a licence of that
kind if the person will, at
the expiration of the period for which the licence was granted, require a
renewal of that licence or
a grant of a further licence of the same kind;
137 Cases to which licence schemes
(1) For the purposes of this Part, a case
shall, subject to the next succeeding subsection, be deemed to be a case to
which a licence
scheme applies if, in accordance with a licence scheme for the
time being in operation, a licence would be granted in that case.
(2) For the purposes of this Part, where, in accordance with a licence
(a) the licences that would be
granted would be subject to conditions by virtue of which particular matters
would be excepted from
the licences; and
(b) a case relates to one or more matters falling within such an exception;
that case shall be deemed not to be a case to which the scheme applies.
Subdivision H – References and applications relating to licences and
licence schemes
154 Reference of proposed licence schemes to
(1) Where a licensor proposes to bring a
licence scheme into operation, he or she may refer the scheme to the
(4) The Tribunal shall consider a scheme referred under this section and, after
giving to the parties to the reference an opportunity
of presenting their cases,
shall make such order, confirming or varying the scheme or substituting for the
scheme another scheme
proposed by one of the parties, as the Tribunal considers
reasonable in the circumstances.
159 Effect of order of Tribunal in relation to
Order under
section 157
specifying conditions and charges
(4) Where the Tribunal has made an order on an application under
subsection 157(1)
, (2) or (3) specifying charges, if any, and conditions,
in relation to the applicant, in respect of the matters specified in the
(a) the applicant has complied
with the conditions specified in the order; and
(b) in a case where the order specifies any charges – he or she has paid
those charges to the licensor or, if the amount payable
could not be
ascertained, has given to the licensor an undertaking in writing to pay the
charges when ascertained;
the applicant shall be in the like position, in any proceedings for infringement
of copyright relating to any of those matters, as
if he or she had at all
material times been the holder of a licence granted by the owner of the
and subject to payment of the charges (if
any), specified in the order.
(5) Where the Tribunal has made an order on
an application under
subsection 157(4)
specifying charges (if any) and
conditions, in relation to the persons, or to persons included in the classes of
persons, specified
in the order, in respect of matters specified in the order,
(a) any such person has complied
with the conditions specified in the order; and
(b) in the case where the order specifies any charges – the person has
paid those charges to the licensor or, if the amount
payable could not be
ascertained, has given to the licensor an undertaking in writing to pay the
charges when ascertained;
that person shall be in the like position, in any proceedings for infringement
of copyright relating to any of those matters, as
if he or she had at all
material times been the holder of a licence granted by the owner of the
and subject to payment of the charges (if
any), specified in the order.
(6) Where a person in relation to whom an
order referred to in subsection (4) or subsection (5) applies does, in
relation to any of
the matters specified in that order, anything that, apart
from that subsection, would be an infringement of copyright but would not
such an infringement if he or she were the holder of a licence in respect of the
doing of that thing granted by the owner of the
conditions and subject to payment of the charges (if any) specified in the
order, that person is liable
to pay to the owner of the copyright the amount of
any charges that would be payable if he or she were the holder of such a licence
and the owner of the copyright may recover that amount in a court of competent
owner of the copyright.
(7) To avoid doubt, subsections (4) and (5) do not apply to an order that a
person be granted a licence.
Order under
section 157
that person be granted
(8) A person whom the Tribunal has ordered
section 157
be granted a licence in the terms proposed by the
applicant, the licensor concerned or another party to the application under that
(a) is taken, for the purpose of
proceedings for infringement of copyright, to have been granted the licence in
those terms; and
(b) is liable to pay the owner of the copyright concerned the amount of any
charges that would be payable if the person had been
granted the licence in
those terms.
Note: Paragraph (a) – if those terms made the licence subject to
conditions and the person did not comply with the conditions,
the licence will
not give the person a defence in the proceedings.
(9) The owner of the copyright may recover
the amount described in paragraph (8)(b) from the person in a court of
competent jurisdiction
as a debt due to the
The principles governing the attribution of meaning to the
statutory text – questions of construction and interpretation
is often said that the task of attributing meaning to statutory text begins and
ends with the text. Of course, there is no
acontextual
language spoken
or written by anyone. References to construction beginning and ending with the
text are not intended to suggest
that attributing meaning to the text occurs
without reference to context. Ultimately, however, the aim is to examine, and
to, the text and attribute meaning to it.
Norman Lindsay’s iconic work of children’s literature,
Pudding, Being the Adventures of Bunyip Bluegum and his friends Bill Barnacle
& Sam Sawnoff
, Bill Barnacle makes a statement to the personified
Pudding, Albert, which causes Albert to respond by asking Bill Barnacle what
statement means. Bill Barnacle responds, “severely”, by saying,
“Let words be sufficient, without explanation”
Robertson, 1995 Edition at p 169). Bill Barnacle’s observation that
the meaning was to be found in the words
without explanation was an
inappropriate response because it denied the role of
at the very
outset of the quest for meaning. Context matters in every use of language,
whether oral or written, but ultimately only
for the purpose of usefully
illuminating the actual words spoken or the language adopted as text, whatever
the discourse or instrument
being construed might be.
Mrs Malaprop, in Richard Brinsley Sheridan’s play
(first performed on 17 January 1775), says to Sir Anthony Absolute that her
ward, Lydia Languish, should be “instructed in
geometry, that she might
know something of the contagious countries”, Sir Anthony understood those
that Lydia should be “instructed in geography, that
she might know something of the contiguous countries” because, in
Sir Anthony understood that Mrs Malaprop was a person who either tortured
the English language or who selected words with
some broad phonetic similarity
to the words she was trying to find (see p 29 of the text of
in the digitized Library of Congress version of the
edition of 1910 which is regarded as the “only authentic
version of the play”, J Q Adams Jr).
Anthony also knew that when Mrs Malaprop talked about Lydia needing to have
“a supercilious knowledge in accounts”
(at p 29), she meant
“a superficial knowledge in accounts” and when she described her
ward as being “as headstrong
as an allegory on the banks of the
Nile” (at p 74), Captain Absolute understood her to mean that Lydia
was “as headstrong
as an alligator on the banks of the Nile”, and
when she described education as being useful to Lydia so that “she might
reprehend the true meaning of what she is saying” (at p 29), Sir
Anthony Absolute understood Mrs Malaprop to be saying that
“might comprehend the true meaning of what she is saying”. Thus,
, Sir Anthony (and Captain Absolute) and those regularly
engaging with Mrs Malaprop understood
she was intending to convey by the language she used.
least one of the many obvious differences between statutory text and
conversational discourse is that although both engage context
in attributing
meaning to the actual language used, conversational language will most likely
not exhibit the necessary degree of
structure, discipline, consistency,
coherence or unity of object or purpose demanded of statutory text, leading to
the attribution
of meaning to the language used. As to some aspects of these
matters, see the observations of Lord Hoffmann in
Mannai Investment Co Ltd v
Eagle Star Life Assurance Co Ltd
[1997] UKHL 19
[1997] AC 749
at 774‑780.
Thiess v Collector of Customs
[2014] HCA 12
(2014) 250 CLR 664
”), French CJ, Hayne, Kiefel, Gageler and
Keane JJ observed that statutory construction involves “attribution
to statutory text”, and emphasised the methodology for doing so
by reference to the observations of the Court in
Commissioner of Taxation v
Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
Consolidated Media Holdings
”), mentioned later in these
reasons. The modern quest is not so much one of trying to discover the
“intention of the
legislature” which is a common but “very
slippery phrase” (
Wilson v Anderson
(2002) 213 CLR 401,
Gleeson CJ at [8] adopting the description by Lord Watson in
A Salomon & Co Ltd
[1897] AC 22 at 38, “a common but
very slippery phrase”) and, “as everyone knows, the intention of
Parliament is
somewhat of a
” [emphasis added] (
[1990] HCA 6
(1990) 169 CLR 214
, Dawson J at 234;
Zheng v Cai
[2009] HCA 52
(2010) 239 CLR 446
, French CJ, Gummow, Crennan, Kiefel and
Bell JJ at [28]), or a “convenient phantom” (
Sloane v The
Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
[1992] FCA 414
at 443), or a “metaphor” (
Momcilovic v The Queen
(2011) 245 CLR 1
, Gummow J at [146](v)).
“intention” is a “conclusion” reached about the proper
construction of the law in question and “nothing
, Hayne J at [341]. In
at [23], the Court
also observed that objective discernment of the statutory purpose is
“integral to contextual construction”
and also observed that
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
”), which requires that the interpretation that
would best achieve the purpose or object of an Act be preferred to each other
interpretation, is a “particular statutory reflection of a
systemic principle
” [emphasis added].
its intention by the use of language, “and it is by
determining the meaning of that language, in accordance with principles
construction established by the common law and statute, that courts give effect
to the [fiction of] legislative will”:
Wilson v Anderson
Gleeson CJ at [8]. Ascertainment of the meaning to be attributed to
statutory text is “asserted as a statement of compliance
with the rules of
construction, common law and statutory, which have been applied to reach the
preferred results and which are known
to parliamentary drafters and the
Lacey v Attorney‑General for the State of Queensland
[2011] HCA 10
(2011) 242 CLR 573
, French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and
Bell JJ at [43], reaffirming the observations in
Zheng v Cai
[28]. There are many
rules of construction which are engaged
in the task of attributing meaning to statutory text, but the critical governing
CIC Insurance Limited v Bankstown Football Club Limited
”), Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey
and Gummow JJ said this:
It is well settled that at common law, apart from any
reliance upon
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
court may have regard to reports of law reform bodies to ascertain the mischief
which a statute is intended to cure. Moreover,
modern approach
statutory interpretation (a)
that the context be considered
the first instance
, not merely at some later stage when ambiguity might be
thought to arise, and (b) uses “context” in its
widest sense
to include such things as the existing state of the law and the mischief which,
by legitimate means such as those just mentioned,
one may discern the statute
was intended to remedy.
[emphasis added]
observation that the “modern approach” to statutory construction
“insists” that context be considered
“in the first
instance”, using context in the “widest sense”, was also
reflected in the observations of McHugh,
Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ a year
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
194 CLR 355
Project Blue Sky
”) where their
Honours said that the process of construction “
must always begin
examining the context of the provision that is being construed” [emphasis
added]. That was thought to be the emphatic imperative
of the “process of
construction” having regard to the observations and influence of
Dixon CJ in
Commissioner for Railways (NSW) v Agalianos
[1955] HCA 27
who said at 397 that “the
of a provision and its
consistency
surer guides
than the logic
with which it is constructed” [emphasis added]. Seeking out those surer
guides is the very process of attribution
of meaning.
Project Blue Sky
, the plurality also said at [69] that the “primary
object of statutory construction” is to construe the relevant provision
that it is consistent with the language and purpose of all the provisions of the
statute; that a legislative instrument “must
be construed” on the
prima facie basis that its provisions are intended to give effect to harmonious
goals; and that where
conflict appears to arise from the language of particular
provisions, the conflict must be resolved, if possible, by adjusting the
of the competing provisions to achieve that result which will “best give
effect to the purpose and language of the
provisions while maintaining the unity
of all the statutory provisions”.
[71], the plurality observed that “[f]urthermore, a court construing a
statutory provision must strive to give meaning to
every word of the
provision”. At [78], the plurality said this:
However, the duty of a court is to give the words of a
statutory provision the meaning that the legislature is
intended them to have. Ordinarily, that meaning (the legal meaning) will
correspond with the grammatical meaning of the
provision. But not always. The
context of the words, the consequences of a literal or grammatical construction,
the purpose of
the statute or the canons of construction may require the words
of a legislative provision to be read in a way that does not correspond
literal or grammatical meaning.
[emphasis added]
decade later, in
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
Heydon, Crennan and Kiefel JJ said this:
This Court has stated on many occasions that the task of
statutory construction
with a consideration of the
. Historical considerations and extrinsic materials cannot be relied
on to displace the clear meaning of the text. The language
actually been employed in the text
of legislation is the surest guide to
legislative intention. The meaning of the text may require consideration of the
context, which
includes the general purpose and policy of a provision, in
particular the mischief it is seeking to remedy.
[emphasis added]
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
, the Court, French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Bell and
Gageler JJ at [39] said this:
Court has stated on many occasions that the task of statutory construction
with a consideration of the [statutory] text [quoting the
passage from
at [47], quoted at [64] of these reasons]”. So
of statutory construction
. The statutory text
must be considered
. That context includes
legislative history and extrinsic materials. Understanding context has utility
if, and in so far as, it
assists in fixing the meaning of the statutory text.
Legislative history and extrinsic materials cannot displace the meaning of
statutory text. Nor is their examination an end in itself.
[emphasis added]
recently, in
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
”), Kiefel CJ, Nettle
and Gordon JJ at [14] said this about ascertaining the meaning of a
statutory provision:
The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning
of a statutory provision is the text of the statute whilst,
at the same
, regard is had to its
should be regarded at this first stage and not at some later stage and it should
be regarded in its widest sense. This
is not to deny the importance of the
natural and ordinary meaning of a word, namely how it is ordinarily understood
in discourse
, to the process of construction. Considerations of context
and purpose simply recognise that, understood in its statutory, historical
other context, some other meaning of a word may be suggested, and so too, if its
ordinary meaning is not consistent with the statutory
purpose, that meaning must
be rejected.
[emphasis added]
, Gageler J emphasised, at [35], the observation of
K & S Lake City Freighters Pty Ltd v
Gordon & Gotch Ltd
[1985] HCA 48
(1985) 157 CLR 309
”) that the modern approach to interpretation
that the context be considered in the first instance, especially
in the case of general words, and not merely at some later stage
when ambiguity
might arise and, at [36], Gageler J emphasised the observations of the
plurality in
at [408] (quoted at [63] of these reasons). At [37],
Gageler J said this:
Both of those passages [in
] have been “cited too often to be doubted”. Their import
has been reinforced, not superseded or contradicted, by more
recent statements
emphasising that statutory construction involves attribution of meaning to
statutory text. The task of construction
begins, as it ends, with the
statutory text
. But the statutory text
from beginning to end
, and an understanding of context has utility
“if, and only in so far as, it assists in fixing the meaning of the
text” [citing
quoting the passage in
Consolidated Media Holdings
[emphasis added]
[38]‑[40], Gageler J also said this:
constructional choice presented by a statutory text read in context is sometimes
between one meaning which can be characterised
as the ordinary or grammatical
meaning and another meaning which cannot be so characterised. More commonly,
the choice is from “a
range of potential meanings, some of which may be
less immediately obvious or more awkward than others, but none of which is
ungrammatical or unnatural”, in which case the choice “turns
less on linguistic fit than on evaluation of the relative
coherence of the
alternatives with identified statutory objects or policies” [quoting
Taylor v Owners – Strata Plan No 11564
(2014) 253 CLR 531
to making such a choice is discernment of
statutory purpose
unqualified statutory instruction that, in interpreting a provision of a
Commonwealth Act, “the interpretation that would
best achieve the purpose
or object of the Act (whether or not that purpose or object is expressly stated
in the Act) is to be preferred
to each other interpretation” [citing
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth)] “is in that
respect a particular statutory reflection of a general systemic principle”
the same process of contextual construction is involved when the question is one
of what content is to be given to a statutorily
invoked concept which is
expressed in words the ordinary or grammatical meaning of which is
well‑enough understood but insufficiently
precise to provide definitive
guidance as to how the concept is to be understood and applied in the particular
statutory setting.
[emphasis added]
has already been made in these authorities of
Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth). That section is in these terms:
15AA Interpretation best achieving Act’s
purpose or object
In interpreting a provision of an Act, the
interpretation that would best achieve the purpose or object of the Act (whether
that purpose or object is expressly stated in the Act) is to be preferred
to each other interpretation.
Section 15AB
sets out the range of extrinsic material to which reference might be made if it
is capable of assisting in “the ascertainment
of the meaning of the
provision”. Reference to the relevant material may be made to confirm
that the meaning of the provision
is the ordinary meaning conveyed by the text
of the provision taking into account its context in the Act and the purpose or
underlying the Act or to determine the meaning of the provision when the
provision is ambiguous or obscure or when the ordinary meaning
conveyed by the
text of the provision, taking into account its context in the Act and the
purpose or object underlying the Act, leads
to a result that is manifestly
absurd or unreasonable.
Section 15AB(2)
sets out the relevant material.
It is not necessary to recite that subsection in these reasons.
the question of construction of the provisions of the Act relevant to the scope
of the power conferred on the Tribunal under s
157(6B), the Tribunal
applies the principles discussed at [59]‑[73] of these reasons.
Aspects of the Act
broad structure of the Act at one level is to identify the subject matter in
which copyright subsists (“works” having
“subject matter other than works”, having regard to
the nature of the exclusive rights comprised in the copyright in each class of
subject matter within those descriptions; the ownership
of those exclusive
rights; the duration of the rights; and the remedies available to those in whom
the exclusive rights are vested
(and, in the relevant circumstances, the rights
of an exclusive licensee of the owner), in circumstances where infringement, as
concept is understood, of those rights has occurred.
another level, the Act recognises that notwithstanding the bundle of exclusive
rights conferred on the owner of the copyright,
certain acts of others do not
constitute an infringement of the copyright in the relevant subject matter.
Divisions 3, 4, 4A and
contain many particular examples
of such acts. Sections 103A to 106 of Division 6 of
the Act are examples of such acts concerning subject matter other than works.
Other examples are contained in Divisions 2 and
from provisions of the kind described at [76] of these reasons, the Act also
recognises that some conduct (not falling within
provisions of the kind just
mentioned) will not infringe the copyright in, for example, a work by copying or
communicating the whole
or part of the work. That is so where the conduct is
that of a body administering an educational institution (as defined,
and the factors at s 113P(1)(a) to (e) are satisfied. So too
where such a body copies or communicates a copy of the whole or part
broadcast (s 113P(2)) where the factors at s 113P(2)(a) to (d) are
satisfied. One of those factors involves a remuneration
notice applying to the
relevant educational institution which is in force and by which the relevant
body has given an undertaking
to a collecting society to pay equitable
remuneration for “limited copying or communication”: s 113Q(a)
and (b). Another
of those factors (s 113P(1)(e)(i) and (ii), and
s 113P(2)(d)(i) and (ii)) is that the copying and communication complies
agreement between the relevant collecting society and the body, and any
determination by the Tribunal of a relevant question including
a determination
of the equitable remuneration to be paid by the relevant body to the collecting
society for distribution to its members.
These examples of “licensed
copying” are described as either “statutory” or
“compulsory” licences.
They are statutory or compulsory because the
licence arises by operation of the Act itself “if” the factors at
s 113P(1)(a)
to (e) and s 113P(2)(a) to (d) (in this example) are
engaged and they arise irrespective of the wishes or willingness of the owners
of the copyright to grant such licences. Division 4 of
the heading “Educational Institutions – Statutory Licence”.
is a collecting society for the purposes of Division 4 of
the purposes of the example given above.
of the Act is another example of such licences: see s 183
generally and s 183(1), (4) and (5) particularly; s 183A and
There are other examples of such statutory or compulsory licences.
are also other licences contemplated by the Act.
of them are entirely non‑statutory but collectively administered. Some
are statutory but only in the sense that there
is a statutory
in the Act enabling a “licence” to be brought into existence as
between a person claiming to require a licence to exercise
a right comprised in
the relevant copyright and a person described as a “licensor”. The
boundaries of that mechanism
is in issue in these proceedings. There are also
“licence schemes” or arrangements formulated by one or more
in relation to one or more acts engaging the exercise of one or more
rights comprised in the relevant copyright, by which such a
licensor (or
licensors) is willing (or the persons on whose behalf the licensor(s) is acting,
are willing) to grant a licence to
a person to engage in a particular act,
subject to the payment of charges (if any) and compliance with conditions
subject to which
licences would be granted. Some such schemes which meet the
integers of the defined term “licence scheme” can be
to the Tribunal under s 154 of the Act and after
having considered the scheme, the Tribunal is required, by s 154(4), to
order confirming or varying the licence scheme or substituting for the
scheme another scheme proposed by one of the parties, as the
Tribunal considers
reasonable in the circumstances.
notion that a “licence scheme”, as one of its essential statutory
features, sets out the “classes of cases”
in which the relevant
licensor (or the persons on whose behalf the licensor(s) is or are acting) is
“willing” to grant
a licence within the licence scheme as
formulated, makes plain that the licensor (or relevant appointor upstream of the
has voluntarily submitted to the scheme and its framework, subject to
the power of the Tribunal on referral to confirm or vary the
substitute another scheme for the referred scheme. That power, however, does
not extend to varying the licence scheme
beyond that formulated by a licensor so
as to go beyond “aspects of the incidents of copyright in respect of which
the licensor
or licensors (or the persons on whose behalf they act) are willing
to grant licences”:
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd
v Copyright Tribunal of Australia
(2019) 141 IPR 406
, the Court
(Besanko, Middleton and Burley JJ) at [135] (“
It will be necessary to return to aspects of the Court’s decision in
as, although the questions in issue in this proceeding engage
s 157(3) and s 157(6B) rather than a licence scheme or provisions
to a licence scheme, CA places significant analogical emphasis on the
reasoning in
as guiding the approach to the scope of the
Tribunal’s power conferred under s 157(6B) in an application under
s 157(3), in
the context of
of the Act, and the contended
limitations in the scope of that power.
the Act was enacted (commencing on 1 May 1969), s 136(1) contained a
definition of the term “licence” in these terms:
In this Part, unless a contrary intention appears
“licence” means a licence granted by or on behalf of the owner or
prospective owner of the copyright in a literary, dramatic
or musical work, or
the copyright in a sound recording, being –
in the case of
a literary,
dramatic or musical work – a licence to perform the work or an adaptation
of the work in public, to broadcast the
work or an adaptation of the work, to
make a sound recording or cinematograph film of the work or of an adaptation of
the work for
the purpose of broadcasting the work or adaptation or to cause the
work or an adaptation of the work to be transmitted to subscribers
diffusion service; or
in the case of
a sound recording – a licence to cause the
recording to be heard in public or to make a record embodying the recording for
the purpose of broadcasting the recording;
[emphasis added]
enacted, the Act contained a definition of “licensor” in these
“licensor” means –
(a) in relation to
in respect of a
literary, dramatic or
musical work
– the owner or prospective owner of the copyright in the
work or any body of persons (whether corporate or unincorporate) acting
for the owner or prospective owner in relation to the negotiation or granting of
such licences; and
(b) in relation to
in respect of a
sound recording
– the owner or prospective owner of the copyright in the recording or any
body of persons (whether corporate or unincorporate)
acting as agent for the
owner or prospective owner in relation to the negotiation or granting of such
[emphasis added]
definition of the term “licence scheme”, as enacted, was and remains
in the terms set out at [17] of these reasons.
For convenience, that definition
is set out again below in the style as originally enacted:
“licence scheme”
scheme (including anything in the nature of a scheme, whether called a scheme or
tariff or called by any other name) formulated
by a licensor or licensors and
setting out the classes of cases in which the licensor or each of the licensors
is willing, or the
persons on whose behalf the licensor or each of the licensors
acts are willing, to grant licences and the charges (if any) subject
of which, and the conditions subject to which, licences would be granted in
those classes of cases.
to those definitions, and the evident textual correlation between the definition
of “licence” and “licensor”,
the reference to the word
“case” seems to be a reference to the particular subject matter,
that is, a literary, dramatic
or musical work or a sound recording, and the
“licence” in each case is a licence to do a particular nominated
comprised within the copyright in the nominated work or sound
definition of “licence scheme”, in the context of the definition of
the terms “licence” and “licensor”,
contemplated a
“scheme” (by whatever taxonomy might be selected), formulated by one
or more licensors (as defined), which
sets out the “classes of
cases” (that is, whether literary, dramatic or musical works or, as to
subject matter other
than works, a sound recording), in which the licensor or
licensors are willing (or those upstream of them are willing), to grant
to do one or more of the identified things concerning the relevant subject
matter, recited at (a) or (b) of the definition
of licence, otherwise falling
within the exclusive rights of the copyright owner.
the context of a licence scheme, the “classes of cases” comprehended
the subject matter of the class of case (for example,
particular publications
falling within the class – literary works),
the specified act
(or right) corresponding to a literary work (in this example). The scheme might
comprehend more than one class
of subject matter and one or more of the recited
acts in which event there would be classes of cases. The “classes of
comprehended both the subject matter and the
or right corresponding to the nominated subject matter as those acts (or any one
of them) represented the
of the licence the licensor (or those
upstream of the licensor) was “willing” to grant.
definition of “licence” and “licensor” was amended by
(Cth) (the “2006 Act”) which
commenced on 11 December 2006, so as to introduce into the Act the
definitions of “licence”
and “licensor” at [17] of these
reasons. The term “licence” was detached from its particular
relationship
with literary, dramatic or musical works and sound recordings and
acts recited in the earlier definition, and defined to
mean a licence granted by, or on behalf of, the owner or prospective owner
the copyright in a work (any work) or other subject matter (any subject matter
other than works), to do an act (any and all acts)
comprised in the relevant
one of the exclusive “rights”
comprised in the relevant copyright.
It is defined to mean a licence to do
comprised in the relevant
exercise of the relevant right,
can be the subject matter of the licence. A
licence expressed as a licence to exercise an exclusive right might, as a matter
construction of the relevant instrument, carry with it a right in relation to
all acts falling within the conception of the relevant
exclusive right. A
licence defined by the Act in terms of a licence to do an act comprised in the
act in the copyright might be made the subject
of a licence.
term “licensor” was amended to detach it from its particular
correlation with the earlier definition of “licence”
and define it
to mean a licensor of a particular
kind of entity
. Those amendments were
described as implementing aspects of the recommendations of the Copyright Law
Review Committee’s Report
, December 2000 (the “CLRC Report”). The
Explanatory Memorandum (“EM”) (in the House of Representatives)
the Bill explains that, subject to the new definition of “licensor”,
the new definition of “licence”,
“covers a licence to do any
act comprised in the copyright in any work or other subject matter”: EM,
to the definition of “licensor”, the EM explains that the purpose of
the amendment is to “limit the licences
and licence schemes that can be
the subject of an application or reference to the Copyright Tribunal to those
that are collectively
administered”, with the result that “a
licensor must be able to grant licences for a substantial number of copyright
works or other subject matter in a “class” of such materials, eg,
literary works or musical works or sound recordings
which were made by various
different creators” [emphasis added]: EM, para 11.2. The EM also
recites that the “licensor
may have that authority as owner of the
relevant copyrights, as exclusive licensee or as agent for the owners”:
EM, para 11.2.
the CLRC Report, the Committee recommended that the Tribunal’s
exclusively
the review of licences administered by a collecting society including (by
majority view) all licence schemes and transactional
licences administered by a
collecting society: paras 11.67, 11.100 and 11.101. Corresponding
amendments were recommended to the
definition of “licensor” to
reflect a role of
collective administration
of works or subject matter in
a class, as reflected in the EM quoted earlier.
change was made to the definition of “licence scheme” by the 2006
Act. A licence scheme continued to comprehend a
scheme formulated by a licensor
(or licensors) setting out the classes of cases in respect of which the relevant
statutory persons
are “willing” to grant licences and the Full Court
in PPCA has held that “classes of cases” comprehends any
other subject matter and those acts comprised in the relevant copyright, as
formulated for the purposes of the licence scheme,
and brought within the
regard to the emphasis placed by CA upon the Court’s decision in
, it is convenient at this point to examine aspects of the Full
Court’s decision.
, the question before the Full Court, said to be analogically
relevant for present purposes, was whether the Tribunal had the power
s 154(4) of the Act to make an order varying a licence scheme referred to
it under s 154(1) so as to include three classes
of rights (which would
then be the subject of licences granted under the scheme) notwithstanding that
the licensors, granting PPCA
the non‑exclusive right to grant
non‑exclusive licences of the copyright in the sound recordings owned or
controlled by
them (contained in “input agreements”), had not
conferred on PPCA the right to grant non‑exclusive licences of
classes of rights in question. The rights in question were (without describing
the full content of the rights): the Audiovisual
Streaming Rights; the
On‑demand Offering Rights; and the Digital Content Rental Rights.
[128], the Court observes that a licence scheme must set out the “classes
of cases” which the licensor, or those on
behalf of whom the licensor acts
(described as “broadly, the copyright owners”), are
“willing” to grant licences.
The reference to classes of cases was
held to be a reference “to such of the incidents of copyright that the
owner gives permission
to the collecting society to licence” in the
scheme. At [131], the Court notes that s 137 (quoted at [54] of these
addresses the topic of cases to which licence schemes apply. The Court
regarded s 137 as aiding in the resolution of the “potential
overlap” between a “case” (the incidents of copyright the
subject of permission given to the collecting society)
“condition”, which is to be regarded as “any term that does
not concern the scope of the rights granted”
(such as terms going to
warranties, the mechanics of payment, choice of law and other such terms). The
Act provides that a reference
to a “condition” is a reference to
“any conditions other than conditions relating to the payment of a
s 136(2)(a). In
, the Court regarded, for the
purposes of a licence scheme, a reference to a condition as a reference to any
conditions other than
conditions relating to a charge, and other than, the
incidents of copyright the subject of the permission given to the collecting
to the question of the scope of the power conferred on the Tribunal under
s 154(4) (quoted at [54] of these reasons), the Court
construed the reference to “scheme” in s 154(4) as a reference
to a “licence scheme” and thus the power to
make an order confirming
or varying the scheme or substituting for the scheme another scheme, was
confined to an order concerning
a scheme exhibiting the “central”
requirement that the classes of cases the subject of licences granted under the
be ones the licensor collecting society, or the owners conferring
authority on the collecting society, is “willing to grant”:
at [141]. As to this central requirement, the Court said this at
The reference to “willing” in this context
is to be understood to mean that those persons [the collecting society or
the owner of the copyright] are prepared to offer for licence those
particular aspects, or “classes of cases”, of the
subject of the scheme. Taken together these matters indicate that the classes
of cases in which the licensor or the
person on whose behalf the licensor is
willing to grant licences will be parts of the copyright interest of the owners
by the collecting society in the licence scheme referred
to the Tribunal (as may be varied by licensor from time to time).
[emphasis added]
[142], the Court said this:
The second and third characteristics [of a licence
scheme], being the charges and conditions to be applied, do not contain
to the willingness or otherwise of the licensor or person on whose
behalf the licensor acts. Accordingly, a scheme as determined
by the Tribunal
that includes conditions and charges that conflict with proposals made by these
people will remain
the definition of a licence scheme and be
within the power of the Tribunal provided that it is reasonable in the
circumstances.
[emphasis added]
[143], the Court expressed observations about the relationship between the
conclusions at [141] and [142] and the policy and purpose
of Part VI of the
Act, within which both s 154 and s 157 fall, in these terms:
In our view this approach is consistent with the policy
and purpose of Pt VI of the Act, which is to confer on the Tribunal power
to supervise the relationship between collecting societies and persons in need
of licences. The starting point mandated by s 154(1)
of a licence scheme by the licensor on behalf of its members. It is
a scheme for the compulsory licence of rights, which are addressed in
other provisions of the Act. Indeed, the absence of the prescriptive
applicable to compulsory licensing provides a further indication that this is
the correct approach.
[emphasis added]
[144], the Court observed that the “real point” of distinction in
determining the scope of the power to make an order
of the kind described in
s 154(4) “turns on the ‘willingness’ or otherwise of the
parties mentioned to grant the
licence in respect of the classes of cases
identified”. The Court observed that the willingness or otherwise is to
be ascertained
from the form of licence scheme proposed by the licensor, which
represents the interests of the copyright owners and accordingly
may be taken to
reflect the “willingness” of both.
[145], the Court said this:
The consequence of our construction is that the Tribunal
does not have power to vary the scheme proposed by a licensor insofar as
affects the classes of cases in respect of which the licence is proposed to be
granted. In our view this does not lead to an
absurd or unworkable result (as
Foxtel contends). Subdivision H (ss 154‑159) of Div 3 of
Pt VI of the Act concerns the regulated
approval of licence schemes
volunteered by rights owners. These licence schemes are to be
with the grant of statutory licences under the Act, where statutory mechanisms
provide for the
compulsory licence
of certain acts within the copyright
of an owner, subject to certain provisos. An example of the latter is
s 108 of the Act, which
provides a defence to copyright infringement in a
sound recording performed in public on terms requiring, inter alia, the payment
to the copyright owner of equitable remuneration the amount of which is to be
determined by the Tribunal if the parties are unable
to agree. Under s 154
of the Act a degree of decisional freedom is given to the Tribunal to impose
reasonable charges and conditions
on the licensor,
to expand the
cases in respect of which the copyright licence is to be granted. To do so
would permit the Tribunal to impose a compulsory
licence upon the rights owners
in circumstances where the Act indicates that this is not its intention.
[emphasis added]
examining the contentions of the applicants, it is convenient, having regard to
the matters discussed at [95] to [101] of these
reasons in relation to
and the emphasis CA places on the reasoning in
the essential position adopted by CA.
contends that Part VI of the Act is concerned with the regulation of
licence schemes and licences which are, in their nature, “voluntary”
in the sense that the licensor, and those on whose behalf it acts, are
“willing” and “able” to grant licences
of the acts an
applicant seeks to do. CA contends that these voluntary licences are to be
contrasted with statutory licences under
the Act which, in their nature, are
“compulsory”. In other words, the Act itself confers a licence,
subject to particular
statutory factors, to exercise the relevant right by doing
certain things, whether or not the owner of the copyright in the particular
subject matter is “willing” to grant a licence to do those things.
CA contends that an application under s 157(3) can
claim for a licence that a licensor is
to grant, and the scope of
the power under s 157(6B) does not extend to an
to grant an
applicant a licence of a scope of proposed rights (or acts) which go
“beyond the mandate or authority of the licensor”,
notwithstanding
that the Tribunal has a degree of “decisional freedom” to impose or
determine “charges” and
“conditions” it considers
reasonable in the circumstances. CA contends that it has a particular mandate
from the copyright
owners, conferred by CopyCo, and the scope of the acts in
respect of which it is able to grant licences are those set out in the
Licence supplemented by the Additional Rights set out in the Confidential
Schedule. CA says that s 157(6B) does not confer a
power to make an order
granting a licence that reaches beyond
those rights
from these matters, CA notes that the applicants attach significance to the
circumstance contemplated by s 157(3)(a) that a
licensor has “refused
or failed to ... procure the grant of the licence” (that is, the required
licence), and the power
in s 157(6B)(b) to order that “the applicant
be granted a licence in the terms proposed by the applicant”, as
the conferral of a power to order the grant of a licence that goes
beyond the mandate of the licensor. CA says that attributing
such a meaning to
those words operates to convert the regulation of voluntary licences under
s 157 of the Act into a regime of compulsory
licences conferring rights
that, in this case, CA is not authorised to grant.
The contentions of the applicants and aspects of the statutory
the outset, the applicants accept that even though the Tribunal is not
“technically” bound by the decision of the Full
, the Tribunal would “give significant weight” to the
Full Court’s reasons. Nevertheless, they point out that the
concerns questions of construction of the essential characteristics of a
“licence scheme”, as defined, the centrality
of the notion of a
licensor (or person on whose behalf a licensor acts) being “willing”
to grant licences (in relation
to “classes of cases” as construed),
and the scope of the particular power conferred on the Tribunal under
s 154(4) of
to s 157 (quoted at [10] of these reasons), the following matters should be
Section 157
falls within subdivision H of Part VI of the Act. Part VI is
concerned with the topic “Copyright Tribunal of Australia”
subdivision H is concerned with “References and applications [to the
Tribunal] relating to licences and licence schemes”.
Section 154
is concerned with a referral by a licensor (as defined in s 136(1)) who
proposes to bring a licence scheme
into operation
. Section 154(2)
identifies who are to be the parties to such a reference. The Tribunal may make
the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission (the “ACCC”) a
party to a reference. Persons or organisations with “a substantial
in the operation of the scheme” may be made parties:
s 154(3). The possible orders to be made by the Tribunal are set out
s 154(4) as described earlier. Matters in relation to an order under
s 154(4) are set out at s 154(5). Steps the licensor may
take where a
licence scheme has been referred are set out at s 154(6).
Section 154(7) provides for the coming into operation of
the scheme.
Section 155
is concerned with a reference to the Tribunal of an
scheme in circumstances where a dispute has arisen with respect to the
“terms of the scheme” between a licensor
operating the scheme and,
either, an organisation claiming to be representative of persons requiring
licences in cases included in
a class of cases to which the scheme applies, or
any person claiming that he or she requires a licence in a case included in a
of cases to which the scheme applies. Section 155 reflects a similar
approach to that adopted in s 154 concerning parties to the
reference, the
ACCC, persons claiming a substantial interest, matters relating to orders and
timing. As to the power of the Tribunal
to make orders, it must make an order
in relation to the scheme it considers reasonable in the circumstances,
“doing one of
the following to the scheme so far as it relates to the
relevant class”: confirming the scheme; varying the scheme; or
substituting
for the scheme another scheme proposed by one of the parties:
Section 156
also engages a reference of a licence scheme to the Tribunal. It provides that
where the Tribunal has made an order under
either s 154 or s 155,
then, subject to s 156(2), at any time while the order remains in force,
the licensor operating the scheme,
an organisation claiming to represent persons
requiring licences in cases included in a relevant class of cases governed by
or any person claiming that he or she requires a licence in a case
included in that class, may refer the scheme to the Tribunal in
so far as it
relates to cases included in that class. Section 156(2) provides that a
scheme shall not be referred at a time earlier
than that set out at (a) or (b).
Again, s 156 adopts a similar approach to parties, the ACCC and related
matters. Subsection (5)
adopts subsections (3), (4) and (6) to (10)
inclusive of s 155 and applies those subsections as part of s 156.
The scope of the
orders in relation to the scheme, are set out at s 156(4)
in the same terms as s 155(5) as mentioned at [109] of these reasons.
of these sections, if engaged by a relevant person, provides for a mechanism
enabling the Tribunal to exercise supervision over
a proposed licence scheme or
an existing licence scheme governed by orders under s 154 or s 155 so
as to either confirm or vary or
substitute the scheme for another as the
Tribunal considers reasonable in the circumstances (and in the case of orders
under s 155(5)
and s 156(4) the orders are to relate to “the
relevant class”, or the scheme so far as it is referred). As the Full
Court observed in
at [143], the policy and purpose of Part VI
of the Act is to confer on the Tribunal power to supervise the relationship
between collecting
societies and persons in need of licences.
to s 157, the applicants note that s 157(1) is concerned with a claim
by a person in a case to which a licence scheme applies.
subsection contemplates that a licensor operating the licence scheme has
“refused” or “failed” to grant
the claimant a licence
“in accordance with the scheme” or “to procure the
grant” to such a person of
a licence. That subsection,
although not s 157(3) upon which the applicants rely, focuses upon licences
that would be in
with the scheme and, having regard to
(which is directly concerned with a licence scheme), that means
licences that would engage only the incidents of copyright brought
scheme. The subsection captures the notion of a failure or refusal of a
licensor to procure the grant of a licence which
would be in accordance with the
scheme. Section 157(1) does not engage a claim to a licence which goes
beyond one which would be
in accordance with the scheme, or the procuring of a
licence which goes beyond one which would be in accordance with the scheme.
Once s 157(1) is engaged, the claimant may apply to the Tribunal and seek
one of the orders contemplated by s 157(6A) of the Act,
according to its
Section 157(2)
also engages a claim in a case to which a licence scheme applies and
contemplates a claim that the grant of a licence
in accordance with the scheme
would be made subject to the payment of charges, or to conditions, that are not
reasonable in the circumstances
of the case. Once s 157(2) is engaged, the
claimant may apply to the Tribunal and seek one of the orders contemplated by
of the Act, according to its terms.
Section 157(3)
is concerned with a claim by a person that he or she requires a
“licence” in a case to which a licence
scheme does not apply. The
claim would thus engage a claim to be granted, “by or on behalf of the
owner or prospective owner
of the copyright in a work or other subject
matter”, a licence “to do an act comprised in the copyright”:
s 136(1). Section 157(3) is the subsection
upon which the applicants rely in bringing the principal applications. Although
is set out at [10] of these reasons, s 157(3) as a matter of
convenience is repeated below:
No licence scheme and licensor refuses or fails to
grant reasonable licence
(3) A person who claims that he or she requires a licence in a case to which a
licence scheme does not apply (including a case where
a licence scheme has not
been formulated or is not in operation) and:
(a) that a licensor has refused or failed to
grant the licence, or to procure the grant of the licence, and that in the
circumstances
it is unreasonable that the licence should not be granted; or
(b) that a licensor proposes that the licence should be granted subject to the
payment of charges or to conditions, that are unreasonable;
may apply to the Tribunal under this
Section 157(3)
engages a number of elements.
it engages a claim by a person who requires a “licence in a case to which
a licence scheme does not apply”, including,
as the language makes plain,
a case where a licence scheme has not been formulated or is not in operation.
this context, the elements of s 137 of the Act should be noted.
Section 137 provides that for the purposes of Part VI, a case
subject to subsection (2), be deemed to be a case to which a licence scheme
applies if, in accordance with a licence scheme
for the time being in operation,
a licence would be granted in that case: s 137(1). The qualification in
subsection (2) is that,
for the purposes of Part VI of the Act, where,
in accordance with a licence scheme, the licence that would be granted, would be
to conditions, by virtue of which, particular matters would be
from the licence, and a case relates to one or more matters
falling within such an exception,
“shall be deemed not to
be a case to which the scheme applies”.
Section 157(3)
is engaged, at the threshold, so far as the introductory words are concerned,
where a person claims to require a licence
in a case where no licence scheme
applies because no licence scheme (as defined) has been proposed (including a
licence scheme not
formulated or not in operation) and thus does not apply, but
also where a claim is made for a licence that would be granted in accordance
with a licence scheme but subject to “conditions” excepting
“particular matters” from the licence where a
case “relates
to” one or more “matters”, “falling within such an
exception”. In that second
circumstance, that “case” is
deemed “not to be a case to which the scheme applies” which would
seem to bring
the case within s 157(3) and engage the question of whether
the conditions referred to in s 137(2)(a) “are unreasonable”
for the purposes of s 157(3)(b) of Part VI. Section 157(2) also
addresses questions concerning “conditions” and whether
reasonable or not in the circumstances, but those questions only arise in
circumstances of “a case to which a licence
scheme applies”.
Section 157(3)
seems to comprehend two possibilities as described above.
(and in conjunction with the first or threshold element), s 157(3) engages
a claim that a licensor has done one or more of three
licensor has “refused” to grant the licence.
licensor has “failed” to grant the licence.
licensor has refused or failed “to procure the grant of the
licence”. In all three cases, “the licence”
seems to be a
reference to a licence the person claims he or she requires and, in addition to
that element, the person claims that,
in the circumstances, it is
“unreasonable” that the licence should not be granted: the
s 157(3)(a) elements.
as an alternative set of circumstances to those at s 157(3)(a), the person
claiming to require the licence claims that a licensor
“proposes that the
licence should be granted” (which, again, seems to be a reference to the
required licence as claimed),
but subject to the “payment of
charges” or “to conditions” that are unreasonable: the
s 157(3)(b) elements.
circumstances of claims engaging the threshold element and the elements of
s 157(3)(a), or the threshold element and the elements
of s 157(3)(b),
the person may apply to the Tribunal under the section which, so far as
applications under s 157(3) are concerned
(and also s 157(2)), engages
the possibility of orders under s 157(6B) of the Act according to the terms
or integers of that section.
following further aspects of s 157(3) should be noted.
the section contemplates a claim that a person requires “a licence”
(in a case to which a licence scheme does not apply),
which is a reference to
the defined term, “licence”, in s 136(1) of the Act. The
reference to a “licence”
in s 157(3) is a reference to a claim
to require the grant of a licence by, or on behalf of, the owner (or prospective
the copyright in the relevant subject matter, to do an act comprised
in the copyright. The licence required by an applicant under
s 157(3) must
be a licence of identified
comprised in the relevant copyright and
it must be a claim to a grant of a licence
the owner or prospective
owner of the copyright, or a grant of such a licence by
of the owner of the relevant copyright.
as to that “someone”, s 157(3), whether having regard to the
elements of s 157(3)(a) or (b), contemplates conduct on
the part of a
“licensor”. That term is, as already mentioned, a defined term and,
put simply (and without controversy
in these proceedings) for present purposes,
it suggests a body in the nature of a “collecting society” because
only an entity or body having those particular characteristics that falls
within the definition of the term “licensor”
: see [17] of these
reasons. The parties accept that CA is a licensor and a collecting society.
CA, is not the owner of the copyright in the subject matter in respect of which
the applicants seek the grant of a licence
to exercise the field of rights
comprehended by the Proposed Licence in each case. Thus, the claim of the
applicants is to a licence
they say they require concerning acts engaging an
exercise of particular rights vested in the copyright owner or owners set out in
the Proposed Licence in each case, to be granted
CA, the licensor (on
behalf of the owners of the copyright in the relevant works), irrespective of
whether the owner or owners of
the copyright in the relevant works have
conferred on CA, as a matter of legality, the power or authority to act
behalf” in creating or granting a relevant right in anyone
to do the relevant act, or exercise the relevant right, comprised
the prima facie difficulty of seeking to obtain a grant of a licence of some of
the acts comprised in the relevant copyright from
on behalf of
owners of the relevant copyright in circumstances where CA does not have a
conferral of any power, permission or authority to
act on behalf of the owners
(either directly or through CopyCo), in respect of the relevant acts, as an
expression of the relevant
rights in issue (owned by the upstream publishers),
is sought to be answered, fundamentally, by three things.
the applicants say that there are no words of express limitation in
s 157(3)(a) or (b) which have the effect of
the scope of
the licence (that is, the scope of the acts comprised in the relevant copyright
and made the subject of a claim to a
required licence), that may be brought
before the Tribunal by a claimant so as to engage, subject to its terms,
the applicants say that to the extent that the Full Court’s decision in
is thought to analogically suggest that there is simply “no
power” to make an order that an applicant be granted a licence,
licensor, “in the terms proposed by the applicant”, where the
licensor does not have the power, permission or authority
to act on behalf of
the owners in respect of the relevant acts and rights asserted and claimed, the
applicants make the following
point. They contend that
reasoning in
statutory imperative
“licence scheme” (which does not apply here), by its very
definition, contemplates a scheme formulated by licensors
” to grant licences in the relevant “classes of
cases” (or the persons on whose behalf they act are
grant licences in the relevant classes of cases). Thus, the scope of the power
under s 154(4) of the Act could not reach beyond
the barrier of the rights
the licensor (or owners) were willing to make the subject of licences in
accordance with the scheme. They
observe that any order
to engage a
“licence scheme” exhibiting that central characteristic. The
applicants say that there is no notion of “willingness”
on the part
of a licensor (or owner) in the statutory language of s 157(3) or
s 157(6B) which operates to constrain the scope of
the licence a person
requires and which may be made the subject of an
application
Tribunal. Nor, they say, is there anything in the language of s 157(6B)
that operates to constrain the reach of an
under s 157(6B)(b)
in such an application under s 157(3), to grant a licence “in the
terms proposed by an applicant”,
if the Tribunal is satisfied that the
claim of the applicant under s 157(3) is “well‑founded”.
necessarily follows, for the applicants, that particular acts comprised in the
not willing
to grant others to exercise, and in
respect of which no authority has been conferred, either directly or through an
intermediary such
as CopyCo, on a collecting society licensor, can properly be
made the subject of a
to the grant of a licence and an
that such a licence “be granted” to an applicant “in the terms
proposed by the applicant”.
the applicants say that the purpose and object of the provisions of the Act
in subdivision H of Division 3 of Part VI engaging the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction in regulating the approval of licence schemes and
licences (ss 154‑159), is to exercise some
supervisory constraint
upon the discretionary exercise of exclusive rights conferred on copyright
owners engaging in such schemes
or grants of licences, so as to
counter‑balance or constrain the monopoly or potential monopoly of
collecting societies and
their member owners in their licensing programs with
users who require access to particular rights to engage in particular conduct,
much along the lines of the discussion in Ch 11.04–11.11 and
Ch 11.42 and following, in the CLRC Report, and as reflected in
speeches of the then Attorney‑General, Mr N H Bowen, in relation to
in the House
of Representatives.
will return to these matters later in these reasons.
Tribunal’s power to make an order arising out of an application under
s 157(3) is conferred by s 157(6B). For convenience,
that section is
set out again below:
Order dealing with application under subsection (2)
(6B) If the Tribunal is satisfied that the claim of an applicant under
subsection (2) or (3) is well‑founded, the Tribunal
(a) make an order specifying, in respect of
the matters specified in the order, the charges, if any, and the conditions,
Tribunal considers reasonable in the circumstances in relation to the
applicant; or
(b) order that the applicant be granted a licence in the terms proposed by the
applicant, the licensor concerned or another party
to the application.
scope of the orders capable of being made under s 157(6B) in an application
under s 157(3) are also capable of being made in an
application under
s 157(2) which, as mentioned earlier, concerns the possibility of the grant
of a licence in accordance with a licence
scheme, but subject to the payment of
charges or to conditions not reasonable in the circumstances.
Section 157(6B)
provides that if the Tribunal is satisfied that the claim of an applicant under
s 157(3) is “well‑founded”, the
Tribunal must do one of two things. The
of those is to make an
order specifying, in the order, the charges, if any, and the conditions that the
Tribunal considers reasonable
in the circumstances in relation to the relevant
applicant under either subsection. Section 157(6B)(a) seems to provide a
answer to a well‑founded claim of an applicant under
s 157(2) who seeks a licence in accordance with the scheme but contends
that the charges and conditions to which that licence would be subject are not
reasonable in the circumstances.
s 157(6B)(a) seems to provide a remedial answer to a well‑founded
claim under s 157(3)(b) that a person requires
a licence (where a licence
scheme does not apply), and a licensor has “proposed” that
“the licence” “should
be granted”, but subject to the
payment of charges or to conditions that are unreasonable.
both s 157(2) and s 157(3)(b), the licence “to do acts comprised
in the [relevant] copyright” would not be in issue,
if the reference in
s 157(3)(b) to “the licence” is properly understood as a
cross‑reference to the licence the
applicant claims to require for the
purposes of the introductory words of s 157(3), and, in the case of
s 157(2), it can only be
a licence in accordance with the licence scheme.
If, on the other hand, the reference to “the licence” in
s 157(3)(b)
is a reference to a licence proposed by a licensor but not
necessarily the licence the applicant claims to require referred to in
introductory words of s 157, the acts comprised in the copyright the
subject of the licence may be different as between an applicant
and a licensor.
remedial answer to the contested matters of charges and conditions is that the
Tribunal can make an order specifying the charges,
if any, and the conditions it
considers reasonable in the circumstances concerning either the
subsection (2) or the subsection (3)
of the two possible orders arising under s 157(6B), if the
Tribunal is satisfied that an applicant’s claim under subsections
or (3) is well‑founded, is an order that the applicant be granted a
licence in the terms proposed by the applicant, the
licensor concerned or
another party to the application: s 157(6B)(b).
to an application under
, s 157(6B) seems to provide
the Tribunal with the power to
specify in the order it makes, in
respect of each of the “matters” specified in the order, the
particular charges and
conditions that the Tribunal considers reasonable once
satisfied that the applicant’s claim is well‑founded; or, rather
than specify the
relation to the various matters, in the order, the Tribunal has power to order
that the licence be granted
in the terms
proposed by the applicant or by
the licensor or another party to the application. If the Tribunal is satisfied
that the claim of
an applicant under subsection (2) is well‑founded,
it is difficult to see, prima facie, how an order could be made that the
applicant be granted a licence in the terms proposed by the licensor. However,
the subsection seems to recognise that a licence
might ultimately be proposed by
a licensor or other party to the application (or, of course, the applicant) that
reflects terms properly
made the subject of an order by reference to the licence
rather than specifying separately each and every charge or condition considered
by the Tribunal reasonable in the circumstances.
way, the licence as to the “acts” comprised in the relevant
the licence scheme referred
to under that subsection.
to an application under
, s 157(6B)(b) seems to also
contemplate that if the Tribunal is satisfied that an applicant’s claim
under s 157(3)(b), that
a licensor proposes that the licence “should
be granted” but subject to charges and conditions that are
“unreasonable”,
is well‑founded, it must
the charges and conditions in respect of the relevant “matters”, or
order that the applicant be granted a licence
in the terms proposed by the
applicant, the licensor or another party.
applicants contend that the central matter decisive of the present proceeding is
the relationship between s 157(6B)(b) and s 157(3)(a).
matter, the contentions are these:
(1) The applicants claim that they require a licence
which involves a licence to do a range of identified acts comprised in the
in the relevant works and they contend that the licensor has failed or
refused to grant
licence or to
the grant of that
licence. They say that recent amendments have been proposed to the scope of the
licence and absent CA accepting
that a licence as amended “should be
granted”, s 157(3)(a) is engaged.
(2) Section 157(6B)(b) gives the Tribunal the power to order that the
applicants be granted a licence (which, they say, is “undoubtedly”
apt to pick up the licence referred to in the opening words of s 157(3)),
in the terms proposed by each applicant, if the Tribunal
is satisfied that the
claim made under s 157(3)(a) is “well‑founded”.
(3) Because the power under s 157(6B)(b) can only be exercised if the
Tribunal is satisfied that the claim under s 157(3)(a) (that
engaged claim, leaving aside any question arising under s 157(3)(b)) is
well‑founded, the Tribunal will need to be
satisfied that the refusal or
failure to grant, or procure the grant, of the licence is, in the circumstances,
unreasonable.
(4) The applicants seem to accept that because CA has “proposed
licence” of certain acts comprised in the copyright in the relevant
subject matter on particular terms, that s 157(3)(b) is
also engaged. The
acceptance of that proposition seems to accept that the reference to “the
licence” in s 157(3)(b)
is not necessarily a reference to the licence
a person claims to require, referred to in the opening words of s 157, that
is, a cross‑reference
to “a licence”. On that footing, both
s 157(3)(a) and (b) would be engaged.
(5) Although CA contends that the power conferred under s 157(6B)(b) is
confined in the sense that an order granting the applicant
a licence cannot
include any incident of the copyright comprised in the relevant work or subject
matter that goes beyond the “mandate”
or authority or power of the
licensor, the applicants contend that there is no “inherent
language” (in either s 157(3)(a)
or s 157(6B)(b)) that seems
“clearly to limit the Tribunal’s power in that way. They say that
the power to order the
grant of a licence “in the terms proposed by the
applicant” turns upon the Tribunal’s state of satisfaction that
applicants’
is well‑founded, and a claim framed in
terms of the language of s 157(3)(a) is not expressly confined in the way
CA contends.
(6) The applicants say that a strong “textual indicator” that
suggests that the Tribunal’s power is not confined
as CA contends, is the
inclusion in s 157(3)(a) of a licensor’s “refusal or failure
... to procure the grant of the licence”.
They say that
“procure” is an “ordinary” word which means
“obtain especially by care or effort; acquire;
bring about” (Oxford
English Dictionary), and it ought to be given its ordinary meaning in
s 157(3)(a). Thus, the use of the
phrase in s 157(3)(a) contemplates
a situation where a licensor does not itself have the power or authority to
grant a licence required
by an applicant but the licensor can go to the
to bring about” the grant of the licence or “seek to
have its own powers extended” so as to bring about the grant.
that the use of the phrase “procure the grant” recognises, by the
very nature of the language, that granting
the licence is something the licensor
cannot immediately do and requires the licensor to take
bring about the grant. Thus, the language is said to be apt to address a
circumstance where the licensor does not have the power,
authority or mandate to
grant a licence in respect of the particular incidents of copyright the subject
of the licence sought by
the applicant.
(7) The applicants say that CA’s contention that “procure” in
the context of s 157 and Part VI of the Act means
or connotes a step
the licensor is empowered or authorised to take under its mandate, takes the
word beyond its ordinary meaning.
(8) The applicants say that CA’s contention that the only licence that can
be the subject of an order under s 157(6B)(b) is
a licence that engages
incidents of the copyright falling within the licensor’s mandate, leads to
an incongruity that s 157(3)(a)
and s 157(6B)(b) are to be construed
as confined to the limits of the licensor’s mandate even though a claimant
would not necessarily
know the limits of the licensor’s mandate.
(9) As to CA’s contention that the applicants are adopting an inconsistent
position by accepting that s 157 applies where the
licensor is a collecting
society acting on behalf of the copyright owners on the one hand, and denying,
on the other hand, that the
terms on which the licensor is appointed and
authorised to
of those owners are relevant, and that
those terms constrain the power to order a licence proposed by an applicant, the
say that there is no inconsistency in contending that a collecting
society acts on behalf of the copyright owners within the limits
authority, on the one hand, and contending, on the other hand, that the
authority conferred on the collecting society does
not constrain the meaning to
be attributed to the
of s 157(6B)(b) and its relationship with
s 157(3)(a), especially having regard to the use of the word
“procure” in s
(10) Put another way, the applicants say that there is no inconsistency in
saying that the licensor acts on behalf of the copyright
owners (whatever the
limits of the mandate or authority might be) and contending that the text of
s 157 “extends” to
those circumstances where the collecting
society does not have a mandate for
incidents of the copyright in the
subject of the required licence (at the time of the claim or proposal by an
applicant), but where
the licensor can seek to procure, from copyright owners, a
grant of the licence that includes those incidents of the copyright going
the then mandate of the licensor.
(11) As to the strong “bargaining position” of a collecting society
licensor, the applicants contend that once the owners
of copyright organise
themselves through such a licensing organisation as the grantor of licences, it
gives the owners and the collecting
society a strong bargaining position and
that is the mischief which Part VI of the Act is directed to addressing.
That purpose or
object of Part VI is said to “guide” the proper
construction of s 157 and support the construction contended for by the
applicants. They say that, in the end, if the copyright owners elect to
participate in arrangements for the granting of licences
of acts comprised in
the relevant copyright even if as to only particular acts, then “the price
they pay” is that the
arrangements for granting licences become subject to
the supervision of the Tribunal through the mechanism of s 157 and that is
basic point” they emphasise.
(12) The applicants say that the copyright owners cannot limit the power of the
Tribunal under s 157(6B)(b) by limiting the authority
or power or mandate
of the collecting society, and if the Tribunal’s power is so limited, the
have an “enhanced opportunity” to
exploit their bargaining position (quoting references to the role of a
bargaining position
by Mr N H Bowen) and market power arising by reason of
their exclusive rights.
(13) The applicants also say that CA’s contention that the particular
bargaining power or (monopoly) market power of CA is
extinguished, constrained
or counter‑balanced by potential rivalry between copyright owners, and as
between the owners and
CA(as CA only enjoys a non‑exclusive right to grant
licences), is not to the point on the question of construction of the text.
They also say that the circumstances that particular owners could potentially
compete with CA in the grant of licences does not
mean that there is an absence
of a risk that the bargaining power of CA might be exercised. They say that
unless the publishers
do “actively”, in effect, compete with CA,
then there is a risk of market power which s 157 seeks to constrain.
(14) As to CA’s notion that the construction contended for by the
applicants gives rise to an “unworkable regime”
because it means
that once a copyright owner has appointed a collecting society to grant licences
of, for example,
comprised in the relevant copyright, the door is
then forced open enabling the Tribunal to grant a licence as sought by an
in respect of each and every right comprised in the copyright in the
relevant subject matter on the terms and conditions determined
by the Tribunal,
the applicants contend that the power of the Tribunal is only engaged once there
is a well‑founded claim of
a refusal or failure to grant the licence or to
procure the grant of the licence sought by an applicant, and that, in the
circumstances,
it is unreasonable that the licence should not be granted
(s 157(3)(a)), or the licensor proposes a licence subject to charges or
conditions (or both) that are unreasonable. The applicants say, in effect, that
the controlling mechanism is whether the Tribunal
can be satisfied, “in
the circumstances”, that it is “unreasonable” that the licence
as sought should not
be granted.
(15) The applicants say that if the Tribunal is satisfied that the claim of an
applicant is well‑founded, that a licensor has
failed or refused to grant
the licence or has refused or failed to procure the grant of such a licence and
that in the circumstances,
it is unreasonable that the licence should not be
granted, s 157(6B) is engaged and the Tribunal has power to order under
s 157(6B)(b)
that the applicant be granted a licence “in the terms
proposed by the applicant” extending, as it does in this case,
to a number
of acts comprised in the copyright that CA does not have authority to confer by
sub‑licence and which lie within
the exclusive rights conferred by the Act
on the owners of the relevant works or other subject matter. Thus, it must
follow on such
a construction, that none of the owners of the copyright could
complain that an applicant’s exercise of rights comprised in
the copyright
is an infringement even though the licensor, as the grantor of the licence as
required by the order, cannot actually
confer such a licence of rights vested in
the owners.
is convenient at this point to note s 159(8) of the Act. That subsection
addresses the topic of the effect of an order of the
Tribunal in relation to
licences. Subsections (1)‑(3) address the effect of orders made
under ss 154, 155 and 156. Subsections
(4)‑(6) address the
effect of orders made under s 157 “specifying conditions and
charges”. Subsection (8) addresses
an order under s 157 that a
person be granted a licence. It provides that, in circumstances where the
Tribunal has made an order
under s 157 that a person be granted a licence
“in the terms proposed by the applicant, the licensor concerned or another
to the application”, the person to whom the licence is granted is
, for the purpose of proceedings for infringement of
those terms
, and such a
person, is liable to pay the owner of the copyright concerned the amount of any
charges that would be payable
been granted the
licence in those terms” [emphasis added]. The applicants contend that
s 159(8) is “very much a side
issue” as to the scope of the
operation of s 157 in the sense that the licence arises by operation of an
order under s 157(6B)(b)
without the “necessity for the parties
thereafter to formally execute a licence”.
The construction question
attributing meaning to s 157, the Tribunal applies the principles discussed
at [59]‑[73] of these reasons and takes into
account all of the
submissions of the parties. Applying those principles, the Tribunal makes these
observations.
(1) The starting point is to recognise that
s 157(3) addresses a claim by a person to require a licence in a case to
which a licence
scheme does not apply. In a licence scheme, a licensor
formulates a scheme (by whatever taxonomic description) which sets out the
classes of cases in which a licensor is willing (or persons on whose behalf the
licensor acts, are willing) to grant licences in
those classes of cases (and the
charges and conditions to which the licence, granted in accordance with the
scheme, would be subject).
As already noted, the Full Court in
construed the phrase “classes of cases” as concerned with the
incidents of the copyright in the relevant subject matter
brought, willingly,
within the licence scheme. Thus, the licence scheme gives content to the term
“licence” by identifying
the acts comprised in the copyright which
can be the subject of a licence in accordance with the scheme.
(2) Section 157(3) is not concerned with such a construct, although
s 157(3) engages a possibly unusual circumstance where a licence
be granted in accordance with a licence scheme, would be granted subject to
“conditions” by virtue of which
“particular matters”
would be excepted “from the licence” and a case relates to one or
more matters falling
within such an exception such that the case is deemed not
to be a case to which the licence scheme applies, and thus such a case,
fall within s 157(3). That is not this case. However, the statutory text
is not to be construed only within, or by reference
to, the boundaries of the
facts immediately thought to engage the relevant section.
(3) Section 157(3) addresses a person’s claim to require a licence
where no licence scheme applies defining the incidents of
the copyright the
subject of the licence. In order to derive the content of the statutory term
“licence” in s 157(3),
the subject of a person’s claim to
require a licence, the claimed licence must be a licence granted by someone (a
by, or on behalf of, the owner or owners of the copyright in a work or
other subject matter to do an act comprised in the copyright.
Thus, the content
of the licence the subject of a claim under s 157(3) is to be found, in
circumstances where the licensor is a
collecting society acting on behalf of the
owners of the copyright, in the scope of the authority, permission or power
on the licensor by the owners to grant licences of acts comprised
within the rights subsisting in the relevant copyright.
(4) The so‑called mandate of the licensor might be conferred upon the
licensor directly by some form of licence, conferring
authority to grant
sub‑licences of particular rights, or the authority might be conferred by
an intermediary licensor deriving
authority to grant a licence to the collecting
society “licensor” from the upstream owners. Either way, the
of the licence, the subject of a claim, is determined by recognising
that a collecting society licensor which is not the owner (or
prospective owner)
of the copyright in the subject matter, but rather a body that acts “on
behalf of” the owner or owners
of the copyright, can only grant a licence,
on behalf of the owners of the incidents of copyright, that falls within the
conferred on the licensor.
(5) Once the licensor engages or purports to engage with a claim to licence acts
comprised in the relevant copyright beyond the scope
of the authority it holds,
it no longer acts on behalf of the owners of the copyright as to those acts. It
simply acts beyond power.
(6) Of course, a person might well make a claim to require a licence, in a case
where no licence scheme applies, which comprehends
many (perhaps all) acts
comprised in the relevant rights in the copyright subsisting in the relevant
subject matter, but the subject
matter of s 157(3) is not such a licence
unless the licensor is the owner of the bundle of rights comprised in the
the licensor has authority from the owners of the copyright to act
on their behalf in respect of the acts the subject of the required
(7) In other words, the statutory constraint on the subject matter of
s 157(3) is determined by recognising, first, that the claim
to a required
licence concerns a case to which a licence scheme does not apply and, second,
that the claim can only concern a claim
to require something the Act defines as
a “licence” which is a licence, permission or authority, granted by
or granted by someone acting on behalf of the owners to do the
comprised in the copyright the
of the claimed
(8) It is essential to the statutory structure and subject matter of
s 157(3) that the licensor collecting society acts on behalf
“licensor” that engages the “claim”
for the required
“licence”. Thus, it is incorrect to describe a collecting society
licensor as “acting on behalf
of the copyright owners” in relation
to rights falling outside the scope of its mandate or authority. In order to
licence of rights going beyond the boundaries of the authority
conferred on the licensor that a person claims to require, it would
be necessary
to find in the text of s 157, or in the Act otherwise, an express conferral
of power to include, within the licence
granted to an applicant by a licensor,
by order of the Tribunal, rights going beyond the scope of the licensor’s
(9) The applicants find that conferral in the combination of the power contained
in s 157(6B)(b) to make an order that the applicant
be granted a licence
“in the terms proposed by the applicant”, and s 157(3)(a),
which refers to a licensor’s refusal
or failure “to procure the
grant of the licence” which is said to recognise, by the very nature of
the language used,
“to procure”, that although the licensor’s
“immediate” authority might be limited, a collecting society
licensor conferred with authority to act on behalf of the owners as to
acts comprised in the relevant copyright or
might well be able to engage with the owners on a wider basis (in the sense
identified by the applicants at [144](6) of these
reasons), providing a textual
foundation for an order going beyond the limits of the licensor’s
immediate authority. I will
(10) As to the question of context concerning Part VI and
Subdivision H of Division 3 of the Act, the Tribunal respectfully
the observations of the Full Court in
at [145] quoted at
[101] of these reasons. It should also be noted that the definition of
“licensor” introduced into
the Act by the 2006 Act sought to limit
the licence schemes and licences that could be the subject of an application to
the Tribunal,
to licence schemes engaging a licensor as defined (formulating a
licence scheme reflecting the elements earlier described), and licences
a licensor as defined, thus confining both matters “to those that are
collectively administered”: see [91]
of these reasons. Thus, the limits
of the authority of the collecting society to collectively administer a licence
scheme (those
rights willingly brought within a scheme) and collectively
administer licences (those licences granted by or on behalf of the owners
an act comprised in the copyright) are critical to the limits of that which may
be the subject of an application to the Tribunal.
(11) As to the phrase “the licensor has failed or refused ... to procure
the grant of the licence”, the phrase, as mentioned
earlier at [113] of
these reasons, is mentioned in s 157(1) in the context of a licence scheme
where the licensor has refused or
failed to procure the grant of a licence to
the claimant in accordance with the scheme. In s 157(1)
“procure” clearly
means that the licensor has failed to put in place
a licence capable of being granted within the boundaries of the scheme (because
it must be a licence in accordance with the scheme), and within the authority of
the licensor to
, as the licensor “operating the
scheme”. CA contends that, contextually, where s 157(3) uses the
phrase “the licensor
has refused or failed to procure the grant of the
licence”, the word “procure” ought to be understood as having
a consistent meaning in s 157 with the result that in s 157(3), in
conjunction with the notion that a “licence” must
be a licence
granted by or on behalf of the owners of the copyright (collectively
administered) to do an act comprised in the copyright,
“procure” must mean giving effect to something falling within the
capability or authority of the licensor under
the powers or authority conferred
on the licensor by owners (whether directly or by an intermediary dealing with
upstream owners),
; or taking a step
within such
. I accept that CA’s submission on this question is correct
and is to be adopted.
(12) It follows that the licence contemplated by s 157(3) is a licence
falling within the scope of the power or authority a licensor
is capable of
granting or in respect of which a licensor is capable of taking a step,
contemplated by or within the power or authority
of the licensor under the
arrangements conferred upon the licensor for the collective administration of
the relevant rights or acts.
Section 157(3) does not extend to a claim,
made of a licensor, to a licence engaging acts outside the boundaries of the
authority of the licensor and engaging what might be described as a
course of persuasion or advocacy for an extension of the authority
licensor to seek to enable a licence to be granted under a broader conferral of
authority which may or may not be granted
as a result of such a process.
(13) The power conferred on the Tribunal by s 157(6B) in its relationship
with s 157(3)(a) is a power to order that any acts within
incidents of the relevant copyright falling within the authority of the
licensor, be made the subject of a licence granted
to an applicant, “in
the terms proposed by the applicant”, subject to the Tribunal being
satisfied that the claim as
framed is well‑founded and the power to make
an order is engaged. It is only those acts within those rights that can be
described as a licence that the licensor has refused or failed to grant
or refused or failed to procure, for the purposes of s 157(3)(a).
power to make such an order does not carry with it a power to order that the
applicant be granted a licence by the licensor
that goes beyond the authority
conferred on the licensor to grant licences of rights or acts. As a matter of
construction, an obligation
requiring a licensor collectively administering
licences (to which a licence scheme does not apply) to seek to obtain a right to
grant a licence going beyond the authority conferred upon the licensor, coupled
with a power to order that a licence be granted going
beyond the authority
conferred upon the licensor, would be unlikely to be found in a phrase in a
subparagraph of a subsection of
a section which is addressing voluntary licences
in a Part of the Act providing regulatory supervision by the Tribunal of
(14) Assuming that the grant is within power and assuming that the relevant
state of satisfaction is reached as required, the Tribunal
might choose
to grant a licence “in the terms proposed by the
applicant”, but rather, elect to specify the “charges”,
any, and the “conditions” that the Tribunal considers reasonable in
the circumstances of the s 157(3) applicant (or
a s 157(2) applicant).
Thus, whether the claim arises under s 157(6B)(a) or (b), the question for
the Tribunal is whether the licence
is to be granted “in the terms”
proposed by the applicant (or by the licensor or another party to the
application as
proposed by either of them) containing the “licence”
of the relevant acts and terms as to “charges” and
“conditions”;
or, whether it elects to specify the charges and
conditions it considers reasonable in the circumstances of the particular
An order under s 157(6B)(b) may be a convenient shorthand way
of determining, by order, the terms of the licence to be granted.
Section 157(6B)(a) provides for particular charges and conditions thought
by the Tribunal to be reasonable in the circumstances
of the relevant applicant,
to be specified in the order after the Tribunal has undertaken an analysis of
the charges and conditions
to decide which of them are reasonable: see
paras 11.14‑11.16 (Item 12) of the Explanatory Memorandum
in the House of
Representatives.
(15) Because the power of the Tribunal under s 157(6B)(b) to order that the
applicant be granted a licence in the terms proposed
by the applicant is not
engaged unless the Tribunal is satisfied that the claim under s 157(3) is
“well‑founded”,
a claim for a licence, to be granted by a
licensor, to do acts comprised in the relevant copyright which goes beyond the
the acts or incidents of the relevant copyright falling within the
authority conferred on the licensor, could not, to that extent,
“well‑founded”.
(16) The ultimate point then is that the Tribunal is not conferred with a power
that a licence be granted to a person who claims to require a
licence which goes beyond the limits of the permission, power or authority
conferred upon the licensor in the collective administration of rights the
subject of the licensor’s authority,
to the extent
that the licence
goes beyond the limits of the licensor’s authority. CA accepts that a
claim by the applicants to require a
licence from CA that reflects the acts
contained in the CA Licence, as amended by the Additional Rights, can properly
be the subject
of an order under s 157(6B) according to its terms.
(17) Considerable emphasis has been placed by CA upon the meaning of the word
“case” in s 157 and the observations of
the Full Court in
on the meaning to be attributed to the phrase, “classes of
cases” in the definition of “licence scheme”,
relationship between the powers conferred on the Tribunal under s 154(4) of the
Act on a reference under s 154(1), having
regard to the essential
characteristics of a licence scheme. Although the Full Court regarded that
phrase as engaging, by reason
of the definition of the term “licence
scheme”, the “incidents of copyright” willingly brought within
scheme, I do not accept that the term “case” in s 157 plays an
analogous role to that played by the phrase “classes
of cases” found
in the definition of licence scheme which aided the proper construction of the
powers conferred under s 154(4).
The relevant definition of importance for the
purposes of s 157(3), and its relationship with s 157(6B), is the term
in s 136(1), which is bound up with the notion of a
licence granted, by or on behalf of, the owner or prospective owner of the
in a work or other subject matter, to do an act comprised in the
in engaging the
scope of the authority of the licensor and which aids the proper construction of
the power of the Tribunal to make
orders under s 157(6B) of the Act. The phrase
“classes of cases” is confined to the proper construction of one of
essential characteristics of the definition of a licence scheme. Also, the
phrase “a case to which a licence scheme applies”
and the phrase
“a case to which a licence scheme does not apply” are given a
particular meaning for the purposes of
In s 157, the term
“case”, in the context of those phrases, ought to be understood as
meaning: “A person who claims
in a case where the contention is that a
licence scheme applies” and; “A person who claims that he or she
licence in a case where the contention is that a licence scheme does
not apply”.
(18) The applicants have placed considerable emphasis, in attributing the
meaning they contend for in construing s 157 (and particularly
s 157(3) and the
powers conferred on the Tribunal to make orders under s 157(6B)), on the
regulatory role of the Tribunal in exercising
supervision over licensors
collectively administering either a licence scheme, or licences, where a
collecting society is administering
the rights of copyright owners who have
elected to gather together to appoint a collecting society to licence their
rights, or some
of their rights, comprised in the relevant subject matter. They
say that the role of the Tribunal is one of constraining the exercise
exclusive rights conferred on the copyright owners on the footing that the
statutory conferral of a bundle of exclusive rights
engages power, and perhaps
market power, enabling the owners to extract monopoly rents by setting the
scope, limits, terms and conditions,
and charges that, in the circumstances in
relation to an applicant, are determined by the Tribunal to be not reasonable.
say that if the Tribunal is satisfied that an applicant’s claim
is “well-founded” within the integers of s 157(3),
together with the text of s 157, enables a person seeking a licence of
particular acts comprised in the copyright, on reasonable
terms, to apply to
the Tribunal to exercise oversight of the failure or refusal of the licensor to
grant, or to procure the grant
of, a particular licence, and to determine the
charges and conditions of the grant which, in the view of the Tribunal, are
in the circumstances of the applicant. Thus they say that the
meaning to be attributed to s 157, in the context of
, is that the power
to make orders granting a licence goes beyond the limitations in the conferred
power or authority of the licensor
and that once owners elect to collectively
act through a body such as CA, they submit themselves to the statutory powers
exercises of licensing power. Thus, the applicants say that the text
and context of s 157 ought to be construed widely and purposively
with the regulatory role of the Tribunal, otherwise the role of the Tribunal is
diminished. As to these matters, it is
true to say that the rights conferred by
the Act on the copyright owners are exclusive rights and one measure at least of
of those rights is the statutory and jurisprudential conception of
infringement. It may also be, in respect of certain subject matter,
rights comprised in that subject matter, that the owners of the copyright find
themselves in a position where they can exert
market power either by asserting
constraints upon others doing acts said to fall within the relevant rights, or
by granting licences
to do acts falling within those rights, on terms and
conditions that extract unreasonable rents, rates, charges or conditions or
least are perceived by some to do so. The role of the Tribunal, relevant for
present purposes, is to consider applications brought
to it in relation to
licences within the scope of the authority of the licensor collecting society
and determine whether a licence
is to be granted to an applicant, and if so, a
licence of which acts or rights (remembering that the limit of the acts that
be the subject of such an order is the limit of the authority of the
licensor but recognising that the Tribunal has power to order
a licence of acts
to the full limit of the licensor’s authority), and on what conditions and
subject to what charges. It is
true to say that the Tribunal exercises
regulatory oversight of a licensor and, in that sense, the owners for whom the
licensor acts,
but only within the constraints described above because they are
the statutory constraints. The power of the Tribunal to make orders
those boundaries is a power designed to counter-balance unreasonable rent taking
and unreasonable charges and conditions.
An important element of that power is
a proper understanding of the matters that fall within the conception of a
“condition”
for the purposes of s 157(3), s 157(6B) and
the Act. That matter is discussed later in these reasons.
The questions
is now necessary to consider the six questions to be answered by the Tribunal.
The questions are these:
In circumstances where CA has proposed the CA Licence, then, with the exception
of charges and conditions which may be specified
or varied by the Tribunal, is
the form of the licence that may be ordered by the Tribunal under s 157(6B)
limited to the terms of
the CA Licence?
If the answer to Question 1 is “yes”, which terms of the CA Licence
are neither charges nor conditions and thus outside
the power of the Tribunal to
In an application brought under s 157(3), does the Tribunal have the
(a) under s 157(6B)(b) of the Act, to order that the Applicants be granted
licences on all the terms of the Proposed Licences; and/or
(b) under s 157(6B)(a) of the Act, to make an order specifying the charges,
if any, and conditions that it considers reasonable in
the circumstances in
respect of each of the Proposed Licences?
If the answer to Question 3(a) is “no”, which (if any) of the
following rights or terms in the Proposed Licences are
beyond the power of the
Tribunal to order:
(a) the Isentia User Copying Right;
(b) the Searchable Archive Right;
(c) the Excluded Works Term;
(d) the Downstream Communication Right;
(e) the External Sharing Right;
(f) the Downstream Storage Right;
(g) the countries comprising the Territory in Isentia’s Proposed Licence
other than on the terms of the CA Licence.
If the answer to Question 3(b) is “no”, with respect to which
(if any) of the rights and terms referred to in Question
4 is the Tribunal
not empowered to make an order pursuant to s 157(6B)(a)?
Do the answers to Questions 3, 4 and/or 5 change in circumstances
(a) CopyCo is authorised by the owners of the relevant copyright to grant
licences of the rights in the Proposed Licences referred
to in Question 3,
but has not authorised CA to grant licences of those rights to MMOs; or
alternatively,
(b) CopyCo is not authorised by the owners of the relevant copyright to grant
licences of the rights in the Proposed Licences referred
to in Question 3
answering those questions, it is convenient to recall the particular
falling within the reproduction right and the communication right that the
applicants claim to require by licence from CA, but which
fall outside the
authority of CA to grant, either because CopyCo has not conferred the authority
on CA, or CopyCo itself does not
have authority from the copyright owners (the
publishers) to confer authority on CA to grant sub-licences to MMOs. They are
communicating the work to customers of an MMO by communicating a
the Licensed Work allowing a customer to access the work behind a
publisher’s paywall where the customer has not subscribed
for access to
such works through the publisher’s website. The obligation the applicants
seek to obtain from CA is a best endeavours
obligation to ensure the customer
will enjoy that right: the
Isentia User Copying Right; the Streem and
Meltwater Copying Right;
Cl 22(a), SOAF.
communicating to customers any and all copies of Licensed Works, by making those
works available through a searchable archive located
in a secure portal
containing the works for up to twelve months from the date copied, communicated
or scraped: the
; Cl 22(b), SOAF.
authorising MMOs to permit their customers to copy and communicate to nominated
users, portions of scraped copies of Licensed Works
and copies of Licensed
Works, by means of a downstream licence in favour of MMO customers: the
Downstream Communication Right
; Cl 22(c)(i), SOAF.
in the case of Isentia and Streem (and perhaps also Meltwater), the act of
enabling the customer of an MMO to share access to a
licensed work with
particular service providers to the customer, where the service providers are of
a particular kind: the
External Sharing Right
; Cl 22(c)(ii), SOAF.
enabling Isentia to store a portion of a scraped copy of a Licensed Work, or a
copy of a Licensed Work, without limiting the form
of storage to an email, on a
Downstream Storage Right
; Cl 22(c)(iii), SOAF.
in the case of Streem and Meltwater, the
Downstream Unlimited Storage
; Cl 22(c)(iv), SOAF.
a limitation on the right of major mastheads to withdraw their Licensed Works
from the licence granted to the applicants during
the period of the licence,
except where the publisher ceases to publish the publication or where Isentia
agrees in writing to the
withdrawal: the
Excluded Works Term
; Cl 22(d),
in the case of Streem and Meltwater, the
Adaptation Right
, Cl 22(e),
to Question 1, if the acts the subject of the licence recited in the CA Licence,
supplemented by the Additional Rights, correctly
identifies the limits of the
authority conferred on CA to act on behalf of the owners of the copyright in the
relevant subject matter,
the power of the Tribunal under s 157(6B) is
limited to making an order by which CA grants a licence to the applicant, on
of the owners, to do only those acts, or acts not beyond those acts. If
the acts described at [149] to [156] of these reasons do
not fall within the
authority of CA, the Tribunal does not have the power to order that the grant of
a licence extend to those acts.
to Question 2, the Tribunal has the power to make an order specifying (in
respect of the “matters” specified in the
“charges” and the “conditions” that the Tribunal
considers reasonable, in the circumstances in
relation to each applicant, or, if
thought convenient, order that a licence be granted in the exercise of the power
under s 157(6B)(b).
Sections 157(3) and 157(6B) recognise three statutory
things: a “licence”, which is the notion of a licence or permission
to do particular acts comprised in the copyright in question the subject of the
grant or, put another way, the “incidents of
the copyright” a person
is licenced to do or exercise by the grant; the notion of “charges”;
and the notion of
“conditions”. Section 157(6B)(b) also refers to
“terms proposed” which seems to refer to all three, although
licence cannot go beyond the limits of the licensor’s authority, which has
been the central point of CA’s submissions
in this proceeding. A
reference to “conditions” in
of the Act is a reference to
conditions other than conditions relating to the payment of a
charge [emphasis added]”: s 136(2)(a).
136(2)(a) does not provide that a reference to “conditions” is a
reference to any conditions other than conditions
relating to the payment of a
charge “or, other than, conditions relating to the licence”.
Sections 157(3)(b) and 157(6B)(a)
(and necessarily s 157(6B)(b)) recognise that
the grant of a licence is likely to be made subject to the payment of charges or
conditions (and most likely both, for all the obvious reasons). Why does it
follow that a reference to “conditions” in
is a reference to
conditions excluding any conditions that concern or relate to or engage with the
licence of acts comprised in the
instrument contains a condition which purports to operate on the footing that it
establishes
requirements, entitlements, or obligations such that the licence
extends beyond the authority of the licensor collecting society,
the Tribunal
has no power to specify such a condition (as might, for example, be sought by an
applicant), or to grant a licence under
s 157(6B)(b) in
such a condition for the reasons earlier mentioned. If, however, the condition
relates to aspects of the acts the subject
of the licence, it nevertheless may
be properly understood, subject to characterisation of the clause, as a
condition in respect
of which the Tribunal has the power to specify “the
conditions that [it] considers reasonable in the circumstances in relation
[each] s 157(2) or (3) applicant” for the purposes of s 157(6B).
Tribunal does not accept that the power of the Tribunal is confined under either
s 157(6B)(a) or (b) to specifying “charges”,
on the one hand, and
“conditions” that have nothing whatsoever to do with any aspects of
the acts comprised in the relevant
“licence”, or their exercise, on the other hand.
“condition”, for the purposes of
and thus s 157, is merely a
“stipulation” or “something upon the fulfilment of which,
something else depends”:
Oxford English Dictionary. There is nothing
expressly in the text or in the context of s 157(3) or s 157(6B) that suggests
stipulation, or the relevant something, cannot address an aspect of an
act comprised in the copyright the subject of the licence
such that a clause of
the relevant instrument stipulating matters so related, can no longer be
characterised as a condition for the
purposes of ss 157(3) or 157(6B) and
therefore beyond the power of the Tribunal to determine or vary or alter or
specify as the Tribunal
considers reasonable in the circumstances of the
applicant. What a condition clearly cannot be, is a stipulation or something
to the payment of a charge: s 136(2)(a).
is now necessary to examine each clause of the CA Licence. The examination of
the relevant clauses are set out in the confidential
schedule as the CA Licence
is marked as a confidential document.
to all of the matters described as either fees and charges or conditions, as
described in the confidential schedule, the Tribunal
has power to make an order
under s 157(6B) specifying relevant matters it considers reasonable in the
circumstances in relation to
each applicant. What is, or is not relevant, in
the circumstances in relation to each applicant is ultimately a matter of
to Question 3, if each Proposed Licence purports to provide for the grant by CA,
on behalf of the copyright owners, of a licence
to do acts reaching beyond the
limits of the authority of CA to grant licences of acts comprised in the
nor s 157(6B)(b) confers power on the Tribunal
to grant a licence extending to such acts.
to Question 4, the applicants seek the grant of a licence from CA (acting on
behalf of the owners), which grants the applicants
a licence to do the things
described at (a) to (g) of Question 4. The applicants accept (by the SOAF) that
CA does not have the authority
of the copyright owners either directly or from
CopyCo (as non-exclusive licensee of the owners) to grant those
so described. That would be the end of the matter if
those “rights” are properly characterised as acts comprised in
whether the subject matter of each so-called “right”
(a)-(g) in Question 4 is truly an act comprised in the copyright (beyond power
if beyond CA’s authority) or something
which is properly characterised as
a description of a “condition” of the grant of the licence to do an
act comprised
in the copyright in the relevant subject matter in respect of acts
which do fall within the limits of the grant reflected in the
CA licence amended
by the Additional Rights. If an item at (a)-(g) is, in truth, a stipulation
sought to be imposed as a condition
of a grant within CA’s authority, an
order that such a “condition” be specified is at least within the
the Tribunal and the question is whether specifying a condition in the
terms sought is “reasonable” in the circumstances
of the relevant
applicant. If, on the other hand, each item at (a)-(g) is characterised as a
proposal for an expansion in the acts
comprised in the copyright the subject of
the licence, beyond the authority of CA, the items in each case are beyond
is now necessary to characterise each of the Question 4 items. Those matters are
addressed in the Confidential Schedule.
to Question 5, the position does not change in relation to each of the matters
the subject of Question 4, for the purposes of s
157(6B)(a) of the Act.
to Question 6, the answers to Questions 3, 4 and 5 do not change depending upon
whether CopyCo is, or is not, authorized by the
licences of the rights in question. The question relevant to s 157(3) and s
157(6B) is whether CA has
the relevant authority.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
sixty-eight (168) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Determination
of the Tribunal constituted by the Honourable Justice Greenwood
(President)
Dated: 15 July 2019
RTF format (715 KB)
Signed PDF/A format