Review Applicant: Anh Dung Nguyen Visa Applicant: Thi Nhat Le Hoang IRT Reference: V98/00056 #number 13380 [1999] IRTA 13380 (28 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND
REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT Reference: V98/00056 13380.doc
REVIEW APPLICANT: Anh Dung NGUYEN
VISA APPLICANT: Thi Nhat Le HOANG
TRIBUNAL: Harry ALEVIZOS
Presiding Member
DATE: 28 January 1999
PLACE: Adelaide
DECISION: The Tribunal affirms the decision under review that Ms Thi Nhat Le
Hoang is not entitled to the grant of a (Temporary)
(Class TO) Subclass 300
(Prospective Marriage) visa.
REASONS FOR DECISION
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
On 8 January 1998, Mr Anh Dung Nguyen (the review applicant) applied to this
Tribunal for a review of a decision made by a delegate
of the Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (the Minister) at the Australian
Consulate-General in Ho Chi Minh City,
Vietnam, on 27 November 1996 to refuse
his fiancee Ms Thi Nhat Le Hoang (the visa applicant), a (Temporary) (Class TO)
Subclass 300
(Prospective Marriage) visa to enable her to migrate to Australia.
This decision was affirmed by the Migration Internal Review Office
(MIRO) on 24
October 1997.
Ms Thi Nhat Le Hoang (the visa applicant) was born in Vietnam on 28 April 1961
and is a citizen of that country. Her mother (father
deceased) and three
married sisters continue to reside in Vietnam. Her other married sister
resides in Australia. At some time
in 1991 the review applicant visited
Vietnam and while there met the visa applicant. In November 1993 the parties
had an engagement
ceremony in Nha Trang, Vietnam. Subsequently on 19 July
1995, the visa applicant completed an application form (Form 47) to migrate
Australia as the prospective spouse of an Australian citizen. Mr Anh Dung
Nguyen her prospective spouse, and Australian citizen/sponsor
relevant sponsorship form (Form 40), on 2 March 1995. The application form was
date stamped as received at the Bangkok
post of the Department on 19 July 1995.
After receipt of further fees due to increases on 1 July 1995 the application
form was lodged at the Australian Consulate-General
in Ho Chi Minh City.
On 27 November 1996 a decision (primary decision) was made at the Australian
Consulate-General, Ho Chi Minh City to refuse the visa
applicant's application
for migration to Australia. In refusing the application, the primary
decision-maker stated in part as follows:
'...You stated you met your sponsor for the first time when he returned to
Vietnam in 1991 and again in 1992 bringing presents from
your sister...You met
each other only once on the first trip and twice on the second...You claim you
had no contact with your sponsor
when he returned to Australia in 1991 but were
in contact by phone when he left the second time. You could provide no
evidence of
this contact...
...In statements submitted by you and your sponsor regarding your relationship
you both claim that the relationship became close
on your sponsor's second
visit to Vietnam in 1992...
...When you were asked when the relationship became serious, you stated 1993
but could not give a more precise date...you commenced
a written correspondence
with your sponsor in the beginning of 1993. You also stated that he proposed
at this time. You were asked
to clarify when your sponsor proposed, and you
stated in direct opposition to your last statement, that he had proposed over
phone in 1992. This discrepancy was put to you and you then stated that
your sponsor had declared his love for you in 1992 and proposed
...You provided evidence of contact with your sponsor dating from August 1993,
only one month prior to your sponsor's return to Vietnam
in September 1993 for
your engagement on 01/11/93. You could provide only 9 letters in total for
both you and your sponsor for a
relationship of nearly 3 years...It was put to
you that there was only limited contact anyway, you responded by saying your
had had a bag stolen at the airport and it had contained letters from
this period...
...You state you are engaged and had an engagement party on 01/11/93...None of
your relatives attended and when this was put to you,
you gave unacceptable
reasons for their not being at the party. I find this indicates that your
relationship is not genuine as you
have had no public recognition of this
relationship with your family.
It was put to you that your relationship was not following the usual pattern of
relationships in Vietnam. You did not respond other
than to repeat that your
sponsor's bag had been stolen, that's why there were no photos.
I find that you do not have a genuine relationship as you have very limited
evidence of contact, there is no public recognition of
your relationship, and
you had limited knowledge of your sponsor.
Taking into consideration all of the above information, I am not satisfied that
you have a genuine relationship with your sponsor
and therefore that you do not
intend to marry your sponsor and live together as spouses in Australia...'
The decision was affirmed by MIRO on 24 October 1997. The MIRO review officer
in 'Statement of Reasons', stated in part as follows:
'...In order to confirm various aspects of the claims raised by the applicant
and sponsor, I have studied the sponsor's recent movement
records. The
outcomes of this examination have raised considerable concerns as to the
accuracy of the claims concerning the development
of the relationship.
The applicant and sponsor have both claimed that their second meeting, after
which they remained in contact by phone, occurred in
1992. This was indicated
both at the applicant's interview and by the sponsor in a statutory declaration
of 12 February 1996 and
in the review application.
However, movement records indicate that the sponsor entered Australia on 6
August 1991, and did not leave Australia again until 6
September 1993. I
corroborated this by checking through the copies of the sponsor's passport,
provided as part of the original visa
application,, and have noted that there
are no stamps in that passport to indicate that the sponsor travelled outside
Australia in
Given that both the applicant and sponsor have been considerably adamant that
their second meeting occurred on the sponsor's visit
to Vietnam in 1992, and
given that it is confirmed that the sponsor did not travel outside Australia in
1992, I therefore have considerable
concern as to the credibility of the claims
in this case, in the light of this discrepancy.
From the record of interview and other information on file, I have ascertained
that the total number of times that the applicant
and the sponsor claim to have
met in Vietnam is set out as follows:-
1991 - initial meeting;
1992 - a second meeting, after which they remained in contact;
1993 - the sponsor returned in September and they were engaged in November
1994 - the sponsor spent a week in April in Vietnam;
1995-6 - the sponsor returned in December and remained until March.
As indicated above, there is considerable evidence to indicate that the 1992
meeting did not occur.
Aside from this, an examination of the sponsor's movement records indicates a
very high incidence of travel during this period, including
a number of
additional trips overseas to those which have been claimed were to see the
One of these absences from Australia was during the period 10 June to 29
September 1996. It was during this period that the applicant
was interviewed
by the processing office. I have studied those interview notes closely, and I
note that the applicant does not claim
that the sponsor was visiting her at
Whilst this does not in itself preclude the relationship from being bona fide,
I am concerned that the sponsor appeared to be then
travelling in the region,
and not visiting his fiance at that time.
At interview, the visa applicant was asked various details about the
development of the relationship. Her answers revealed some
discrepancies, and
these were of considerable concern to the primary decision maker. The review
application has not provided any
further information to redress these
The applicant was asked at interview when the relationship changed from
friendship to a more serious level. She first said that
it started to get
serious in 1993, and at this time they started writing letters to each
She then said that the sponsor proposed over the phone in 1992. When it was
pointed out that this contradicted the previous statement,
she indicated that
she did not remember the date of the marriage proposal.
The applicant then said that they started writing to each other in 1994, after
they had held the engagement celebration during the
sponsor's third visit.
In themselves, these contradictions raise some major concerns about the nature
of the relationship, as they suggest the possibility
that the account of the
relationship's development has been contrived for the purposes of misleading a
migration officer. These
concerns are further exacerbated by my discovery that
the sponsor in fact did not visit Vietnam in 1992 as has been repeatedly
The primary decision maker was concerned that the engagement celebration which
occurred in November 1993 did not appear to match
the usual pattern for such
None of the applicant's relatives attended this engagement celebration, which
featured about 10 people. The applicant claimed at
the interview that this was
because her mother was sick and her sisters had small children.
Whilst the sponsor has claimed that their engagement has been recognised by
family and friends, no evidence has been submitted in
the form of third party
statements to verify this claim. Given that the applicant's sister is a
longstanding friend of the sponsor
and an Australian resident, I find it
unusual that no such statements attesting to the social aspect of the
relationship have been
submitted at either primary or review stage.
There are a number of concerns with this case. The applicant made statements
at interview which were contradictory and which contained
a number of
discrepancies. The couple's second meeting, which was the start of their
friendship, appears from the evidence of movement
records not to have occurred
at all. The sponsor appears to have travelled on other occasions in the area
and not visited the applicant.
There is only limited evidence of contact and
no corroborative information. The engagement party and the applicant's account
it do not appear highly plausible..'.
Subsequently, the review applicant sought review of the primary decision by
making an application to the Immigration Review Tribunal
at its Melbourne
registry on 8 January 1998.
LEGISLATION
In Class TO there is only one subclass, namely subclass 300 (Prospective
Marriage). The criteria for a subclass 300 (Prospective
Marriage) visa are
found in Schedule 2 of the Migration (1994) Regulations. There have been a
number of legislative amendments in
respect to a subclass 300 (Prospective
Marriage) visa. As the application was lodged before 3 July 1996, the
application is to be
considered as if the provisions of Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations as in force on 30 September 1996, continue to apply.
(see regulation 145 of SR 211 of 1996).
The relevant criteria are reproduced below:
SUBCLASS 300 - PROSPECTIVE MARRIAGE
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING THIS SUBCLASS
300.1 INTERPRETATION
300.111 In this Part:
"prospective spouse" means the Australian citizen, Australian permanent
resident or eligible New Zealand citizen referred to in
clause 300.211;
"the parties" means the applicant and the prospective spouse.
: "eligible New Zealand citizen", "guardian" and "parent" are
defined in regulation 1.03.]
300.2 PRIMARY CRITERIA
[NOTE: The primary criteria must be satisfied by at least one member of a
family unit. The other members of the family unit who are
applicants for a visa
of this subclass need satisfy only the secondary criteria.]
300.21 Criteria to be satisfied at time of application
300.211 The applicant intends to marry a person who is:
(a) an Australian citizen; or
(b) an Australian permanent resident; or
(c) an eligible New Zealand citizen.
[300.212 was omitted by SR 376 of 1994]
300.213 The applicant is sponsored by:
(a) if the prospective spouse has turned 18 - the prospective spouse; or
(b) if the prospective spouse has not turned 18 - a person who:
(A) an Australian citizen; or
(B) an Australian permanent resident; or
(C) an eligible New Zealand citizen; and
(ii) is a parent or guardian of the prospective spouse; and
(iii) has turned 18.
300.214 Unless the marriage has been arranged in accordance with traditional
custom observed by the family of either or both of the
parties, the parties are
known to each other personally.
300.215 The applicant establishes:
(a) that the parties genuinely intend to marry; and
(b) that the marriage is intended by the parties to take place within the visa
300.216 The Minister is satisfied that the parties genuinely intend to live
together as spouses.
At the time of decision the visa applicant must continue to satisfy the
requirements in the above criteria together with public interest
criteria and
the requirements that there be no impediment to the marriage under Australian
'Spouse' is defined in regulation 1.03 as having the meaning set out in 1.15A.
Amongst other requirements, the Minister must be satisfied
that two persons who
claim to be spouses 'have a mutual commitment to a shared life as husband and
wife to the exclusion of all others'.
A number of mandatory conditions are imposed on the grant of a prospective
marriage visa. These include condition 8515 which requires,
in effect, that
the applicant, if she is granted this visa, must not marry before entering
Australia and condition 8519, which requires
that if the Applicant is granted
the visa, she must enter into a marriage with the spouse within the visa period
which she would
be granted.
The salient issues for the Tribunal in this case arise under clauses 300.214,
300.215 and 300.216, that is, whether the parties are
known to each other
personally, whether the parties genuinely intend to marry, whether the marriage
intended by the parties is to
take place within the visa period, and whether
the parties genuinely intend to live together as spouses, and this continues to
the issue before this Tribunal.
EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS
The Tribunal gave consideration to documentation submitted as part of the
application in this matter, it also had available to it
the Departmental file
which was forwarded. These files form part of the evidence considered by the
Tribunal in this matter. A preliminary
meeting was conducted with the review
applicant and his agent Mr Ba Phuc Tran on 14 May 1998. The review applicant
was assisted
by an interpreter. At the applicant's request a hearing was
convened in the Melbourne Registry, on 27 May 1998 at which the review
applicant gave sworn evidence, with the assistance of an interpreter. The
review applicant's agent did not attend at hearing.
Mr Anh Dung Nguyen (the review applicant) gave evidence. He confirmed that he
was born in Vietnam on 21 October 1951. He told the
Tribunal that he arrived
in Australia as a refugee on 27 July 1979 and since 12 April 1993 has been a
citizen of Australia. Mr Nguyen
told the Tribunal he has no immediate family
in Australia. His two married brothers and two married sisters continue to
reside with
their respective families in Vietnam.
The review applicant told the Tribunal that he married a Chinese national in
Australia on 25 June 1982, and the marriage did not
work out. He and his first
wife subsequently divorced in March 1986, and there are no children of that
Mr Nguyen told the Tribunal he returned to Vietnam for the first time in 1991,
'...to visit his family and for general visit'
. He told the Tribunal
all his siblings reside in Ho Chi Minh City. Mr Nguyen told the Tribunal on
the occasion of his return in
1991 his fiancee's sister whom he had known in
'...asked me to take gifts and money to Le's
He told the Tribunal that his fiancee and her family
live in Nha Trang. Mr Nguyen stated
'...this small city is about 400
kilometres north of Ho Chi Minh City, and I took gifts and money to Le's
family, that is where I
met her. I told her that I didn't know anyone around
that area and asked her if she could help me in being my guide. She and her
sibling showed me around Nha Trang for two weeks, I stayed a further week in
Nha Trang in a hotel. I thought she was a nice girl,
I visited her family and
I liked her very much, we were friends at that time. I then returned to Ho Chi
Minh City stayed there with
my siblings for approximately one more week before
returning to Australia'
Mr Nguyen told the Tribunal he returned to Vietnam for one month in 1992. He
first visited his siblings in Ho Chi Minh City and
'...I then went to
Nha Trang, visited my fiancee, we developed a relationship on that occasion, I
proposed, I asked her if she would
like to be my wife, she agreed'
The Tribunal asked the applicant what arrangements were made for engagement.
'...we informed family and organised engagement ceremony. We
planned for me to return to Australia to work, save money and return
for our engagement in November 1993'
Mr Nguyen was asked to describe the composition of his fiancee's family. He
told the Tribunal her mother and three siblings, his
fiancee being the fourth
child all reside in Nha Trang. The review applicant confirmed that all his
four siblings reside in Ho Chi
Minh City. The Tribunal asked the applicant if
his siblings attended the engagement ceremony, he replied
'...all were
invited however only my brother came for the ceremony. My other three siblings
were busy and had work commitments'
. Mr Nguyen told the Tribunal that his
fiancee's mother and three sisters attended as well as some family friends. He
'...approximately one dozen people attended the engagement
ceremony that was held in Nha Trang'
Mr Nguyen told the Tribunal he stayed for approximately two months in Vietnam
in 1993, and
'...after our engagement we spent all the time together, we
stayed in Nha Trang for one month and then went to Ho Chi Minh City where
stayed for another month. I introduced her to the remainder of the family.
She left Ho Chi Minh City by herself and returned
to Nha Trang and I returned
to Australia'
. The review applicant told the Tribunal he returned to
Vietnam again in 1995, reunited with his fiancee and stayed with her for
weeks, and stayed a further week with his siblings in Ho Chi Minh City. He
'...I returned again in 1996 and stayed for approximately three
months with my fiancee in Nha Trang. We stayed at a hotel in Nha
lived together as man and wife. We didn't live at her families as it was too
tight and crowded'
. The applicant then told the Tribunal that he
accompanied his fiancee to Ho Chi Minh City for the interview at the Embassy.
'...I wasn't allowed in, they announced fiancee's name and she
went in to be interviewed by herself. I asked her about the interview
way home and she thought it was all over and fine'
The Tribunal asked Mr Nguyen if he knew the reasons why his fiancee's
application was refused. He replied
'...all references in refusal were to
my fiancee and discrepancies at interview'
. The Tribunal read to Mr Nguyen
his statement dated 12 February 1996 at folio 53 of the Department's file
wherein he declared as
'...In 1992 I returned to Vietnam again to visit my fiancee Ms HOANG, Thi Nhat
Le. We became more friend and we felt that we have
a lot in common. We got to
know each other well and our relationship developed strongly...'
The Tribunal also brought to Mr Nguyen's attention Section 5 'Reasons why you
want Decision reviewed' in Form 856 'Application for
Review of a Decision under
Migration Act 1958
' (at folio 70 of the Department's file) wherein he indicated
as follows:-
'...In 1992 I returned to Vietnam again to visit Le and we was going out a lot
and felt that we like each other very much'.
The Tribunal also brought to Mr Nguyen's attention his movement details which
indicate that after he returned to Australia on 6 August
1991 he did not depart
Australia again until 6 September 1993 and invited him to comment on this
anomaly. The Tribunal was not satisfied
with his explanation and indicated
same to him.
The Tribunal also indicated that his account of his engagement ceremony in Nha
Trang differed to that given by his fiancee at interview.
In particular, his
fiancee stated at interview that her immediate family did not attend. He
stated in evidence that his brother,
fiancee's mother and three sisters all
Mr Nguyen replied
'...my fiancee and I are genuine in our relationship'
'I was struck on the head about 20-30 years ago in Vietnam and I am
sometimes forgetful'
The Tribunal brought to the applicant's attention that on the application form
(Form 47), Question 68 indicating details of his family,
namely he has three
married siblings, a brother in Korea, another brother in Canada and a sister in
Japan. In his evidence, he clearly
stated that he has four siblings all
married and all residing in Vietnam in Ho Chi Minh City where he visited them
regularly while
in Vietnam.
The Tribunal instructed the review applicant to provide a written statement
addressing the anomalies contradictions raised during
the hearing.
On 12 June 1998, the Tribunal received the following:-
...Please find enclosed a statement by the review applicant which he has asked
us to forward to you. You should note that Mr Nguyen
has not appointed us as
his migration agent and all correspondence should continue to be sent to Mr
Nguyen and his agent.
Yours faithfully,
LAW PARTNERS...'
'...STATEMENT OF NGUYEN ANH DUNG
I NGUYEN ANH DUNG of ... state:
1. I am the fiance of Hoang Thi Nhat Le ("Le") and have sponsored her for the
grant of a subclass 300 prospective visa.
2. During an IRT hearing on Wednesday, 27 May 1998 I stated to the presiding
member Mr. Harry Alevizos that I had siblings living
in Vietnam. This is in
fact not the case. I apologise for misleading the tribunal. I was very
nervous during the hearing and became
confused by all the questioning.
3. I have also stated previously that I visited Le in 1992. I may have been
mistaken about this although it was my honest recollection
at the time. I was
so sure of this that I did not even bother to check my passport regarding the
exact dates of my travel.
4. I may have confused in my mind the exact timing of some of my meetings with
Le. For instance the times I thought I went out
with Le in 1992 might have
actually happened on either my 1991 or 1993 trip. Because there was such a
long delay before lodging
the application in October 1995 and from then to now
I cannot be completely sure of the dates on which things happened. They all
merge into one another in my mind.
5. I honestly love Le and it is our genuine intention to spend the rest of our
lives together as husband and wife.
Nguyen Anh Dung'
The Tribunal gave due consideration to all the written and oral evidence in
this matter.
The central issues to be determined by the Tribunal in this instance is whether
or not the relationship entered into by Mr Nguyen
and his fiancee Ms Hoang is
such that the parties genuinely intend to marry within the specified period
upon Ms Hoang's arrival,
and that the parties genuinely intend to live together
as spouses (see 300.215 and 300.216 above). Also, whether the parties have
and are known to each other personally (see 300.214 above).
The Tribunal will first consider whether the parties genuinely intend to marry
and live together as spouses. Spouse is defined in
Regulation 1.03
the meaning set out in Regulation 1.15A. Amongst other requirements, the
Minister must be satisfied that the two persons
who claim to be spouses, or in
this case prospective spouses, have a mutual commitment to a shared life as
husband and wife to the
exclusion of all others. In cases where the evidence
on which the parties rely to support their case consists mainly of claims and
assertions, the Tribunal has to determine if those claims and assertions are
genuine or merely self-serving statements. These claims
and assertions maybe
based on many factors including recollections, reconstructions or fabrication,
or a combination of those factors.
The Tribunal has to consider these claims
and assertions in the context of the totality of the evidence in order to
determine what
weight, if any, should be given to them.
The Tribunal notes that the Federal Court in
Bretag v Immigration Review
(Federal Court, O'Loughlin J, 29 November 1991, unreported)
indicated that the Tribunal may have regard to subsequent history of
in determining a question of fact at the time of application, so long as it
tends logically to show the existence or non-existence
of facts relevant to the
issue to be determined, quoting from
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs v Pochi
[1980] FCA 85
(1980) 4 ALD 139
at 160. This criteria namely that the
parties have a mutual commitment to a shared life as husband and wife must also
be satisfied
at date of decision. The Tribunal notes Sackville J comments in
Esteron v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1995] FCA 1252
(1995) 57 FCR 126
at 132-133;
'in any event, the administrative decision-making process retains its character
as a continuum and the Tribunal continues to exercise
all the powers of
discretions conferred by the Act upon the Minister. Accordingly, even if the
Tribunal affirms the Ministers refusal
to...decision-making process is not
complete until the Tribunals decision is made'
The undisputed evidence in this matter is that the review applicant is a 47
year old citizen of Australia, and the visa applicant
is a 37 year old
Vietnamese citizen. At some time in 1991 the review applicant returned to
Vietnam. He met the visa applicant at
Nha Trang while taking gifts and money
to her and her family on behalf of her sister in Australia. On the occasion of
applicant's second visit (movement details indicate he departed
Australia on 6 September 1993 and returned on 12 November 1993) the
applicant and visa applicant met again. Both parties namely the visa applicant
by written statement to the Department dated
14 December 1994 and subsequently
at interview at the overseas post on 25 August 1996, and the review applicant
in statutory declaration
dated 12 February 1996 in the Department's file and in
oral evidence referred to an 'engagement ceremony' on 1 November 1993.
The respective parties written and oral statements as to the development of the
relationship is consistent in that both indicate
that in 1992, upon the review
applicant's return to Vietnam, they became closer, and decided to marry in the
future. Movement details
and photocopies of the review applicant's passport
indicate that the review applicant had not departed Australia at any time since
his return on 6 August 1991 and his subsequent departure from Australia on 6
September 1993. In the Tribunal's view this casts doubts
as to the respective
parties account of how the relationship developed from friendship to one
whereby they became closer to each
other and began to plan for a future
Furthermore, the recollection of the parties about their 'engagement ceremony'
differs greatly. The visa applicant at interview
told the Departmental officer
that no member of her family that is, neither her mother nor three married
sisters all of whom lived
in Nha Trang attended the engagement ceremony. The
review applicant in his evidence told the Tribunal that of his four siblings
his brother attended and his fiancee's mother and siblings attended as well.
The review applicant at hearing constantly referred
to his siblings who reside
in Vietnam. It was brought to his attention that on application form (Form 47)
none of his siblings reside
in Vietnam and he was invited to respond to this
discrepancy. He was also asked to respond to the discrepancy over dates, as
as other discrepancies and contradictions in his evidence. In response,
the review applicant submitted a written statement (see
The Tribunal is of the view that in many cases, especially spouse cases,
credibility of the parties is an essential issue. Nevertheless
the Tribunal is
aware that credibility is very difficult to determine and ought to be treated
with a great deal of caution. The
Tribunal is aware of the fact that spouses
or intending spouses may have lied about some aspects of the case does not
necessarily
mean that the relationship is not genuine. Each case must be
determined on its merits.
In this case, having considered the evidence, the Tribunal is not satisfied
that the review applicant has presented as a truthful
and honest witness which
leads the Tribunal to doubt the relationship entered into by the review
applicant. On the totality of the
evidence, and for the above reasons, the
Tribunal does not accept the evidence of the review applicant regarding his
commitment to
a prospective spousal relationship. There is no cogent evidence
that would lead the Tribunal to be satisfied otherwise.
As stated earlier, it is necessary to satisfy all prescribed criteria including
clause 300.216 which states that the Minister ('Tribunal')
is satisfied that
the parties genuinely intend to live together as spouses. The Tribunal, for
the above reasons, is not so satisfied.
Accordingly this application must
The Tribunal affirms the decision under review that Ms Thi Nhat Le Hoang is not
entitled to the grant of a (Temporary) (Class TO)
Subclass 300 (Prospective
Marriage) visa.
I certify this and the preceding 16 pages are a true copy of the Decision and
Reasons for Decision of Harry Alevizos, Presiding Member
of the Tribunal.
For Deputy Registrar
RTF format (68 KB)
Signed PDF/A format