Houten v Lennon [2025] FCAFC 158 (11 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Houten v Lennon
[2025] FCAFC 158
Appeal from:
Houten v Lennon
[2025] FCA 252
File number:
VID 510 of 2025
Judgment of:
JACKSON, ANDERSON AND NEEDHAM JJ
Date of judgment:
Date of publication of reasons:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
- appellants'
interlocutory application to vacate hearing of appeal - appellants' former
solicitors failed to comply with timetabling
directions - appellants' former
solicitors filed notice of ceasing to act - appeal hearing vacated - application
otherwise dismissed
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
- respondent's
interlocutory application for dismissal of appeal or alternatively order
requiring appellants to provide security
for the costs of the appeal -
discretion to grant security for the costs of the appeal exercised to protect
respondent from prejudice
of vacating hearing of appeal - application otherwise
Legislation:
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) r 36.09
Cases cited:
Bechara v Bates
[2021] FCAFC 34
286 FCR 166
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Houten v Lennon (Costs)
[2025] FCA 708
Khera v Jones
[2008] FCA 548
Lehrmann v Network Ten Pty Limited
[2024] FCA 1226
Lenijamar Pty Ltd v AGC (Advances) Ltd
[1990] FCA 745
(1990) 27 FCR
General Division
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
General and Personal Insolvency
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellants:
The appellants appeared in person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr MJ Galvin KC
Solicitor for the Respondent:
VID 510 of 2025
ADAM HOUTEN
VERONICA FINARELLI
Second Appellant
PATRICK LENNON
JACKSON, ANDERSON AND NEEDHAM JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
hearing of the appeal today is vacated.
appellants' interlocutory application filed on 5 November 2025 is otherwise
appellants must provide security for the costs of the appeal in the amount of
$20,000 by payment of the money into court or by
other method agreed between the
the meantime the appeal is stayed, and if security for the costs of the appeal
are not provided by 4.00 pm AEDT on 31 January 2026,
the appeal will be
respondent's interlocutory application filed on 23 October 2025 is otherwise
the provision of security for the costs of the appeal, the matter is referred to
a Registrar for making of case management directions
programming the
costs of today including the costs of the respondent's interlocutory application
filed on 23 October 2025 and the appellants'
interlocutory application filed on
5 November 2025, and costs thrown away by reason of the vacation of the
appeal hearing are payable
by the appellants in any event.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
appeal was listed for hearing on 11 November 2025. But on that day the Court
did not hear the appeal. Instead, it heard two
interlocutory applications; one
by the appellants and one by the respondent. The applications raised several
intersecting questions:
should the hearing of the appeal be vacated; should the
appeal be dismissed; and should security for the costs of the appeal be
against the appellants, and if so in what amount?
the end of the hearing, the Court ordered that the appeal hearing be vacated,
and refused to dismiss the appeal, but it did order
security for the costs of
the appeal. These are the reasons for those orders.
circumstances that gave rise to the applications were as follows.
December 2024, on the petition of the appellants, a Registrar of the Court made
a sequestration order against the estate of the
respondent. The respondent
applied for review of those orders by a judge of the Court.
25 March 2025, the primary judge granted the respondent's application for review
of the Registrar's decision:
Houten v Lennon
[2025] FCA 252.
set aside the sequestration order and dismissed the bankruptcy petition.
appellants were represented before the primary judge by a firm of solicitors,
McDonald Legal. It is relevant to note that in
her Honour's reasons for setting
aside the sequestration order, the primary judge described the appellants as
having laboured under
a 'fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of the
review hearing' (at [17]). The misunderstanding was that they approached the
application for review as though it were an application by the respondent for
the annulment of his bankruptcy, in which the onus
was on him to show
exceptional circumstances: see, for example, [42]-[43].
truth, as is well established by authority, the review of the Registrar's
decision was a hearing de novo, where the onus was on
the appellants to
establish the necessary facts to support the sequestration order, albeit that
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(Cth), the onus was on
the respondent to establish his solvency as a basis for the Court to dismiss the
Bechara v Bates
[2021] FCAFC 34
(2021) 286 FCR 166
(Allsop CJ, Markovic and Colvin JJ). The appellants failed before the primary
judge because her Honour held that the respondent
had established that he was
solvent. The appellants sought to meet the respondent's submissions by applying
to reopen, after the
matter had been heard and after the primary judge had
notified the parties that her Honour was going to deliver the judgment she
reserved. At the hearing to reopen (and that hearing only) the appellants were
represented by a barrister. Had they been given
leave to reopen, they would
have adduced evidence of debts said to be owing by the respondent, other than
the debts owed to them
as petitioning creditors. But her Honour refused leave
primary judge assigned responsibility for the fundamental misunderstanding of
the matter to McDonald Legal. In a subsequent costs
judgment, her Honour
awarded the respondent his costs of the initial hearing before her, to be paid
by McDonald Legal:
Houten v Lennon (Costs)
[2025] FCA 708.
Honour found that McDonald Legal was responsible for the appellants' failure to
address the correct legal test and to engage
with the relevant authorities:
Houten v Lennon (Costs)
at [41]-[42]. In her Honour's view, the
solicitors' actions 'extended beyond a mere oversight or isolated error'; their
reflected a lack of diligence and fell short of the standard expected of
practitioners appearing before the Court:
Houten v Lennon (Costs)
22 April 2025, the appellants lodged the notice of appeal in this proceeding.
They were still represented by McDonald Legal at
that stage. There are three
grounds of appeal: the first challenges what is said to be the primary judge's
reliance on opinion
evidence of the respondent that he was able to pay his
debts; the second alleges that her Honour took that into account in addressing
the wrong legal test; and the third challenges her Honour's refusal to permit
the appellants to reopen.
26 August 2025, a Registrar made standard programming orders on the basis that
the appeal was to be heard in the Full Court sittings
in November of this year.
The first step programmed was for the appellants to submit a draft index to Part
A of the appeal book,
for approval by a Registrar. This McDonald Legal did, but
more than a week late, on 10 September 2025. That belated compliance
only after the respondents' solicitors wrote to the Court notifying it of the
non‑compliance. A Registrar required
the draft index to be revised.
McDonald Legal submitted the revised draft index to the Registry on 25 September
is the only programming direction in the appeal that has been complied with
(albeit late). The next substantive step, by which
the appellants were to file
and serve an outline of written submissions, has not occurred. Consequently,
none of the subsequent
steps have taken place and the appeal was not ready for
hearing on the appointed day, 11 November 2025.
appellants seek to put the blame for this default on McDonald Legal. The first
appellant, Mr Houten, affirmed an affidavit on
3 November 2025, in
opposition to the respondent's interlocutory application (
First Houten
), in which he says that the appellants were not made aware of
numerous communications between McDonald Legal and the respondent's
solicitors,
in which the latter sought to engage with the former concerning the programming
of the appeal, only to receive no or
no substantive response. Mr Houten's
affidavit says that the appellants 'relied on McDonald Legal to competently
manage filings
and deadlines. Any delay arose from their omission, not
25 September 2025, McDonald Legal filed a notice of intention to cease acting
and on 3 October 2025, they filed a notice of ceasing
Mr Houten gives evidence in a further affidavit affirmed on 3 November
2025, in support of the appellants' application to
vacate the appeal (
Houten Affidavit
), that the appellants were unaware that McDonald Legal had
failed to comply with timetabling directions made by the Court. They
McDonald Legal did not notify them that they were in default of orders for the
filing of a draft appeal book index and did
not inform them of communications
with the respondent's solicitors. However, there is no direct evidence as to
the reasons why McDonald
Legal ceased to act. There is, however, correspondence
in evidence between Mr Houten and the accounts recovery clerk for List A
barristers which suggests that funds that the appellants had remitted to
McDonald Legal to pay barrister's fees had not been used
to pay the barrister
for up to two months.
Second Houten Affidavit also contains evidence of attempts the appellants have
made to obtain alternative legal representation.
On 10 October 2025, the
barrister who appeared on the application to reopen indicated willingness to
assist in the appeal on a limited
basis, and recommended a firm of solicitors.
But on 17 October 2025, the barrister said that he could no longer act. There
is evidence
that the appellants approached two different firms of lawyers during
late September and early October 2025, but those firms have
declined to act. In
the case of one of them, the reason given was that there was not enough time to
prepare before the hearing of
the appeal.
First Houten Affidavit contains evidence to the effect that the respondent's
failure to pay the petition debt, and 'unnecessary
correspondence and
interlocutory steps intended to increase costs' has led to their financial
position. This is mostly said at a
high level of generality; the affidavit
gives some brief particulars of other proceedings in which the respondent's
asserted conduct
occurred but gives no context for these, meaning it is
impossible to put any weight on them.
than that, there is little evidence as to the appellants' financial position.
They have, however, put into evidence an email
dated 17 October 2025 from a
solicitor they sought to retain saying that one reason she would not accept
instructions was her understanding
that the appellants did not 'have the
financial capacity to fund an appeal that could cost up to $100k'. In the same
email the solicitor
advised the appellants that the barrister who had
represented them at the application to reopen would not represent them in the
there is little evidence as to the quantum of security for costs sought by the
respondent. He did not propose an amount
in his application or submissions. In
an affidavit sworn by the respondent on 23 October 2025, he gave evidence that
he has incurred
costs of $30,000 to date in the appeal. However, his solicitors
have not had to do any work on it other than chase compliance in
correspondence,
so that appears excessive. When asked about quantum at the hearing, senior
counsel for the respondent nominated
$25,000 as an appropriate figure by way of
intersecting questions described at the outset required the Court to consider
the exercise of three discretions. The first two
presented an effectively
binary choice: whether to vacate the appeal hearing, that is adjourn it, or
whether to dismiss the appeal
for the appellants' default. And while the
discretion to grant security for costs would only arise if the Court did not
the appeal, its availability was relevant to the question of whether it
should do so.
is not necessary to describe in any detail the well-established principles as to
how the discretions were to be exercised. Each
is broad and essentially
unconfined. Whether to vacate the appeal was a case management decision to be
made so as to best promote
the administration of justice.
to dismissal for default, the respondent relied on the often-cited passage from
Lenijamar Pty Ltd v AGC (Advances) Ltd
[1990] FCA 745
(1990) 27 FCR 388
at 396, where Gummow and Wilcox JJ referred to two situations as obvious
candidates for the exercise of the power. To adapt these
to the present
situation, they are cases in which the history of non‑compliance is such
as to indicate an inability or unwillingness
to co-operate with the Court and
the respondent in having the appeal ready for hearing within an acceptable
period, and cases in
which the non‑compliance is continuing and
occasioning unnecessary delay, expense or other prejudice to the
respondent.
counsel for the respondent also relied on
[2008] FCA 548 (Buchanan
J), a case where an appeal was dismissed for
default which he submitted was on all fours with the present case. But in
the appellant had commenced an appeal without legal representation,
took no action to prosecute the appeal, and then became legally
represented
whereupon, the Court found, the position did not improve. Despite having
solicitors on the record, the appellant filed
reply submissions under his own
name, and informed the Court his intention was for the appeal to proceed on the
basis of written
submissions, seemingly with no appearance at the hearing.
Buchanan J held that the appellant had had no lack of opportunity to deal
the matters which required attention, and only on the day before the appeal was
listed for hearing had he approached the Court:
see [4], [8], [16]-[23]. The
circumstances in
were materially different to the circumstances in
this matter. Each case where a discretion of this kind is exercised is likely
to turn on its own facts, and we derived no assistance from
to security for the costs of an appeal, in particular as against natural
persons, we gratefully adopt, without setting out, the
summary of principles
which Abraham J gave in
Lehrmann v Network Ten Pty Limited
Consideration
exercised the discretions in the way we did for the following reasons.
as to whether the appeal should be dismissed or the appeal hearing vacated, the
starting point is that the appellants are in substantial
default. They have not
filed any outline of written submissions, with the result that the appeal
hearing could not proceed when
real issue is why the appellants were in default. McDonald Legal did appear not
to have taken any steps in the appeal until,
belatedly and under pressure from
the respondent's solicitors, they provided a draft appeal book index. The
appellants' evidence
blamed this on McDonald Legal. But that evidence was at a
high level of generality. It was also selective, in that they put into
heavily redacted communications between them and McDonald Legal which, even if
unredacted, appear unlikely to be a complete
Nevertheless,
we were also cognisant of the manner in which McDonald Legal appears to have
conducted the proceeding before the primary
judge, of their complete lack of
response to many communications from the respondent's solicitors about the
appeal (as distinct from
responses saying that they were unable to obtain
instructions), and of the objective evidence of the communications with the
barrister's
accounts recovery clerk about delay in remitting funds provided to
pay counsel's bills. That disposed us to accept Mr Houten's evidence,
broad and conclusionary as it was, that McDonald Legal failed to comply with
timetabling directions made by the Court, without
communicating those failures
to the appellants or seeking their instructions.
similar reasons, we did not consider the apparently selective and incomplete
nature of the appellants' evidence about their dealings
with McDonald Legal, and
why the firm went off the record, to be fatal to their application for the
hearing to be vacated. It can
be inferred from the above that relations between
the firm and the appellants were not harmonious and that the root cause of the
disharmony was likely the way the firm conducted the proceeding before the
primary judge.
is no suggestion that the disharmony can in any way be laid at the feet of the
respondent, so on one view the appellants' difficulties
are between them and
McDonald Legal. But it did appear likely that the firm was the source of those
difficulties, so that fault
was not in fact that of the appellants. That
focussed attention on the practical forward-looking question of whether the
are unwilling or unable to pursue the appeal.
as to that, the evidence did not establish that the appellants were unwilling.
Their current inability to conduct the appeal hearing
is a result of the loss of
legal representation at an inopportune time. While criticisms could be made of
the alacrity with which
they sought alternative representation, there was some
evidence of attempts to do so which could not be described as desultory.
effort they put in to their application and to resisting that of the respondent
demonstrated a willingness to see the appeal
to whether the appellants are unable to pursue the appeal, that depends in large
part on whether they are able to obtain legal
representation. We did not
consider that their failure to obtain representation in the relatively short
time between 3 October 2025
and the time listed for hearing the appeal
necessitated a conclusion that they would not be able to obtain that
representation in
the future. However, as will be explained shortly, it was
appropriate to provide for security for costs on terms that gave them
reasonably generous but strictly circumscribed time period within which to
obtain that representation.
as to security for costs, the Court is generally disinclined to make an order of
that kind against natural persons, although it
is no bar to doing so. There was
no clear evidence that the appellants were impecunious, but there were
statements in their own
evidence suggesting that they might be unable to meet a
substantial costs order against them (see [
] above). It was also necessary
to take into account that, on the face of things, the respondent has the benefit
of the primary judgment,
so any concern about stifling the proceeding is
although it would not be appropriate to make any definitive comment on the
merits of the appeal, our first impression of
the grounds is that they are not
especially strong. The primary judge is criticised for relying on what is said
to be opinion evidence
from the respondent, but it is not clear whether any
objection was made to that evidence being admitted. Her Honour is criticised
for enlisting that evidence in relation to what is said to be the wrong limb of
Bankruptcy Act
, but even if she was wrong to do so
(on which we express no view), it is not clear that it had any operative effect
on the decision.
And as for the challenge to her Honour's refusal of the
application to reopen, there is no doubt that the application was made late
the proceeding, when judgment was about to be delivered, and the appellants will
have to establish that her Honour erred in the
exercise of her discretion by
satisfying the relatively demanding standard mandated by
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
we do not criticise the respondent for any delay in bringing the application for
security for costs, since the pressing need
for it is likely to have become
apparent to him only when it became clear that the appellants' default was to be
ongoing and jeopardised
the hearing of the appeal. On balance, an order for
security for costs was appropriate in the circumstances, if the appeal was not
to be dismissed.
all these matters into account, it appeared to us that the just outcome was to
give the appellants a further chance to obtain
legal representation so as to put
the appeal on a proper footing to proceed to a hearing. Their default is likely
the result of
their solicitors going off the record, rather than any fault of
their own. But by the same token, the risk of prejudice to the respondent
to further non‑compliance needed to be minimised. That prejudice included
not only exposure to further legal costs, but
also excessively long exposure to
the risk of the sequestration order being reinstated so that, for example,
dispositions of property
by the respondent in the present situation of
uncertainty might be liable to be set aside.
matters summarised above indicated that the appropriate way in which to guard
against that prejudice was to provide for security
for costs, for a reasonably
modest amount, but on terms that provide for the dismissal of the appeal if the
security is not paid
within a set period of time: see r 36.09(1)(c) of the
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth). The availability of this protection was
itself one reason not to dismiss the appeal for default at this stage.
regard to the upcoming holiday season, 31 January 2026 is an appropriate
deadline for the provision of security. That will
give the appellants a
reasonable period of time to secure legal representation but at the same time
give the respondent certainty
that the appeal will be dismissed if security is
not provided within that time. The respondent will have no apparent cause to
further legal costs in the meantime.
the appellants do provide security within that time, the matter will be referred
to a Registrar to make case management directions.
The directions will be for
the Registrar to determine after hearing from the parties depending on the
circumstances as they then
obtain. But in view of the history of the matter,
the Registrar may consider it appropriate to make orders that are self-executing
in the event of further default.
appellants are in default, the respondent bears no responsibility for that
default, the appellants were seeking an indulgence
from the Court, and the
respondent has been essentially successful in his application for security for
costs. It was, therefore,
appropriate to order that the appellants pay the
costs of the applications as well as costs thrown away by reason of the vacation
of the appeal hearing.
Other matters
appellants sought a number of other orders in their interlocutory application,
namely orders that:
(a) McDonald Legal pay the costs wasted by reason of their conduct and
procedural defaults, the trustee in bankruptcy's fees, and
costs improperly
incurred by reason of solicitor error, as identified in
Houten v Lennon
(b) the petition debt 'be confirmed as unpaid';
(c) the respondent's solicitors confirm whether funds to meet that amount remain
held in trust; and
(d) an offer made by the appellants, apparently on terms that it is without
prejudice to costs, 'be recorded as remaining open for
consideration'.
was not appropriate to make any of these orders. The first could only be made
after giving proper notice to McDonald Legal and
giving them an opportunity to
be heard. It was also not clear that it was a matter falling within the
appellate jurisdiction exercised
by the Full Court, as distinct from the
original jurisdiction of the Court. There was no point to the second order; it
ground that the petition debt is unpaid, and the respondent does not
dispute his liability to pay it. It is unclear what circumstances,
would make it appropriate for the Court to make the third order, and in any
event in oral submissions senior counsel for
the respondent confirmed that the
funds are available for payment of the debt. The fourth order concerned a
without prejudice offer
which it is not appropriate for the Court to view at
this stage (and the Court has not viewed it). If the appellants want the offer
to be considered as remaining open for acceptance, they are free to communicate
that to the respondent or his solicitors directly.
the appellants' evidence and submissions made a number of allegations about the
conduct of the respondent in this proceeding,
the proceeding below, and other
proceedings. We have mentioned one instance of this already at [
] above. In many other instances, the
relevance of the evidence to the Court's consideration of either of the
interlocutory applications
was doubtful. But even if it had been relevant, it
was at such a high level of generality, and so devoid of context, that the Court
could put no weight on it.
example, Mr Houten's evidence was that the appellants 'have a pending
default judgment' against the estate of a named individual.
The only asserted
connection between that individual and the respondent is a statement (in as many
words) that the proceeding arose
from matters where the respondent 'also
frustrated compliance and prolonged litigation'. While it is said that the
anticipated judgment
will improve the appellants' financial position, no
evidence of quantum or recoverability is given. No doubt if the appellants do
recover funds, that will assist them to provide the security ordered and,
depending on the amount recovered, may help them obtain
legal representation.
But the Court cannot act on evidence of this kind.
I certify that the preceding forty-two (42)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Jackson, Anderson and
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (344 KB)
Signed PDF/A format