BKM17 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1868 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
BKM17 v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1868
File number(s):
SYG 810 of 2019
Judgment of:
JUDGE SKAROS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– judicial review of a
decision of the Immigration Assessment Authority (Authority) – whether it
was unreasonable for
the Authority to not exercise its discretion under s
473DC(1) – whether there was actual or apprehended bias on the part of
Authority – whether it was unreasonable for the Authority not to consider
other country information– whether the
Authority erred in consideration of
the complementary protection criterion under s 36(2)(aa) – jurisdictional
error not established
– application for judicial review dismissed
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
, 473DA(1), 473DB, 473DC, 473DD, 473DE, 473FA(1),
473GA, 473GB
Cases cited:
ABT17 v Minister for Immigration and Border
(2020) 269 CLR 439
[2020] HCA 34
ADX17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
BBX17 v Minister for Immigration
[2019] FCCA 59
CCQ17 v Minister for Immigration & Border Protection
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v CRY16
[2017] FCAFC 210
CRA16 v Minister for Immigration & Anor
[2018] FCCA 2877
DCP16 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] FCAFC
DLK18 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2020] FCCA 1200
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
(2000) 205 CLR 337
ENJ17 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2020] FCA 1079
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507;
[2001] HCA 17
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs v BOA18
[2021] FCA 943
NAHI v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous
[2004] FCAFC 10
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Self-represented litigant
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Ms A Wilford of Sparke Helmore
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
Submitting appearance, save as to costs
SYG 810 of 2019
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
IMMIGRATION ASSESSMENT
Second Respondent
JUDGE SKAROS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
application filed on 2 April 2019 is dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or order to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors (r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 24.04
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal
Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE SKAROS
application filed on 2 April 2019 the applicant seeks judicial review of a
decision of the Immigration Assessment Authority (the
Authority) dated 13 March
2019. The Authority affirmed the decision of a delegate (the delegate) of the
first respondent (the Minister)
to refuse the grant the applicant a Safe Haven
Enterprise (Class XE) (Subclass 790) visa (the
following background is derived from information set out in the Minister’s
submissions and the Amended Court Book filed
with the Court on 7 August
applicant is a 40-year-old citizen of Sri Lanka.
10 September 2012, he arrived in Australia as an irregular maritime arrival. On
16 September 2012, he participated in his first
arrival interview. On 21
January 2013, he participated in his second arrival interview.
2 June 2016, the applicant applied for the visa, subject of this review. In the
statement attached to his application, the applicant
made the following
(a) His father was shot and killed in 1989 because he had links to and did small
favours for the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE). His family’s home
was attended by faceless men for about six months, and his mother took the
family to India for their
safety. Eventually they returned to Sri Lanka, but
they were always concerned about their safety.
(b) The applicant’s grandfather died in 1996 and left land to his sons. As
the applicant’s father was deceased, the land,
in part, went to the
applicant, his mother, and his sister. As the land was under military control,
nothing could be done with it.
In May 2012, the Sri Lankan army began building
on the land. The applicant claimed that the army compulsorily acquired the
land without any notice or restitution. The applicant reported the issue
to the Human Rights Commission (HRC) in Mannar. The applicant
returned to the
land to obtain video and photographic evidence in support of the complaint to
the HRC. On the first occasion, he
and his uncle were assaulted, and the
applicant was threatened. On the second occasion, the applicant was threatened
and his camera
(c) The Army became aware of the HRC complaint. One evening, three soldiers
intercepted the applicant on his way home from work and
assaulted him. The
applicant and his uncle went into hiding. In July 2012, the army visited his
(d) He feared he would be killed if he returned to Sri Lanka due to the land
dispute and Tamil ethnicity.
16 December 2016, the applicant attended an interview with the delegate. He made
the following further claims:
(a) He was called to an army post, where he was detained for two days and
questioned about the LTTE as revenge for making complaints
against the army;
(b) His family moved to Jaffna and now worked there. They received a letter in
2015 from the Presidential office stating that the
army would be staying on his
family’s land.
23 January 2017, the delegate refused to grant the visa because they were not
satisfied the applicant met the criteria set out
ss 36(2)(a)
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (the Act).
30 January 2017, the matter was referred to the Authority (the First Authority).
On 17 March 2017, the First Authority affirmed the decision under review
(the first Authority decision).
applicant unsuccessfully sought judicial review of the first Authority decision.
However, on appeal to the Federal Court, orders
were made by consent on 15
August 2018 remitting the matter for reconsideration by the Authority on the
basis that the First Authority
had misinterpreted the applicant’s
21 February 2019, the Authority (the Second Authority) wrote to the applicant
informing him that his case had been remitted to
it for reconsideration.
13 March 2019, the Second Authority affirmed the decision to refuse to grant the
applicant the visa (the second Authority decision).
THE SECOND AUTHORITY DECISION
dispositive issue before the Authority was whether the applicant was a person in
respect of whom Australia has protection obligations.
[1]–[6], the Authority summarised the procedural history of the matter and
the information before it, including the first
Authority decision. The Authority
also considered two Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) prepared
reports: ‘Country
Information Report – Sri Lanka, 24 January
2017’ and ‘DFAT Country Information Report – 23 May
Despite not being before the delegate, the Authority was satisfied
there were exceptional circumstances to justify considering the
DFAT reports.
The Authority summarised the applicant’s claims for protection: at
Authority accepted that the applicant was a Sri Lankan citizen of Tamil
ethnicity, and that Sri Lanka was his receiving country:
Authority referred to the delegate failing to put contradictory evidence
regarding the applicant’s passport to the applicant,
and recorded that
this omission was the basis for the Federal Court quashing the first Authority
decision: at [11]. In those circumstances,
the Authority considered whether it
was unreasonable for it to consider the applicant’s earlier statements
concerning the location
of his passport, without seeking further information: at
Ultimately,
the Authority was satisfied that the applicant was aware that all the evidence
he provided to the Department would be
considered, including his earlier
statements, and he was aware that material changes to his earlier statements
could result in an
adverse credibility finding against him: at [16]. On the
basis of the applicant’s contradictory evidence, the Authority was
satisfied that the applicant’s passport was confiscated by the Sri Lankan
authorities in July 2012.
Authority accepted that the applicant and his family had fled to India on three
occasions, despite the lack of independent supporting
evidence: at
Authority accepted that the applicant’s father was shot and killed in
September 1989. While the Authority held some doubts,
it was willing to accept
that his father provided some limited, unspecified logistic support to the LTTE
before his death, which
may have led to his death: at [21]. It was also willing
to accept that his mother and aunt were harassed for a short period around
after his father’s death: at [22].
[23]–[39], the Authority documented the applicant’s claims relating
to his dispute with the Sri Lankan military about
land left to him by his
grandfather (including having reported the dispute to the HRC). The Authority
expressed concerns about the
legitimacy of the applicant’s claims. The
Authority noted the applicant’s failure to provide any independent
proving his ownership of the land, despite asserting that he possessed
the relevant
documents: at [32]. In spite of this, the Authority accepted
that the applicant’s land had been occupied and that an article
published about this, which the army may have linked to the applicant and his
family: at [33].
the applicant failed to adduce evidence to the contrary, the Authority was not
satisfied the applicant lodged a complaint with
the Sri Lankan HRC: at [36].
Further, due to inconsistencies in the applicant’s evidence, his lack of
links to the LTTE and
his ability to obtain a genuine passport, the Authority
did not accept that the applicant had been detained and questioned about
LTTE: at [37].
Authority accepted that the applicant may have faced some harassment from the
army on the basis of his land being occupied in
2012, but it found that this was
limited in nature. However, noting the vague nature of the applicant’s
evidence, the Authority
did not accept the following claims to be credible: that
his mother or his family home had been visited by the Sri Lankan authorities;
that the applicant went into hiding; or that the applicant received death
threats at the time: at [38]. In relation to the status
of the land at the time
of the Authority’s decision, it did not accept that the land was still
occupied having regard to the
country information before it: at [39].
[40]–[42], the Authority outlined the refugee assessment and definition of
‘well-founded fear of persecution’
of the Act.
Authority considered whether the applicant would be killed if he returned to Sri
Lanka on the grounds of being a Tamil, his father’s
links to the LTTE, and
the issue of his occupied land. It considered the DFAT country information
regarding the Tamil community,
the military presence in the aftermath of the
civil war, and LTTE: at [43]–[50]. It was not satisfied the applicant
any harm due to his deceased father’s support for the LTTE, who
died over 30 years prior. It found the applicant did not have
a profile that
would be of interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka, or that he would face a
real chance of harm due to his Tamil
ethnicity, or his father’s historic
LTTE links: at [52].
Authority noted that land rights activists were of interest to Sri Lankan
authorities, and may come under surveillance and be
harassed. However, it found,
the applicant did not fall within this category as he had not been involved in
any land rights activism
in Australia, nor had he suggested that he would become
involved in such advocacy if returned to Sri Lanka. It was not satisfied
would face harm arising due to the former occupation of his land if he returned
to Sri Lanka: at [54]—[55].
Authority also assessed whether the applicant would face harm based upon his
illegal departure from Sri Lanka, and his attempt
to claim asylum in Australia.
While the applicant did not advance this claim, or any similar claim, the
Authority considered it because
it was previously considered by the
Authority accepted that the applicant had departed Sri Lanka illegally in
contravention of the
Immigrants and Emigrants Act
Lanka), and that he would likely face charges on that basis: at [57], [60],
[62]. However, on the basis of its earlier finding
that the applicant did not
have a profile of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities, the Authority was not
satisfied that the applicant
would face any harm amounting to persecution for
the purposes of the Act: at [63], [66].
assessing the complementary protection criterion, the Authority referred to its
earlier findings that the applicant would likely
be detained for a period of
time on his return to Sri Lanka: at [71]. The Authority found that whilst the
applicant would likely
be subject to judicial proceedings, there was no evidence
to suggest those proceedings would be applied in a ‘discriminatory
persecutory’ way, or that it would amount to significant harm within the
meaning of the Act. It was further satisfied the
social stigma and monitoring
that the applicant may face would not amount to significant harm: at [72].
on its earlier findings, the Authority concluded that the applicant would not
face a real risk of significant harm: at [73].
these reasons, the Authority affirmed the delegate’s decision.
APPLICATION TO THIS COURT
2 May 2019, the originating application for judicial review was filed. The
applicant filed an accompanying affidavit which was
in the nature of submissions
and annexed the second Authority decision. To the extent relevant, the matters
set out in the affidavit
were taken into account as submissions.
7 October 2025, the Minister filed written submissions. The applicant did not
file any written submissions.
21 October 2025, at the hearing, the applicant appeared in person with the
assistance of an interpreter in the Tamil and English
languages. The Minister
was represented by Ms A Wilford of Sparke Helmore. The Minister tendered the
Amended Court Book into evidence,
which was marked exhibit CB.
GROUNDS OF REVIEW
application for judicial review advanced the following rounds (without
alteration):
1. The Immigration Assessment Authority (hereinafter referred as "the
Authority") made a jurisdictional error failing to invite the
applicant and/or
failing to invite him to comment on the DFAT report of Sri Lanka published on 23
May 2018 (Report 2018) circumstances
where the failure is legally
unreasonable.
Particulars:
a) The Authority said "The 2017 DFAT report has since been superseded by a newer
DFAT report, which was published on 23 May 2018,
and which provides further
information about the conditions in Sri Lanka. This report was not before the
delegate. For the same reasons
as outline above, I am satisfied that there are
exceptional circumstances to justify considering the 2018 DFAT Report" at
b) The Authority considered the said 2018 DFAT Report under s 473DC(l) of the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (Act).
c) The Authority relied upon the 2018 DFAT Report in reaching its decision.
d) It was legally unreasonable for the Authority to fail to consider exercising
s 473DC(l) of the Act so as to invite comment form
the Applicant (See: Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection v CRY16
[2017] FCAFC 210
e) In any event, it was legally unreasonable for the Authority not so to
exercise s 473DC(l) of the Act (See: Plaintiff M174/2016
v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] HCA 16
2. The Authority made a jurisdictional error by making a finding of fact
referable to the absence of corroborative evidence without
also having regard to
the credibility of the applicant's assertions and also without regards to
possible testing that assertions
at in law under s473DC of the Act.
Particulars:
a) The Authority said "I have accepted that the applicant had some land occupied
in 2012. However, I am not persuaded that he has
told the entire truth about
these claims. Given the applicant has failed to adduce any evidence; I do not
accept that he lodged a
complaint in the SHRC. I conclude that has invented this
aspect of his claim in order to enhance his claims for protection" at [paragraph
3. By applying the common law rules, in the form of actual bias or apprehended
bias on the part of the Authority's reviewer M Currie.
Particulars:
a) in view of the previous decision of the Authority dated 17 March 2017 and the
judgement and orders of the Federal Court dated
15 August 2018 (NSD2288/2017)
BKM17 v Minister for Immigration & Anor
[2019] FCCA 99
that the Authority
review according to law the decision of the delegate of the Minister dated 23
January 2017 rejecting the applicant's
application for a Safe Haven Enterprise
(Class XE) subclass 790 visa.
b) The Authority's finding ignores the structure in Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
(1996) 185 CLR 259
that a decision is not to be
read with an eye too keenly attuned to the perception of error. (Cited by
Heffernan Jin (para 35-35
in BTFJ7 v Minister for Immigration & Anor
4. The change of government and the new information of the country information
the Immigration Assessment Authority's decision has
become legally unreasonable.
(See Australian Retailers Association v Reserve Bank
2005 FCA 1707
Particulars:
a) The delegate's decision was dated 9 February 2017 and the political situation
was drastically changed on 26 October 2018 and the
return of the Mahinda
Rajapaksa which was not taken to consideration by the delegate. Rajapaksa's
administration was accused of serious
human rights violations during the final
stages of the conflict between the government of Sri Lanka and the Liberation
Tamil Eelam (LTTE). It is a matter of record that the Sri Lank.an
military indiscriminately attacked civilians, hospitals and schools,
prisoners and interned thousands of Tamils with widespread use of torture and
sexual violence. Thousands of Tamils and other
minorities with links to the
Tigers were also forcibly disappeared. For a beleaguered Tamil population in the
north and east of the
country, the concern will be that history could repeat
itself with the threat of further discrimination and violence looming. With
real accountability processes for previous crimes committed, Rajapaksa's return
could see Tamil activists and perceived dissidents
targeted once again.
b) The new Report of the UN Rapporteur Ben Emmerson QC dated 23 July 2018
(Emmerson Report) in support of the applicants' protection
c) According to the 2018 Emerson report, Tamils also experience pervasive and
insidious forms of stigmatisation." at [para 55] of
the said report.
d) The Special Rapporteur was told about the surveillance of Tamil civil
society, including women's groups and of fear of reporting
alleged human rights
violations and sexual violence to the authorities. [para 55] of the said
e) The Special Rapporteur said "When viewed side by side with the figures that
show that Tamils have been, and still are, overwhelmingly
and disproportionately
affected by the operation of the Act (PTA), a figure emerges of wide spread
institutional stigmatisation of
a single community. [para 56] of the said
f) The Special Rapporteur said in his conclusion "The Tamil community remains
stigmatised and disfranchised, while the trust of other
minority communities is
being steadily eroded.
g) In 201 7, the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka ordered the State to pay over Rs. 2
million each to the parents of two Tamil youths tortured
and killed in police
custody by Batticaloa police, following the filing of a Fundamental Rights case.
In this case the petitioners
cited the former OIC of Batticaloa Police and four
others as respondents. The petitioners stated that their deceased sons' arrest,
detention is wrongful and illegal and that they were subjected to torture and
killed that their fundamental rights guaranteed by
Article 11, 13(1), 13(4) and
Constitution
was violated by the respondents. The applicant is also a
Tamil from Sri Lanka in an area formerly controlled by the LTTE.
h) According the above new information as there is a material change in the
applicants' circumstances which occurred after the Minister
made a decision
Migration Act 1958
as the significant and rapidly
deteriorating conditions emerging in the referred applicants' country of claimed
of protection, such
as a change in the political and/or security landscape.
Filing to consider the material change in the applicant's claims if he were
5. The Authority erred in law in failing to respond to the appellant's claim to
fear of significant harm in Sri Lanka prisons by
reason of being imprisoned on
pre-trial remand.
Particulars:
a) The Authority said " ... I am not satisfied that these proceedings would
result in him facing torture, the arbitrary deprivation
of his life, or the
death penalty. I do not accept that these proceedings would lead to the
applicant facing cruel or inhuman treatment
or punishment, or degrading
treatment or punishment as defined in the Act." at [paragraph 71].
b) The Authority's findings in respect of the applicant's claim for a protection
visa on the complementary protection ground ins
36(2)(aa) of the
Migration Act
(Cth) in contrast to the Refugees Convention ground ins 36(2)(a). The IAA
did not deal with the applicant's case of torture whilst
in remand detention
under the complementary protection provisions.
c) The Authority also did not properly deal with the Pre-Trial Remand Claim in
considering the applicant's claim for a protection
visa on the complementary
protection ground. Where the Tribunal fails to deal with a claim expressly
articulated by an applicant,
this is a jurisdictional error: NABE v Minister for
Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 263
Therefore, the Authority committed a jurisdictional error.
ground one and its particulars, the applicant contended that it was unreasonable
for the Authority not to consider exercising its
power pursuant to s 473DC(1) to
invite him to comment on the 2018 DFAT report.
the hearing, the applicant submitted that the 2018 DFAT report reflected the
current situation in Sri Lanka, that this was accordingly
relevant, and should
have been considered. Under particular (a) of the applicant’s written
grounds, the applicant properly
noted the Authority identified the 2018 DFAT
report as ‘new information’ not before the delegate and that it was
there were exceptional circumstances to justify its consideration: at
Particulars
(b) and (c) identify that the Authority considered the report and relied upon it
in reaching its decision.
particular (d), the applicant contended that the Authority was required to
invite him to comment upon the 2018 DFAT report pursuant
to s 473DC(3) of the
Act and that its failure to do so was unreasonable.
3 of Part 7AA, with ss 473GA and 473GB, contains its own exhaustive statement of
the natural justice hearing rule: s 473DA(1).
In this context, the question of
legal unreasonableness is to be approached through the lens of the specific
statutory scheme and
not through the lens of the principles of natural justice
unaffected by statute:
CCQ17 v Minister for Immigration & Border
[2018] FCA 1641
Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection v CRY16
(2017) 253 FCR 475 at [67]. The discretion in
ss 473DC(1) and (3) when read with s 473DC(2), provides that the Authority
does not have an obligation to request or accept, any new
information whether
requested to do so, or in any other circumstance. Further, s 473DE(3)(a)
expressly provides that new information,
such as current country information,
may be used to affirm a decision without an obligation to give a referred
applicant the opportunity
to be heard: s 473DE(1)(a)(ii).
noted by the Minister in written submissions, the threshold for legal
unreasonableness in relation to the exercise of discretion
under s 473DC is high
given the structure of Part 7AA, to which s 473DC belongs:
DCP16 v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] FCAFC 91
view of the above, I accept that the Authority was not obliged to invite the
applicant to comment on the 2018 DFAT report pursuant
to s 473DC(3)(a), having
regard to the discretionary nature of the Authority’s the power under s
473DC(3). It is also accepted
that the Authority was not required to put to the
applicant the 2018 DFAT report pursuant to s 473DE(1), as it did not
information specifically about or in reference to the applicant, and
was only relied upon by the Authority as contemporaneous information
class of persons of which the applicant is a member, namely: Tamils; persons
perceived to have connections to the LTTE;
persons who departed Sri Lanka
illegally; and returning asylum seekers.
the context of the review being conducted under Part 7AA, no legal
unreasonableness is disclosed on the part of the Authority.
one does not establish jurisdictional error.
ground two and its particulars, the applicant takes issue with the
Authority’s finding at [36], that it was not satisfied
the applicant ever
made a complaint to the HRC about his land being occupied in 2012. It was
contended that this finding was made
in the absence of corroborative evidence,
which could have been obtained by the Authority under s 473DC.
ground alleges that the Authority breached s 473DC because of its failure to
exercise discretion under s 473DC(1) to obtain corroborative
the hearing, the applicant submitted that the complaint to the HRC was made by
his mother and his uncle. He said that his uncle
was in hiding and therefore he
had difficulty obtaining the evidence from him. As he was unable to obtain
evidence of the complaint,
he provided a newspaper clipping about it.
Minister submitted that s 473DC was a discretionary power. It was contended that
the Authority was not obliged to make out the
applicant’s case out for
BBX17 v Minister for Immigration
[2019] FCCA 59
; s 5AAA of
the Act. Nor was it obliged to provide the applicant with an opportunity to fill
in the gaps in the information he had
DLK18 v Minister for Home
[2020] FCCA 1200
Minister also relied upon
ABT17 v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2020] HCA 34
(2020) 269 CLR 439
in contending that there was no
obligation on the Authority to invite the applicant for an interview, or to give
further evidence,
merely because his credibility was in issue.
accept that it was open to the Authority to accept the applicant’s claim
that his land was occupied in 2012 but not to accept
his claim to have
complained to the HRC about its occupation based on the absence of evidence. The
Authority, in its decision, noted
that assertions were made by the applicant (at
the interview before the delegate) that he had received correspondence from the
provided the correspondence to corroborate his claim nor had
an explanation been
provided as to why he was unable to provide this evidence: at [32]. The Minister
submitted, that in the circumstances,
it was open to the Authority to make the
finding that no formal complaint had been made to the HRC. This submission is
to the applicant’s explanation given at the hearing that he was unable to
obtain the HRC complaint documents because they
were with his uncle who was in
hiding, I accept that this explanation was never advanced before the delegate or
the Authority. In
the circumstances, it was open to the Authority to conclude
that the document did not exist and that the applicant had fabricated
to bolster his claim for protection.
to the newspaper clipping, I accept the Authority did have regard to that
evidence as it considered it probative of the applicant’s
claim that his
family’s land was occupied by the Sri Lankan military. On this basis, it
also accepted that the applicant had
suffered some harassment by the Sri Lankan
military, as this was consistent with the country information before the
Authority: at
[38]. Further, it is accepted that the newspaper clippings did not
contain information probative of the applicant’s claim that
a complaint
had been lodged with the HRC, as such, it cannot be said that the Authority
failed to consider evidence relevant to that
error is disclosed in the Authority’s reasoning at [36]. The
Authority’s rejection of the applicant’s claim that
a complaint had
been made to the HRC was open to it on the evidence before it. Having regard to
the legislative scheme within which
the Authority was required to make its
decision, it cannot be said that it was legally unreasonable for the Authority
not to exercise
its discretionary power under s 473DC to obtain further
information or clarification in respect of this claim. The alleged breach
473DC has not been made out.
two does not establish jurisdictional error.
Ground three
ground three, the applicant contends actual or apprehended bias on the part of
the Authority.
submitted by the Minister, an assertion of bias levelled at the Authority is a
serious allegation that must be distinctly made
and clearly proved citing
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
205 CLR 507 (
bias requires the applicant to establish that the Authority had a pre-existing
state of mind which disabled it from undertaking,
or rendered it unwilling to
undertake, a proper evaluation of the matter:
[35]–[72]. As for apprehended bias, the test is whether a fair-minded and
appropriately informed lay observer might reasonably
apprehend that the
Authority might not bring a fair, impartial and independent mind to the review:
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
oral submissions, the applicant provided further particulars to this ground. He
submitted that on 21 February 2019, the Authority
notified him that his matter
had been remitted from the Court for reconsideration and that he should act
quickly as ‘[they]
aim to complete the review within six weeks’: CB
127. He submitted that the Authority made its decision within 20 days and
he was not given the opportunity to make any submissions, provide evidence, or
retain a lawyer in that time.
understood, this ground alleges that the speed with which the Authority made its
decision (the second Authority Decision)
and having not given the applicant the
opportunity to provide new information following remittal from the Federal
Court, demonstrated
bias on the part of the Authority.
oral submissions, the Minister sought to address this by stating that there was
no evidence the Authority was unwilling to review
the applicant’s claims
or that it was closed off or not impartial in its assessment of the claims. It
was submitted that there
was no evidence before the Court that the applicant had
information. The Minister contended that it was within the scope of the
Authority to make the decision within the timeframe that
it did and that 20 days
was not an insignificant period of time.
the Minister was unaware of the basis on which the applicant had contended bias
on the part of the Authority, I granted a short
period of time after the hearing
for the Minister to identify and provide details of any cases which may have
considered this issue
in the context of Part 7AA decisions.
the hearing, the Minister provided details of the following cases to the
Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs v BOA18
[2021] FCA 943
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2020] FCA 1079
) at [63]–[69],
Minister for Immigration & Anor
[2018] FCCA 2877
Court considers the circumstances of
and the basis upon which the
Authority’s decision was challenged in that case (i.e., bias) to be the
most analogous to the
circumstances of this case.
circumstances of
were somewhat different to those in this case as
they related to the timeframe within which the Authority made its decision after
the initial referral.
dealt with the expeditious finalisation of the
review by the Authority upon remittal from the Court. However, in
the appellant challenged the decision on the basis that the Authority’s
exercise of its discretion to proceed to a decision,
without allowing him
further time to provide new evidence and submissions was legally unreasonable.
, notwithstanding a request by the appellant’s
representative for a period of four weeks to provide submissions and evidence,
the Authority proceeded to a decision on the review without granting the
requested time. After discussion of the legislative framework
within which the
Authority was required to make its decision, the Federal Court found that while
many reasonable decision-makers
might have allowed the appellant more time, it
could not be said that the decision to proceed was legally unreasonable:
, the first Authority decision was quashed by the Federal Circuit
Court and remitted back to the Authority for reconsideration. The
Authority, on
remittal, affirmed the refusal decision within 12 working days (18 calendar
days) of notifying the applicants that
their case had been remitted for
reconsideration. The applicants appealed again to the Federal Circuit Court, who
found that the
Authority had committed a jurisdictional error on the basis of
apprehended bias. The Minister appealed that decision to the Federal
Australia. The issue on appeal was whether the Federal Circuit Court erred in
concluding that the second Authority’s
conduct; that being the speed of
the review, the opaque notification sent to the applicants following the
remittal, and the refusal
to invite evidence, created in the mind of a
fair-minded lay observer, the apprehension that the Authority might not bring an
mind to the review.
respect to the speed with which the second Authority proceeded with the review
following remittal from the Federal Circuit Court,
Besanko J observed that it
was important to consider the statutory provisions relevant to an assessment of
this matter and the other
matters advanced by the applicants. His Honour said in
at [38]–[40]:
[38] The first of the three matters is the speed with which the second Authority
proceeded with the review following remittal from
the Federal Circuit Court. The
statutory provisions which are relevant to an assessment of this matter, and
indeed of the second
and third matters, are as follows. First, s 473FA(1) of the
Act provides that the Authority in carrying out its functions under the
to pursue the objective of “providing a mechanism of limited review that
is efficient, quick, free of bias and consistent
with Division 3” of Pt
7AA of the Act. Division 3 of Pt 7AA deals with the conduct of a review.
Secondly, s 473DB(1) provides
that, subject to Pt 7AA, the Authority is to
review a fast track reviewable decision by considering the review material
to it, without accepting or requesting new information and without
interviewing the referred applicant. Also important is s 473DB(2)
which provides
as follows:
(2) Subject to this Part, the Immigration Assessment Authority may make a
decision on a fast track reviewable decision at any time
after the decision has
been referred to the Authority.
[39] Thirdly, the following limits on the powers of the Authority to get new
information (s 473DC) and to consider new information
(s 473DD) are
[40] Section 473DC(1) provides a definition of “new information”. It
is information that was not before the Minister
when the Minister made the
decision under s 65 of the Act and that the Authority considers may be relevant.
The subsection provides
that the Authority may get new information, however, by
reason of s 473DC(2), it is clear that it does not have a duty to do so.
J acknowledged the speed (12 working days from the notification letter) within
which the second Authority made its decision,
but observed that when the
statutory and procedural context is considered, those matters were insufficient
to lead to the conclusions
drawn by the primary judge:
referring to
at [24]. In respect of the notification letter, his
Honour said the Authority was authorised to make a decision at any time after
decision had been referred to it, the notice advised the applicants to
‘act quickly’, and did not contain an invitation
for the applicants
to provide further submissions as the first Authority had done in accordance
with applicable Practice Directions.
His Honour further noted that any
deficiency in the notice was not sufficient in itself to lead to a conclusion of
apprehended bias.
In respect of the refusal to invite evidence relevant to the
reason for remittal, Besanko J said the second Authority was not bound
such an invitation (s 473DC(2)) and that the way it proceeded was
‘expressly contemplated by the Act’. Having
regard to the statutory
and procedural context, his Honour found that the refusal could not lead to a
conclusion of apprehended bias.
considering the three matters cumulatively, Besanko J considered they did not
lead to a conclusion of apprehended bias. His Honour
concluded that a
fair-minded observer who was aware of the statutory context and the procedural
history of the application would
not reasonably apprehend that the second
Authority might not bring a fair, impartial and independent mind to the
determination of
the matter on its merits. His Honour upheld the
Minister’s appeal.
the present case, the second Authority proceeded to a decision within 20 days of
notifying the applicant that his case had been
remitted to it for
reconsideration. As in
, the notification letter informed the
applicant that he should ‘act quickly’ in his dealings with the
Authority. However,
in the present case, the Authority indicated that it would
aim to complete the review within ‘six weeks of the case being
to it. As in
, the Authority did not invite the
applicant to make any submissions or provide further evidence relevant to the
reason for the remittal.
than the timeframe of ‘six weeks’ indicated in the notification
letter that was sent to the applicant after the
remittal, the circumstances of
this case (being the procedural history) were the same as those in
Not much turns on the timeframe stated in the notification letter, because it
indicated that the Authority would aim to complete
the review within six weeks
of the ‘case being remitted’ to it. The applicant’s case was
remitted to Authority
on 15 August 2018, being six months prior to the
notification letter. So, by the time the notification letter had been sent to
applicant, the six-week period since remittal had already passed. It is also
of note that the applicant, since the remittal in August
2018, had not provided
any further information to the Authority or informed it that he wished to
provide further information. Any
new information provided by the applicant could
have only been considered by the Authority if it met the strict criteria in s
any event, no information was provided to the Authority since the matter was
remitted for reconsideration and, in the context of
the statutory framework of
Part 7AA and the procedural history of the case, the applicant has not
established that the period (of
20 days from the notification letter), within
which the review was completed, demonstrated actual or apprehended bias on the
of the Authority.
s 473DB(2) provided for the Authority to finalise the review ‘at any
time’ after the decision had been referred
to it. The Authority was also
under no obligation to get, request, or accept new information: s 473DC(2). In
view of this, the Authority,
by completing the review in the timeframe that it
did, without permitting the applicant to provide any further information, had
consistently with the provisions of Part 7AA. The applicant has not
established that the Authority, by proceeding to a decision without
inviting or
permitting him to provide further information, demonstrated actual or
apprehended bias.
these reasons, ground three does not establish jurisdictional error.
Ground four
ground four and its particulars, the applicant alleges that due to significant
changes in the political situation in Sri Lanka
from 26 October 2018, it was
legally unreasonable for the Authority to consider the information that it
relied upon, while failing
to consider the information contained in the
‘Report of UN Rapporteur Ben Emmerson QC’ (the Emmerson Report)
Minister submitted that the Emmerson Report was not before the Authority at the
time of its decision. It was submitted that, in
any event. The choice and
treatment of country information was a matter for the Authority:
Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs
ADX17 v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2018] FCA 1967
is accepted that the choice of country information and the weight given to it
was a matter for the Authority. In the present case,
the Authority considered
there were exceptional circumstances to justify considering the 2017 DFAT
country information report on
Sri Lanka, which was not before the delegate but
was before the First Authority, and the 2018 DFAT country information report on
Sri Lanka, which was published on 23 May 2018 and provided further information
reasons, at
[5]–[6] of its decision, disclose an evident and intelligible
justification for why it considered there were exceptional
circumstances to
justify consideration of the updated (new) DFAT country information reports. In
this regard, it cannot be said that
the Authority’s reliance on the
updated country information reports was legally unreasonable.
for the Emmerson Report, this was not before the Authority and, as such, there
was no obligation on the Authority to consider it.
To the extent that the
applicant says the Authority had an obligation to obtain the report and consider
it, this is not made out.
As stated earlier, there was no duty on the Authority
to get, accept, or request any new information: s 473DC(2). Nor could it be
said, within the statutory context, that the Authority’s failure to
exercise its discretion to obtain the Emmerson Report was
unreasonable.
four does not establish jurisdictional error.
Ground five
ground five and its particulars, the applicant takes issue with the
Authority’s consideration of his claim to fear significant
harm in Sri
Lanka, because he would ‘[be] imprisoned on pre-trial remand’ and
faced the risk of being tortured, when
determining whether he satisfied the
complementary protection criterion.
oral submissions, the applicant submitted that his life was in danger, that he
would be detained and interrogated by the army if
he returned to Sri Lanka, that
he had been in Australia since he was 27 years of age and is now 40, having lost
that period of his
life due to the threats he faced and risk to his life.
Minister submitted that the Authority at [71] expressly considered the
applicant’s claim of fearing being detained and facing
proceedings if returned to Sri Lanka. It was submitted that, whilst the
Authority acknowledged the applicant may be detained
and/or undergo judicial
proceedings due to his illegal departure from Sri Lanka, it was not satisfied
that those proceedings would
be applied in a discriminatory manner or would
amount to torture, the arbitrary deprivation of life, or the death penalty.
Minister further submitted that the Authority, at [72] of its decision, was not
satisfied that any challenges or stigmas the applicant
may face in Sri Lanka, as
a returned asylum seeker from Australia, would result in him facing torture, the
arbitrary deprivation
of life, or the death penalty.
assessing whether the applicant satisfied the complementary protection
criterion, the Authority had regard to the definition of
‘significant
harm’ under s 36(2A) of the Act: at [70]. The Authority’s reasons
disclose that it considered the
applicant’s claims and the material before
it that was relevant to the likelihood of him being detained upon return to Sri
Lanka. The evaluation of the material before it and its conclusion that the
proceedings would not be applied in a discriminatory
or persecutory way, and
therefore it would not constitute ‘significant harm’ were open to
the Authority for the reasons
it gave. I am unable to discern any error in the
Authority’s consideration of the material before it or in its
was also open to the Authority on the material before it to find that any:
monitoring of the applicant by the authorities for a
short period; social
stigma; or practical challenges he may face upon return to Sri Lanka, would not
constitute ‘significant
harm’. No error is discerned in that
considering the applicant’s claims overall, the Authority found that as
the applicant would not face a real risk of significant
harm upon return to Sri
Lanka for reason of his Tamil ethnicity, father’s links with the LTTE,
land problems, status as a failed
asylum seeker, illegal departure, or any
combination of these factors. This conclusion was open to the Authority having
its earlier findings and the reasons it gave for those findings.
to the applicant’s submission that his life is still in danger if he
returns to Sri Lanka and that he has spent a long period
of time in Australia
due to that fear, neither of these matters establish jurisdictional error on the
part of the Authority.
the applicant may strongly disagree with Authority’s assessment of his
claims and its conclusions, this does not provide
a basis for establishing that
the decision of the Authority was affected by jurisdictional error.
five does not establish jurisdictional error.
none of the grounds advanced establish jurisdictional error on the part of the
Authority, the application for judicial review must
be dismissed.
will hear the parties as to costs.
I certify that the preceding eighty-nine (89)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 13 November 2025
The judgment was the subject of
an application for special leave to appeal to the High Court brought by the
applicants for the visa.
On 17 February 2022, the High Court refused the
application for special leave.
RTF format (580 KB)
Signed PDF/A format