DDC19 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1865 (14 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
DDC19 v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1865
File number(s):
MLG 2662 of 2019
Judgment of:
JUDGE HUMPHREYS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
MIGRATION –
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal – Protection (Class XA) (subclass 866) visa – Whether the
Tribunal failed to consider
the personal circumstances of the applicant –
Sole ground of judicial review has no merit - No jurisdictional error is made
out – Application dismissed with costs
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) Schedule 2
Cases cited:
Abebe v Commonwealth of Australia
197 CLR 510
Djokovic v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 3
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Lat
(2006) 151 FCR
NAHI v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous
[2004] FCAFC 10.
Randhawa v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437
Selvadurai v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Self-Represented Litigant
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
Submitting appearance, save as to costs
MLG 2662 of 2019
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Second Respondent
JUDGE HUMPHREYS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
name of the First Respondent be amended to read
“Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship”.
Application is dismissed.
Applicant is to pay the First Respondent’s costs, fixed in the amount of
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or order to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors (r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 24.04
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal
Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE HUMPHREYS
INTRODUCTION
is an Application for judicial review filed on 16 August 2019, seeking review of
a decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(“the Tribunal”),
as it was then, dated 29 July 2019, affirming an decision of a delegate of the
first respondent (“the
delegate”) to refuse to grant the applicant a
Protection (Class XA) (subclass 866) visa (“the visa”) under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (“the
the reasons set out below, the Application must be dismissed.
30 May 2014, the applicant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, first arrived in Australia
on a Transit (Class TX) visa.
7 July 2014, the applicant lodged an application for a protection visa. A second
application was lodged on 28 July 2014, after
the first application was deemed
31 May 2016, a delegate of the first respondent refused to grant the visa on the
basis that the delegate was not satisfied that
the applicant met the
requirements under
21 June 2016, the applicant lodged an application for review of the
delegate’s decision with the Tribunal.
20 September 2018, the Tribunal invited the applicant to appear at a hearing on
10 October 2018 to give evidence and present arguments.
applicant’s representative requested a postponement of the Tribunal
hearing, which was granted. The hearing was rescheduled
for 13 November
13 November 2018, the applicant and his representative appeared before the
5 June 2019, the applicant was invited to respond to the information pertaining
to the political situation in Sri Lanka following
the 2018 constitutional crisis
and the Easter Sunday bombings in 2019.
29 July 2019, the Tribunal affirmed the decision not to grant the applicant the
TRIBUNAL DECISION
[1] – [4], the Tribunal set out the application for review and the
background of the matter.
Tribunal correctly considered the refugee criterion set out in
and Schedule 2 of the
Migration Regulations 1994
Regulations
[16] – [19], the Tribunal considered the complementary protection
criterion under s 36(2)(aa) of the
, and in accordance with the
Ministerial Direction No. 56, took into account PAM3 Refugee and Humanitarian
– Complementary Protection
Guidelines, PAM3 Refugee and Humanitarian -
Refugee Law Guidelines, and country information prepared by the Department.
Tribunal reviewed the claims outlined in the applicant’s written
statement, which was attached to their visa application.
[31], the Tribunal reviewed the supportive letter
submitted by the
applicant, dated 23 June 2014, of an elected member of the North Western
Provincial Council (“the supportive
letter”). The supportive letter
claimed that the applicant participated in various United National Party
protests against the government in Sri Lanka at the time,
which led the applicant to fear persecution from October 2011 onwards.
elected member claimed that the applicant was unable to protect his life in Sri
[35], the Tribunal outlined additional claims made by the applicant during an
interview with a Department of Immigration and Border
Protection official. These
additional claims included that people in villages sought revenge against
supporters of the UNP due to
the inability to target high profile UNP Members of
Parliament; that the applicant had suffered permanent facial scarring during
physical argument following the 2010 elections; that the applicant had no faith
in the current government in Sri Lanka; and that
applicant believed that the
government was temporary which may result in an ‘even worse’
[46]– [48], the Tribunal considered the burden of proof in relation to
administrative decision-making, noting that decision-makers
were not required to
accept all allegations made by applicants, especially where claims were
inconsistent with independent evidence.
At [48], the Tribunal stated that it did
not accept that the applicant was a credible or reliable witness.
Tribunal considered the applicant’s claim surrounding the fear of
persecution being undermined due to personal circumstances.
At [54], the
Tribunal noted that persecution arose in and from 2010, and at [24], it noted
that the applicant lived in New Zealand
from 2011 to 2012, after which he
returned to Sri Lanka.
[53] – [55], the Tribunal considered both the applicant’s failure to
lodge any protection claims while in New Zealand
despite the applicant holding
fears of persecution during this time and the applicant’s return to Sri
Lanka upon departure
from New Zealand. The Tribunal found that the
applicant’s failure to lodge a protection claim or discuss their fears of
persecution
while in New Zealand undermined the credibility of the
applicant’s claim of genuine or deeply held personal fears of persecution.
The Tribunal further found that the applicant’s return to Sri Lanka for a
period of two years indicated that the claims of
genuine or urgent fears of
persecution were not credible.
[63], the Tribunal considered a claim made by the applicant during the
Departmental interview relating to harm suffered in 2010,
which caused the
applicant severe physical harm, losing part of his face while fleeing rival
political supporters. The Tribunal noted
that this claim was not mentioned in
the applicant’s written claims or the supportive letter that was
submitted. On this basis,
the Tribunal was of the opinion that, given the
significance of the physical harm claimed, it would have been reasonable to
it in both documents.
[64] – [70], the Tribunal considered the applicant’s concerns
regarding the political situation in Sri Lanka. The Tribunal
noted at [66] that
the applicant did not respond to the invitation to comment on the country
information. Therefore, the Tribunal
made its finding based on the assessment of
the available country information. The Tribunal found that the applicant’s
non-responsiveness
to the invitation to comment further undermined the
credibility of the applicant and any genuine, deep, or urgent fears of
persecution
for political reasons as claimed.
[71] – [82], the Tribunal made cumulative adverse credibility findings,
noting that the applicant’s claims of past
harm, political opinions, and
activities were weak and that these claims did not convincingly substantiate any
support the applicant
had for the UNP, or any activities, when considered
against the applicant’s travel history. The Tribunal noted that it was
unable to provide the applicant with the benefit of significant doubt due to the
above cumulative findings and that due to these
findings, the Tribunal was
unable to find that the applicant’s claims had not been fabricated for
migration purposes, or that
the applicant would suffer any real risk of
significant harm as a consequence of being returned to Sri Lanka.
Tribunal did not accept the applicant’s past memberships, support or
affiliations of the UNP in general to have been genuine
or credible, or that the
applicant had any genuine affiliations or associations with the UNP. The
Tribunal did not find the supportive
letter to be reliable corroborative
evidence of the applicant’s past activities. It did not accept or view the
content as genuinely
reflecting the applicant’s actual past political
activities, sympathies or actual political opinions. The Tribunal further
not accept the applicant’s written and oral claims of being subjected to
assault by a rival political supporter. The Tribunal
did not accept that the
applicant did not make any complaint to the authorities in Sri Lanka, including
the police, or that the authorities
had refused to take any action.
Tribunal did not accept that the applicant was unable to or was intimidated out
of lodging a protection claim while in New Zealand,
or that the applicant had
been prevented from doing so. The Tribunal did not accept that the applicant had
been forced, compelled
or threatened into not returning to his home area in the
North Western Province, or that the applicant held any fears of being located
discovered by political rivals and was intimidated by them to prohibit him from
participating in other electoral activities for
the UNP candidates. The Tribunal
did not find that the applicant had any subjective or objective fears of
persecution based on Convention
reasons or non-Convention reasons, if the
applicant returned to their home area or anywhere in Sri Lanka.
Accordingly,
at [81], the Tribunal did not find the applicant to be or resemble a person of
interest who may be harmed or killed for
holding their political views anywhere
in Sri Lanka.
on the overall adverse credibility findings (cumulatively considered), the
Tribunal at [82] was not satisfied that there were
substantial grounds to
believe, as a necessary or foreseeable consequence of the applicant being
removed from Australia to Sri Lanka,
that the applicant would suffer harm or was
at real risk or significant harm based on the fabricated dispositive written,
documentary claims.
Tribunal noted at [84] that the applicant, at no stage, advanced any claims that
he had a real chance of serious harm based on
ethnicity or his membership as a
failed asylum seeker.
Tribunal at [92] was satisfied, based on the available country information, that
the level of insecurity from Islamic terrorism
did not mean that the applicant
would not receive a level of protection commensurate with international
standards. Given that the
level of insecurity was a result of external forces,
the Tribunal was satisfied that the authorities in Sri Lanka had taken
measures in accordance with the international standards.
Tribunal at [93] accepted the applicant’s claim to be of the Sinhalese
Buddhist faith. The Tribunal noted that the applicant
did not have a profile
from these attacks. Therefore, it did not accept that the applicant had any real
chance of being targeted
for investigation for these attacks by the authorities,
either upon arrival or in the community.
[94], the Tribunal similarly assessed the applicant to be at no real risk of
suffering significant harm in Sri Lanka, on the basis
that the applicant could
obtain protection from further Islamic attacks from the authorities. Thus, the
Tribunal found that there
was no real risk pursuant to s 36(2B) of the
[97], the Tribunal found that the applicant did not have a real chance of
serious harm for any Conventions or non-Convention reasons,
and that the
applicant did not have a well-founded fear of persecution to satisfy s 36(2)(a)
[98], based on the same considerations, both individually and cumulatively, and
the evidence before it, the Tribunal was not satisfied
that the applicant had
satisfied the alternative provisions under s 36(2)(aa) of the
Consequently,
at [100], the Tribunal was not satisfied that the applicant was a person in
respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the Refugee
Convention and found that the applicant did not satisfy the criteria under s
36(2)(a) of the
[101], the Tribunal considered the alternative criteria and found that the
applicant did not meet the requirements under s 36(2)(aa)
[102], the Tribunal noted that there were no suggestions made that the applicant
satisfied s 36(2) of the
, on the basis of being a member of the same
family unit that satisfies s 36(2)(a) or (aa) of the
. The Tribunal
found that the applicant did not meet the criteria in s 36(2) of the
Accordingly,
the Tribunal at [103] affirmed the decision not to grant the applicant the
GROUNDS OF JUDICIAL REVIEW
applicant advances one ground of judicial review contained in an Originating
Application filed with the Court on 16 August 2025.
The applicant’s sole
ground of judicial review is as follows:
Migration & Refugee Division reviewer erred in failing to consider the
personal circumstances of the applicant and the real
risk he would suffer if
returned to Sri Lanka.
to consider the applicant's claims and ignoring the current level of insecurity
from Islamic terrorism and the failure on
the part of the Government to provide
protection to the people.
THE APPLICANT’S SUBMISSIONS
applicant appeared before the Court unrepresented. He was assisted by an
interpreter. Prior to the commencement of the hearing,
the Court ensured that
the applicant was in possession of a copy of the relevant Court Books and that
the respondent’s written
submissions had been translated to him. The
Court also ensured that the applicant had access to a pen and paper so that he
take notes during the course of the hearing, should he wish to.
the commencement of the hearing, the Court explained that it was undertaking a
judicial review, not merits review, and the difference
between the two types of
review. The Court also explained the procedure by which the hearing would be
undertaken.
applicant claimed that as a former opposition political party member, he was
subjected to threats and verbal abuse from supporters
of the ruling party at the
time. Strangers visited his home multiple times, throwing rocks and breaking
windows. On one occasion,
he was physically assaulted in the street by these
supporters. The applicant reported these incidents to the police several times,
but no action was taken, as the police were influenced by those in power. The
applicant claimed that the failure of law enforcement
to protect individuals in
such situations is well-documented, and his case is no different. Returning to
Sri Lanka would expose him
to serious risks, including physical harm or
extrajudicial actions from those in power.
applicant noted that under section 36(2)(a) of the
, an applicant is
required to demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution and show that the
authorities are either unwilling or
unable to provide protection, stating that
his situation clearly fulfils this condition.
applicant claimed that the political situation in Sri Lanka remains unstable,
with numerous reports from international organisations
highlighting human rights
abuses and political repression. The individuals who pose a threat hold
significant influence within the
police and judiciary, making it impossible for
the applicant to seek redress or safety through official channels. The
culture of impunity ensures that those responsible for such abuses
face no consequences, leaving people like himself in constant
applicant claimed that the ongoing threats and uncertainty about his future have
had a significant impact on his mental health
and that of his family. Living
with the constant threat of violence has caused extreme stress, anxiety, and
emotional strain, and
his health has deteriorated, leading to panic attacks,
memory loss and sleep disturbances.
forced to return to Sri Lanka, the applicant claimed he would immediately face
the same dangers he had experienced previously.
Although the new government is
making efforts to tackle underworld activities, it has been unsuccessful so far.
Underworld gangs
continue to fight among themselves and target their opponents.
The applicant stated that he was deeply fearful of returning to Sri
Lanka as he
believes the Sri Lankan government and authorities would be unable to protect
applicant stated that his case aligns with the principles of Article 1A (2) of
1951 Refugee Convention
, and that the failure of Sri Lankan
authorities to protect him demonstrates his need for international
protection.
applicant stated that Article 3 of the
Convention Against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
prohibits the return of
individuals to countries where they may face torture or inhumane treatment, and
that, given the history of
extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances in
Sri Lanka, the likelihood of facing torture or serious harm upon return is
applicant claimed that the threats against him met the standard of the principle
of non-refoulement, enshrined in both the
Convention Relating to the Status
of Refugees
the International Convention on Civil and Political
applicant further claimed that the Tribunal relied on official information from
the Sri Lankan government when assessing his claims,
rather than conducting a
thorough factual analysis. However, the applicant stated that the accuracy of
such information cannot always
be trusted, as the state of democracy in Sri
Lanka is far from ideal.
THE FIRST RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
applicant’s sole ground of judicial review does not identify an error in
the Tribunal’s decision that would justify
overturning its decision.
matters that the applicant claims the Tribunal failed to consider were, in fact,
considered by the Tribunal. It appears that the
applicant simply disagrees with
the outcome of that consideration.
Tribunal explicitly considered the “personal circumstances” of the
applicant, in considerable detail. At [53], the
Tribunal considered that the
applicant’s claim that he sought a protection visa in Australia as he
feared persecution in Sri
Lanka was undermined by the applicant’s personal
circumstances. At [53], the Tribunal had regard to the fact that persecution
alleged to have begun in 2010, and at [24], the Tribunal noted that the
applicant had lived in New Zealand from 2011 until 27
July 2012, when he
returned to Sri Lanka.
fact that the applicant never lodged any protection claim in New Zealand, and
that after leaving New Zealand, he returned to Sri
Lanka, were two matters that
undermined the credibility of his claim to fear persecution: [53] – [55].
These findings, which
are fatal to the applicant’s sole ground of judicial
review, were open on the evidence available and justified the conclusion
Tribunal reached.
to the alleged failure to consider the
“current level of insecurity
from Islamic terrorism”,
the Tribunal did in fact give
consideration to that issue. At [90], the Tribunal found that although there
were isolated incidences
of attacks associated with Muslim organisations, the
Sri Lankan government has implemented measures to uproot these organisations.
Contrary to the applicant’s submissions, the Tribunal’s analysis at
[90] – [92] was not based on information from
the Sri Lankan
government.
CONSIDERATION
Djokovic v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 3
, the task of a Court conducting
judicial review was described in this manner:
... an application for judicial review is one in which the judicial branch of
government reviews, by reference to legality or lawfulness,
the decision or
decisions of the Executive branch of government, here in the form of a decision
of the Minister. The Court does not
consider the merits or wisdom of the
decision; nor does it remake the decision. The task of the Court is to rule upon
the lawfulness
or legality of the decision by reference to the complaints made
is well established that the Tribunal enjoys an advantage of fact to test the
veracity of evidence given orally by observing the
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
ABT17 v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2020] HCA 34
is also well established that the Tribunal is not required to accept
uncritically any and all claims made by an applicant
: Randhawa v Minister for
Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437
does the Tribunal have to possess rebutting evidence before holding that a
particular assertion was not made out:
Selvadurai v Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs
(1994) 34 ALD 347
selection of country information and the weight the Tribunal gives to that
information are matters for the Tribunal:
NAHI v Minister for Immigration
& Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 10.
is for the applicant to satisfy the Tribunal, being the relevant decision maker,
that the applicant meets the criteria for being
Commonwealth of Australia
(1999) 197 CLR 510
was for the applicant to provide his evidence and arguments in sufficient detail
to enable the tribunal to reach the requisite
state of satisfaction:
for Immigration and Citizenship v Lat
(2006) 151 FCR 214 at [76].
sole ground of judicial review is that the Tribunal failed to consider the
personal circumstances of the applicant and the risk
he would suffer if returned
to Sri Lanka. The sole particular makes reference to the risk of Islamic
terrorism and the failure of
the Sri Lankan Government to provide protection to
the people.
ground fails on its facts. At [29], the Tribunal comprehensively set out the
claims the applicant initially made. At [35], the
additional claims made by the
applicant at the interview are also recorded.
[53] and onwards, the Tribunal outlined its credibility concerns regarding the
applicant, based on his failure to claim protection
while in New Zealand and
then return to Sri Lanka. I am satisfied these concerns were open to the
Tribunal, based on the evidence
before it, and for the reasons it gave. In so
doing, the Tribunal also specifically considered the late claim made by the
that he suffered facial injuries in Sri Lanka at the hands of
supporters of a rival political party to the one he supported.
Tribunal also considered relevant country information that indicated, while
there had been Islamic-based terrorism in Sri Lanka,
the government had taken
significant steps to improve the overall security situation, including the
deployment of troops following
the incidents and the arrest of suspected members
of the terrorist group following the Easter suicide bombings. The Tribunal was
satisfied that the overall security situation was not one where the applicant
would not receive a level of protection commensurate
with international
standards [92].
information relied upon was not solely sourced from the Sri Lankan government,
but from multiple sources, as footnoted in the
decision, including a situational
update prepared by the Australian Department of Home Affairs at [69].
am satisfied that the conclusions of the Tribunal were reasonably open to it for
the reasons it gave based on the totality of the
evidence before it. The
applicant’s claims can be most properly described as vehement disagreement
with the Tribunal’s
factual findings. They do not point to jurisdictional
error on the part of the Tribunal.
the applicant is unrepresented, the Court has perused the Court Book tendered
and other relevant material. The Court is unable
to detect any unarticulated
DETERMINATION
these circumstances, the Application must be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding sixty-nine (69)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 14 November 2025
RTF format (440 KB)
Signed PDF/A format