Pairoj Suktarachan [2025] APO 24 (31 July 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT
Pairoj Suktarachan
[2025] APO 24
Patent Application: 2020201206
Title: RogerRoj SocialScience BioInformatic WealthManagement
FinancialServices Reformulation
Patent Applicant: Pairoj Suktarachan
Delegate: Dr S. J. Smith
Decision Date: 31 July 2025
Hearing Date: Written submissions filed on 5 June 2025
Catchwords:
– section 223 – extension of time to
gain acceptance – whether failure to gain acceptance was due to an Office
error – whether circumstances beyond control caused failure to gain
acceptance – extension of time refused
Representation: Applicant was self-represented.
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Patent Application: 2020201206
Title: RogerRoj SocialScience BioInformatic WealthManagement
FinancialServices Reformulation
Patent Applicant: Pairoj Suktarachan
Date of Decision: 31 July 2025
The requirements for an extension of time to be granted
under section 223(1) or section 223(2)(b) have not been met.
I refuse the application for an extension of time to gain acceptance.
REASONS FOR DECISION
application 2020201206 (the
application
) was filed by Pairoj Suktarachan
) on 19 February 2020. Following a request for expedited
examination on 9 January 2024, a first examination report was issued on
January 2024. During the twelve-month examination period a further eight
examination reports were issued. The ninth examination
report was issued on
20 January 2025. The applicant filed responses on 25 and 26 January 2025,
but there was insufficient time for
an examiner to consider these before the
application lapsed for failure to gain acceptance within the 12 month period
provided (I
note that because 25 January 2025 fell on a Saturday the final date
for acceptance was 28 January 2025 pursuant to section 222A of
10 February 2025 the applicant requested an extension of time which I understand
to be on the basis of either section 223(1) or
section 223(2)(b), to allow the
examiner more time to consider his response.
this request, on 17 March 2025, a tenth examination report was issued including
objections indicating that amendments proposed
to the specification are not
allowable, and that the claimed invention is not patentable subject matter.
a series of exchanges in which various Patent Office staff identified serious
concerns with the request for extension and indicated
an intention to refuse the
request, the matter was set for hearing and on 5 June 2025 the applicant filed
written submissions in
support of the requests for extensions of time under
sections 223(1) and 223(2)(b).
relevantly provides that:
(1) The Commissioner must extend the time for doing a relevant act that is
required to be done within a certain time if the act is
not, or cannot be, done
within that time because of an error or omission by:
(a) the Commissioner or a Deputy Commissioner; or
(b) an employee; or ...
(2) Where, because of:
(a) ...; or
(b) circumstances beyond the control of the person concerned;
a relevant act that is required to be done within a certain time is not,
or cannot be, done within that time, the Commissioner may,
on application made
by the person concerned in accordance with the regulations, extend the time for
doing the act.
concept of an “error or omission” has the same meaning in section
223(1) as it does in the more commonly discussed
context of section
That is, it has a broad
scope, and encompasses accidentals
unexpected failures to
exercise due diligence,
breakdowns in
respect to section 223(2)(b), Jenkinson J, albeit in the context of the
, indicated that circumstances beyond control is essentially a
force majeure
“In the context in which it is found, the expression
‘circumstances beyond the control of the person concerned’
my opinion designate – and designates only – occurrences which
neither the person concerned nor any person acting
on his behalf to do the act
or take the step could prevent. The operations of nature and the activities of
strangers may result
in such occurrences. So, too, may the acts and omissions
of certain independent contractors engaged by the person concerned or by
agent, as for example the carrier of mail or the office cleaner, either of whom
causes the loss or destruction of a document
to be filed. But the acts or
omissions of the agent who on behalf of the person concerned is to do the act or
take the step are
not occurrences of the description specified in paragraph
131(1)(a), in my opinion. Nor, in my opinion, are the acts or omissions
agent’s servants. The section is, I think, correctly described as a force
majeure provision.”
note that in contrast to section 223(1), section 223(2) is a discretionary
provision – even where there are relevant circumstances
that enliven
section 223(2)(b), it is necessary to consider whether the Commissioner’s
discretion should be exercised. As
the delegate in
Guang-ming Weng
“...the Commissioner
extend the time. The
Vangedal-Nielsen v Smith (Commissioner of Patents)
, provided some factors for consideration in this regard. Of particular
relevance to the present case is the public interest in the
issue of a valid
patent while also operating the patent system efficiently and without
unreasonable delay. While the provisions
of sub-section 223(2) are beneficial
in nature, the discretion should not be exercised where, for example, it would
serve no useful
meaning of the term “relevant act” is defined in subsection
relevant act
means an action (other than a prescribed
action) in relation to a patent, a patent application, or any proceedings under
(other than court proceedings), and includes the making of a Convention
application within the time allowed for making such application.
explained by the AAT, acceptance (rather than the filing of an examination
response) is a relevant act:
“Acceptance is ... an action or step required to be taken by the
Commissioner if an application comes within sub-section 49(1)
and provided
section 51 is not applicable. It is also a relevant act within the meaning of
sub-section 223(11) for it is an action
in relation to a patent application and
is not a ‘prescribed action’ within the meaning of sub-regulation
to both sections 223(1) and 223(2)(b) is the requirement for a causal connection
between the error by the Office or the
circumstances beyond the control of the
applicant and the relevant act (in this case acceptance) not being done in time.
that errors or circumstances that occur
the final date
for acceptance will not enliven section 223, because they cannot have caused the
failure to gain acceptance.
The specification
specification as filed is a relatively succinct document. For convenience, a
copy of the specification is annexed to this decision.
The invention is said to
be used “for Wealth Management and Financial Services Reformulation”
and the applicant explained
the invention (in the context of responding to
examination reports) as follows:
“My invention is a methods and processes of how to Improve social on
health, environment and finance offering technical detail
that discloses a
technical improvement and advantage to social and finance, which is
patentable.
There are four different types of activities, one or all of which may be used
to process as credit for purchasing goods and services,
through a system called
‘devotion credit’. My invention can be used to make society
awareness of options that is obvious
and tangible which can solve the problems
of the world today, include economic problems, society, crime, war, premature
global warming problem, by making the choice of using Devotion Credit
Reward System for individual to exchange for goods and services
instead of using
Information from biofeedback, salary calculators, anthropogenic impact on the
environment and communities data will be used to processed
as credit to purchase
goods and services. A credit calculation or to determine incentives for
individual motivation to perform activities
that best help environment and
society are ways of analyzing reward distributions. The using of computers and
artificial intelligence
that focuses on combining the above 3 data and
calculating them to measure the economic value of various goods and services in
form of DEVOTION CREDIT REWARD SYSTEMS and calculating exchange rates to
other currencies, processed as credit to be used to purchase
“My invention is about restructuring and organizing in a more efficient
and effective manner helping people: as individuals,
their behaviours and interactions with each other and with their built,
technological and natural environments
using information from biofeedback
(include neurofeedback) to managing wealth and assets in a way that maximizes
growth and minimizes
risk and at the same time facilitating transactions for
businesses, individuals and
governments.”
specification as filed does not include conventional claims. New claims, as set
out below, were included in amendments proposed
Claim 1. The using of biofeedback information for the purpose of Social
Science Bio-Informatics Wealth Management Financial Services
Reformulation.
There are four different types of activities, one or all of which may be used
within the following overall process
to form Devotion credit which hold current
or potential monetary value for purchasing goods and services
- The using of any biofeedback information collected of biofeedback data from
bodily functions including brain wave activity, electrical
activity of the
brain, blood flow, muscle tension, body temperature, sweat volume, pulse and
heart rate using biofeedback devices
to measure physical or mental health, and
transformed the data to the form of Devotion credit which hold current or
potential monetary
value to be used to purchase goods and services.
- The using of any salary information benefits and other factors include
salary records for available jobs by name, government, company,
employee, career field, location, experience, education, special skills, cost of
living, , and transformed the data to
the form of Devotion credit which hold
current or potential monetary value to be used to purchase goods and
- The using of information of any human activities that have an impact on the
environment and communities, and transformed the data
to the form of Devotion
credit which hold current or potential monetary value to be used to purchase
goods and services.
- The using of computers and artificial intelligence that focuses on
combining the above 3 data and a) calculating them to measure
the economic value
in the form of Devotion credit which hold current or potential monetary value
for purchasing goods and services
and b) calculating exchange rates to other
currencies.
Claim 2. Biofeedback information on how an individual, group of people or
whole group of people feel and interact from the Devotion
credit they
Claim 3. The ways of analyzing reward distributions of Devotion credit
calculation by transform biofeedback, employment related, anthropogenic
on the environment and communities data to determine incentives for individual
motivation to perform activities that best
intermediary and/or party that provided goods or services or non-credit rewards
such as discounts,
private offices, housing, benefits, and different perquisites
for the Devotion credit be the one who analyzing reward distributions
Devotion credit which depend on their availability of product or service or
times, financial situation, a preplanned course of
action establishing a guide
to work toward acceptable outcomes and objectives(policy or plan), health and
environment concerns, skill,
knowledge, and a reasonable assessment of the
adequacy of enablement(activity based on the facts that are available with moral
legal obligation), supply and demand associate with the value amount of
Devotion credit that someone is willing to pay in the market.
Each case is
unique, each case has to be considered on its own facts and merits; and
judgments of the intermediary and/or party
that provided goods or services or
non-credit rewards for the Devotion credit.
Devotion credit is the credit arrangement directly between 2 parties or more
or with the assistance of an intermediary that when one
party perform activities
that best help himself and society on health, environment another party will
exchange goods or services
or non-credit rewards such as discounts, private
offices, housing, benefits, and different perquisites for the Devotion
Claim 4. The using of “biofeedback” as a new technique wherein a
person is provided with feedback about the physiological
functions of their mind
in order to improve their ability to control mind functions to the physiological
changes that often occur
in conjunction with changes to thoughts, emotions, and
behavior for purpose of Social Science Biolnformatic Wealth Management and
Financial Services Reformulation.
understand the invention to be essentially an alternative to
current/conventional currency, whereby value is assigned by reference
including biofeedback and environmental impact.
extension of time
applicant identified several circumstances as supportive of the request for an
extension of time:
(i) reliance on IP Australia’s advice (to file an extension of time)
impacted by system changes regarding the issuance of post-lapsing
examination
reports – this is said to support an extension under both sections 223(1)
and 223(2)(b);
(ii) the final date for acceptance falling on a weekend, followed by a public
holiday, limiting the practical ability to act –
this is said to be
relevant to section 223(2)(b);
(iii) examination history – I understand this to be in relation to both
the report content, and some reports issuing outside
of IP Australia’s
timeliness targets, which I understand to be potentially relevant to both
sections 223(1) and 223(2)(b).
will address each of these in turn.
Reliance on IP
Australia’s advice and subsequent events
letter advising that the application lapsed for failure to gain acceptance, sent
on 5 February 2025, includes the following statement:
If you wish to reinstate your standard patent application
apply for an extension of time (under
section 223
Patents Act
) and file a response to overcome outstanding objections to gain
acceptance.
take it from the applicant’s submissions that he understood this to be
advice to seek an extension of time:
“On 5 February 2025, IP Australia advised reinstatement via an
extension of time (EOT) and filing of a response to objections.
The applicant
complied by submitting the EOT request on 10 February 2025.”
note here that the information in the lapsing notice must be understood in the
context of the
section 223
requirements; it is necessary that the lapsing be due
to one of the circumstances that enlivens
section 223
for this option to be
successfully pursued.
written submissions the applicant stated:
“The applicant acted promptly on IP Australia’s guidance (5
February 2025) to file the EOT. Any procedural oversight
or miscommunication
regarding system limitations constitutes an ‘error/omission’ by the
Commissioner’s delegate.”
understand the relevant system limitations here to relate to the issuing of a
tenth examination report after the application had
lapsed, the circumstances of
which the applicant discussed in detail in a letter received 3 March
“He [the examiner] advised me on 14 February 2025 that his intention
for the application was to issue an examination report
several weeks after the
case had lapsed. Unfortunately, he later discovered that the system at IP
Australia has changed to mean
that this is no longer possible. He wasn’t
aware of this at the time, so he apologise for that. This means that currently
he is not able to issue a report. (a report issued after a case has lapsed is
essentially a formality; for instance, it would not
be possible for him to
accept the application after it has lapsed, even if it was appropriate to do
applicant also referred to a failure to communicate changes in process regarding
post-lapse reports to stakeholders.
noted previously, a tenth examination report ultimately was issued. However,
even if any confusion or uncertainty around the process
for the issuance of such
a report could be considered an error by the Commissioner’s delegate, or a
circumstance beyond the
applicant’s control, it cannot have been causal of
the failure to gain acceptance because it did not arise until the application
had already lapsed. As such, the circumstances surrounding the issuance of the
tenth examination report do not enliven
section 223.
final date for acceptance
applicant indicated that the final date for acceptance falling on the weekend,
and being followed by a public holiday, provided
“[limited] practical
ability to act.”
is true that the date the first report issued, and consequently the final date
for acceptance, are not within the control of the
applicant, and that the final
date for acceptance fell on a weekend followed by a public holiday (although
pursuant to
section 222A
the period for gaining acceptance did not end until the
following day on which the Office was open). However, this is not a matter
which is causal of the failure to gain acceptance. The applicant availed of
numerous opportunities to file examination responses
in an effort to gain
acceptance. That the final of these was immediately before the final date for
acceptance such that the examiner
did not have time to consider the response is
not a circumstance beyond the control, in the sense of
force majeure
the applicant. It is a case of running out of time to gain acceptance. In any
event, it is apparent that the examiner was not
satisfied that the final
examination response placed the application in order for acceptance based on the
content of the tenth examination
report. As such, this was not causal of the
failure to gain acceptance and does not provide a basis for an extension of time
section 223.
Compliance with timeliness
applicant notes that seventh, eighth and ninth examination reports were issued
outside of the 20 working day examination timeliness
In the written
submissions, this is said to demonstrate “consistent complexity requiring
additional time”. In correspondence
of 11 April 2025, the applicant said
that this delay “directly cause[d] the failure to meet the deadline and is
the circumstances
beyond my control”.
to the question of complexity, it is clear that the prosecution of this
application has been challenging – the issuance of
nine examination
reports during the examination period is highly unusual. However, as I will
discuss in more detail below, this
is a function of the nature of the invention.
It is not a
force majeure
any event, even if the delay in response were to be considered a circumstance
beyond the control of the applicant enlivening
section 223(2)(b)
, or an error by
the office enlivening
section 223(1)
, I do not consider that it is causal of the
failure to gain acceptance. That is, while regrettable, despite the delays in
the issuing
of a number of examination reports, there were evidently many
opportunities for the applicant to file examination responses during
twelve-month examination period. The examination reports issued indicated on
many occasions that the prospects of gaining acceptance
were remote, and
post-lapsing the examiner indicated that outstanding objections to the
application remained. As such, delays during
the examination process were not
causal of the failure to gain acceptance in this case.
Report content
applicant points to “systemic errors” in the examination of the
application that are said to support an extension
of time. Specifically, the
applicant submitted that:
“The applicant has overcome prior objections (patentable subject
, novelty, inventive step). Outstanding objections in Report
No. 9 (amendments, patentable subject matter) are resolvable with proper
first note that, contrary to the applicant’s submission, prior objections
were not overcome. Rather, consideration of these
objections was suspended
pending resolution of the objection regarding the allowability of amendments.
Where amendments result in
claims to new matter, examiners are not required to
examine those claims – this is because there is no purpose in examining
claims that cannot be allowed. Despite this usual approach, I understand the
examiner to have included the patentable subject matter
objection in the latest
reports to make it clear that amendments could not overcome the objections to
the specification.
any event, I understand the applicant’s position to be that the
outstanding objections are wrongly taken and that the application
in its current
form is in order for acceptance, given that no amendments to the specification
were filed with the responses to the
ninth examination report. The applicant
has identified specific concerns with the final two examination reports, which
objections regarding the allowability of amendments proposed to the
specification and manner of manufacture.
short, having reviewed the reports and the application, I am satisfied that the
examiner’s objections are consistent with
the guidance set out in the
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure, which reflects practices, procedures
and principles to be followed
by examiners that have been established with
regard to the relevant authorities. There is no causal error by an employee
and accordingly
section 223(1)
is not enlivened. Nevertheless, I
think it is useful in this case to consider the objections and the
applicant’s comments
in relation to them in some detail.
first to manner of manufacture, it is a requirement of paragraph 18(1)(a) of the
that an invention be a manner of manufacture within the meaning of
section 6 of the Statute of Monopolies. The classic question
to be asked when
deciding whether an invention is a “manner of manufacture” is set
out in the decision of the High Court
National Research Development
Corporation v Commissioner of
“The right question is: ‘Is this a proper subject of letters
patent according to the principles which have been developed
for the application
of s. 6 of the Statute of
Monopolies?’”
High Court went on to explain that:
“a process, to fall within the limits of patentability which the
context of the Statute of Monopolies has supplied, must be
one that offers some
advantage which is material, in the sense that the process belongs to a useful
art as distinct from a fine art
... that its value to the country is in the
field of economic
endeavour.”
“Sufficient authority has been cited to show that the
‘something’ need not be a ‘thing’ in the sense
article; it may be any physical phenomenon in which the effect, be it creation
or merely alteration, may be
observed...”
the High Court has made clear that there is no precise formulation to be applied
unthinkingly; a case-by-case methodology
undertaken,
in which regard is
had to the substance of the claimed invention, not simply its form. As Gageler
and Nettle JJ succinctly put it
“Whatever words have been used, the matter must be looked at as one of
substance and effect must be given to the true nature
ideas – business, commercial and financial schemes as such – have
never been considered
patentable.
Court quoted Sir Robert Finlay A-G in
Re Cooper’s Application for a
: “[y]ou cannot
have a Patent for a mere scheme or plan – a plan for becoming rich; a plan
for better government of a
State; a plan for the efficient conduct of a
Conversely, a
patentable invention may be found where there is a technical
contribution.
In considering
the question of manner of manufacture it is necessary to distinguish between a
technological innovation, which is
patentable, and a business innovation, which
With respect to whether
a physical effect is required, the Court in
“A physical effect in the sense of a concrete effect of phenomenon or
manifestation or transformation is required. In
, an artificial
effect was physically created on the land. In
State Street
, there was a component that was
physically affected or a change in state or information in a part of a machine.
These can all be
regarded as physical effects. By contrast, the alleged
invention is a mere scheme, an abstract idea, mere intellectual information,
which has never been held to be patentable, despite the existence of such
schemes over many years of the development of the principles
that apply to
manner of manufacture. There is no physical consequence at
an invention involves the implementation of a scheme via computer technology, it
is necessary to understand whether there is
invention in the computer
implementation:
“A claimed invention must be examined to ascertain whether it is in
substance a scheme or plan or whether it can broadly be
described as an
improvement in computer technology. The basis for the analysis starts with the
fact that a business method, or mere
scheme, is not, per se, patentable. The
fact that it is a scheme or business method does not exclude it from properly
subject of letters patent, but it must be more than that. There must
be more than an abstract idea; it must involve the creation
of an artificial
state of affairs where the computer is integral to the invention, rather than a
mere tool in which the invention
is performed. Where the claimed invention is
to a computerised business method, the invention must lie in that
computerisation.
It is not a patentable invention simply to ‘put’ a
business method ‘into’ a computer to implement the business
using the computer for its well-known and understood
functions.”
Encompass Corporation Pty Ltd v InfoTrack Pty Ltd
, regarding a method and
apparatus for displaying information to provide business intelligence, the Court
also discussed computer
implementation of a scheme:
“...the appellants sought to make much of the fact (if it be a fact)
that the claimed method cannot be implemented using ‘generic
software’. The difficulty with this submission is that the claims in suit
do not secure, as an essential feature of the invention,
any particular software
or programming that would carry out the method. It is left entirely to those
wishing to use the method to
devise, and then to implement, a suitable computer
program for that purpose. As we have said, all that the specification teaches
is that the processing system by ‘suitable programmed’.
...the appellants submitted that the claimed method is, itself, a high-level
description of a computer program. We do not accept
this characterisation. If
approached from this point of view, the method is really an idea for a computer
program, it being left
(as we have said) to the user to carry out that idea in
an electronic processing device. ... Patentable subject matter is not provided
simply because the method is a ‘method ... in an electronic processing
device’, which itself is not characterised.
To find otherwise would be to
elevate form over
substance.”
examiner’s objection in the ninth and tenth examination reports is
essentially that the invention is not a technical innovation,
financial scheme in which various data is used to measure economic value in the
form of devotion credit, which holds
monetary value.” “[P]roviding
an incentive, in the form of devotion credit, to encourage people to behave or
certain ways” is said to be not a technical solution to problems
resulting from the current monetary system.
applicant asserted various errors in the final two examination reports which I
have summarised below:
Ninth examination report
Misinterpretation
of manner of manufacture: An invention must create an artificially created state
of affairs that has economic utility.
The examiner’s error is conflation
of the non-financial incentive system of the invention with narrow financial
incentives.
“The invention constitutes a ‘human-designed systemic
framework’ that alters behavioral dynamics indirectly through
bioinformatic algorithms’, and is a manner of manufacture as set out in
threshold for technical improvement: The
test of artificially
created state of affairs with economic utility does not impose a rigid technical
improvement requirement. The
examiner’s error is demanding a computer
science improvement and ignoring the technical contribution made by the
in biotechnology (biofeedback-driven algorithms for bias mitigation)
and social technology.
Overlooking
patentability of social science innovations: The examiner’s error is
failing to fully recognise the technical merit
of the integration of
neuroeconomic algorithms and ethical frameworks in addressing system challenges
rooted in monetary systems.
“Their combined application offers a novel
approach to resolving deeply entrenched structural issues, suggesting a
oversight in evaluating their interconnected
Tenth examination report
Misapplication
of “artificially created state of affairs”: The examiner’s
error is incorrectly equating the non-monetary
incentive mechanism for
health/environmental behaviour with financial schemes, which contradicts the
specification’s distinction
between intrinsic motivation and monetary
technical character in biotechnology: Innovations in biotechnology are
patentable if they involve a technical effect. The
examiners error is
disregarding the integration of biofeedback devices and neuroeconomic algorithms
to improve health outcomes, which
is a technical advance in data processing and
behavioural prediction.
addition to identifying these errors, in criticising the examiner’s
approach the applicant pointed to the “reliance
on selective analysis of
the specification (e.g., omitting interdisciplinary technical context such as
neuroeconomic frameworks and
bioinformatics integration” in the
post-lapsing examination report which “violates established examination
requiring ‘holistic assessment of technical
contributions’.” The applicant stated that the analysis
integration with bioinformatic systems” and focused
“narrowly on isolated technical elements”, thereby deviating
procedural norms requiring “comprehensive review of all technical effects
and contextual innovations”. The applicant
also noted that by addressing
societal harms caused by the current monetary system, the invention is aligned
with the goal of the
understand the applicant’s position to be that, as a non-monetary
incentive mechanism, the invention is not a financial scheme,
although noting
that claim 1 (filed on 18 June 2024) provides for the calculation of an exchange
rate to “other currencies”
this seems a dubious distinction.
Instead, the applicant characterises the invention as an incentive mechanism
embedded in a bioinformatic
framework, with a technical implementation that
improves bias detection in neuroeconomic systems. Ultimately, the question is
whether the invention may be characterised as a financial scheme or not, but
whether it is for a manner of manufacture.
invention which is, in substance, a scheme or plan, without more, is not
patentable; it does not give rise to the requisite artificially
created state of
affairs of economic significance. I accept the applicant’s submission
that it is necessary to understand
the invention holistically. However, in the
present case, having reviewed the specification and as discussed below, I agree
the examiner that the invention is not for a manner of manufacture. It is
in substance a scheme for the attribution of incentives
to individuals; it does
not provide a patentable artificial effect – no physical consequence
results from the invention. This
is akin to the non-patentability of systems of
government and plans for the conduct of a business. The alteration of
behavioural
dynamics, while it may be beneficial to society and an admirable
pursuit, is not, in my opinion, a patentable effect within the meaning
the applicant referred to the integration of biofeedback devices and
neuroeconomic algorithms to improve health outcomes, the
specification as filed
does not disclose how such a result is to be achieved. At best, there is what
is described in
as an idea, the implementation of which is left
to the skilled addressee. The specification as proposed to be amended does
more detail/examples regarding the invention, including information
However, no
technical advance is described or claimed – simply including data obtained
via technical measures within the context
of a scheme does not transform the
character of the invention. Accordingly, while I agree with the applicant that
a technical contribution
in the field of computer science is not necessary (and
not described), I cannot agree that a technical contribution in biotechnology
social technology has been described.
may be that the integration of neuroeconomic algorithms and ethical frameworks
to address issues associated with the current monetary
system, or the
integration of biofeedback devices with neuroeconomic algorithms to improve
health outcomes, would involve a technical
contribution and an associated
patentable artificial effect. However, such a contribution is not apparent
given the degree of abstraction
or generality at which the invention is
described, both in the specification as filed and as proposed to be
Accordingly,
I do not consider that the matters identified by the applicant are errors, and
certainly not errors causal of the failure
to gain acceptance. I also note that
RPL Central Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
, which the applicant
referred to as aligning “more closely with societal applications requiring
technical implementation”,
and in which patentability of a
computer-implemented system for competency assessments was upheld, was
overturned by the Full Court
am satisfied that the invention described does not provide a patentable
artificial effect. It follows that the manner of manufacture
objections were
appropriately raised throughout the examination of this application. Moreover,
this objection is such that, as noted
on multiple occasions, there is no
prospect of the application being accepted – the specification as filed
reveals nothing
that could satisfy the manner of manufacture requirement. This
means that there is no allowable amendment that could be made to
specification that would overcome this objection.
view of the above, it is unnecessary to consider the allowability of the
amendments in detail. However, the specification as proposed
to be amended as
at the ninth examination report is 18 pages long. Noting the brevity of the
original specification, it is apparent
that a significant amount of text has
been added. Given that the test for added subject matter at section 102(1) of
is “strict” and “a patent applicant is not
permitted to add by amendment matter simply because it would have been
to the skilled person”,
prima facie
this expansion of the specification is troubling. The
examiner has focused on specific added text which is said to expand the
of “biofeedback” beyond what the skilled person would
have understood in view of the specification as filed.
applicant submitted that the specification as amended, viewed through the lens
of the skilled addressee when properly characterised
(as a neuroeconomics
expert), does not include new matter:
“The amendments do not introduce new matter. A person skilled in the
art (PSA) in ‘neuroeconomics and bioinformatics’–fields
integral to interpreting the invention–would derive no new insights beyond
the original specification.”
cannot agree with the applicant. Certainly the specification must be understood
from the perspective of the person skilled in the
relevant art, but this does
not provide licence to add new contextual information regarding an invention
simply because that information
may have been obvious to the relevant skilled
person. The material referenced by the examiner, regarding positive and
negative biofeedback
in the economy, particularly with respect to share trading
behaviour, is not clearly and unambiguously disclosed in the application
filed – biofeedback in the context of the share market is not mentioned at
all. Even if this would be obvious to the skilled
person in view of the
disclosure, that is not the relevant test; it is not part of the original
disclosure and such matter cannot
issues raised by the applicant regarding the content of the examination reports
do not establish a basis for an extension of time
under either section 223(1) or
that the provisions for allowance of an extension of time are not enlivened
there is no need to consider the exercise of discretion.
For completeness, even
if circumstances beyond the applicant’s control were established, I
consider that it would be inappropriate
to exercise the discretion to grant an
extension of time. I acknowledge the applicant’s submissions regarding
engaging with
the examiner (“[t]he applicant proactively submitted draft
responses (26 January 2025) and sought clarification on objections...”),
and there is nothing in the applicant’s conduct itself that would warrant
an adverse exercise of discretion. However, as I
noted above, the objections to
the application are such that there are no prospects of it being accepted. In
these circumstances
an extension of time in order to gain acceptance would serve
no useful purpose and therefore I would not have exercised the discretion
extend the time.
will refuse the application for extension of time. The ultimate cause of the
failure to gain acceptance is the existence of insurmountable
objections to the
application. This is not grounds for an extension of time under either section
223(1) or section 223(2)(b).
Dr S. J. Smith
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
Annex: Specification filed in compliance with formality direction of
Jiejing Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Patents
[1995] AATA 100
Kimberly-Clark Ltd v
Commissioner of Patents (No 3)
[1988] FCA 421
Total Peripherals Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Patents
[1998] AATA 784
Oz Technology, Inc. v
Boral Energy Ltd
Atomic Skifabrik Alois
Rohrmoser v Registrar of Trade Marks
[1987] FCA 22
[2018] APO 69
(emphasis in original).
Jiejing Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Patents
[1995] AATA 100
Applicant’s
correspondence of 18 February
Applicant’s
correspondence of 26 January
The Patent Manual of
Practice and Procedure at 3.2 indicates that the patent examination target for
responses to examination reports
is “85% sent within 20 working days from
receiving the
correspondence”.
[1959] HCA 67
102 CLR 252
at 269, [14].
at 275, [22].
at 276, [23].
D’Arcy v Myriad Genetics Inc
[2015] HCA 35
258 CLR 334
Grant v Commissioner of Patents
[2006] FCAFC 120
(1901) 19 RPC 53
Commissioner of Patents v RPL Central Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 177
RPL Central
Research Affiliates
Commissioner of Patents
[2014] FCAFC 150
Research Affiliates
RPL Central
[2019] FCAFC 161
[2013] FCA 871.
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation v BASF Plant
Science GmbH
[2020] FCA 328
RTF format (18.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format