Bishop v Sports Massage Training School Pty Ltd [2000] HREOCA 50 (15 December 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
DISCRIMINATION ACT 1992
Matter No: H99/55
GREGORY CHARLES BISHOP
Complainant
SPORTS MASSAGE TRAINING SCHOOL PTY LTD
REASONS FOR DECISION OF INQUIRY COMMISSIONER ANTHONY
CAVANOUGH QC
Place of hearing: Adelaide, South Australia
Date of hearing: 10 April 2000
Date of decision: 15
December 2000
Appearances: Helen Campbell, solicitor for the complainant
Mr Bill Van Rikxoort,
managing director of the respondent, for the respondent
1. REASONS FOR DECISION
The complainant, Mr Bishop, suffers from dyslexia. Expert evidence given at
this inquiry by Ms Sarah Evans, an educational psychologist,
satisfied me that
the complainant’s dyslexia amounted to a “disability” within
the meaning of the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) (“the
In July 1998 the respondent, which conducts training courses in sports
massage, was conducting a written theoretical examination in
a course in which
the complainant was enrolled.
The respondent made no allowances for the disability of dyslexia under which
the complainant was labouring. In particular, it required
him to complete the
examination in the same two-hour period as the other, able-bodied students. It
did not offer him the alternative
of an oral examination. The evidence in this
case satisfies me that the respondent could easily have allowed the complainant
half-hour to complete the examination and should have done so. On
balance, I am also satisfied that the respondent could properly
have offered the
complainant an oral examination and, in all the circumstances, should have done
so. In my opinion, the conduct of
the respondent constituted indirect disability
discrimination in the field of education (within the meaning and for the
of the DDA). It may also have come within
DDA (“discrimination by qualifying bodies”) although I need not
decide this point.
The respondent claimed that the complainant had not done enough to bring his
disability to its attention prior to the examination.
Whilst it is true that the
complainant was a little diffident in this respect, in my view he did sufficient
to enable it to be found,
as I do, that the imposition by the respondent of the
requirement or condition complained of was “not reasonable having regard
to the circumstances of the case” for the purposes of
of the DDA.
It was admitted by the respondent’s witnesses that the complainant had
told his lecturer, Ms Hare, about his dyslexia
(which had only been diagnosed in
April 1998) from time to time between April and July 1998. It was also admitted
that one week prior
to the examination (if not before) the complainant had
endeavoured to hand to Ms Hare a copy of the report of the educational
psychologist
in which specific recommendations for modification of examination
requirements for the complainant were made. There was considerable
dispute about
what was said and done on that occasion, but there was no dispute that, as a
result of what occurred, the lecturer
knew that a report about the
complainant’s dyslexia existed and that the head of the School was made
aware of this too.
The complainant failed the examination, somewhat narrowly. There is a real
chance that had he been given an extra half-hour, or had
the examination been
conducted orally in his case, he would have passed. As a result of the failure,
he has moved to another massage
training school where appropriate modifications
have been made for his disability. He is doing well there. However, as a result
his failure of the examination at the respondent’s training school in
July 1998 the complainant suffered a delay in his career
and a significant loss
of self-esteem. He claims that it contributed to the break-up of his marriage,
but there is insufficient in
the material before me to enable me to take that
matter into account in assessing the consequences of the respondent’s act
of indirect discrimination. The complainant did incur some minor additional
expense associated with his new course which he would
not have needed to incur
if he had passed the respondent’s examination. However, it appears that
the amount involved was only
I find that the complaint has been substantiated and by way of a
determination under s.103(1)(b)(ii) that the respondent should pay
complainant the sum of $3,000.00 to redress the loss and damage suffered by the
complainant. I consider that the complainant
would have been entitled to some
compensation even if I had not been satisfied that there was a real chance that
he would have passed
a modified examination. On the other hand, the proposed
award is less than I would have fixed if I had been sure that the complainant
would have passed such an examination.
In concluding, I note that this inquiry has continued pursuant to the
transitional provisions contained in s.13 of the
Human Rights Legislation
Amendment Act (No 1)
(Act no 133 of 1999) despite the repeal of certain
provisions of the DDA by virtue of that Act as from 13 April 2000.
2. DETERMINATION
I find that the complaint has been substantiated and pursuant to
s.103(1)(b)(ii) of the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) I declare
that the respondent should pay to the complainant the sum of $3,000.00 to
redress the loss and damage suffered by
the complainant as a result of the
unlawful conduct of the respondent.
I certify that this and the preceding three (3) pages are a true copy of the
Reasons for Decision herein of Inquiry Commissioner
Anthony Cavanough
Hearing Solicitor:
Date: 18 December
RTF format (19.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format