Gao v Citywide Service Solutions Pty Ltd [2012] FWAFB 9830 (23 November 2012)
Note: Judicial review of this decision [VID
1081/2012] pending.
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Citywide Service Solutions Pty Ltd
(C2012/5532)
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HAMBERGER
COMMISSIONER BISSETT
MELBOURNE, 23 NOVEMBER 2012
Appeal against decision in transcript of Commissioner Blair at Melbourne on 14 September 2012 in matter number U2012/11478.
Introduction
This matter concerns an appeal by Mr Peng Gao against a decision
in transcript given by Commissioner Blair on 14 September 2012. In the decision the Commissioner refused Mr Gao an extension of
the time for the making of his application
to Fair Work Australia (FWA) for an order granting a remedy in respect of his alleged unfair dismissal by Citywide Service Solutions
Pty Ltd (Citywide). An order
in respect of that decision was issued by the Commissioner on 5 October 2012.
An application for an unfair dismissal remedy must be made within 14 days of the dismissal taking effect or within such further period
as FWA allows.
FWA may allow a further period for an unfair dismissal remedy application to be made if satisfied there are exceptional circumstances
taking into account the reason for the delay, whether the applicant first became aware of the dismissal after it had taken effect,
action taken by the applicant to dispute the dismissal, prejudice to the employer, the merits of the application and fairness as
between the applicant and others in a similar position.
Mr Gao’s employment was terminated by Citywide on 27 April 2012. Mr Gao filed his unfair dismissal remedy application on
17 July 2012. Mr Gao’s application was, therefore, made outside the 14 days specified in
s.394(2)(a)
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (FW Act) for the making of such an application. Mr Gao’s delay in making his application required the Commissioner to
decide whether to allow him a further period for the making of his application.
At the hearing of the appeal, Mr Gao represented himself. Citywide was represented by Mr Anthony Dalton of The Australian Industry
Group pursuant to the provisions of s.596(4) of the FW Act and, to the extent necessary, with the permission of FWA pursuant to s.596(2)(a).
Grounds of appeal
Mr Gao gave oral submissions at the appeal hearing consistent with the detailed written submissions contained in his notice of appeal
and the written submissions in respect of his appeal that he filed with FWA and served on Citywide on 23 October 2012.
Citywide also filed and served detailed written submissions in respect of the appeal on 31 October 2012
and spoke in support of them at the appeal hearing. Mr Gao can speak English but his language skills are such that, at times, he
is difficult to understand. We offered Mr Gao the services of an interpreter but he did not want one. As a result, when necessary
we asked Mr Gao to repeat himself or questioned him about his submissions so as to ensure we had understood him.
Mr Gao’s grounds of appeal, in summary, include that:
• there are differences in the wording of the decision the Commissioner gave in transcript and his later order;
• the FWA member who heard his matter was not listed in the notifications he received from FWA in respect of the hearing of
his matter and he was not aware of the FWA member who was to hear his matter until the day of the hearing;
• there are errors in the transcript of the hearing;
• the Commissioner erred in failing to find that the reason for Mr Gao’s delay in making his unfair dismissal remedy application,
being that he was awaiting the outcome of related criminal proceedings, constituted exceptional circumstances;
• the Commissioner erred in his finding about the merits of Mr Gao’s unfair dismissal remedy application; and
• the Commissioner should not have dismissed his unfair dismissal remedy application.
Consideration of the appeal grounds
We regard both the decision in transcript and the order of the Commissioner as the subject of the appeal before us. Mr Gao was given
the opportunity to put submissions in respect of both the decision and the order in the appeal proceedings on 19 November 2012 and
he referred to both the Commissioner’s decision and order in his submissions.
We are not persuaded we should grant permission to appeal in this matter.
The differences in the wording of the decision the Commissioner gave in transcript and his later order reflect the Commissioner’s
appropriate editing of his ex tempore decision and do not constitute appealable error. The decision and order are not materially
Mr Gao has not established that the content of the notifications he received from FWA, his being unaware of who would be the FWA
member to hear his application until the day of the hearing or the alleged errors in the transcript resulted in a denial of procedural
fairness or other appealable error in the Commissioner’s decision in transcript or order.
Nor are we persuaded the Commissioner erred in failing to find that the reason for Mr Gao’s delay in making his unfair dismissal
remedy application constituted exceptional circumstances. Mr Gao could have made his unfair dismissal remedy application to FWA
before the conclusion of the criminal proceedings and sought an adjournment of proceedings in respect of the application until the
outcome of the criminal proceedings. Further, there was delay between the outcome of the criminal proceedings and Mr Gao making
his unfair dismissal remedy application, for which no reason constituting exceptional circumstances was given.
In respect of
s.394(3)(e)
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (FW Act) concerning the merits of Mr Gao’s unfair dismissal remedy application and whether those merits constitute exceptional
circumstances for allowing Mr Gao a further period for the making of his application, the Commissioner points out that Mr Gao and
Citywide seem to differ on what was the reason for Mr Gao’s dismissal. The Commissioner finds, in effect, that neither reason
nor the difference between them as to the reason constitute exceptional circumstances warranting FWA allowing Mr Gao a further period
for the making of his unfair dismissal remedy application. We are not persuaded that finding is affected by appealable error.
There is no appealable error in the Commissioner dismissing Mr Gao’s unfair dismissal remedy application, in light of his refusal
to allow Mr Gao a further period for the making of his unfair dismissal remedy application because he was not satisfied there were
exceptional circumstances for doing so.
None of the other grounds of appeal raised by Mr Gao establish appealable error in the Commissioner’s decision in transcript
Mr Gao has not established that the Commissioner’s decision in transcript or order involved a significant error of fact or
that it is in the public interest for us to grant permission to appeal. We refuse Mr Gao permission to appeal. An order
to that effect is being issued at the same time as this decision.
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
on his own behalf.
of the Australian Industry Group with
for Citywide Service Solutions Pty Ltd.
Hearing details:
November 20.
Decision in transcript in matter U2012/11478 at PN189-201.
Peng Gao v Citywide Service Solutions Pty Ltd
, U2012/11478.
Peng Gao v Citywide Service Solutions Pty Ltd
Fair Work Act 2009
Fair Work Act 2009
Appeal exhibit A1.
Appeal exhibit R1.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code A, PR531524>
No downloadable files available