Kianah Ashton v Aldi Stores [2025] FWCFB 227 (10 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 227
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Kianah Ashton
(C2025/8705)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SLEVIN
DEPUTY PRESIDENT GRAYSON
COMMISSIONER
SYDNEY, 10 OCTOBER 2025
Appeal against decision [
] of Commissioner Simpson at Brisbane on 15 August 2025 in matter
number C2025/3512
Ms Kianah Ashton has lodged an appeal, for which permission to appeal
is required, under
Fair Work Act 2009
against a decision
Commissioner Simpson dated 15 August 2025. The Commissioner’s decision was
of the Act made against
ALDI Stores (
At the time the general protections application was made, Ms Ashton
had already made an unfair dismissal application under
of the Act. The
Commissioner’s decision was to dismiss the general protections application
of the Act stops two applications being made concerning the same
The Commissioner’s decision was made on his own initiative.
There had been delays in progressing proceedings due to Ms Ashton’s
health. The Commissioner considered that the issue of the two applications could
be determined even though Ms Ashton’s health
prevented her from
progressing her challenge to the dismissal.
This decision deals with Ms Ashton’s appeal and whether
permission to appeal should be granted.
The background to the matter is set out in the Commissioner’s
decision at [3] to [38]. Put briefly, Ms Ashton was dismissed
on 20 December
2024. An unfair dismissal application was filed on 9 January 2025, within the
21-day time limit in
That matter faced delays due to Ms
Ashton’s health. ​ A conciliation scheduled for February 2025 was
postponed, and subsequent
directions hearings were adjourned as Ms Ashton
remained unfit to participate.
On 30 April 2025, Ms Ashton filed a second application, the general
protections claim alleging her dismissal contravened the general
protections in
of the Act. ​ As
prohibits multiple applications regarding
the same dismissal, the Commission informed Ms Ashton that the general
protections application
was not available to her because an unfair dismissal had
been filed.
Ms Ashton was invited to take steps to ensure she only had one
application before the Commission. Ms Ashton was informed that if she
continue her unfair dismissal application, she should withdraw the general
protections claim. If she wished to make a general
protections application she
should discontinue both applications and refile a general protections
application seeking an extension
of the 21 day time limit for such applications
which is found is
of the Act.
​Ms Ashton expressed a preference for the general protections
claim, but did not take steps to ensure that only one application
was before the
Commission.
Ms Ashton continued to provide medical certificates that she was
unable to engage in proceedings. Following a number of exchanges
Commissioner’s chambers Ms Ashton indicated that she was unavailable to
engage in proceedings before the Commission
until 5 October 2025.
Given Ms Ashton’s unavailability, the Commissioner decided
that it was open to him to address the jurisdictional issue raised
by having two
applications. He determined that the general protections claim, filed after the
unfair dismissal application, was invalid
due to the prohibition on bringing two
applications in
of the Act. ​
The Commissioner’s decision incorrectly refers to
s. 587(1)(c)
of the Act as conferring a power to dismiss the matter. This appears to us to be
a typographical error, given the content of the
Commissioner’s decision
and the otherwise correct references to
s 587(1)(a)
of the Act.
was the appropriate section to dismiss the application. The general
protections application was not made in accordance with the Act
because of the
prohibition on two applications being made about the same dismissal.
Permission to Appeal
There is no right to appeal, and an appeal may only be made with the
permission of the Commission. Without limiting when the Commission
might grant
permission,
the Act provides that the Commission must grant permission
if the Commission is satisfied that it is in the public interest to do
Permission to appeal may be granted on other grounds.
The task of assessing whether the public interest test is met is a
discretionary one involving a broad value
. The public
interest is not satisfied simply by the identification of error or a preference
for a different
Considerations that may attract the public interest include that the matter
raises issues of importance and general application,
that the decision manifests
an injustice or that the result is
counterintuitive
It will rarely be appropriate to grant permission to appeal unless
an arguable case of appealable error is demonstrated. However,
that the Member
at first instance made an error is not necessarily a sufficient basis for the
grant of permission to appeal.
Consideration
Ms Ashton’s grounds of appeal set out in her notice of appeal
focus on why she should be granted an extension of time to pursue
protections application. The submissions filed in support of her application for
permission to appeal go beyond the matters
raised in the notice of appeal. Ms
Ashton also points to the decision relying on incorrect evidence and refers to a
timeline of incidents
that occurred while she was employed by ALDI.
The decision made by the Commissioner only addressed the question of
whether the general protections application was made in accordance
with the Act.
The decision was not about the matters that led to the dismissal.
It became clear on the hearing of the application for permission to
appeal that Ms Ashton seeks that the Commission on appeal quash
Commissioner’s decision and allow her general protections application to
proceed even though it was filed out of time and
at the same time that she had
unfair dismissal proceedings on foot.
Ms Ashton appears to have proceeded on the misunderstanding that the
Commissioner has refused an extension of time application. The
Commissioner did
not have an extension of time application before him and his decision is not a
refusal to extend time. The matter
dealt with by the Commissioner was simply the
issue of whether
allowed Ms Ashton to bring two applications concerning
her dismissal. The Commissioner’s decision is correct on that point.
Section 725
prevented Ms Ashton from bringing the general protections action
while she had an unfair dismissal application on foot.
Consequently, Ms Ashton has not made out a case for permission to
appeal to be granted. An arguable case has not been made out that
the decision
is attended by appealable error. Nor are we satisfied that the public interest
is enlivened or that there are any other
discretionary grounds justifying the
grant of permission to appeal. The appeal does not raise any issue of law,
principle or wider
application but rather turns upon its own facts.
Order and disposition
Permission to appeal is refused.
We note that Ms Ashton is still pursuing her unfair dismissal
proceedings and that case may be progressed by contacting the chambers
Commissioner Simpson.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Ms K Ashton, the Appellant on her own behalf
Ms P Noakes for the
Hearing details:
Via Microsoft Teams Video
O’Sullivan v Farrer
[1989] HCA 61
(1989) 168 CLR 210
at 216-217 per Mason CJ,
Brennan, Dawson and Gaudron JJ: applied in
Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 243 CLR
at [69] per Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ;
& Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler and others
(2011) 192 FCR 78
at [44]-[46
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Makin
; 197 IR 266 at
Lawrence v Coal & Allied Mining
Services Pty Ltd t/as Mt Thorley Operations/ Warkworth
FWAFB 10089
, affirmed on judicial review;
Coal & Allied
Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler
(2011) 192 FCR 178
NSW Bar Association
v Brett McAuliffe
Commonwealth of Australia represented by the
Australian Taxation Office
; 241 IR 177 at
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Makin
, 197 IR 266 at
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (388 KB)
Signed PDF/A format