Kerr & Christie [2021] FamCA 624 (27 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Kerr & Christie
[2021] FamCA 624
File number(s):
SYC 3851 of 2020
Judgment of:
ALTOBELLI J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PROPERTY – interim
distribution of funds– application for interim spousal maintenance –
interim property
adjustment or interim costs – application for a binding
private ruling to be made by the Commissioner of Taxation in accordance
Division 359 of the
Taxation Administration Act 1953
asset pool – whether there exists capital gains tax liabilities –
where one party is in a position of
relative financial strength compared to the
other – whether the husband ought to liquidate assets in order to fund
– interim costs order made – parties to attend
conciliation conference – parties to make an application to the
Commissioner of Taxation for a binding private ruling.
Legislation:
Family Law Act
Cases cited:
Blueseas Investments Pty Ltd v Mitchell
(1999) FLC 92-856
[1999] FamCA 745
Cimorelli & Wenlack
[2020] FamCAFC 58
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the
Mr Alexander
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Russell Kennedy Aitken Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Richardson SC
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Barkus Doolan
SYC 3851 of 2020
MS CHRISTIE
ALTOBELLI J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The matter be referred back to the Docket Registrar for a Direction
8 September 2021 at 2pm
for the purpose of making
directions for the matter to proceed to Conciliation Conference and allocating a
date for same.
2. In the event that the parties do not reach agreement in four weeks
following the date of the Conciliation Conference, the husband,
in his capacity
as a director, shareholder and public officer of B Pty Ltd (“the
company”), forthwith do all acts and
things and make all payments and sign
all documents, applications, authorities and provide all information and
documents as necessary
or required to apply to the Commissioner of Taxation for
a Private Binding Ruling in accordance with the requirements set out in
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth), asking:
(a) if the Commissioner is satisfied or thinks it
reasonable to assume, that the majority underlying interests in the
C” and "Property D" E Town property owned by the company
has been held by the same ultimate owners at all times from immediately
20 September 1985 to now, and therefore, on disposal of the property, any
capital gain arising to the company is disregarded;
(b) if the Commissioner is not satisfied that the disposal of any property held
by the company will not be exempt from any capital
gain, a Ruling be made
identifying the date which triggered the change resulting in that property being
subject to capital gains
3. To give effect to Order 2:
(a) the husband shall make an application for a private
ruling in the approved form to the Commissioner of Taxation;
(b) that application is to be collaboratively prepared by the accountant/advisor
for the husband and the accountant/advisor for the
wife and each party's
accountant/advisor is to agree to the final version of the Private Binding
Ruling to be submitted;
(c) the husband shall answer all requests for information and documents from the
Commissioner of Taxation in a timely manner;
(d) the husband shall confirm in writing that the information provided in the
final Private Binding Ruling is true and correct, provide
a copy of that
confirmation in writing to the wife, and confirm the accountant/advisor is
authorised to submit the application; and
(e) the husband shall provide to the wife a copy of all communications and
correspondence between himself and or his agents, and
the Commissioner of
Taxation in respect of this issue, within seven days of sending/receiving any
such communication and or correspondence.
4. Pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
and within 21 days
of the date of this order
the wife is to pay to the husband the sum of
$200,000, such sum to be paid into an account nominated by the
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Kerr & Christie
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
ALTOBELLI J:
INTRODUCTION
1 These reasons for judgment explain interim orders
that have been made in a complex property matter.
2 The husband is the Applicant in substantive
proceedings for alteration of property interests, but is the Respondent in the
application. He is 56 years old and describes himself as a farmer. The
wife is the Respondent in the substantive proceedings, but
is the Applicant for
present purposes. She is 55 years old. The parties commenced cohabitation in
1995, and married in 1996. They
have three adult children aged 22, 20 and 18 at
the time of the interim hearing. They separated in August 2019. The present
proceedings
commenced in June 2020. The husband lives in Sydney, and the wife
lives in the F Region of New South Wales. It is common ground
that the net pool
of assets has a value in the vicinity of $50 million. The wife controls about
$35 million of that and the husband
THE COMPETING APPLICATIONS
3 As a result of negotiations and sensible
compromise between the parties, no doubt assisted by their solicitors and
counsel, I was
able to make consent orders in relation to disclosure issues, as
well as the division of personal property. Two issues therefore
remained for
determination.
4 In Order 2 set out in the wife’s Case Outline document filed 27 May
2021 she sought an order that the husband, in effect,
cause a company known as B
Pty Ltd (‘the company’) to make an application to the Commissioner
of Taxation for a Private
Binding Ruling (‘BPR’) in relation to
capital gains tax issues pertaining to the assets held by the company. This was
on the basis that the wife would fund the cost of such application, and that the
application would be made as soon as possible.
Should the Court order the
parties to attend a conciliation conference, then the wife would be prepared to
postpone the application
until after any unsuccessful conciliation conference.
The husband opposed the making of such an order for the time being. He
that the matter proceed to a conciliation conference as soon as
possible, but subject to the other order he sought which will be
below, any further consideration about the need for a BPR be adjourned until
after the conciliation conference. The Court
notes that the issue is whether
there is a capital gains tax liability which affects the value of the shares
held by the husband
in the company. The impression formed by the Court is that
the husband seems more confident than the wife that there is no capital
tax liability and thus he was prepared to attempt to negotiate a settlement on
this basis.
5 The second issue relates to the orders sought by the husband in Orders 5-8
of the minute of order provided to the Court by his lawyers
before the interim
hearing. In effect, he sought a sum of money pursuant to a number of
alternative heads of power. At the hearing
itself, the husband amended his
proposal so that he sought $200,000 to cover his needs, including interim costs,
up to and including
the conciliation conference and on the basis that a further
application would be made after that date, should the matter not settle.
wife strenuously opposed the making of this or any order for funding,
particularly having regard to the husband’s asset
THE MATERIAL BEFORE THE COURT
6 In the wife’s case, she sought to rely on
the following documents:
(a) Her Response to Initiating Application filed 19
August 2020;
(b) Her Financial Statement filed 1 April 2021;
(c) Her Affidavit filed 7 May 2021 and accompanying exhibit bundle;
(d) An Affidavit of Ms G filed 7 May 2021 and accompanying exhibit bundle;
(e) A Case Outline document filed 27 May 2021;
(f) A costs disclosure statement marked by the Court as exhibit C1; and
(g) A Court Book marked by the Court as exhibit C2.
7 In the husband’s case, he sought to rely on the following
(a) His Initiating Application filed 17 June 2020;
(b) His Affidavit filed 23 April 2021;
(c) His Financial Statement filed 1 April 2021;
(d) A Case Outline document filed on 31 May 2021;
(e) A costs disclosure statement marked by the Court as exhibit K1; and
(f) A minute of orders sought by him marked by the Court as exhibit
THE BPR ISSUE
8 Counsel for the husband submitted that the Court
did not have power to make an order requiring the husband to compel a third
the company, to make an application to a fourth party, the Australian
Taxation Office.
9 Senior counsel for the wife submitted that the power is found in
Family Law Act
(Cth) (‘the Act’). That
section provides:
(3) A court exercising jurisdiction under this Act in
proceedings other than proceedings to which subsection (1) applies may grant
injunction, by interlocutory order or otherwise (including an injunction in aid
of the enforcement of a decree), in any case in
which it appears to the court to
be just or convenient to do so and either unconditionally or upon such terms and
conditions as the
court considers appropriate.
10 Moreover, senior counsel submitted, and the Court accepts, that the
evidence establishes that the husband had practical control
of the company and
could comfortably cause it to make the BPR application. The Court is satisfied
that it does have the power to
make the order sought by the wife pursuant to
as reproduced above. The question is whether it should, in the
circumstances, do so. It seems to the Court that whilst the wife
would prefer
that the BPR be sought as soon as possible, she would nonetheless be prepared to
attend a conciliation conference to
explore settlement in the absence of the
ruling. In these circumstances, the Court would not be prepared to order that
an application
for a BPR be made before an unsuccessful conciliation conference.
One could be forgiven for thinking that the husband was keen to
try to settle
this case without the BPR, no doubt for his own reasons. He will be given that
opportunity but, self-evidently, the
value that he places on his shareholding in
the company will need to reflect his confidence that there is no capital gains
tax liability,
otherwise one would reasonably think there is little incentive on
the wife to accept his valuation of what is clearly a substantial
Should the wife’s proposed order in relation to the BPR
be made, if the matter does not settle at, or as a result of, the conciliation
conference?
11 It was difficult to understand the
husband’s opposition to this. His counsel quite properly accepted that
evidence would
need to be led at a final hearing about whether there was a
capital gains tax liability and if so, in what quantum. With great respect
counsel, his explanation for why such evidence should not be obtained sooner,
rather than later, was somewhat unconvincing. The
issue of the value of the
husband’s shares in the company, and whether there was a capital gains tax
liability affecting this
value, was the subject of correspondence between the
wife’s and husband’s lawyers. At times, even the correspondence
the husband’s lawyers seemed to suggest that there was a potential capital
gains tax liability that needed to be explored,
which was strangely at odds with
the husband’s desire at the interim hearing to postpone this for as long
as possible.
12 The wife read an Affidavit of Ms G, affirmed 7 May 2021. Ms G is a
finance professional whose experience, as evidenced in her
curriculum vitae,
suggests that she has expertise in taxation matters. The Court is, of course,
cognisant of the fact that her evidence
is untested:
Cimorelli & Wenlack
[2020] FamCAFC 58
. Nonetheless, the strong impression formed in the
context of an interim hearing is that the only way that there can be any
one reading of the report there is room for reasonable confidence
that the BPR
would be favourable, if the appropriate evidence were to be furnished.
13 Having regard to the above, the Court is inclined to make the orders
sought by the wife, but on the basis that the matter does
not settle within four
weeks of the conclusion of the conciliation conference.
THE INTERIM COSTS/PROPERTY/MAINTENANCE ISSUE
14 As foreshadowed, the husband sought interim
financial provision from the wife in the sum of $200,000 to see him through to
conciliation conference. His counsel submitted that the order could be made
on a number of alternative bases including an interim
property order under
, a maintenance order under
, or finally as a costs order
of the Act. Whilst the husband’s counsel advanced the case
on any of these bases, by the time oral submissions had concluded,
the Court was
satisfied that the preferred statutory foundation of the claim was under
of the Act, but on the basis that if the order were made, a trial judge
could make a compensatory costs order in favour of the wife
15 A number of observations are apposite. The claim for $200,000 bears no
resemblance to the amounts referred to in Order 5 of the
husband’s minute
of order. One suspects that the husband’s approach was pragmatic. That
is not to say that the claim
is unsupported by his evidence. The husband
conceded that he is not impecunious. However, he submitted that whilst he is
rich he is very much cash poor. That is a fair summation of the evidence
of his financial circumstances. There is still a live
issue to be determined,
however, as to whether he was unable to meet his litigation costs out of his
substantial assets. There is
no doubt, based on the evidence of the
wife’s financial circumstances, that she is in a position of relative
financial strength
compared to the husband, and that she would have the capacity
to meet an order for interim financial provision in the sum of $200,000.
16 The husband’s costs notice, marked as exhibit K1, discloses that as
at 31 May 2021 he owed his lawyers approximately $201,415.12
in outstanding
legal fees, which figure does not take into account work in progress both at
that time, and subsequently. In that
same costs disclosure notice, his
solicitors estimate costs up to and including the present interim hearing,
inclusive of counsel’s
fees, to be $30,000. The Court is therefore
satisfied that a claim for interim costs in the sum of $200,000 is supported by
17 The submissions made on behalf of the wife, however, were to the effect
that the husband did, in fact, have capacity to meet his
own expenses and costs.
Indeed, there was almost a sense of incredulity that a man with approximately
$10 million worth of assets
could seek interim financial provision from his
wife, merely because her wealth was considerably greater than his.
18 A close examination of the financial circumstances of the husband needs to
be undertaken. The context of this exercise must be
recognised. This is an
interim hearing. The evidence of the husband cannot be tested. The best the
Court can do is to form impressions
regard to the submissions made on behalf of the wife. The husband is 56 years
old. He describes
himself as a farmer. He explains that the drought has had a
considerable impact on his farming operations, and thus his income.
accepts this evidence at face value. To suggest that, somehow, the husband
should be finding some other work probably
minimises the practical difficulties
for him. For example, the fact that the drought is affecting his farming income
does not mean
that he does not have to continue to work the properties. For
example, he gives evidence about undertaking works to improve water
paragraph 71 of his Affidavit filed 23 April 2021, he deposes that these efforts
have been time-consuming but resulted
in only small financial gains. The
husband deposes to the income that he has been able to derive from his
properties, including
rental income from the H Town property, income from
farming, as well as agistment fees. He accounts for this income, and his
His Financial Statement made 31 March 2021 deposes to a significant
weekly shortfall between income and expenses, even taking into
account more
recent income from agistment received after the Financial Statement. There is
no doubt that the husband has substantial
equity in the properties that he owns.
Nonetheless, he deposes to liabilities of nearly $2.7 million. To suggest that
somehow the
husband could borrow money on the security of his assets merely
because he has equity, and notwithstanding a significant deficit
between income
and expenses on a weekly basis and his existing liabilities, is simply
unrealistic. Moreover, the Court does not accept
that the husband should
necessarily be forced to liquidate his assets for the purpose of funding his own
litigation in circumstances
where, on the wife's own evidence, she has
significant liquid assets that could be used to fund the same, without any
ultimate prejudice
to her claim.
19 It must be remembered that the principle that underlies the jurisprudence
imbalance of power between litigating parties:
Blueseas Investments Pty Ltd v
[1999] FamCA 745
(1999) FLC 92-856
. In some cases, there may be little or
no difference between all of the assets being held by one party, and 80 per cent
of the assets
being held by one party. The law aims to create a level playing
field between the litigants, and to minimise abuses of power and
process when
the playing field is not level. Thus, on the facts of this case, to suggest
that the husband should liquidate assets
is akin to an abuse of the power which
the wife inherently possesses in this case because of the enormous disparity in
that is controlled by them.
20 Senior counsel for the wife was critical about aspects of the husband's
expenditure. The issues raised included excessive rental
costs paid on his
Sydney accommodation, the amount spent on furnishing that accommodation,
post-separation travel and holidays, and
discretionary spending. The context of
this criticism needs to be understood. It is clear from the husband’s
Case Outline
that these are matters directly relevant to the husband's
contention that he could not fund the litigation from his own resources.
also relevant to the husband's reasonable expenses, were he to have formulated
the basis of his claim for financial provision
as being spousal maintenance.
The Court does not accept that these criticisms are legitimate or reasonable.
Whilst the total of
the husband's weekly expenses are in excess of $12,000, a
substantial proportion of that is business expenses including loan repayments.
The wife claims weekly expenses in excess of $7,000 per week, which do not
include any business expenses or loan repayments notwithstanding
the fact that
the balance sheet annexed to her Affidavit of
7 May 2021 refers to
significant loan liabilities, quantified in the millions of dollars. The Court
is therefore far from convinced
that the husband's expenditure complained of is
excessive, and should be used towards payment of his litigation costs.
21 Accordingly, the Court finds that there is neither a general principle,
nor is it the situation in this particular case, that the
mere fact that an
applicant for financial provision has $10 million in assets necessarily
precludes a successful application for
that financial provision. Each case must
be determined having regard to its own facts, and in particular the individual
circumstances
of the applicant, and the nature of the assets held by them.
22 As the financial circumstances of the parties are so divergent, this is a
reason to make the order for interim costs sought by
the husband:
s 117(2)(a)
the Act. The pool of assets is large enough to reasonably assure the wife that
if the husband’s claim is unsuccessful, any
costs order made against him
can recompense her for the present interim payment.
23 The only other relevant consideration is
s 117(2)(g)
of the Act. The
husband’s ability to conduct this litigation will be greatly hampered if
he is not adequately represented.
The pool of assets is large and the issues
complex. The wife is well-represented.
24 Having regard to my earlier comments, I consider that the evidence
supports an order for interim costs in favour of the husband.
I will order that
the wife pay to the husband the sum of $200,000 pursuant to
of the Act,
such amount to be payable within 21 days of the date of the order.
25 In addition, I will order that the matter be referred to the Docket
Registrar to enable directions to be made and a date allocated
for the matter to
proceed to a conciliation conference.
I certify that the preceding twenty-five (25)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 27 August 2021
RTF format (374 KB)
Signed PDF/A format