A v Credit Provider [2011] PrivCmrA 1 (3 May 2011)
Case Citation:
A v Credit Provider
[2011] PrivCmrA 1
Subject Heading:
Listing of a credit default on an assigned debt
Section 18E of Part IIIA and
and paragraph 2.7 of the Credit Reporting Code of Conduct.
The Privacy Commissioner's
Credit Provider Determination No. 2006-3
(Assignees)
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner (the Commissioner)
prior to 1 November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the
powers of the
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
The complainant alleged their credit provider had improperly listed a default
on their consumer credit file because they did not receive
a final notice from
the credit provider before the default was listed.
The complainant's debt had been assigned to XYZ Credit Co by their original
credit provider. Prior to the assignment, the complainant
had signed an
Acknowledgement of Debt form, which notified the complainant that they would be
liable to repay the debt to XYZ Credit
Co, not their original credit
provider. It also notified the complainant that XYZ Credit Co could take
whatever steps it deemed
necessary to collect the debt.
In addition, the complainant had been issued with a Notice of Assignment
advising that their original credit provider had assigned
the debt to XYZ Credit
Co and that all monies still owing by complainant must be paid to XYZ Credit Co
not their original credit
The credit reporting provisions at
safeguards in relation to consumer credit reporting.
If a payment in relation to consumer credit is outstanding, a credit provider
may report a payment default on the individual's consumer
credit file. A payment
default is permitted if:
the debt is at least 60 days overdue
(section 18E(1)(b)(vi))
the credit provider has taken steps to recover part or all of the amount
outstanding (section18E(1)(b)(vi))
o in particular, the credit provider must have sent a written notice to the
last known address of the individual advising them of
the overdue payment and
requesting payment of the amount outstanding (paragraph 2.7 Credit Reporting
Code of Conduct)
the credit provider has notified the individual that it may provide
information to a credit reporting agency (section
18E(8)(c)).
Section 6 of the Act defines a ‘current credit
provider' as a credit provider who has given the individual concerned, credit
that has not yet been fully repaid or otherwise fully discharged.
The Privacy Commissioner's
Credit Provider Determination No. 2006-3
(Assignees)
states that a corporation that acquires the rights of a credit
provider with respect to the repayment of a loan is regarded as the
provider for the purposes of the Act. In addition, that corporation is
regarded as the credit provider to which the loan
application was submitted or
which initially provided the loan.
The Commissioner conducted preliminary inquiries into the complaint under
The Commissioner looked at whether the credit provider fitted the description
of a ‘current credit provider' in terms of
and whether it had
acquired the rights of a credit provider further to the Commissioner's
Provider Determination No. 2006-3 (Assignees)
(the Determination).
The Commissioner considered that XYZ Credit Co was a ‘credit provider'
as defined in
The Commissioner also found that as the Determination
was in force when the assignment of the complainant's debt took place, XYZ
Credit Co had also assumed all the rights and responsibilities of the original
credit provider in relation to the complainant's mortgage
On this basis, the Commissioner took into account the steps taken by the
original credit provider in recovering the debt before it
assigned. These steps included a notice of demand that was sent to the
complainant's last known address which stated that
if a payment which was owed
remained unpaid for at least 60 days, the overdue payment may be reported to a
credit reporting agency
to be added to the complainant's credit information
file. The Commissioner found that the original credit provider had met the
requirements
to list the debt and, consequently, XYZ Credit Co had also met
these requirements. The Commissioner concluded that the complainant
notified that their debt may be listed with a credit reporting agency and the
default was listed correctly.
Accordingly, the Commissioner closed the complaint under
section 41(1)(a)
on the grounds that the credit provider had not interfered
with the complainant's privacy.
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (44.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format