Hudson and Commissioner of Taxation (Taxation) [2024] AATA 3678 (11 October 2024)
Hudson and Commissioner of Taxation (Taxation)
[2024] AATA 3678
October 2024)
Division: TAXATION AND COMMERCIAL DIVISION
File Number(s):
Gregory Hudson
Commissioner of Taxation
Senior Member D
The reviewable decision dated 8 February 2023
is varied to the extent that:
Applicant’s claims for home to office travel, and depreciation and
deductions for his vehicle are refused; and
Applicant’s claimed deductions relating to the deductibility of office
expenses totalling $320.23 are allowed in
........................[SGD]................................................
Senior Member D Benk
Income tax – allowable deductions – travel expenses ––
transport of materials between home
and work – whether materials bulky and
essential to income generating activity-– whether personal choice involved
decision under review affirmed
Work related home office expenses – set aside
Balancing adjustment – termination value and car depreciation
– arm’s length transaction burden of proof not satisfied
LEGISLATION
Assessment Act 1997
; s 8-1 and subdivision 40-D, s 40-
(2)(b) s 40-300,
Barnsdall v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
(1988) 88 ATC 4565
Commissioner of Taxation v Smith
[1981] HCA 10
(1981) 147 CLR 578
Commissioner of Taxation v Vogt
[1975] 1 NSWLR 194
Danmark Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1943) 7 ATD
Forestwood Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1944) 7 ATD
Granby v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1995) 95 ATC 4240
Lunney v Commissioner of Taxation
[1958] HCA 5
(1958) 100 CLR 478
Macmine Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
McCormack v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1979) 79 ATC 4111
Re Crestani and Commissioner of Taxation
Trantwein v Federal Commissioner of Taxation (No 1)
[1936] HCA 77
(1936) 56 CLR
REASONS FOR DECISION
Senior Member D Benk
October 2024
the Applicant
) has made an application to the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal (
the Tribunal
) seeking that the decision made by the
Commissioner of Taxation (
the Respondent
) refusing his claims for
taxation deductions be set aside (
Respondent maintains that its position is correct although did concede at the
review hearing that office expenses relating to
Xerox, HP Laptop and HP Folio
were properly deductable and so this aspect of the Commissioner’s
objection decision should be
set aside and substituted with a decision that they
claimed expenses be allowed in full ($320.23), a concession unopposed by the
dispute relates to a claim for a tax deductions in relation to work-related car
expenses for the 2017 income year.
Applicant claimed work related car expense deductions totalling $14,607 but the
respondent allowed a sum of $5,258.45.
the Applicant claimed depreciation of his vehicle totalling $22,345 but the
Respondent allowed a sum of $1,117.45. The
amount claimed by the Applicant for
depreciation deductions arose from a balancing adjustment of $20,408.85 plus
$1,936.15 which
he claims occurred on the sale of his Subaru WRX to his company
(Gold Quarters Pty Ltd for $6,500 on 27 June 2017). In making its
assessment,
the Respondent noted that the vehicle was purchased on 22 March 2017 for $28,000
including $845 in stamp duty and so
allowed 101 days (up to 30 June 2017) and
applied a business use percentage of 56.6%.
basis of the claim for motor vehicle expenses is that, during the relevant
income year, the Applicant was required by his work
circumstances to carry bulky
equipment between his workplace and home. He says that the bulky equipment
required transportation
between a number of work sites. In those circumstances,
he was forced to carry/transport the equipment every day to and from home.
only way he could do that was by car.
the basis of the claim for a balancing adjustment/depreciation was on the basis
that the Subaru was sold just three months
after purchase as it was no longer a
viable asset, being on-sold to his company who then undertook repairs before
selling it.
issues before the Tribunal are whether;
(a) the Applicant is entitled, under s 8-1 of the
Income Tax Assessment Act
) to the deduction claimed in respect of his travel from
(b) is the Applicant entitled to deductions for car depreciation in accordance
with s 8-1of the ITAA and specifically whether the
Applicant is entitled to a
deduction as a result of any balancing adjustment under subdivision 40-D of the
ITAA on the sale of the
matter was heard on 15 August 2024 when both parties gave evidence via MS Teams.
The Tribunal considered the T-docs, oral and
written submissions of both parties
and additional documentation forwarded by the Applicant in its assessment of the
ONUS OF PROOF
Applicant (
) has the burden of proving that the amended
assessments issued by the respondent were excessive: paragraph 14ZZK(b) of the
Taxation Administration Act 1953
14ZZK(b) effectively creates a rebuttable presumption that an assessment is not
is for the taxpayer to rebut the presumption; there is no onus on the
Commissioner to show that the assessment is
Consequently,
the taxpayer does not discharge the onus by merely showing that the Commissioner
made an error in the assessment. The
taxpayer must positively establish, on the
balance of probabilities, that the facts upon which the Commissioner asserts as
for its assessment have not been made
onus rests on the taxpayer to establish the facts upon which he relies and, if
it is necessary for him to establish a particular
fact in order to displace the
assessment, he must satisfy the Tribunal with respect to that
Consequently, the
taxpayer’s case must necessarily fail, if the evidence relied upon by him
to prove that an assessment is
excessive, is rejected.
assessing the quality (the weight) of the evidence adduced by the taxpayer, it
will often be important to bear in mind that facts
concerning a taxpayer’s
income are peculiarly within his or her knowledge. The taxpayer cannot take
advantage of inadequate
recollections.
Applicant’s employment arrangements are not controversial or in dispute.
He is a sole director and sole shareholder of
Gold Quarters Pty Ltd and Hudson
Global Investments Limited. In 2017, the Applicant was employed as a Business
Analyst and was contracted
to provide services to Sydney Trains via Randstad, an
employment agency. Income of Gold Quarters Pty Ltd from Randstad is the
Applicant’s
personal services income and notably Gold Quarters Pty did not
conduct a personal services business.
the 2017 financial year, the amount of $105,000 in consulting fees paid by
Randstad to Gold Quarters Pty Ltd was the Applicant’s
personal services
income. The Applicant claimed deductions of $73,343.90 in his 2017 income
taxation return against the $105,000
Following internal review,
some deductions were allowed, but the claims made in relation to work related
car expenses of $14,607,
and the depreciation of the 2012 Subaru WRX claimed at
$22,345 remain in dispute — which is why the matter is now before the
THE DEDUCTION CLAIM
Applicant’s contentions – work related
car expenses
Applicant’s testimony with regard to travel from home to work were
consistent with previous written representations, relevantly
(unedited);
I travelled regularly from my home in Northbridge to the Sydney Trains
located on level 3 at 477 Pitt St Sydney NSW 2000.
I was required to drive from my home office and bring bulky equipment to the
and then to site anywhere across Sydney from Pitt st to as far as Sefton.
Please see the attached statutory declarations regarding travel and the
letter from
my Sydney Trains Manager requiring use of a motor vehicle for the job.
Equipment I carried included, but not limited to:
Whiteboard markers
External Hard disk drive
Hi-Vis vest
Laser measuring equipment to measure warehouses, car parks, racking, storage
A monitor to plug into laptop to use on site for presentations and work
Boots for safety and required onsite
Safety glasses
Sun glasses
Various PPE
Often a range of tools required to gain entry to site or remove items such
hammers, screwdrivers, tools etc
I also drove staff and team members to site
Any other tools required to carry out site visits for the range of
construction, office, relocation, civil projects etc
addition, with regard to the need for the use of his personal vehicle between
He was required
to work across 28 depots for Sydney Trains over an 18 month period, conducting
over 1200 staff assessments;
There was no
fixed office where he could store items hence the need to transport them;
He applied the
logbook method 100% of the time. Most days he was required to transport up to
25kg and this included over the summer
months where temperatures exceeded
The materials he
had to transport were bulky;
reasonable way he could transport the materials was by car; and
The cost of
travelling by car between his workplace and home should be deductible as a loss
or outgoing incurred “in gaining
or producing [his] assessable
income”, in the words of
the Applicant submitted;
The delays in
finalising this matter have been stressful. He has not been able to get a
straight answer. There must be a better
way in dealing with these matters as
the beaurocracy has little appreciation that his life has been on hold.
This dispute has
prevented the finalisation of taxation returns for Gold Quarters Pty Ltd and
Hudson Investments which has had an
impact on his ability to secure finance.
His family has also incurred family assistance and child care debts raised by
the Department
of Human Services (Centrelink) which cannot be
finalised/reconciled until a determination is made on his claims.
THIRD PARTY EVIDENCE
Statement of Kevin Blye
Respondent requested further and better particulars from the Applicant’s
employer as follows
(unedited);
Please confirm if Mr Hudson:
1. As part of his role, was he required to carry items like protective
clothing, a computer monitor
and tools such as hammers, screwdrivers?
2. Whether any storage was available to Greg at the Sydney Trains office
located at 477 Pitt St
Sydney NSW 2000 or at other Sydney Trains sites for the storage of item?
3. Was he expected to carry these items from his home to Sydney Trains
4. Was he provided a place to work at 477 Pitt St Sydney NSW 2000?
5. Was he required to wear PPE by Sydney Trains?
6. With respect carrying items like a hammer and screwdrivers, what were they
required for? How often were they required and were
any other tools required in
7. With respect to a computer monitor, was he required to:
a. Supply his own computer monitor whilst working at Sydney Trains?
b. Carry his own monitor from home and to the Sydney Trains’ various
8. Had a regular place of work at 477 Pitt Street Sydney NSW 2000.
9. Did not know the exact location or site of where he could be expected to
work daily.
10. How often was he required to attend 477 Pitt St Sydney NSW 2000?
11. How many different sites would he attend in a day?
12. How far in advance was he informed of the Sydney Train sites he was
required to visit?
13. Were allowances or disbursements paid for his travel expenses?
14. Was Mr Hudson required as part of his role to transport other team
members to various offices or site locations?
response, the following answers were recorded as being given by Mr Blye (and
subsequently confirmed by him). The Tribunal understands
that Mr Blye was
nominated as the employer contact, relevantly (unedited);
Meeting held on Friday 16 February 2024.
In attendance:
Lauryn Petropoulos – ATO
Mahmoud Roumie – ATO
Kevin Blye – Sydney Trains
Meeting commenced at or around 10:02am
LP: As part of Greg’s role, was he required to carry items like
protective clothing, a
computer monitor and tools such as hammers, screwdrivers?
What was his
KB: The office may have shown Pitt St. The main office was based in
He was hired as a business analyst.
Developed tools for analytics and developed documents.
Supported me around facilities. Project for consolidating facilities.
Locations were Strathfield, Chullora, and Clyde. Majority of time at
Not required for the role with me.
LP: Whether any storage was available to Greg at the Sydney Trains
office located at 477 Pitt St Sydney NSW 2000 or at other Sydney
Trains sites
for the storage of items like the ones I mentioned?
KB: No, nowhere to store it safely at the facilities. There was already
monitors so he could plug in his laptop.
Was he expected to carry these items from his home to Sydney Trains
Was he provided a place to work at 477 Pitt St Sydney NSW 2000?
LP: Was he required to wear PPE by Sydney Trains.
KB: Yes, safety vests, hard hat, and PPE.
With respect to the hammer and screwdrivers listed at (o), what were
they required for? How often were they required and were any
other tools
required in his role? If so, please advise of the other tools required.
LP: With respect to the computer monitor listed at (g) was he required
Supply his own computer monitor whilst working at Sydney
Carry his own monitor from home and to the Sydney Trains’ various
There was no place to store the monitor at a Sydney Trains
KB: He was in other roles as well as with me.
Whether he needed the screens for other roles, I’m not aware about.
LP: Had a regular place of work at 477 Pitt Street Sydney NSW 2000
Did he travel
multiple sites or was it one location
KB: No, it was mixed
LP: Did not know the exact location or site of where he could be
expected to work daily.
KB: Sometimes it was pre-planned the day before. But it could have been on
How often was he required to attend 477 Pitt St Sydney NSW
How many different sites would he attend in a day?
How far in advance was he informed of the Sydney Train sites he was
required to visit?
LP: Were allowances or disbursements paid for his travel
KB: Not that I’m aware of.
He was just paid the typical day rate and claim any expenses on his tax.
LP: Was Mr Hudson required as part of his role to transport other team
members to various offices or site locations?
Meeting ended at or around 10:07am
Statement of Brendan McLean
a statement dated 26 April 2024, Brendan McLean stated
(unedited):
I worked at Sydney Trains from 2014-2021
as a Change Manager. I worked with Greg Hudson on projects across the
Engineering and Maintenance
Directorate in 2016 to 2019, including the
construction of the Sydney Central Hub at Clyde, including the business
transformation
and relocation of approximately 1,200 staff from various Sydney
Trains sites, depots, offices and warehouses to this newly built
workplace. Greg was required to meet a Change Manager on site or travel to
site when carrying out work or engaging with
Sydney Trains staff. This was a
union requirement”.
cross examination, the Applicant maintained the statement of Kevin Blye is
inaccurate as Blye was not his supervisor for all periods,
nor did he work with
him between November 2016 and June 2017, and so the statement must carry little
weight. He did not nominate
any other individuals, nor did he provide evidence
from any other relevant employer contact apart from Mr McLean. He also did not
obtain any evidence from Blye to verify the supervision and reporting
arrangements. The Respondent and the Tribunal queried why no
additional evidence
was obtained from Kevin Blye to verify these contentions to which the Applicant
responded “I was never
asked to provide it”. He did however submit
that the statement of Brendan McLean should be preferred.
Deductibility
Act allows for the claiming of deductions. Deductions may be
The provisions are
technical but to make the complex simple, in order to claim a general deduction,
what must be demonstrated is
that the ‘loss or outgoing’ (ultimately
claimed as a deduction) was incurred in gaining or producing the assessable
reflected in the taxation return for the financial year.
Act, however, stipulates that a loss or outgoing cannot be claimed to the extent
that it is of a capital nature; a private or
domestic nature; or alternatively
incurred in relation to producing exempt income.
assessing whether an outgoing is deductable, the Applicant must demonstrate that
there is a sufficient nexus between the expense/outgoing
and the activity which
has produced his assessable
starting point in a case such as this is the well-established principle that
travel between home and a place of employment is
deductible.
there are exceptions to that general principle. One category of exception,
which is relevant in the Applicant’s case, is
the circumstance in which a
taxpayer carries, between work and home, equipment which is both bulky and
essential to the income-generating
activity. In some circumstances that
transport can be characterised as something other than simply “travel
between work and
example, in
Commissioner of Taxation v Vogt
[1975] 1 NSWLR 194
4073, Waddell J considered the case of a professional musician who performed at
various locations. He played acoustic bass,
electric bass, trumpet and flugel
horn. He had to transport his instruments and related equipment, which his
Honour described as
“very bulky”, between the various work locations
and home, and sometimes from one work location to another. The taxpayer
generally stored his equipment at home, “for justifiable reasons of
convenience and for the purpose of practising on them”.
concluded as follows:
... in a practical sense, the expenditure should be attributed to the
carriage of the taxpayer’s instruments rather than to
his travel to the
place of performance. The mode of his travel was simply a consequence of the
means which he employed to get his
instruments to the place of performance, that
is by carrying them in the motor vehicle which he drove. In the light of these
it is my opinion that the essential character of the expenditure was
such that it should be regarded as having been “incurred
in gaining or
producing the assessable
same sort of reasoning has been applied in other cases. In
Re Crestani and
Commissioner of Taxation
[1998] AATA 612
(1998) 40 ATR 1037
; 98 ATC 2219,
Senior Member Block (as he then was) allowed deductions to an aircraft engineer
who transported “bulky”
tools from work to home, in circumstances
where the taxpayer’s employer provided no secure location for the tools to
at work. The travel expense was accepted as reasonably attributable
to the tools, which formed an essential part of the taxpayer’s
in which taxpayers’ claims have been unsuccessful are generally those
where the travel expense has retained its character
as “travel between
work and home”, and has not taken on the flavour of a work-related
attributes that tend to shift the expense (generally a car expense) from the
category of non-deductible private transport to that
of a deductible
work-related activity are that:
the equipment
being carried is necessary for the income-generating activity;
the equipment is
there is no
secure storage at the workplace; and
practicable way to transport the equipment is by car.
APPLICATION OF THE PRINCIPLES TO THE APPLICANT’S
accept the statement of Kevin Blye. Mr Blye is the only nominated employer
no evidence to negate that
premise or his statements. I acknowledge the statement is made almost 7 years
after the relevant taxable
year, but there is nothing in the statement that
would appear to be inconsistent with the Applicant’s job description.
answers by Mr Blye to the questions asked of him were direct and did not
suggest any lack of recollection due to the passing of time.
statement persuasive in the absence of any contrary information.
acknowledge the statement of Mr McLean but it provides little insight into the
Applicant’s activities on a daily basis. His
statement is largely
consistent with the Applicant’s description of his job description and
duties but does not provide any
information about the ‘bulky goods’
issue and so is of limited assistance.
the lack of support by the supervisor/employer for the requirement to transport
any such claimed bulky material, to the extent
that the Applicant carried
‘essential equipment’ between work and home, and the requirement to
do so, I find he engaged
in such activities as a matter of personal choice; that
is, the evidence has not established the equipment being carried was necessary
for the income generating activity.
if it were the case that he did transport the material nominated above at all
times, it is not supported by the employer as being
essential equipment and so
his claim would similarly fail. That would also be a matter of personal choice,
and personal choice of
that kind is not enough to displace the principle
established in
case that transport between work and home
is not deductible.
I find the circumstances do not support a re-characterisation of his transport
expenses out of the category of non-deductible
private transport into that of a
deductible work-related activity.
Depreciation claim and
balancing adjustment
next have to consider the claim for depreciation and specifically the balancing
adjustment claimed.
there is no dispute the Applicant purchased the Subaru WRX on 22 March 2017 for
a total of $28,000 but sold it to his company
three months later for $6,500 on
27 June 2017.
Applicant testified the dramatic fall in value was due the vehicles requirement
for cosmetic and mechanical repairs nominating,
in oral submissions, panel
damage of $7,500; a blown head gasket which cost $3,500 to replace; replacement
of the clutch valued
at $2,000; viscous coupling and shock absorbers
collectively costing $2,500; brake pads $1,300 and tyres at $630. The
submits that, in hindsight, he probably paid too much for the vehicle
at first instance but confirmed his company had sold it approximately
after its purchase for $13,000. He acknowledged in his evidence that he did not
have receipts or invoices for the work
undertaken or estimates for costs of
repair for damages both cosmetic and mechanical.
response to questioning by the Respondent, the Applicant submitted that, whilst
there was panel damage, he made no claims on his
insurance company as the excess
was prohibitive, as each panel was subject to a separate claim and each claim
would be subject to
Applicant admits he did not get the vehicle valued before he sold it to his
company for $6,500 as he never knew that he would
be encountering problems with
the Respondent. He believes it was a fair price given the state the vehicle was
in and referred the
Tribunal to photographs of the vehicle found in the
exhibits. He admits that he does not have all of the receipts for the repairs
undertaken. His evidence did not reveal any market research into the value of
the vehicle at the time of sale. The Applicant confirmed
he had no evidence to
justify that the repairs and cosmetic damage had a significant impact on sale
Respondent maintains the Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence that the
termination value of the vehicle was $6,500 and
therefore cannot show that the
termination value is less than its adjustable value just before the transfer of
sale to Gold Quarters.
It further submits the transaction was not at
arm’s length because the Applicant had complete capacity and control to
the sale price of his car to his own company; the nature of the
dealing was unusual as the Applicant claimed significant depreciation
having serious damage, but then purchased it for $6,500 and then on sold it just
one year later for $13,000 with no evidence
of repairs undertaken; and finally
the dealing was not of a bargaining nature as the Applicant has not provided
substantiation that
the vehicle which was purchased for $28,000 in March 2017
was worth only $6,500 three months later.
40-285(2)(b) of the ITAA allows for the application of balancing adjustments in
certain circumstances which are prescriptive
— particularly for vehicles.
The termination value of an asset is determined with reference to section 40-300
ITAA and generally
consists of the consideration taken to have been received by
the taxpayer for the asset.
40-300(1)(a) of the ITAA defines ‘terminating value’ and
specifically Item 6 of the termination valuation table
stipulates certain rules
that apply to the termination value of the vehicle if the circumstances of
termination are considered to
not be at ‘arm’s length’. The
definition of arm’s length is found in section 995-1 (1) of the ITAA and
me to consider the connection between the parties in the overall
transaction. I am mindful of authorities which state that a ‘finding
to a connection between the parties is simply a step in the course of reasoning
and will not be determinative unless it leads
to the ultimate
conclusion’.
Authorities
suggest that an arm’s length transaction will be established where it can
be shown that ‘separate wills and
minds of the parties have been applied
to the bargaining
circumstances where an arm’s length transactions cannot be established,
the ITAA directs that the market value of the car
is to be substituted as the
termination value. This amount then requires further adjusting by reference to
the car depreciation
limit adjustment required by s40-325 of the ITAA.
acknowledge the photographic evidence of cosmetic panel damage and the claims
regarding mechanical defects. However, given the
dearth of evidence in regard
to the value of such defects on the actual sale value and market position, I
cannot be satisfied that
a vehicle which was purchased only three months earlier
for $28,000 would have dropped in value to $6,500. There was no evidence
the Applicant attempted private sales or obtained a trade in estimate. There is
no evidence of the costs of repairs and what
the costs of such repairs did to
the actual value of the vehicle.
these reasons, I find that the Applicant has not discharged his burden in
establishing that the outgoings/deductions claimed had
a nexus to gaining or
production of his assessable income and I cannot find that the arrangement was
‘arm’s length’.
these reasons, the objections decision relating to the Applicant’s claims
for home to office travel and depreciation for
his vehicle are affirmed. The
decision relating to the deductibility of office expenses totalling $320.23 is
set aside and allowed
I certify that the preceding 51 (fifty-one) paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for the decision herein of Senior Member D Benk
..............................[SGD]..........................................
Dated: 11 October 2024
Date(s) of hearing:
for the Respondent:
L Petropoulos, Australian Taxation Office
McCormack v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
(1979) 79 ATC 4111, Jacobs J at 4128 and see Gibbs
J at 4121 (
McCormack, above;
Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1979) 79 ATC 4133
236 (Stephen J)
Danmark Pty Ltd v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
(1943) 7 ATD 191;
Forestwood Pty Ltd v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
(1944) 7 ATD 333
, at 337 (Latham CJ).
Trantwein v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation (No 1)
[1936] HCA 77
(1936) 56 CLR 63
at 87-88 (Latham CJ).
T3 – folios 21 to 53.
Folio 429 of the T docs.
Supplementary T Doc 1-7
Section 8-1 of the 1997 Act.
Subsection 8-5(i) of the
Commissioner of Taxation
[1981] HCA 10
(1981) 147 CLR 578.
Lunney v Commissioner of
[1958] HCA 5
(1958) 100 CLR 478.
Barnsdall v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
(1988) 88 ATC 4565.
Commissioner of Taxation
(1995) 95 ATC 4240.
RTF format (1.66 MB)
Signed PDF/A format