Aristocrat Technologies Australia Pty Limited [2021] ADO 1 (21 July 2021)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Design application number
201816709 –
A Bank of Gaming Machines
– in the name of
Aristocrat Technologies Australia Pty Limited
Nicholas Barbey
REPRESENTATION:
Griffith Hack
Pre-registration formalities check under
sections 39
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) – definition of
complex product and meaning of disassembly and re-assembly – application
contains more than one
design as identified by the applicant –
registration of the designs refused
1. On 13 November 2018, Aristocrat Technologies
Australia Pty Limited (‘
’) filed an application
Designs Act 2003
’) to register the following design
Design number:
Product name:
A bank of gaming machines
Priority date:
Representations:
Statement of Newness and Distinctiveness:
The shape and configuration
of the portions of the product shown in solid lines is new and distinctive
2. The application was accompanied by a registration request and subsequently
underwent a pre-registration formalities check. A formalities
notice issued to
the Applicant asserting that the application did not contain any representation
which showed the Design fully assembled.
That is, the Design was not in relation
to one product.
3. The Applicant responded to the formalities notice highlighting that the
application particularised the product name as ‘a
bank of game
machines’. In the Applicant’s view, a ‘bank’ refers to a
plurality of gaming machines arranged
together and it is a product within the
meaning of the Act. Attention was drawn to the ‘front perspective
view’ representation
which displayed the individual gaming machines
arranged in a specific ‘bank’ configuration – namely, two
of gaming machines arranged back-to-back. On this basis, it was submitted
that the product is shown in an assembled form. The response
also contained a
request to be heard if the objection was maintained.
4. Unpersuaded by the response, the formalities officer issued a second
formalities notice. The notice explained that of the three
representations
provided, none showed the product as particularised in the application –
namely, a bank of gaming machines.
Rather, the representations disclosed
‘four separate gaming machines ... with no visible connection between any
of the machines’.
formalities officer maintained that the Design was in relation to an arrangement
of four individual products as opposed to one
product. As such, the formalities
objection was maintained and the Applicant’s request to be heard was
5. A hearing was scheduled and the Applicant was invited to submit further
submissions and/or evidence. The Applicant filed submissions
Submissions
’) together with a declaration made on 10
November 2019 by Benjamin Attwood (‘
Attwood Declaration
The Applicant elected to have the matter heard by way of written submissions
and, as a delegate of the Registrar of Designs,
I will now decide this matter.
In doing so I will consider the material detailed above.
6. Mr Attwood has been employed by the Applicant for approximately thirteen
years in various marketing roles. His current position
is Senior Marketing
Manager for the Applicant in Australia and New Zealand. In this role, he
frequently interacts with customers
’) products offered by the Applicant. As such, Mr
Attwood submits that he has a detailed understanding of commercially viable
7. In Mr Attwood’s experience, EGMs are presented in
‘banks’ on a venue’s gaming floor. He observes that a
EGMs may include between four to eight individual EGMs, often share a common
theme (such as game style) and each bank is
usually sourced from the same
manufacturer. Mr Attwood claims that there are common configurations for a bank
of EGMs. These include
an ‘eight bank’ arrangement where four EGMs
are placed back-to-back, a ‘four flat’ arrangement where four
are placed against a wall and a ‘carousel’ arrangement where five
EGMs are placed in a carousel
8. According to the Attwood Declaration, venues ordinarily update their
gaming floor by replacing banks of EGMs as opposed to replacing
individually. Mr Attwood notes that while the Applicant offers both individual
EGMs and banks of EGMs, the latter is more commonly
purchased. When a bank of
EGMs is sold, the Applicant provides the components of the bank (e.g. the
individual EGMs, overhead signage)
to the customer as well as instructions
regarding the relative positioning of the EGMs. However, the physical assembly
of EGMs is completed by the customer at their own venue. In this
regard, Mr Attwood explains that the electronic connections between
the EGMs are
generally hidden ‘within a base or raised flooring on which the EGMs are
assembled’.
9. Mr Attwood declares that he was shown the representations of the Design
and identified the product as being a ‘four-machine
bank, in the
configuration two back-to-back as would be assembled on a gaming
A similar process
occurred in relation to the representations of Australian design
registrations 201814988, 201814920 and 201814901
Registrations
Mr Attwood identified the product disclosed in each set of design
representations as being a bank of gaming machines.
Legislative framework
of the Act provides:
Formalities check--applications in respect of
one design only
(1) This section applies to a design disclosed in a design application
(a) the design is the only design disclosed in the application; and
(b) the applicant has requested that the design be registered.
(2) The Registrar must register the design if the Registrar is satisfied
(a) the design application satisfies the formalities check specified in the
regulations; and
(b) if the design is purportedly a common design in relation to more than one
product--that the design is a common design in relation
to each product; and
(c) the Registrar is not required to refuse to register the design under
subsection 43(1).
of the Act provides:
Formalities check--applications in respect of more than one design
(1) This section applies if:
(a) more than one design is disclosed in a design application; and
(b) the applicant has requested registration of one or more of those
(2) The Registrar must register a design requested to be registered if the
Registrar is satisfied of the following:
(a) that each product to which the design relates belongs to the same Locarno
Agreement class;
(b) if the design requested to be registered is purportedly a common design
in relation to more than one product--that the design
is a common design in
relation to each product;
(c) that the design application satisfies the formalities check specified in
the regulations;
(d) that the Registrar is not required to refuse to register the design under
subsection 43(1).
Regulation 4.05
Designs Regulations 2004
Regulations
’) relevantly provides:
Formalities check--applications in respect of more than 1 design
(1) For paragraph 40(2)(c) of the Act, the formalities check is confirmation,
by the Registrar, that:
(g) the number of designs disclosed in the design application is the number
of designs identified, by the applicant, as being separate
designs disclosed in
application ...
13. At the outset, I note the purpose of a
formalities check is to verify that an application contains sufficient
particulars to enable
a design to be entered in the Register of Designs
’). A formalities check includes, for example,
confirming that the number of designs shown in the representations correspond
with the number of designs identified by the applicant. However, it does not
entail substantive examination of the application and
concepts such as
distinctiveness and the informed
are irrelevant in this
setting. As such, there is no obligation to accept Mr Attwood’s
observations as being an authoritative
interpretation of the Design. Since Mr
Attwood is a long serving employee of the Applicant, understandably, he is also
not a disinterested
party. Accordingly, the Attwood Declaration should be
approached with circumspection.
14. Broadly speaking, the Submissions advanced two lines of argument. First,
it was contended that the Design is in relation to a
product’ as contemplated by the Act. The Applicant’s position is
that the representations show an assembled
complex product with the replaceable
component parts being constituted by the individual gaming machines.
Componentry, such as the
jackpot controller and electronic connections between
each gaming machine, are alleged to be concealed within a raised floor or a
upon which the complex product sits atop. The Submissions point out that the Act
does not require hidden features of a product
to be shown when it is in an
assembled form. In the Applicant’s view, the treatment of a kit under the
Act further strengthens
its position that the representations disclose a complex
15. Second, the Applicant contends that, for consistency, the Design should
proceed to registration. Attention was drawn to the Prior
Registrations which,
in the Applicant’s view, disclose banks of gaming machines analogous to
the present Design given there
is no physical connection between the individual
gaming machines depicted in each registration. Reliance was also placed on Mr
identification of the Design as a bank of gaming machines
together with his evidence that the relevant market recognises same as
16. Accordingly, the present matter concerns the representations of the
Design and whether they correspond to the product name identified
application. This was the only deficiency raised in the formalities check. If
the representations of the Design are found
to be consistent with the specified
product name (i.e. the representations disclose a single design in relation to
one product),
the Registrar must register the Design. However, if inconsistency
exists between the representations and the product name, such that
application is determined to include further
the Registrar may refuse
to register the Design. This is because the Applicant had prior notice of the
deficiency and declined to
amend the application.
Interpretation
17. For clarity, the substantial issue for determination is whether the
representations provided in the application show one product
or four individual
products. The Applicant’s position, that the former applies, primarily
rests on its interpretation of the
terms ‘product’ and
‘complex product’. It is therefore necessary to consider the
intended meaning of each
term as they appear in the Act. This requires attention
to be given to both the text of the provision itself as well as ‘the
context for and purpose of the
provision’.
18. The term ‘product’ was introduced in the Act and replaced the
term ‘article’, which appeared in the design
definition under the
Designs Act 1906
(Cth). The introduction of the term
‘product’ was largely cosmetic given its perception as being a
‘more contemporary
The new design
definition was aimed at excluding ‘naturally occurring things from design
protection’
but did not
substantially widen the scope of things that could attract design
protection.
19. Section 5 of the Act relevantly provides:
, in relation to a product, means the overall
appearance of the product resulting from one or more visual features of the
has the meaning given by section 6.
20. Section 6 of the Act relevantly provides:
Definition of
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a thing that is manufactured or hand made
is a product (but see subsections (2), (3) and (4)).
(2) A component part of a complex product may be a product for the purposes
of this Act, if it is made separately from the product.
(4) A kit which, when assembled, is a particular product is taken to be that
21. Section 8 of the Act provides:
References in this Act to a design
In this Act, a reference to a design is a reference to a design in relation
to a product.
22. Evidently, ‘product’ in the above provisions is consistently
drafted in the singular (e.g. ‘a product’,
particular product’) which suggests that the ordinary meaning of a design
is in relation to one product. This reading
is internally consistent with the
definition of ‘product’ being ‘
manufactured or hand
Again, phrasing
‘a thing’ in the singular indicates that ‘product’
pertains to one thing. However,
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
creates a presumption of statutory construction that words in the singular
number include the plural and vice versa. The
mere fact that the above
provisions appear to emphasise singularity is insufficient to displace this
presumption.
Thus, these
provisions are not sufficient to establish that a reference to
‘product’ should be construed as being one
23. Nevertheless, the operation of
of the AIA is subject to a
contrary intention appearing in the
Ascertaining the existence
of a contrary intention to include the plural is not restricted to consideration
of a particular section
of the Act. Instead, the ‘substance and
of the Act in its
entirety should be considered. In my view, a contrary intention appears in
s 22 of the Act which relevantly provides:
A design application may be in respect of more than one design
(1) A single design application may be in respect of:
(a) one design in relation to one product; or
(b) one design that is a common design in relation to more than one product;
(c) more than one design in relation to one product; or
(d) more than one design in relation to more than one product, if each
product belongs to the same Locarno Agreement class.
(3) To avoid doubt, a design that is a common design in relation to more than
one product is a design in relation to each product.
24. The repetition of ‘one product’ in s 22 of the Act represents
a clear contrary intention. It is evident from this
provision that
‘product’ should not be understood as including the plural. The
different types of applications envisaged
by each subsection makes it plain that
a single design must correspond to one product. Indeed, a design that is in
relation to ‘more
than one product’ is specifically addressed and
categorised as a ‘common
interpretation is further supported by s 111 of the Act which prescribes the
particulars of a registered design that must be
entered in the Register.
Specifically, s 111(2)(a) of the Act states that ‘the product or
in relation to which the design is
registered’
recorded. This express distinction between the singular and plural of
‘product’ reinforces the appearance of
a contrary intention to
include the plural. For these reasons, I consider that the statutory presumption
in s 23(b) of the AIA has
been displaced, with any reference to a
‘product’ being intended to mean in the singular. In my assessment,
a reference
to a ‘product’ should therefore be construed as a
reference to one thing.
Complex product
25. The introduction of the term ‘complex product’ in the Act
stems from the Australian Law Reform Commission’s
recommendation that
‘[a] design of a product that consists of a number of component parts
should be able to be registered as
one design. A component part may itself be a
recommendation recognised the marketplace realities that a product may be
assembled from several component
26. Section 5 of the Act relevantly provides:
"complex product"
means a product comprising at least 2
replaceable component parts permitting disassembly and re-assembly of the
27. Three points may be distilled from this. First, a complex product falls
under the term ‘product’ and should accordingly
be construed as a
reference to one thing. Second, in the phrase ‘disassembly and
re-assembly’, the word ‘and’
should be read conjunctively
based on its ordinary meaning. Third, the meaning of assembly is essential to
this definition because
the characterisation of a ‘complex product’
is contingent on the component parts permitting disassembly and re-assembly.
word ‘assembly’ is not defined in the Act. Pursuant to
s 15AB(1)(a) of the AIA, guidance to confirm its ordinary
meaning may be
drawn from the
Macquarie Dictionary
which relevantly
(plural assemblies)
3. the act of assembling.
4. the state of being assembled.
6. the putting together of complex machinery, as aeroplanes, from
interchangeable parts of standard dimensions.
28. The clear message from these definitions is that ‘assembly’
involves parts being put together, in the sense of being
physically connected,
to create one assembled thing. It is apparent that the Act envisages a
‘complex product’ as being
in an assembled form. That is, all its
component parts being put together to create one thing. This can be inferred
from the fact
that a ‘complex product’ must, by definition,
permit disassembly and re-assembly. To achieve this, a
‘complex product’
must start in an assembled form in order to
permit the initial disassembly and subsequent re-assembly (i.e. reversion to its
form). To maintain otherwise would cause incongruity within the
definition. Accordingly, to satisfy the definition under the Act,
at least one
representation of a design in relation to a ‘complex product’ should
show its assembled form.
Application to the present matter
29. Turning to the present matter, a gaming machine being a thing that is
manufactured, clearly satisfies the definition of a ‘product’
the Act. Although it was not directly addressed in the Attwood Declaration, I
accept that a bank of gaming machines may be
disassembled, component parts
replaced and then be re-assembled. On this basis, a bank of gaming machines may
constitute a ‘complex
product’ as contemplated by the Act.
Nevertheless, neither proposition assists the Applicant. A formalities check
involve a consideration of an application’s particulars in
relation to theoretical or general principles. Rather, the particulars
assessed against what has been disclosed in the application. For the reasons
that follow, I consider that the representations
of the Design are inconsistent
with the identified product name and that further designs exist.
30. The product name is particularised in the application as ‘a bank of
gaming machines’ and the Applicant asserts that
the representations
disclose one product. I do not accept this assertion. In my assessment, the
representations disclose four individual
gaming machines situated in close
proximity to one another. There is no connection between any of the gaming
machines depicted. They
are not physically joined nor do the representations
provide any basis to infer they are connected. On its face, the representations
therefore show four discrete products.
31. The Applicant does not dispute that the gaming machines are not
physically connected in the representations. Instead, it posits
depicted gaming machines are physically connected albeit via electronic
connections omitted from the representations because
they are usually hidden
within a base or in the venue’s gaming floor. The Submissions point out
that the Act does not require
hidden elements of a complex product to be visible
when it is assembled. It is true that no such requirement exists, however, this
is not determinative of the issue. This line of argument puts the cart before
the horse insofar as it is premised on the representations
having disclosed an
assembled complex product. Here, no such disclosure exists. The application does
not contain a single representation
which shows the complex product in an
assembled form in the sense of being physically connected. At best, the
representations show
four disconnected component parts of an unassembled complex
32. The Applicant’s position that a ‘complex product’ is
disclosed in the application is only tenable if missing
component parts are read
into the representations. However, it is not incumbent upon, nor is it open to,
a formalities officer to
cure a deficiency in an application in this manner.
That is, by reading in the presence of undisclosed parts to convert what is
four discrete products into one product. Such an approach would be
completely speculative with respect to how the depicted products
are connected,
the positioning of such connections as well as their visual features. Further,
it would be impossible for a third
party to discern the presence of the alleged
connections from the Design’s representations that will appear on the
In short, reading component parts into the representations would
render the overall appearance of the Design indeterminate. Plainly,
approach that must be rejected.
33. The Submissions also highlight that a complex product requires an element
of assembly and note that a kit under the Act ‘provides
for a scenario
where assembly will only ever be performed by the end
As I understand
this argument, the Applicant is essentially asserting that the representations
could be construed as disclosing a
kit and there is no requirement to disclose
an assembled form because assembly of the kit is completed by the end customer.
view, this misconstrues the definition of a
which specifically includes
the words ‘when assembled’. As explained above, the application has
not disclosed a single
representation which shows the complex product in an
assembled form. As such, even if I were to ignore the omission of the connectors
and interpret the representations as having disclosed a design of parts of a
kit, this would not remedy the current deficiency.
34. Finally, the Applicant contends that consistent office practice dictates
that the Design should proceed to registration given
its representations are
analogous to the representations of the Prior Registrations. Naturally,
consistency in decision making within
the Designs Office is highly desirable.
However, the probative value of comparing the Design with the Prior
Registrations is limited.
This is because each design application must be
assessed on its own merits. To this end, the mere fact that the Prior
Registrations
exist on the Register does not override the application of the
Act. This is particularly so when consideration is given to the small
size of registrations referred to by the Applicant. It follows that the mere
existence of these Prior Registrations does not
alter my view that an
inconsistency exists with respect to the number designs disclosed in the
application and the number of designs
identified by the Applicant.
35. In light of the above, I find that the
representations should be properly regarded as disclosing four individual gaming
products and not one product as identified by the Applicant. It follows
that the application is deficient because it contains three
further designs. As
such, I am satisfied that the application does not meet the requirements of reg
4.05(1)(g) of the Regulations.
In accordance with s 43(2) of the Act, I refuse
to register all of the designs in the application that contains design number
36. An application for a review of this decision may be made to the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal under the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
application to review this decision is made on or before one month from the date
of this decision, the application will be
subject to a determination by the
relevant body.
Nicholas Barbey
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and
Trade Marks and Designs
Design registration 201814901
Representations:
Design registration 201814920
Representations:
Design registration 201814988
Representations:
Formalities Notice 2 (4
February 2019).
Declaration, [10].
See Annexure 1 to this
decision which contains the representations for each of the Prior
Registrations.
Designs Act
previously accepted Mr Attwood to be an informed user of electronic gaming
Aristocrat Technologies Australia Pty Limited
[2020] ADO 4
Regulations 2004
(Cth) reg 1.04 (interpretation of ‘further
design’) which ‘means a design that is disclosed in a design
application,
but that has not been identified, by the applicant, as being a
separate design disclosed in the
application’.
[2019] HCA 35
Australian Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 74, 1995) para 4.9
Explanatory Memorandum, Designs Bill 2003 (Cth)
‘Government
response to ALRC Report 74’, see response to recommendation 10, (Web Page)
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/inquiry/designs/government-response-to-alrc-report-74/>.
(n 6) s 6(1) (emphasis
Industries Ltd v Dilley
[1969] UKPCHCA 2
(1969) 117 CLR 651
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(n 13) 656.
(n 6) s 22(3).
Emphasis added.
(n 9) Recommendation 12. This recommendation was accepted by the
Australian Government: see Government response to ALRC Report 74
(online at 23 June 2021) ‘assembly’ (defs 3, 4,
Submissions,
6(4) which has been reproduced at [20] of this
RTF format (2.37 MB)
Signed PDF/A format