Virginia Toth v Telstra Corporation Limited - re Termination of employment - motion to dismiss application - termination at initiative of Respondent or not [2009] AIRC 894; (10 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Termination of employment
Virginia Toth
Telstra Corporation Limited
(U2009/3437)
COMMISSIONER RAFFAELLI
SYDNEY, 10 DECEMBER 2009
Termination of employment - motion to dismiss application – termination at initiative of Respondent or not.
On 21 April 2009, Ms Virginia Toth (the Applicant) made an application pursuant to
section 643
Workplace Relations Act 1996
alleging that her termination by her former employer, Telstra Corporation Ltd (the Respondent) was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
In reaction to the application, the Respondent filed a notice of motion to dismiss the application on the basis that the Applicant
had not been terminated at the initiative of the Respondent.
That motion became the subject of proceedings which occurred on 22 June 2009. At the conclusion of those proceedings, the parties
provided written submissions. This decision concerns the Respondent’s motion for dismissal of proceedings.
It is convenient to commence with the Respondent’s view as to the circumstances concerning the Applicant’s termination.
Ms Sandra Hinchey, the Respondent’s National Corporate Records Manager gave evidence (Exhibit Telstra 1) which included that:
- The Applicant worked in Ms Hinchey’s department from July 2002 until her retirement on 1 April 2009.
- In July 2006, the Applicant had informed her that she had been diagnosed with breast cancer.
- A support program was put in place. This program involved periods of time working from home, extended sick leave and flexible approach
to working hours to accommodate her treatment.
- The Applicant returned to work on a full-time basis in July 2007
- One of the responsibilities given to Ms Toth for her work plan 2007/2008 was the On-Loans Cartons Project.
- On 8 May 2008, the Applicant informed her that she would not be able to complete the project before going on five weeks leave.
- The Applicant was able to obtain assistance from someone else and she proceeded on leave.
- On 3 July 2008, she met with the Applicant on her return from leave. The Applicant was told that a further meeting was to be arranged
under the Respondent’s Performance Improvement and Conduct Management Process (PICM) and a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP)
would issue specifying particular objectives that would need to be met.
- On 4 July 2008, she received a telephone call from the Applicant’s sister-in-law indicating that the Applicant was ill and
would not be attending work.
- On Monday, 7 July 2008 she received an email from the Applicant indicating that she would be absent for the remainder of the week.
She was absent for the following three weeks.
- On 31 July 2008, she received a worker’s compensation claim from the Applicant indicating that she was suffering anxiety and
depression due to work-related stress.
- The Applicant was away from work until 1 December 2009 while the workers compensation claim was considered and ultimately rejected.
- A return to work plan was discussed and agreed to.
- On 11 February 2009 a meeting took place with the Applicant to discuss a PIP and a draft PIP proposal was sent to the Applicant
soon after.
- On 17 February 2009, she met with the Applicant with the purpose of the meeting being to finalise the return to work plan and the
PIP. At the meeting, the Applicant informed her that she intended to resign with the last day of work being 1 April 2009.
- She pressed the Applicant as to her reasons and was told that she had always wanted to retire at 55 and intended moving to the Central
Coast. She also indicated that she was uninterested in part-time work.
- In the circumstances, it was mutually agreed that the PIP process need not continue.
- Following some interaction with the Respondent, the Applicant advised that she would wish to leave on a retirement basis (Exhibit
T1 / SH13).
- The Applicant also advised that she wished to leave in a low-key manner.
Ms Hinchey denied that she had engaged in any bullying or harassment towards the Applicant. She also denied that the work allocated
to the Applicant was unachievable or that the performance management undertaken was unfair in any way.
Ms Hinchey denied that the Applicant had no choice but to resign her employment.
Ms Hinchey’s response in her oral testimony included that:
- Following a serious illness, the Applicant had worked from home and had then decided to come back to work to be with other people.
- In her dealings with the Applicant, she may have raised her voice at times.
The Applicant’s written evidence (Exhibit Toth1) included that:
- She had worked for the Respondent for 19 years.
- In 2003, she had experienced adverse treatment from her manager, Ms Hinchey who had required her to go to Melbourne to complete
a project, thus affecting some annual leave plans.
- After that, her relationship with Ms Hinchey was never reconciled.
- Ms Hinchey always treated her in a cold, abrasive and harassing manner.
- In February 2008 she returned to full-time work following a serious illness.
- In May/June 2008 she had planned some annual leave which had been previously approved. However, Ms Hinchey unreasonably required
her to complete a project. This was unfair as the remaining work on the project was unachievable. Ultimately the project was completed
by others and she proceeded on leave.
- On return to work in July 2008 Ms Hinchey placed her on a Performance Improvement and Conduct Management program. This was designed
to give her a hard time.
- From 4 July to August 2008 she was on sick leave due to stress from the constant bullying and harassment from Ms Hinchey.
- On 28 July 2000 she lodged a workers compensation claim. This was rejected by Allianz, the insurer of the Respondent.
- Between August 2008 and November 2008 she was on long service leave. This was followed by annual leave. This period was the result
of stress at work.
- During this period, Ms Hinchey had sent her a letter (26 September 2008) in regard to the performance review. She considered the
timing inappropriate and this increased her stress.
- On 27 November 2008, she lodged a resignation with another manager, Ms Howells. However, Ms Howells convinced her to stay on.
- When she returned to work, she was subject to ongoing performance management by Ms Hinchey.
- She was forced to sit next to Ms Hinchey and obliged to work at her desk
The Applicant’s oral testimony included that:
- When she returned to work on 1 December 2008, she was aware that she would be performing some of the duties that she performed before
she had gone off on workers compensation. She also knew that Ms Hinchey would continue to manager her.
- On 11 February 2009 she met with Ms Hinchey and Ms Howells.
- The managers discussed the PICM process with her.
- She realised that in addition to working for Ms Hinchey she was also to do work for Ms Nancy Atkins.
- At a further meeting with Ms Hinchey on 17 February 2009 she indicated that she intended to resign, effective 1 April 2009.
- She agreed that she told Ms Hinchey that she had always wanted to retire at 55 and intended moving to the Central Coast. She also
told Ms Hinchey that she was finding it hard to get up the stairs of her Westmead apartment.
- She also agreed that she told Ms Hinchey that she had decided against returning to the Philippines.
- She agreed Ms Hinchey said that “if you need a job in the future, just let me know”.
- She agreed that sometime later, Ms Hinchey had raised the prospect of retiring rather than resigning. Ms Hinchey had also raised
the prospect of a retirement function for her.
- Her reason for retiring was her grievance with Ms Hinchey but she never told Ms Hinchey of that.
- She agreed that she had wanted to resign in November 2008.
- She considered that if she had continued with the PICM process this may have led to her termination.
- The first reason for resigning was that in the accountabilities that were given to her, it was clear that she would be working for
two managers. Secondly, she was concerned as to her health and finally, there was a financial reason for leaving.
Michael Gunter, a work colleague of the Applicant’s gave evidence. He said that on occasions he heard Ms Hinchey raise her voice
in an authoritarian manner.
In her written submission on behalf of the Respondent, Ms Eastman of counsel put that:
- The Applicant bears the onus of proof that she did not resign voluntarily.
- While the accusation of bullying and harassment by Ms Hinchey is denied, even if one assumed such, this does not provide evidence
that the Respondent intended to bring the relationship to an end or forced the Applicant to resign.
- There is no evidence that the Respondent (or Ms Hinchey) wanted to end the employment relationship.
- When the Applicant announced her intention to resign she made no reference to any adverse conduct by Ms Hinchey.
- There was no evidence that at the meeting of 11 February 2009 that the Applicant was encouraged to resign.
- Much of the so called treatment of the Applicant by Ms Hinchey occurred prior to mid 2008 and no issues of substance are apparent
at or about February 2009.
- This evidence of Mr Gunter as to Ms Hinchey’s raising her voice does not specify what time period he was referring to.
In his written submission, Mr Rowland who represented the Applicant put that:
- The Applicant has been the subject of an overbearing supervisor since at least 2003 when the Applicant was threatened with having
her leave cancelled.
- The Applicant was seriously ill from July 2006, but ultimately returned to work.
- By about March 2008, it became clear to the Applicant that she could not complete all the project work allocated to her. She informed
Ms Hinchey who told her that if she didn’t complete the project, her pre-approved leave would be cancelled.
- The Applicant ultimately was able to take leave but the episode added to her stress.
- On her return to work the Applicant was placed under a PICM process.
- She felt under intense pressure which caused her to take leave for much of the rest of the year.
- While on leave, the Applicant received correspondence from Ms Hinchey concerning her performance review. This was inappropriate
and further upset her.
- She told Ms Howells that she wished to resign but was convinced to give it another go.
- It became clear to her that the performance management would continue and she would still have Ms Hinchey as her direct supervisor.
- She also noted that there was to be an increase in responsibility including working for Ms Atkins.
- She ultimately decided to retire.
- But for the Respondent’s conduct, the Applicant would have remained in employment. Using the mechanism of the PICM and PIP
in an unreasonable manner threatened to compromise her health, leaving her with no other choice but to resign.
- At the time of her resignation, the Applicant was too exhausted to stand up for herself. It was clear to her that there was no prospect
that she would be given a fair go and that ultimately she would be terminated.
It is clear that several alleged facts are in dispute.
The Applicant says that her decision to terminate her employment was driven by the conduct of the Respondent and particularly of its
manager, Ms Hinchey. The Applicant had no other choice but to resign/retire.
The Applicant says that Ms Hinchey’s conduct was overbearing and so demanding that it amounted to harassment and bullying. This
took the form of unreasonable work demands and threats to cancel pre-approved leave on at least two occasions. One other witness
gave evidence that he heard Ms Hinchey speak to the Applicant in an authoritarian manner on occasions.
Ms Hinchey denies any suggestion of untoward conduct and harassment or bullying.
The Applicant also says that the Respondent and Ms Hinchey, in particular, failed in giving the Applicant workload levels and outcome
expectations that gave due consideration to her physical and emotional state arising from a serious medical episode.
The Respondent denied such allegations, pointing to a sympathetic attitude while the Applicant underwent treatment and providing the
option of work from home and finally offering the possibility of part-time work.
It is not easy to reconcile two competing views which are strongly held and are based on perception and personal feelings.
However, even if we assume that, Ms Hinchey was overbearing and authoritarian, and the threat of cancelling leave inappropriate and
unprofessional and was generally insensitive to the Applicant’s emotional and physical condition, I need to consider whether
at or around February 2009, the Applicant had no other choice but to leave the employment.
In this case, it is clear that there was a resignation and it was not effected in the heat of the moment. The evidence is clear that
it was a considered decision.
That leads then to the question as to whether the resignation was not voluntary but was forced. In that regard
section 642(4)
Workplace Relations Act 1996
provides as follows:
“For the purposes of this Division, the resignation of an employee is taken to constitute the termination of the employment
of that employee at the initiative of the employer if the employee can prove, on the balance of probabilities, that the employee
did not resign voluntarily but was forced to do so because of conduct, or a course of conduct, engaged in by the employer.”
In its written submission the Respondent referred to an extract from a decision of Commissioner Spencer in
Nicholson v RACQ
[2007] AIRC 54
. That extract contains an helpful outline of the applicable law in these situations and I find it relevant to my consideration.
At paragraph 20 and following the Commissioner said:
“[20] The definition of termination at the initiative of the Employer is included in
(4) of the Act. The Applicant has the onus in such a matter, to satisfy the Commission on the balance of probabilities that the termination
of employment was directly attributed to the actions of the Employer.
[21] In this regard, a Full Bench in
O’Meara v Stanley Works Pty Ltd
) reviewed the authorities in relation to constructive dismissal as follows:
‘In our view the full statement of reasons in Mohazab which we have set out together with the further explanation by Moore J
in Rheinberger and the decisions of Full Benches of this Commission in Pawel and ABB Engineering require that there to be some action
on the part of the employer which is either intended to bring the employment to an end or has the probable result of bringing the
employment relationship to an end. It is not simply a question of whether ‘the act of the employer [resulted] directly or consequentially
in the termination of the employment’. Decisions which adopt the shorter formulation of the reasons for decision should be
treated with some caution as they may not give full weight to the decision in Mohazab. In determining whether a termination was at
the initiative of the employer an objective analysis of the employer’s conduct is required to determine whether it was of such
a nature that resignation was the probable result or that the appellant had no effective or real choice but to resign.’
[22] I concur with Senior Deputy President Richard’s assessment of the relevant jurisdictional test as follows:
‘The now relevant statutorily stipulated test in relation to whether a resignation of an employee’s employment that led
to the termination of an employee’ s employment, in effect, was at the initiative of an employer for purposes of
of the Act comprises the following elements:
• the onus is on an employee or Applicant to demonstrate certain facts on the balance of probabilities; and
• the facts that the Applicant must demonstrate are that:
a) the employee did not resign his or her employment voluntarily, but;
b) was forced to do so;
c) because of the employer’s conduct, or course of conduct.
Consequently, the requirements of the Act are now directly expressed.
It seems that the term “ forced ” is the past tense of the verb form “ to force ”, and as such, an understanding
of the plain meaning of the term “ force ” is relevant to applying
Relevantly, the Macquarie Dictionary defines “ force ” as:
“….strength or power exerted upon an object; physical coercions; violence….power to influence, affect, or control;
power to convince….to compel; constrain or oblige (oneself or someone) to do something….to bring about or effect by force;
bring about of necessity or as a necessary result….to put or impose (something) forcibly on or upon a person….to press,
urge or exert to violent effort or to the utmost . . . ” ’
The term “force” appears to encompass both the application of physical power to directly achieve a result and the actions
of a person to persuade or otherwise convince another for the same purposes. In either case, there is an important element of compulsion
[23] The Full Court in Mohazab found that a termination at the initiative of the Employer may be treated as such when the action of
the employer is the principal contributing factor which leads to the termination of the of the employment relationship, as follows:
‘In these proceedings it is unnecessary and undesirable to endeavour to formulate an exhaustive description of what is termination
at the initiative of the employer but plainly an important feature is that the act of the employer results directly or consequentially
in the termination of the employment and the employment relationship is not voluntarily left by the employee. That is, had the Employer
not taken the action he did, the Employee would have remained in the employment relationship’. ”
It is clear from
Mohazab v Dick Smith Electronics Pty Ltd
(1995) 62 IR 200
that the Respondent’s conduct must result directly or consequently on the termination. Had the Respondent not taken the action
it did the Applicant would have remained in employment.
I have difficulty in finding that the alleged conduct up to mid 2008 could be said to have directly caused the resignation in February
2009. Firstly, well over half a year had passed. Secondly, the Applicant was on leave caused by stress and then consciously and voluntarily
revoked a resignation of November 2008 and returned to work in December 2008.
That is not to say that her experience from the past did not continue to play on her mind.
However in the meetings held to discuss other ongoing work including her performance management the Applicant did not at any time
(even on her evidence) express to Ms Hinchey or Ms Howells any displeasure as to workload, performance outcomes or as to the conduct
of Ms Hinchey.
The only comments from the Applicant were that she sought resignation, and later retirement as a better financial outcome and that
she did not want to make a fuss on leaving.
There was never an attempt made in the weeks leading to her termination by the Applicant to raise any concerns including by way of
a grievance. She did nothing of the kind.
Further, it is clear from the authorities (and indeed the words of
that it is the action of the employer that is critical. One needs to look at the employer to see if it was the driver of the employee’s
In this case, there is no evidence that the Respondent did anything from December 2008 to February 2009 that could in any way amount
to action that could be described as forcing the Applicant to resign or leaving her with little option but to do so. It gave her
a workload proposal and wanted to sign off on a PIP process. The Applicant made no adverse comments in that regard. Indeed the Respondent
offered part-time employment which further tells against any suggestion of a forced resignation.
Often in these sorts of cases there is evidence that an employer even if not the driving force is relieved at the resignation. In
this case even this is absent. There is no evidence that the Respondent was pleased or relieved by the Applicant’s decision.
I have no doubt that the Applicant genuinely felt aggrieved and was unhappy particularly with her immediate supervisor but that does
not translate into the Respondent being the principal driver of the resignation. Even if the conduct of Ms Hinchey was intolerable
(and I do not so find) that would not mean that resignation was the only option available. There may have been a range of options
which of course were not explored because the Applicant did not put her feelings or concerns to the Respondent.
I have considered all the evidence and submissions. In my view the Applicant was unhappy but there is no factual basis in finding
that the Respondent by its conduct forced the Applicant to make its decision to resign/retire because there was really no alternative.
I find that the Applicant was not terminated at the initiative of the employer and I also find that the Applicant was not forced to
resign because of conduct or a course of conduct engaged in by the employer.
The application is dismissed for want of jurisdiction.
BY THE COMMISSION:
COMMISSIONER
Appearances
K. Rowlands
V. Rowlands
for the Applicant.
of counsel with
solicitor for the Respondent.
Hearing details:
Last submissions received:
16 September 2009.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR989988>
No downloadable files available