Zewei Chen v Fuzhou Gulou District Yijue E-Commerce Co., Ltd. [2025] ATMO 209 (3 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by Zewei Chen to
registration of trade mark application number 2451566 (class 28) -
- in the name of Fuzhou Gulou District Yijue E-Commerce Co., Ltd.
Anne Makrigiorgos
REPRESENTATION:
Ironside McDonald Limited
Fiona Pearson
2025 ATMO 209
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – opposition under
pursued – ground of opposition established under
for a subset of goods and 62A for the remainder of the goods –
registration refused
decision concerns an opposition under
Trade Marks Act 1995
by Wenxia Chen
’) to registration of the following trade
Application
Fuzhou Gulou District Yijue E-Commerce Co., Ltd.
Filing Date
19 May 2024 (‘
Relevant Date
Specification
: toys; toy models; toys for children; toy model kits; toy
vehicles; toy models of vehicles; toy model vehicles; infant toys; toy
educational toys for infants; toy construction blocks; toy construction kits;
toy buildings; toy building blocks; controllers
for toy planes
Applicant’s Goods
Trade Mark was examined and advertised as accepted for possible registration on
20 October 2024.
25 October 2024, the Opponent filed a Notice of Intention to Oppose the
Application and a Statement of Grounds and Particulars
’). The Applicant filed a Notice of Intention to Defend
the opposition on 11 November 2024.
Opponent filed Evidence in Support (‘
’) on 31 January
2025. The Applicant did not file Evidence in Answer.
parties were given the opportunity to request to be heard by written or oral
submissions. While neither party elected to be heard,
the Opponent requested a
decision without a hearing. I am a delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks and
this matter has been allocated
to me to determine. I have decided this matter
based on the particulars set out in the SGP and the EIS.
the SGP, the Opponent particularised grounds of opposition under
The Opponent carries the burden of establishing at least one ground
of opposition
on the balance of
probabilities.
The date at which
the rights of the parties are to be determined is the Relevant
Opponent filed the EIS set out below. The Applicant did not file any evidence in
this matter.
Declaration of Zewei Chen, (‘
ZC01 to ZC05
Summary of EIS
claims that they have been using the Trade Mark in Australia since April 2021 on
a range of development toys for children including
magnetic tiles, pool toys,
craft kits, robots and toddler tables.
attests that the Trade Mark is used and registered as a trade mark in Europe,
Mexico, the United Kingdom and the United States
of America. Chen provides brief
details of the trade mark registrations in these countries and regions.
provides screenshots from Amazon Australia at www.amazon.com.au
’) dated 19 September 2024 referencing the sale of
magnetic tiles and water marbling paint. The screenshots make reference to:
the brand of
goods and store name as Coodoo and show use of the Trade Mark in respect of
magnetic tiles and marbling paint. I note
the magnetic tiles are toys for
construction or building;
the seller of
products from the Coodoo store as Chen-weilan and state the ‘Date First
Available’ for magnetic tiles as
18 February 2024 and for marbling paints
as 6 April 2021; and
reviews from
Amazon ‘verified purchasers’ in Australia for the magnetic tiles,
one being dated before the Relevant Date.
provides examples of six Amazon orders to Australian consumers of magnetic tiles
dated before the Relevant Date and three of
water marbling paint dated after the
Relevant Date.
states that the Trade Mark is advertised through Amazon Australia and provides
advertising expenditure.
refers to email communication with the Applicant in December 2024 regarding an
approach from Chen to purchase the Application.
Chen proposed two different
monetary offers to the Applicant. In the end the Applicant requested one
month’s profit of Chen’s
business as the purchase price. Chen
exhibits copies of email correspondence between Chen and the Applicant.
claims that the Applicant has filed a large number of trade marks for which the
Applicant is not the owner. Chen provides a list
of eighteen Australian trade
mark applications and registrations for various trade marks filed by the
Applicant (‘
Australian Marks
’). Chen claims the Australian
Marks are the same as trade marks owned and registered by other companies
overseas before the
Relevant Date (‘
Overseas Marks
exhibits details from the World Intellectual Property Organisation
’) Global Brand Database which show the Australian
Marks and the Overseas Marks including trade mark numbers, trade marks, owners,
filing dates, classes and countries. Chen also exhibits summary details of the
Australian Marks from the Australian Trade Mark Register
which include trade
mark numbers, trade marks, status and classes.
58 provides that the registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground
that the applicant is not the owner of the
trade mark.
right to registration under the Act depends upon ownership of the trade mark and
not ownership by registration
this requirement must be satisfied at the filing date of the
application.
Ownership of a trade
mark may be established ‘either by reason of authorship and prior use or
by reason of authorship, filing
the application and an intention to
Authorship in this
context is not predicated on being the first to coin the trade mark, instead it
refers to the first to adopt the
trade mark with an intention of using it in
Australia in respect of the claimed goods and/or
concept of trade mark ownership was discussed in
Anchorage Capital Partners
Pty Limited v ACPA Pty Ltd
wherein the Full Court of the Federal Court
[O]wnership may be acquired by the act of applying for
registration of a trade mark even though the applicant has not previously used
the mark and the mark has already been used outside Australia by someone else.
However, the applicant’s claim to ownership
of the mark may be defeated if
another person has previously used the mark, or a substantially identical mark,
in Australia as a
trade mark in relation to the same goods or services, or goods
or services of the same kind, as those that are the subject of the
application
for registration.
default position under the Act is that the Applicant is prima facie considered
to be the owner of the Trade Mark. Consequently,
it is the Opponent who bears
the evidential onus of establishing that the Applicant was not the owner of the
Trade Mark at the Relevant
Date. To achieve this, the following requirements
must be satisfied:
the trade mark
relied upon by the Opponent is at least substantially identical to the Trade
Requirement
claimed by the Trade Mark are the ‘same kind of thing’ as the goods
for which the trade mark relied upon by
the Opponent has been
Requirement
a person other
than the Applicant has the earlier claim to ownership based on use of the trade
mark(s) relied upon by the Opponent
prior to whichever is the earlier of: (a)
the application to register the Trade Mark or (b) any actual use of the Trade
Requirement
summary, the SGP states that the Applicant is not entitled to registration
because the Opponent first used the Trade Mark in Australia
as early as 2021 in
connection with toys, including toys for children, toy blocks, toy construction
blocks, toy construction kits,
toy buildings and toy building blocks.
shows use of the Trade Mark in respect of magnetic tiles and water marbling
paints before the Relevant Date. While the screenshots
from Amazon refer to the
seller as Chen-weilan and not the Opponent, the purpose of the s 58 ground is to
determine whether or not
the Applicant is the owner of the Trade Mark.
Therefore, regardless of whether or not the Opponent was the owner of the Trade
in Australia in relation to the Applicant’s Goods, the evidence shows
use of the Trade Mark in Australia in respect of magnetic
tiles and water
marbling paints prior to the Relevant Date by a person
other than the
the ground of opposition in s 58 can be established by showing that the
Applicant is not the owner and while the burden of proof
is on the Opponent,
here, I find the evidence sufficient to enable a finding of fact to be made
at the time of filing in respect of magnetic
tiles and water marbling paints. On the evidence before me, I am satisfied that
other than the Applicant first used the Trade Mark in Australia in
respect of magnetic tiles and water marbling paints.
Applicant’s Goods however have a broad claim to ‘toys; toy models;
toys for children; toy model kits; toy vehicles;
toy models of vehicles; toy
model vehicles; infant toys; toy blocks; educational toys for infants; toy
construction blocks; toy construction
kits; toy buildings; toy building blocks;
controllers for toy planes’. In my opinion, magnetic tiles and water
marbling paints
are unquestionably types of toys, infant toys, toys for children
and educational toys for infants, and magnetic tiles are also a
construction kit.
word infant has a number of definitions including ‘a
during the earliest period of its
beginner, as in learning’.
I am satisfied that infant toys including educational toys are not only limited
to toys for a baby but extend to toys for a young
child. For this reason,
magnetic tiles fall under the description ‘infant toys and educational
toys for infants’.
I am satisifed that ‘toy model kits, toy blocks, toy construction blocks
and toy building blocks’ are the same
kind of thing as magnetic tiles. I
am not however satisfied that ‘toy vehicles, toy models of vehicles, toy
model vehicles,
toy buildings or controllers for toy planes’
Subset Goods
’) are the same kind of thing as magnetic tiles
and/or water marbling paints.
meaning of ‘same kind of thing’ was considered by Finkelstein J at
first instance in
Colorado Group Limited v Strandbags Group Pty Limited
where he stated:
It follows that proprietorship by first use is
proprietorship in relation to the goods or classes of goods on which the mark
used. The proprietor is entitled to have his mark registered in respect
of those goods. This entitlement is not confined to identical
goods or classes
of goods. Registration may also be obtained for goods or classes of goods which
is or are “a thing [or things]
of the same kind” (
Co v Napper
[1887] UKLawRpCh 91
(1886) 35 Ch D 160
, 178) or “like articles of
production” (
Columbia Mill Company v Alcorn
[1893] USSC 246
, 464 (1893)) or “articles of merchandise of the same kind”
Colman v Crump
, 578 (1877)) or “kindred articles”
The Collins Co v Oliver Ames & Sons Corporation
(1882)), if there be any difference between these expressions. See also
Edwards v Dennis
(1885) 30 Ch D
Allsop repeated these authorities in
Colorado Group Limited v Strandbags
Group Pty Limited
further stated:
The aim of the enquiry is not to find some broad
genus in which some common functional or aesthetic purpose can be identified.
is it an enquiry about the type of trade in which concurrent use might cause
confusion. Rather, it is identifying, in a practical,
common sense way, the true
equivalent kind of thing or article. For example, use of a mark on hatchets or
small axes, created proprietorship
in relation to axes ... This approach
recognises ownership or proprietorship in a mark beyond the very goods on which
the mark is
used, to goods “though not identical... yet substantially the
same” (Hemming H B, Sebastian’s Law of Trade Marks,
4th Ed at p 91)
or “goods essentially the same ... though they pass under a different name
owing to slight variations in shape
and size”. (Kerly DM and Underhay FG,
Kerly on Trade Marks
(3rd Ed) p 206). This approach is conformable with
the terms of the 1995 Act.
while Kenny J stated:
Authoritative discussions show that this extension to goods of the same kind
is confined to goods that are essentially the same, though
they may differ in
size, shape and name.
my view, ‘toy model kits, toy blocks, toy construction blocks and toy
building blocks’ are a like article of production
and a kindred article to
magnetic tiles. As with toy building blocks in the traditional sense, such as
building bricks, magnetic
tiles interlock to construct any manner of structure.
Magnetic tiles are just a more modern form of a toy building block. Further,
building blocks are often sold in kits for making toy models, a well know
example is Lego®. Lego® produce kits for making
anything from cars to
buildings to animals to paintings. For these reasons I consider ‘toy model
kits, toy blocks, toy construction
blocks and toy building blocks’ are
goods essentially the same and true equivalents, though they may differ in size,
and name to magnetic tiles. Therefore ‘toy model kits, toy blocks,
toy construction blocks and toy building blocks’ are
the same kind of
thing as magnetic tiles.
do not consider the Subset Goods to be essentially or substantially the same as,
nor a true equivalent to, nor a like article of
production nor a kindred article
to magnetic tiles or water marbling paints. While all the Subset Goods can be
used by the same consumer
as the magnetic tiles and water marbling paints, the
Subset Goods cannot be used as a substitute for these goods. Toy vehicles, toy
models of vehicles, toy model vehicles and toy buildings are finished articles.
They are already constructed. They cannot be used
to build or construct. They
are not true equivalents to magnetic tiles or water marbling paints. Controllers
for toy planes are also
finished articles. They have a particular use to control
toy planes are not equivalents in any sense of the word to magnetic tiles
water marbling paints.
conclusion, I find that the second requirement succeeds in respect of
‘toys; toy models; toys for children; toy model kits;
infant toys; toy
blocks; educational toys for infants; toy construction blocks; toy construction
kits; toy building blocks’
Conflicting Goods
not in respect of the Subset Goods. As a consequence, the s 58 ground is
successful for the Conflicting Goods.
will now consider the remaining grounds with respect to the Subset
Section 62A
62A provides:
Application made in bad faith
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the
application was made in bad faith
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Trade Marks Amendment Bill 2006
some non-exhaustive examples of applications made in bad faith:
persons who
monitor new property developments, register the names of new developments as
trade marks for a number of services and
then threaten the property developers
with trade mark infringement proceedings unless the developers licence or buy
the trade marks;
persons who have
a history of applying for trade marks that are deliberate misspellings of other
registered trade marks;
persons who
identify trade marks used overseas but with no Australian use as yet who then
apply to register the trade marks in Australia
for the express purpose of
selling them to the overseas owners.
Federal Court has substantively considered the issue of bad faith in
Consulting Pty Ltd v Sports Warehouse Inc (No
DC Comics v
Cheqout Pty Ltd.
following propositions emerge from these decisions which are relevant to the
present opposition:
Bad faith for
the purposes of s 62A must be [as at the Relevant Date] and must relate to the
making of the subject of that
application.
Bad faith is a
serious allegation that ‘impugns the character of an individual or
collective character of a business’
and requires correspondingly cogent
evidence. The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities, rather than
that of beyond reasonable
Conduct that
falls short of the standards of acceptable commercial behaviour observed by
reasonable and experienced persons in the
particular area is sufficient. Bad
faith does not require
dishonesty.
As stated by
Dodds-Streeton J in
Fry Consulting
Further, in my view, mere
negligence, incompetence or a lack of prudence to reasonable and experienced
standards would not, in themselves,
suffice, as the concept of bad faith imports
conduct which, irrespective of the form it takes, is of an unscrupulous,
underhand or
unconscientious
The registration
of a trade mark is designed to enable bona fide proprietors to protect their
proprietary rights without having to
prove unfair
circumstances surrounding the application to register the mark are
A prior business
connection with and knowledge of the opponent by the applicant such that a
person standing in the shoes of the applicant
should have known that he should
not have applied for a trade mark deceptively similar to that used by the
opponent is sufficient
for a finding of bad
decided cases have established that assessing whether an application was filed
in bad faith is a two-step test with a subjective
and an objective element. The
subjective element requires findings as to what the Applicant knew at the filing
date. The objective
element then asks: armed with that knowledge, would a person
adopting proper standards of commercial behaviour consider the act of
trade mark to be in bad faith?
Opponent bears the onus of establishing that the filing of the Application was
in bad faith and it will not be easily established
given the serious nature of
the allegation.
SGP claims the following:
the purposes of considering the s 62A ground of opposition and determining the
Applicant’s subjective intention, it is necessary
to look at the
circumstances surrounding the filing of the Application which includes the
relevant actions of each party.
to the details of the Australian and Overseas Marks from the WIPO Global Brand
even though the goods covered by
these marks have not been provided, I have no reason to question the veracity of
Chen’s claim
that the Applicant has filed a large number of trade marks of
which the Applicant is not the owner.
note that the majority of the trade marks of the Australian and Overseas Marks
do not consist of descriptive words, well known words
or obvious combinations of
words such as portmanteau words, but rather they consist of highly invented and
distinctive words including
Gigilli, ITODOS, FishYuan, PROTECLE, FEimaX, Zonon,
flintronic, Mildiso, Mingtex, morfone, MeiLiMiYu, KOONIE, Wohlmen, Skoutag and
NETANY. Further, some of the Australian Marks are rendered in matching lower
case or capitalisation to that of the Overseas Marks
e.g. FEimaX, PROTECLE and
Zonon and some have minor changes in capitalisation of letters perhaps to ensure
the Australian Marks are
not identical to the Overseas Marks e.g. FishYuan
rather than FISHYUAN, iTODOS rather than ITODOS and MeiLiMiYu rather than
To me, this heightens the cloud over the conduct of the Applicant. In
my view, it seems a highly unlikely coincidence that the Applicant
adopted and
filed so many unusual trade marks, including the Trade Mark, without knowledge
of any of the Overseas Marks.
the evidence before me, I find that the above circumstances raise an inference
that the Application was filed in of bad faith which
requires a response from
the Applicant. The Applicant has not participated in this opposition other than
filing a Notice of Intention
to Defend the opposition. Therefore, the Applicant
has not refuted the accuracy of the Opponent’s evidence and claims nor
evidence or submissions in response. In the absence of a response from
the Applicant, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that a person
standing in the Applicant’s shoes should have known that it should not
apply for the registration of the Trade
Mark. The Applicant has engaged in
a pattern of behaviour with respect to the filing of the Australian
Marks which were already filed
or registered overseas, and such conduct falls
well short of the standards of acceptable commercial behaviour observed by
and experienced persons. Hence the s 62A ground of opposition is
successful.
the circumstances of this case, noting that in many other cases it is
commercially standard to negotiate settlements around trade
mark disputes, I
also add that the Applicant’s conduct in trying to extract a percentage of
the Opponent’s profits to
sell the Application to the Opponent further
heightens the cloud over the conduct of the Applicant.
found the s 62A ground of opposition established for the Subset Goods, it is
unnecessary that the remaining ground under s
considered.
55 relevantly provides:
(1) Unless subsection (3) applies to the proceedings, the Registrar
must, at the end, decide:
(a) to refuse to register the trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations)
in respect of the goods and/or services then specified
in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
limitations
see section 6.
Opponent has established on the balance of probabilities, the grounds of
opposition under s 58 and 62A. I accordingly refuse to
register the Application.
If the Registrar is served with a notice of appeal within one month from the
date of this decision, I direct
that the disposition of the Application be in
accordance with the court’s direction or order.
Opponent has sought costs. I see no reason to depart from the general rule that
costs follow the event. I accordingly award costs
against the Applicant under s
221 in the relevant amounts under Schedule 8 of the
Regulations.
Anne Makrigiorgos
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
Unless otherwise stated, each
reference to a section is a reference to a section of the
Trade Marks Act
’) and each reference to a regulation is
a reference to a regulation in the
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
Regulations
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd
v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and
Telstra Corporation Limited
v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot
and Edelmann JJ).
Southern Cross Refrigerating
Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 82
, [4] (Kitto J).
Accor Australia & New
Zealand Hospitality Pty Ltd v Liv Pty Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 56
, [170] (Greenwood,
Besanko and Katzmann JJ). See also
PB Foods Ltd v Malanda Dairy Foods Ltd
[1999] FCA 1602
, [78]-[80] (Carr J).
Pham Global Pty Ltd v
Insight Clinical Imaging Pty Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 83
, [29] (Greenwood, Jagot and
Anchorage Capital Partners
Pty Limited v ACPA Pty Ltd
[2018] FCAFC 6
, [48] (Nicholas, Yates and Beach
Carnival Cruise Lines Inc
v Sitmar Cruises Limited
[1994] FCA 936
, [62] (Gummow J).
[1897] VicLawRp 118
(1897) 22 VLR 636
, 640 (Holroyd J).
Settef SpA v Riv-Oland
Marble Co (Vic) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 IPR 402
, 413 (McGarvie J).
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 16 September 2025) ‘infant’ (def. 1).
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 16 September 2025) ‘infant’ (def. 2).
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 16 September 2025) ‘infant’ (def. 4).
[2006] FCA 160
[2007] FCAFC 184
[2012] FCA 81
(Dodds-Streeton
Fry Consulting
[2013] FCA 478 (Bennett
Fry Consulting
21), [145].
Ibid [147]-[148] and
Ibid [166].
Fry Consulting
21), [156].
Hard Coffee Pty Ltd v
Hard Coffee Main Beach Pty Ltd
[2009] ATMO 26
, [12] (Hearing Officer
Nancarrow).
RTF format (755 KB)
Signed PDF/A format