URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1988/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hunter Resources Ltd v Melville [1988] HCA 5; (1988) 164 CLR 234 (18 February 1988)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
HUNTER RESOURCES LIMITED v. MELVILLE AND ANOTHER
[1988] HCA 5
; (1988) 164 CLR 234
F.C. 88/003
Mining(W.A.) - Statutes
High Court of Australia
Mason C.J.(1), Wilson(2), Dawson(3), Toohey(4) and Gaudron(1) JJ.
Mining (W.A.) - Prospecting licence - Requirements - Tenement to be marked
out in prescribed manner - Marking out requirement of
posts at intervals not
exceeding 300 metres along boundaries - Application Effect of failure to
comply strictly with marking out
requirement -
Mining Act 1978
Mining Regulations 1981
(W.A.), reg. 59.
Statutes - Interpretation - Mandatory and directory provisions - Substantial
compliance.
1987, Perth, September 16.
1988, Canberra, February 18. 18:2:1988
APPEAL from the Supreme Court of Western Australia.
This appeal presents an issue of some importance relating to mining titles
in Western Australia. The issue in question is whether
the power of a mining
warden to grant a prospecting licence under
Mining Act 1978
(W.A.) ("the
") is conditioned upon precise compliance by the applicant
with the requirements of reg.59 of the
Mining Regulations 1981
regulating the marking out of the land which is the subject of the
application. The warden resolved the issue in the affirmative.
Court of the Supreme Court by majority (Brinsden and Rowland JJ., with Olney
J. dissenting) rejected this view, holding
that substantial compliance was
sufficient. The appellant contends that the mining warden was correct.
2. Before turning to the question of law we should refer briefly to the facts
and to the relevant statutory provisions. The first
named respondent Brian
Anthony Melville ("the respondent Melville") made application for a
prospecting licence under
covering 52.5 hectares of land at
Mertondale.
Section 40(1)
provides "Subject to this
, the warden may, on
the application
of any person grant to that person a licence to be known as a
prospecting licence".
Section 41(1)
provides that an application shall
the prescribed form and shall be accompanied by a map on which are clearly
delineated the
boundaries of the area of the land
in respect of which the
licence is sought together with a written description of the area. The
application, which was accompanied
by a map, described the land as follows:
"Datum peg situated 1550 metres at 279 degrees from most
northerly corner of late surveyed M.C. 15C; thence
1500 m at 270 degrees
350 m at 360 degrees
1500 m at 90 degrees."
3. The appellant's amended objection claimed that the respondent failed to
mark out the area applied for in accordance with the
and regulations in
that inter alia he "failed to space pegs within the allowable distances".
Section 105
, which applies to prospecting licences in common
with other mining tenements, provides:
"Before making an application for a mining tenement
other than an exploration licence, the applicant
shall mark out in the prescribed manner and in the
prescribed shape the land in respect of which the
mining tenement is sought."
Regulation 59
, which applies to the marking out of land whose boundaries
have not been previously surveyed, provides:
"A mining tenement shall, unless where otherwise
expressly provided, be marked out in the following
(b) by fixing firmly in the ground at intervals
not exceeding 300 metres along each of the
boundary lines of the mining tenement,
substantial pegs or cairns of stones
projecting not less than 1 metre above the
surface of the ground and set between two
trenches not less than 1 metre in length and
15 centimetres deep, cut in the direction of
the boundary line on which it is so fixed ..."
Regulation 92
provides that the shape of a mining tenement other than a
miscellaneous licence or one marked out pursuant to reg.61
but if the boundaries of mining tenements, other boundaries or
natural features make it necessary or desirable
to vary this shape,
of the tenement shall be a straight line and where possible at right angles to
an adjacent side or
parallel to an opposite
7. The respondent Melville's application for a prospecting licence was heard
by the warden, Mr Reynolds S.M., pursuant to
. He found in
favour of the appellant, holding that the respondent had not marked out the
land in accordance with reg.59,
the respondent
conceding that there were
intervals in excess of 300 metres between pegs along two of the boundary
lines. There were
intervals. One was on the northern boundary,
being 302 metres; others were on the southern boundary, being 301 metres
303 metres.
In all other respects there was compliance with the marking out
requirements, so that the non-compliance was minor
and would not
have misled
anyone inspecting the land with a view to identifying the area of land claimed
by the respondent Melville.
considered that the language of the
and the regulations on their true construction required precise compliance
the marking out provisions and did not admit of any
doctrine of
substantial compliance. Accordingly, he upheld the objection and
refused the
application.
8. The appellant submits that the warden's decision was consistent with his
taking the view that non-compliance with reg.59 was
a factor which, in the
exercise of his discretion, should lead him to refuse the application. The
warden's reasons for his decision
are not susceptible of this interpretation.
He considered that precise compliance with reg.59 was mandatory and that he
had no discretion
to dispense with non-compliance.
9. The respondent Melville obtained an order nisi for certiorari. The order
nisi was subsequently made absolute by the Full Court
of the Supreme Court on
the ground that the warden misconstrued the relevant statutory provisions. It
seems to have been assumed
that, once such a misconstruction was established,
a case for relief by way of certiorari for error on the face of the record was
made out. The availability of this form of relief was not disputed in this
10. The appellant's principal submission is that
is mandatory. Not
only does it say that "the applicant shall mark out" but
also that he shall do
so "in the prescribed manner" and
"in the prescribed shape". And reg.59,
which prescribes the mode of marking
out, requires that pegs be placed at
intervals "not
exceeding 300 metres". On their face these provisions permit
no latitude and
no dispensing power is conferred on the warden. The
then points to
which, in the case of competing or conflicting
applications, gives priority to "the applicant who first complies with the
requirement in relation to his application".
Sub-section (2) defines
the expression "complies with the initial requirement" as meaning
in the case
of an application for a prospecting
licence "marks out the land or part
concerned in the prescribed manner".
11. These provisions, so the argument runs, give expression to a policy which
denies to the warden any discretionary power to decide
non-compliance with the marking out requirements should be excused. In this
regard the appellant points to
authorizes the Minister to grant
or refuse a mining lease as he thinks fit, notwithstanding that the applicant
may or may not
in all respects complied with the provisions of the
There is no comparable provision authorizing the grant of a prospecting
licence or for that matter any mining tenement other than
a mining lease
despite non-compliance with the provisions of the
12. An applicant may appeal to the Minister against the warden's refusal of
his application for a prospecting licence: see
no appeal to the Minister against the warden's grant of a licence. It is
suggested that although the warden
to refuse an application once he
is satisfied that there has been non-compliance, the Minister on appeal has a
the licence notwithstanding the warden's finding on that
matter, even if the Minister considers the finding to be correct.
13. According to the appellant, the policy to which we have just referred has
the advantage of ensuring certainty and stability
in the recognition of title
to mining tenements. Indeed, it is suggested that the certainty which would
flow from a regime of strict
compliance with the marking out requirements was
one of the purposes which the
sought to achieve. In support of this
the appellant relies on
Interpretation Act 1984
and certain extrinsic materials.
Section 19(1)
enables consideration to be
given to extrinsic material to determine the meaning of a provision of a
written law where the provision
is ambiguous or obscure.
Section 19(2)
enables such consideration to be given to a report of a committee of inquiry
that was laid before either House of Parliament before
the time when the
provision was enacted
(s.19(2)(c))
and a Minister's speech on the second
reading of the Bill containing the provision
(s.19(2)(f)).
14. The extrinsic material which the Court is invited to examine is the
Minister's second reading speech in the Legislative Council
on the occasion
when an amendment was made to the
in 1985 and the report dated 18 January
1984 of the
Inquiry Committee.
The Minister stated that the
amendment generally followed the recommendations of the Committee with some
modifications.
recommended that a proposal made to the Committee to
confer power to dispense with strict compliance with the formalities
to an application for a mining tenement, except in the case of an application
for a mining lease where such a power existed,
be rejected. The
Committee's view was that the requirements for compliance were clearly stated,
that the introduction of
a discretionary
power to dispense with formalities
would bring about uncertainty and conflicting decisions and was opposed by the
mining industry.
15. It is evident that the extrinsic materials are not materials which the
Court should consider under
in arriving at an interpretation
relevant statutory provisions which were enacted before 1984. The extrinsic
materials do
not relate to the legislative history
or antecedents of any of
the provisions which fall for consideration in the present case.
materials relate to other provisions
and provide a possible explanation for a
legislative disinclination to amend the provisions
with which we are presently
As such the Minister's second reading speech and the report amount
to nothing more than an
expression of opinion of what the relevant
legislation
means. This is not a matter to which we should have regard.
16. It is a matter then of construing the relevant provisions of the
their context which of course includes the scope and
purpose of the statute.
We begin with the command in
that, before applying for a mining
tenement, an applicant shall mark out
the land applied for in the prescribed
manner. The statute
thereby imposes an obligation on an intending applicant
to comply with
the requirements of the regulations as to marking out. Neither
nor any other provision in the
gives any indication that
less than exact compliance with these requirements is a sufficient
satisfaction of the statutory
obligation. And, when
we look beyond the
statute to reg.59, we find that it prescribes that pegs shall be placed at a
distance "not
exceeding 300 metres",
the distance so prescribed being the
maximum permitted distance.
17. However, we need to keep in mind that the question at issue is not
whether the respondent complied in all respects with reg.59.
The question is
whether it was open to the warden to grant a prospecting licence,
notwithstanding non-compliance with that regulation.
18. In arguing for an affirmative answer to this question the respondent
Melville relies on a number of matters. First, neither
nor any other
provision of the
conditions the warden's power to grant a licence on his
being satisfied that there has
been a compliance with
Indeed, the
does not specifically require the warden to satisfy himself that an applicant
out in the prescribed manner and in the
prescribed shape. True it
provides that the warden shall hear applications
prospecting licences in open court and that any person is entitled to object
to the granting of the application. This provision
suggests, subject to a
qualification to be mentioned later, that there is to
be a hearing of the
application whether there is an
objection or not. But the
require an applicant to furnish with his application details of his marking
out or to establish
that marking out has taken
place. The warden has power to
require information in addition to that which accompanies the application
to give such evidence
as he may require
However, the existence of
this discretionary power to call for evidence - on
the matter of marking out -
is a fragile foundation
for an implication that in all cases the warden must
satisfy himself that the
applicant has marked out in the manner and shape
prescribed,
let alone an implication that such satisfaction is a condition
to the grant of a licence.
Section 40(4)
, which was introduced in 1985, is at odds with such an
implication. The sub-section provides that in certain
circumstances, the
approval of the warden to the grant of a prospecting licence may be deemed to
have been given, without any hearing
by him. The circumstances
in which such
provision may be deemed to have been given are (a) where the applicant
satisfies the mining
registrar that the land
is unoccupied Crown land, or is
Crown land used for grazing purposes only under certain classes of lease
is otherwise unoccupied;
(b) no notice of objection has been lodged within
the prescribed time; and (c) the applicant satisfies
the mining registrar
all persons required to be served with a notice of the application have
been so served and that a period
of not less than 30 days
has elapsed
thereafter. Although the sub-section operates as a qualification or exception
to the general
provisions of
, it provides confirmation of the view that
neither marking out in precise compliance with
and reg.59, nor
to that effect by the warden, is a condition precedent to the grant of a
20. Neither the
nor the regulations define or delimit the grounds on
which objections may be lodged. It has been assumed, correctly
in our view,
that non-compliance with the marking out requirements is a permissible ground
of objection. In the light of
it is certainly to be implied that the
warden will inquire into the matter of marking out if an objection is lodged
claiming that
there has been no marking out or that the marking out does not
comply with the
and the requirements. But it does not follow
is also to be implied a condition on the warden's power to grant a licence
that he is satisfied that the applicant has
marked out in the manner and shape
prescribed. True it is that
, which authorizes the warden to grant
prospecting licences,
commences with the words "Subject to this
perhaps possible that the draftsman intended by these words to condition the
power to grant a licence on compliance by the
applicant with the requirements
as to marking out. However, if the power to grant
were so conditioned, it
would mean, subject to
the operation of
to which we will refer
shortly, that the licence would be
vulnerable to subsequent attack with
consequential uncertainty as to the
validity of titles to mining tenements.
And the words in
question are scarcely apt to require the warden to satisfy
himself that
marking out in the prescribed manner and shape has taken
and to condition the power to grant a licence on his being so satisfied.
Section 116(2)
"Except in the case of fraud, a mining tenement
granted or renewed under this
shall not be
impeached or defeasible by reason or on account of
any informality or irregularity in the application
or in the proceedings previous to the grant or
renewal of that tenement ..."
The reference to "proceedings previous to the grant or renewal of that
tenement" is wide enough to comprehend an irregularity in the
proceedings
before the warden and in the marking out of the land the subject of the grant
or renewal. The sub-section is designed
to protect the grant or renewal of a
licence as a root of title and it gives emphasis to the statutory policy that
the grant or renewal
is a root of title.
22. It is also of some significance that
, which deals with
exploration licences, expressly provides that the warden shall
not recommend
the grant of such a licence unless
he is satisfied that the applicant is able
to effectively explore the land in respect
of which the application is made.
In this respect
expressly conditions the power of the warden to make a
recommendation for
the grant of a licence.
23. The factors to which we have pointed indicate that the warden's power to
grant a prospecting licence is not conditioned in the
manner suggested by the
appellant. In combination they are more cogent than the indications on which
the appellant relies.
, to which we have already referred, is to
be explained on the footing that it was thought necessary to make specific
the validity of mining leases because they are a
particularly valuable class of tenement. For this reason we are disinclined
as a basis for making any general implication.
Regulation 119
, proceeds on the footing that a licence may
be granted notwithstanding a failure to comply in all
respects with the
obligation imposed
. The regulation provides that where a
surveyor finds that any mining tenement
or application therefor is not marked
out in the prescribed
shape, he may, where practicable, adjust the boundaries.
Accordingly,
the regulation contemplates that a marking out which does not
comply with the obligation imposed by
, may none the less ground
grant of a prospecting licence.
25. Of course it is not permissible to interpret the statute by reference to
the regulations. All that we can gain from reg.119
is that it proceeds in
conformity with the interpretation which we have placed on the
this, despite the possibility
that a distinction might be drawn between the
consequences of non-compliance with the requirements
as to the manner of
marking out
and those as to shape. There is perhaps more reason for allowing
latitude and flexibility in relation
to the latter than the former.
obligation imposed by
is to comply with what is prescribed by the
regulations on both counts. And in the end the critical
question remains the
Is compliance or a finding of compliance a condition precedent to the
grant of a licence?
26. There is force in the point made by Rowland J. in the Full Court of the
Supreme Court that the
and the regulations should
be interpreted in the
light of an appreciation, born of experience, that for various reasons the
out of land not infrequently
involves non-compliance in some respects
with the prescribed requirements. To make precise compliance
a condition
precedent to the
grant of a licence would give an advantage over other persons
to large mining companies which have the
equipment, the resources and
staff to ensure such compliance. And there seems to be no compelling reason
for supposing that
the legislature would wish to
exclude power in the warden,
as distinct from the Minister, to grant a licence to an applicant who
failed to comply in a trivial
respect only with the prescribed requirements.
may be read as confirming the power of the warden to make a
in such circumstances and as preserving his grant from subsequent
Section 105A
does not support the appellant's case. It may be read as
providing that, in the case of competing or conflicting
applications, the
applicant who has marked out in precise conformity with the
regulations shall have a prior claim.
This is not to deny that the warden has
power to grant a licence to an applicant who
has not complied in all respects
is no competing or conflicting claim.
28. Much of the argument before us was directed to the question whether that
part of reg.59 which called for the placing of posts
at distances "not
exceeding 300 metres" was directory or mandatory. The outcome of the appeal
turns on the interpretation of the
statute rather than on the regulation. In
the present case we have preferred to resolve the problem by reference to the
provisions without examining authorities which deal with other
provisions.
29. For the foregoing reasons we would dismiss the appeal.
I have come to the same conclusion as Dawson J. Save for his Honour's
reliance upon the extrinsic materials to which he refers,
I agree generally
with his Honour's reasons.
2. The problem is one of the proper construction of the
Mining Act 1978
(W.A.) ("the
"), the critical question being: is the warden obliged to
refuse an application for a prospecting licence when it
is shown that the
applicant has failed to comply with the marking out requirements? In my view,
Section 105
mandatory in its terms. The applicant shall
mark out the land in the prescribed manner and he shall do it before he
applies for
the licence. The warden's power to grant a licence is expressed to
be "(s)ubject to this
Section 105A
in 1981) is of
particular significance. That section, prior to its amendment in a respect
which is not material to the
present case
by amending
No.1 of 1986, read
as follows:
"105A. (1) If 2 or more applications are made for
a mining tenement (other than a miscellaneous
licence) in respect of the same land or any part
thereof, the applicant who first complies with the
initial requirement in relation to his application
has, subject to this
, the right in priority
over every other applicant to have granted to him
in respect of that land or part the mining tenement
to which his application relates.
(2) In this section -
'complies with the initial requirement' means -
(a) in the case of an application for an
exploration licence, lodges that
application with the mining registrar; or
(b) in the case of an application for a
prospecting licence, mining lease or
general purpose lease, marks out the land
or part concerned in the prescribed
When this section was introduced into the
in 1981, the section repeated in
relation to prospecting licences a provision which
was already expressed in
as originally enacted. It emphasized the legislative
intention that marking out in the
prescribed manner was to be determinative
priority as between competing applications.
was repealed by
No.122 of 1982. It seems to me that it is a necessary
consequence of these provisions that an applicant for a prospecting licence
cannot, in the case of a contested hearing of the application, be granted a
licence if he has not first marked out the land in accordance
Regulations 1981
(W.A.). Those regulations require that pegs or cairns be
fixed along the boundary lines of the land at intervals "not exceeding
metres" (reg.59(b)). One cannot speak of "substantial compliance" with a
requirement expressed in those terms. The marking
out is either in accordance
with the regulations or it is not. The requirement is not one with which it
is difficult to comply.
The absence of a prescribed minimum distance between
the marks allows for their placement at such intervals, not exceeding 300
as may be most convenient having regard to the nature of the terrain.
3. It is of no moment that in the absence of objection there may be no
occasion for the warden to satisfy himself as to compliance.
The requirement
that the land be marked out in accordance with the regulations applies
generally to every application for a prospecting
licence but the
impose a duty of inquiry upon the warden or, in the case of an application
coming under
mining registrar. In the absence of any objection
as to compliance, there is no question of priority under
be determined and the issue does not arise. In effect the
distinction between contested and uncontested applications.
This may be
explained as an aid to certainty and by the fact
that the legislature is
concerned to minimize the area of disputation
in the warden's court between
competitors for potentially valuable
mining interests. But, however it be
explained, the fact remains
it is the necessary consequence of the statutory
provisions.
4. Once a licence is granted,
has the effect of protecting the
prospecting licence from attack on the basis of, inter alia,
non-compliance
with the marking out
requirements. Whether the power of the Minister
conferred by
in dealing with an appeal
from the decision of the warden
refusing an application for want of compliance extends to a power to grant
application notwithstanding
non-compliance is a question that does not require
to be answered in order to dispose of this appeal.
An affirmative answer to
question would not affect my conclusion as to the more limited powers of
the warden.
5. Although I have paid regard to the various other statutory provisions
referred to by the first respondent, I do not find them
of assistance in
answering the critical question.
6. I would allow the appeal.
Brian Anthony Melville, the first respondent, was an applicant under the
Mining Act 1978
(W.A.) ("the
") for a prospecting licence. That, under the
, is a form of mining tenement and it is provided in
"Before making an application for a mining
tenement other than an exploration licence, the
applicant shall mark out in the prescribed manner
and in the prescribed shape the land in respect of
which the mining tenement is sought."
Regulations made under the
Mining Regulations 1981
(W.A.), prescribe
the manner of marking out land for the purpose of an application for a mining
Regulation 59
"A mining tenement shall, unless where otherwise
expressly provided, be marked out in the following
(a) by fixing firmly in the ground at each
corner or angle of the mining tenement,
or as near as practicable thereto, a
substantial post or cairn of stones
projecting not less than 1 metre above
the surface of the ground and set in the
angle of two trenches commencing between
1.5 and 2 metres from the post or cairn,
not less than 1 metre in length and 15
centimetres deep, cut in the direction of
the boundary lines;
(b) by fixing firmly in the ground at
intervals not exceeding 300 metres along
each of the boundary lines of the mining
tenement, substantial pegs or cairns of
stones projecting not less than 1 metre
above the surface of the ground and set
between two trenches not less than 1
metre in length and 15 centimetres deep,
cut in the direction of the boundary line
on which it is so fixed, but such pegs
and trenches are not required in respect
to any boundary line or portion thereof
(i) coincides with a previously
surveyed boundary, a fence,
railway line, road or other
similar well defined feature if
such boundary, or feature is
referred to in the description of
the tenement recorded on the
notice of marking out in the form
No. 20 and the application in the
form No. 21 in the First
(ii) is within an existing townsite or
built up area; or
(iii) is situated on private land;
(c) on the completion of the requirements of
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this regulation
by fixing firmly to one of the corner
posts or cairns which shall be the datum
post, notice of marking out in the form
No. 20 in the First Schedule."
2. The first respondent marked out the area of land which was the subject of
his application, but in so doing fixed certain of the
intermediate pegs on the
boundaries so that there were three intervals of more than 300 metres. The
discrepancies were not large,
the distances being 301, 302 and 303 metres.
When the first respondent's application came on for hearing in the warden's
court there
was an objection by the appellant alleging that the first
respondent had failed to mark out the land in accordance with the
regulations. The warden upheld the objection, finding that the first
respondent had failed to comply with reg.59(b) in that
intervals exceeding 300 metres between pegs along two of the boundaries of the
relevant land. Accordingly he refused
the application.
3. The first respondent sought to contest the warden's decision by making
application for a writ of certiorari. The order nisi to
show cause was made
returnable before the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Western Australia.
That Court, by a majority (Brinsden
and Rowland JJ.; Olney J. dissenting),
made the order absolute and remitted the application and objection to the
warden to be determined
according to law. It is from that decision that the
appellant now appeals to this Court.
, the warden may, "(s)ubject to this
prospecting licence to an applicant.
Section 41(1)(c)
requires the application
to be made by reference to a written description of the area of land in
respect of which the licence is
sought, and to be accompanied by a map on
which are clearly delineated the boundaries of that area. A survey of the
area for which
a prospecting licence is sought is not required in the first
instance but may be ordered if a dispute arises with respect to the
the boundaries in order to settle the dispute:
Where there is more
than one application for a mining tenement
(other than a miscellaneous
licensee) in respect of the same land,
the applicant who first complies with
the initial requirement
in relation to his application has, subject to the
, priority:
In the case of a prospecting licence, compliance
the initial requirement means the marking out of the land in the
5. The issue between the appellant and the first respondent is a narrow one.
The appellant contends that the warden was obliged
to uphold the objection and
refuse the application because there was a failure on the part of the first
respondent to comply with
the relevant marking-out requirement. The first
respondent, on the other hand, contends that substantial compliance with that
requirement
is sufficient to preserve the validity of the application and that
he achieved this.
6. When substantial compliance is held to be a sufficient observance of a
statutory requirement it is because the statutory provision
containing the
requirement is regarded as directory rather than mandatory. Thus in Woodward
v. Sarsons (1875) LR 10 CP 733, at pp
746-747 Lord Coleridge C.J. said that
"the general rule is, that an absolute enactment must be obeyed or fulfilled
exactly, but it
is sufficient if a directory enactment be obeyed or fulfilled
substantially". One of the difficulties of putting the matter in that
that there are some statutory requirements with which there cannot be
substantial compliance - either they are complied with
or not - which have
nevertheless been regarded as directory only. This led Gibbs J. in Victoria
v. The Commonwealth and Connor
[1975] HCA 39
134 CLR 81, at pp 161-162 to doubt the
statement of Lord Coleridge and to prefer what was said by the majority of
[1960] HCA 92
; (1960) 105 CLR 214, at p 247:
"Lawyers speak of statutory provisions as
imperative when any want of strict compliance with
them means that the resulting act, be it a statute,
a contract or what you will, is null and void.
They speak of them as directory when they mean that
although they are legal requirements which it is
unlawful to disregard, yet failure to fulfil them
does not mean that the resulting act is wholly
ineffective, is null and void."
In the same case, Victoria v. The Commonwealth and Connor, Stephen J. at p 180
appears to depart from the view which he expressed
in Scurr v. Brisbane City
[1973] HCA 39
; (1973) 133 CLR 242, at p 256 that a directory interpretation of a
statutory requirement
necessitates,
as a condition of validity,
should be substantial compliance with the requirement. In the later case he
recognized that
a directory construction
can be given preserving validity
notwithstanding total non-compliance.
7. The point is relevant because this is a case, in my view, in which
substantial compliance with the relevant statutory requirement
possible. Either there was compliance or there was not. The requirement was
that pegs or cairns be fixed along the boundary
lines of the mining tenement
at intervals not exceeding 300 metres. Either the intervals exceeded 300
metres or they did not. I
am unable to understand how it can be said that to
exceed the maximum limit was substantially to comply with it. Any number of
in the distances between pegs up to 300 metres was permissible, but
a distance of more than 300 metres was not a compliance at all,
substantial compliance, with a provision which forbids intervals of more than
300 metres in length. Had reg.59 required
the intervals to be 300 metres in
length, then it is perfectly conceivable that there might have been
substantial compliance with
the requirement. But it did not. It prescribed a
maximum length - a limit - which was either observed or was not.
8. If it were possible to regard reg.59 as playing a subsidiary part to some
more general requirement, it might, perhaps, be contended
that there was
substantial compliance with the general requirement even though there was no
compliance at all with reg.59. I am
not at all sure that this is how the
first respondent put his case, but in any event such an argument cannot in my
view be sustained
in the context of this legislation.
Section 105(1)
requires an applicant for a mining tenement to mark out in the prescribed
manner and shape the land in respect of which the mining
tenement is sought.
The prescription of the manner and shape in which the
land is to be marked out
does not occupy a subordinate
position; it supplies the whole of the content
of the statutory requirement
which otherwise is without effect. The
requirement of
necessarily imports the requirements of reg.59 and it
is not possible,
in my view, to speak of the latter being subordinate to the
former in the sense that there might be substantial compliance with
despite non-compliance with reg.59.
9. However, the matter does not end there because, as I have said, not even
substantial compliance has been thought necessary in
some cases and acts done
in total disregard of the statutory requirements have nevertheless been held
to be effective. Instances
are given by Stephen J. in Victoria v. The
Commonwealth and Connor at p 180. A subsequent example is to be found in
Attorney-General
(N.S.W.) ex rel. Franklins Stores Pty. Ltd. v. Lizelle Pty.
Ltd. and Others (1977) 2 NSWLR 955. Even then there may be difficulty
expressing the consequences. For example, if the marking-out requirement in
this case were to be regarded as merely directory,
it would not seem
particularly apt to say, taking up the words cited from Clayton v. Heffron,
that the act resulting from non-compliance
(presumably the application for the
prospecting licence) was nevertheless not wholly ineffective, null and void.
Rather the question
would seem to be whether the warden, upon concluding that
there was non-compliance, was bound to reject the application. I shall
to that aspect of the matter in a moment.
10. At least some of the difficulty stems from the fact that the language
customarily used to describe the dichotomy between mandatory
and directory
enactments is based upon a distinction between the performance of a public
duty and the acquisition or exercise of
a private right. Indeed, the
classification of provisions as merely directory sometimes appears to have
been regarded as confined
to enactments dealing with public duties. Thus in
Montreal Street Railway Company v. Normandin (1917) AC 170 the Privy Council
a well-known passage expressed the principle as follows at p 175:
"When the provisions of a statute relate to the
performance of a public duty and the case is such
that to hold null and void acts done in neglect of
this duty would work serious general inconvenience,
or injustice to persons who have no control over
those entrusted with the duty, and at the same time
would not promote the main object of the
Legislature, it has been the practice to hold such
provisions to be directory only, the neglect of
them, though punishable, not affecting the validity
of the acts done."
That case is a good illustration of the application of the principle in the
area of public duty. The failure of the sheriff in that
case to cause the
jury list to be revised pursuant to a statutory duty to do so was held not to
have invalidated the verdict of a
jury selected from names on the unrevised
11. But in this case the statutory requirement involves no public duty; it is
merely a step which an applicant, who owes no duty
to anyone but himself, must
take for his application to succeed under the
. The question is not
whether the first respondent's
application was null and void because it was
not preceded by observance of the
relevant marking-out requirement or whether
insufficient to invoke the jurisdiction of the warden - for it is clear
warden must have had jurisdiction to dispose of
the application in
one way or another - but whether the warden acted in accordance
with the law
in rejecting it for non-compliance
. The warden may only grant a
prospecting licence subject to the
and therefore it is apparent that he
may not properly
proceed to grant a licence upon an application made in
contravention of a requirement
. If, therefore, the
strict observance of the marking-out requirements, it cannot be said that the
warden erred in refusing the first respondent's
application
because of his
failure to observe them. That is the question: whether the warden proceeded
in accordance with the law
in determining
that the first respondent failed to
meet the relevant marking-out requirements. The question is not whether the
to entertain the first respondent's application was
conditioned upon the first respondent's observance of the marking-out
requirements
for it may be conceded that it was not. Correctly or otherwise,
it appears to have been accepted on both sides that
such a question
properly be raised in proceedings by way of certiorari.
12. If the concept of a directory enactment is extended to private rights,
the question whether a provision is mandatory or directory
must nevertheless
be one of intent to be gleaned from the scope and object of the statute:
Caldow v. Pixell (1877) 2 CPD 562, at
p 566. It is a question of what
consequences, if any, were intended to flow from the failure to comply with
the statutory requirement
and even if the difference between the performance
of a public duty and the acquisition or exercise of a private right is not
conclusive,
that distinction does at least provide some guidance in
distinguishing those provisions with which strict compliance was intended
those with which it was not. That point was made in Clayton v. Heffron at p
"But in them all (the decided cases) the
performance of a public duty or the fulfilment of a
public function by a body of persons to whom the
task is confided is regarded as something to be
contrasted with the acquisition or exercise of
private rights or privileges and the fact that to
treat a deviation in the former case from the
conditions or directions laid down as meaning
complete invalidity would work inconvenience or
worse on a section of the public is treated as a
powerful consideration against doing so."
13. No public function is imposed upon an applicant for a prospecting licence
and no public inconvenience is worked by holding him
to strict compliance with
the prescribed conditions to be performed before the making of an application
- indeed, public inconvenience
may more easily be seen to flow from the
failure to do so. It is apparent from other decisions of the warden that in
of Western Australia there is fierce competition for mining
tenements. More than one application may be received in respect of the
ground. Under
the applicant who first marks out the land in
the prescribed manner has priority. The only
practical course is for the
deal first with the application which on the face of it is first in
time. If (assuming it
to be possible notwithstanding the wording
regulation) substantial compliance with the marking-out requirements were
sufficient,
then an application which was first
in time because short cuts
were taken in marking out might achieve priority over an application
made later because of the
delay involved in complying strictly with the
requirements. Moreover, (again assuming it to
be possible) if substantial
with the requirement in question were sufficient, it is likely that
the warden would be led
by necessity to fix some limit over 300
metres beyond
which compliance would not be substantial. That would effectively establish
new maximum distance, greater than that
clearly set by the legislature. Yet
until some such limit was fixed there would be uncertainty
substantial compliance.
14. On the other hand, little, if any, inconvenience would result from
insistence upon a strict compliance with the marking-out
requirements. The
specified interval of 300 metres between pegs is a maximum distance so that
any difficulty in achieving precision
might be overcome by erring on the side
of caution. This would enable an applicant to achieve practical certainty in
endeavour where certainty is highly desirable.
Section 105(1)
is couched in mandatory terms and manifests an intention
prescription contained in the regulations should take effect according
tenor. The regulations themselves give no
indication that strict observance of
the specified distance between intermediate
pegs is not required. On the
contrary, where other
marking-out requirements are intended to be flexible
express provision is made
to that effect. Thus, reg.59 speaks of fixing
in the ground at each corner or angle of the mining tenement, or as
practicable thereto, a substantial post or cairn of stones.
Regulation 60
provides that where the nature of the ground will not permit a
trench being cut in accordance with reg.59, a row of
substantial stones
is not less than one metre in length may be substituted. The required
interval between pegs is itself flexible
as I have said,
the flexibility being
achieved by setting a maximum but no minimum distance.
15. The legislative intent is not, however, solely to be discerned from the
wording of the
and the regulations. By
Interpretation Act
(W.A.) a court is entitled, subject to sub-s.(3), to have regard to
extrinsic materials in construing a provision of written law
for the purpose,
amongst others, of confirming "that the meaning of the provision is the
ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of
the provision taking into account its
context in the written law and the purpose or object underlying the written
law". "Written
law" is defined in
to mean "all Acts for the time being in
force and all subsidiary legislation for the time being in force". Under the
same section
"subsidiary legislation" includes regulations. Sub-section (2)
, without limiting the generality of sub-s.(1), allows reference to be
made to, amongst other things, any relevant report of a committee
that was laid before either House of Parliament before the time when the
provision was enacted and the speech of the minister
moving that the bill
containing the provision be read a second time.
16. In 1984 a report was made by a committee set up by the Western Australian
Government to inquire into aspects of the
does not appear whether the
report was actually laid before parliament but clearly reference to it might
be made under the general
Interpretation Act
Mining Amendment Act 1985 (W.A.) was passed to implement most of the
committee's
recommendations: this appears from the second
reading speech of
the minister. That speech dealt with the committee's recommendations
separately under each term of reference.
Under the second term of reference
the committee dealt with suggestions "that the Act should
contain an express
power for the warden
or the Minister to grant title notwithstanding
non-compliance with the Act or the Regulations".
The committee noted that
power already existed in relation to a mining lease and continued at
p.26 of its report:
"In relation to other tenements the Committee's
view is that the procedures required to be complied
with in relation to an application are clearly laid
down under the Act and compliance with those rules
should be a pre-requisite to the grant of an
application. A discretionary power to dispense
with compliance will lead to uncertainty, careless
applications and conflicting decisions. The mining
industry has long argued for establishing a set of
rules and for those rules to be followed."
The relevant recommendation of the committee was that it was "not necessary to
include a power for the Minister to dispense with strict
compliance with the
formalities of an application in the case of an application for any mining
tenement except for the existing power
in relation to a mining lease". It
appears from the second reading speech that this recommendation was accepted:
Hansard, Legislative
Assembly of Western Australia, 13 March 1985, at p.886.
17. In my view it is possible to draw the conclusion from the nature of the
amendments to the Act by the Mining Amendment Act 1985,
and, in particular an
amendment made to s.105 itself, that it was the intention of the legislature
that there should be strict compliance
with the manner prescribed for marking
out land in respect of which a mining tenement is sought. That conclusion
does not arise
from the amendments by themselves because none of them mentions
the need for strict compliance. But it does arise from the absence
provision to that effect in the amending Act when that Act is read with both
the committee's report and the second reading
speech of the minister. Perhaps
close reasoning of this sort is unnecessary because
Interpretation
eschews any reference
to the intention of the legislature and seems to
allow consideration to be given to extrinsic material to confirm
"that the meaning of the provision is the ordinary meaning conveyed by
the text". The report of the committee
would go a long way
in establishing
this of itself, although I must confess to some difficulty in accepting such a
notion. See also
Interpretation Act
But even adopting the more
traditional approach, albeit with the aid of the extrinsic material, the
result is, I think,
18. In Grain Elevators Board (Vict.) v. Dunmunkle Corporation
[1946] HCA 13
; (1946) 73 CLR
70, at p 86 Dixon J. expressed the view
that an amending
Act might be taken
into account in the interpretation of
the prior legislation, at least to avoid
a result that
would render the
amending legislation unnecessary or futile. I
that it is but a short step to take, having regard to the
of the materials which now may be considered, to adopt the
same approach
in order to avoid rendering the amending
legislation deficient.
what lies behind the observation of Dixon
J. in Dunmunkle is that it is
permissible to ascertain
the intention of the
legislature with regard to prior
legislation by reference
to amending legislation. No doubt there are limits
to this approach for
as the House of Lords said in Ormond Investment Co. v.
(1928) AC 143, at p 154 it is not permissible to
construe an unambiguous
phrase in an earlier Act by an erroneous assumption of its
effect contained in
a later Act which did not
purport to amend or alter
the earlier Act. See per
Lawrence L.J., Port of London Authority
v. Canvey Island Commissioners (1932)
1 Ch 446, at p 493. See
also Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxes (S.A.) v.
Elder's Trustee
and Executor Co. Ltd.
[1936] HCA 64
; (1936) 57 CLR 610, at pp 625-626. No
limitation applies in this case, however, where the legislature amended
the Act but refrained
from amending it more extensively upon
the assumption,
which may be seen from the extrinsic materials, that it already required
compliance with the relevant provisions.
Upon this basis and for the
other reasons which I have given, it is my view that the legislation
construed as requiring
strict compliance with the marking-out provisions and
the warden was correct in so construing it.
19. A further submission was made on behalf of the first respondent in
reliance upon s.142(2) of the Act. That sub-section provides:
"No proceedings in a warden's court shall be
dismissed or vitiated by any informality, but the
warden's court has power at any time to amend all
defects and errors in any proceedings, whether
there is anything in writing to amend or not."
In my view, that provision has no application to overcome shortcomings in the
marking out of the relevant land by an applicant for
a mining tenement. The
marking out in the prescribed manner of land in respect of which a mining
tenement is sought is no part of
the proceedings in a warden's court even if
the Act requires the fact to be established, at least when the matter is
raised by way
of objection, before the application may properly be granted.
Nor is it a formality. Furthermore, any deficiency in the marking
something which is capable of amendment. Section 142(2) may be contrasted with
s.116(2) which provides in part that:
"Except in the case of fraud, a mining tenement
granted or renewed under this Act shall not be
impeached or defeasible by reason or on account of
any informality or irregularity in the application
or in the proceedings previous to the grant or
renewal of that tenement ..."
Clearly, the expression "irregularity in the application" is apt to cover
deficiencies in the marking out of the land and it is equally
clear that the
draftsman did not regard informality as being the same thing.
20. The appeal should be allowed.
The circumstances giving rise to this litigation, together with the relevant
provisions of the
Mining Act 1978
(W.A.) ("the
") and the regulations made
thereunder, appear in the joint judgment of Mason C.J. and Gaudron J. and in
the judgment
of Dawson J.
2. It is necessary at the outset to identify precisely the question involved
in this appeal. The question is not whether the warden
had jurisdiction to
entertain the application of the first respondent for a prospecting licence.
Clearly the warden had jurisdiction
to deal with the application, whether or
not there had been a failure to comply with a marking out requirement.
3. And, in my view, the question is not whether the requirements of reg.59 of
Mining Regulations 1981
(W.A.) are mandatory or directory, or whether
substantial compliance with the relevant part of the regulation is sufficient.
(b) of reg.59 is clear enough as to what is necessary as part of
marking out a mining tenement:
" (b) by fixing firmly in the ground at intervals
not exceeding 300 metres along each of the
boundary lines of the mining tenement,
substantial pegs or cairns of stones ...".
4. I agree with Olney J. in the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Western
Australia that the words just mean what they say. In
this regard it may be
noted that the requirements of reg.59 operate "unless where otherwise
expressly provided".
Regulations 60
alleviate some of those
requirements in certain circumstances but not the one with which this appeal
is concerned. Likewise, par.(a)
of reg.59 refers to trenches "commencing
between 1.5 and 2 metres from the post or cairn ...", thus providing some
tolerance in that
regard. But there is no room for reading the particular
words of par.(b) any way other than that pegs or cairns shall be at intervals
not exceeding 300 metres. They may of course be at shorter intervals. The
obligation is not one calling for expensive or sophisticated
equipment. It can
be met, as the warden pointed out in his reasons, by pacing and making quite
sure that pegs are well within the
permitted distances.
5. The warden refused the first respondent's application for a prospecting
licence because he regarded himself as having no discretion
licence, once it appeared that there had not been compliance with the
particular requirement of par.(b) of reg.59. The
Supreme Court granted an
order nisi for a writ of certiorari "to remove into this court for the purpose
of being quashed the decision
to refuse the Applicant's application for a
prospecting licence ...". The order nisi was made absolute by the Full Court
is against the order for a writ of certiorari that the appeal is
brought. Whether certiorari was appropriate relief in the circumstances
point not taken by the respondents.
6. What has been said so far points up that the question before this Court is
whether the warden acted according to law in refusing
the application for the
reason he did. To that question, the answer I would give is that he did act
according to law.
7. The power of the warden to grant the prospecting licence was, by reason of
s.40(1), "(s)ubject to this
Section 105
that before making an
application for a mining tenement, other than an exploration licence, "the
applicant shall mark out
prescribed manner and in the prescribed shape
the land in respect of which the mining tenement is sought." A mining
a prospecting licence: see
The "prescribed manner"
referred to in
includes fixing pegs at intervals not exceeding
metres along each of the boundary lines as set out in reg.59. This was not
is entitled "General Provisions Relating to Mining and
Mining Tenements".
Section 105
, which is within
, has been mentioned
Section 105A(1)
, also within
, gives to an applicant:
" who first complies with the initial requirement
in relation to his application ... the right in
priority over every other applicant to have
granted to him ... the mining tenement to which
his application relates."
The words "complies with the initial requirement" are defined by
mean, in the case of an application for a prospecting
licence, "marks out the
land or part concerned in the prescribed manner".
So far as prospecting
licences are concerned
which came into the
by way of amendment
in 1981, largely repeats what was said in
The latter section had been
since its inception but was repealed in 1982.
Section 105A
can have effect in the manner the legislature clearly
intended it should have, only if priority is given to the
applicant who has
marked out the land in accordance with the regulations. If an applicant has
not fixed pegs or cairns along the
boundary lines at
intervals "not exceeding
300 metres", he has not marked out in accordance with the regulations. In
those circumstances,
of substantial compliance or distinctions between
what is mandatory and what is directory have no part to play.
10. This view of the relevant provisions of the
is in accord with
which provides inter alia that, where the warden refuses
to grant an
application for a prospecting licence, the applicant may appeal
Minister who may dismiss the appeal or uphold
it and grant the application on
such terms and conditions as he determines.
There is no appeal to the
Minister from the grant of
a prospecting licence by the warden. The
Minister's powers on appeal are not
expressed to be qualified, either by
reference to "subject
" or by other language that might suggest a
bar to allowing an appeal where the marking out requirements have not been
is not to suggest that the Minister may act in an arbitrary manner;
it is, however, to contrast the limitations expressly
on the warden
with their absence where the Minister is concerned. The dichotomy between
warden and Minister is familiar
mining legislation.
Section 42(1)
requires that an application for a prospecting licence "be
heard by the warden in open court", with provision
that a person may object
the granting of the application.
Section 40(4)
, introduced by amendment in
1985, contains a procedure
whereby in the case of certain Crown land the
subject of an application for
a prospecting licence, in the absence of
objection, "the
approval of the warden to the grant of the licence may be
deemed to have
been given". In that event a licence may be issued by the
mining registrar. In such a case there may be no occasion for the warden
the registrar to consider whether the marking out requirements
have been met
and a licence may issue even though, for instance,
pegs or cairns have been
placed on boundary lines at intervals greater
than 300 metres. Consistency
and clarity have not always
been a feature of mining legislation in this
country and trying to reconcile
various provisions is often not fruitful. In
I do not think that
can be prayed in aid of an
interpretation that
the relevant marking out requirement does not condition
the grant of a licence. The
legislature may have accepted that applications
for prospecting licences (and
is so confined) can live with a degree
of informality where there is no contest.
12. It is reasonable to ask - if the warden did not act according to law in
refusing the first respondent's application for a prospecting
licence, what
was the effect of the order made by the Full Court remitting the matter to the
warden "to be determined in accordance
with the law"? Was the warden obliged
to grant the application, notwithstanding the failure to comply with
reg.59(b)? Or was he
obliged to approach the matter on the footing that there
had been such a failure but it was a defect which did not preclude granting
the application? In that event, what criteria should he bring to bear in
deciding whether or not to grant the application? These
questions (and the
uncertainty arising from them) remain while the order of the Full Court
13. Once a mining tenement is granted, the holder is entitled to receive an
instrument of lease or licence
(s.116(1)).
The "indefeasibility"
provision of
protects a person dealing with a registered holder of a
tenement. Except in the case of fraud, no
person dealing with a registered
holder need be concerned to inquire into the circumstances under which the
holder was registered
nor is the person affected by notice
of any unregistered
trust or interest. The provision is similar to the "notice" provision to
found in Torrens System statutes:
see for instance
Transfer of Land Act 1893
speaks of the registered holder of a mining
tenement, the
itself does not provide a system of registration. This is
reg.106. While the efficacy of the original grant is not made
depend upon registration, no dealings affecting a mining tenement
effectual to pass any estate or interest ... until
registered" (reg.110(3)).
14. There is no section corresponding with the Torrens System provision
whereby the registered proprietor holds free of any unregistered
other than those expressly mentioned in the section: cf.
Transfer of Land
It should not be assumed therefore
that registration of the
original grant cures any defects in the application leading to the grant.
it is unnecessary to express
a view on that matter. Clearly enough, a person
dealing with the registered holder will, in the
absence of fraud, obtain the
15. As to the first respondent's argument based on
content to adopt what Dawson J. has said. The reference
to "proceedings" in
the sub-section can have no application to a failure
to mark out in accordance
with the regulations. Marking
out is not part of the proceedings in any
relevant sense; nor can a failure
to mark out be described as an
"informality".
16. I would allow the appeal and discharge the order nisi of certiorari made
by the Supreme Court.
Appeal allowed with costs.
Order that the order of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Western
Australia made on 25 March 1987 be set aside and in lieu
thereof order that
the order nisi for a writ of certiorari made by Franklyn J. be discharged with
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter