Bluemont Pty Ltd v Project Material Pty Ltd [2025] ATMO 207 (3 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by Bluemont Pty
Ltd to registration of trade mark application number 2364172 (class 22) for the
trade mark –
ROCK BAG Filter Units & Device
– in the name
of Project Material Pty Ltd
Debrett Lyons
REPRESENTATION:
Baxter IP Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys
self-represented
2025 ATMO 207
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – opposition under
pursued – no ground of
opposition established – opposition unsuccessful and registration
decision concerns an opposition under
Trade Marks Act 1995
by Bluemont Pty Ltd
’) to registration of the trade mark shown below
’) filed in the name of Project Material Pty Ltd
’) on 14 June 2023 (‘
’) as application number 2364172
Application
’) in class 22 for “Plastic nets and
netting (not for sports)” (‘
The Application was examined and advertised as accepted for possible
registration on 15 November 2023.
8 January 2024, the Opponent filed a Notice of Intention to Oppose registration
of the application. On 8 February 2024, the Opponent
filed its Statement of
Grounds and Particulars (‘
’) which nominates grounds of
opposition under
The Applicant filed
a Notice of Intention to Defend the opposition on 8 March 2024.
parties filed the following
Declarant and Position
Exhibits or Annexures
Evidence in Support
Declaration of Arnaud Diemont , director of the Opponent (‘
AD-1 to AD-8
Declaration of Arnaud Diemont (‘
AD-9 to AD-10
Evidence in Answer
Declaration of Kane Leslie Champion, director and secretary of the
PM 0 to PM 14
Evidence in Reply
Declaration of Arnaud Diemont (‘
AD-11 to AD-12
parties were given the opportunity to either request an oral hearing or a
hearing by way of written submissions. The Opponent
elected to be heard on the
basis of written submissions, filing written submissions prepared by Baxter IP
Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys.
The Applicant relied on the written
submissions of its director, Kane Champion.
have decided this matter based on the particulars set out in the SGP, the
evidence described above and the written submissions of
the parties. The
Applicant submitted material to this Office on 21 January 2025 which the
Opponent has objected to as out of time
evidence, but in its written submissions
the Applicant states that it does not rely upon that material.
Discussion and reasons
Opponent carries the burden of establishing at least one ground of
on the balance of
probabilities.
The date at which
the rights of the parties are to be determined is the Relevant
, being the priority date for
the purposes of ss 44 and 60.
a preliminary observation, the written submissions do not provide a cohesive
distillation of the evidence, nor do they present
clear argument or
counter-argument which is focused on the requirements of the several grounds of
opposition. In what follows I
have attempted to eliminate the repetition of
claims made in the submissions and reduce them to a form more directly relevant
the legislation. In that regard I have approached the grounds in an order
which improves clarity and concentrates the key issues.
I note here for
convenience the Opponent’s claim to confidentiality in relation to sales
and other figures and I have observed
far as is relevant to this matter, s 44
Identical etc.
trade marks
(1) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), an application for the
registration of a trade mark (
applicant’s trade mark
respect of goods (
applicant’s goods
) must be rejected
(a) the applicant’s trade mark is substantially identical with, or
deceptively similar to:
(i) a trade mark registered by another person in respect of similar goods or
closely related services; or
(ii) a trade mark whose registration in respect of similar goods or closely
related services is being sought by another person; and
(b) the priority date for the registration of the applicant’s trade
mark in respect of the applicant’s goods is not earlier
than the priority
date for the registration of the other trade mark in respect of the similar
goods or closely related services.
Note 1: For
deceptively similar
see section 10.
Note 2: For
similar goods
see subsection 14(1).
Note 3: For
priority date
see section 12.
Note 4: The regulations may provide that an application must also be rejected
if the trade mark is substantially identical with, or
deceptively similar to, a
protected international trade mark or a trade mark for which there is a request
to extend international
registration to Australia: see Part 17A.
Opponent must therefore identify a trade mark in the name of a person other than
the Applicant which:
priority date which is earlier than the priority date of the Trade Mark;
respect of goods which are similar to the Applicant’s
substantially identical with, or deceptively similar to, the Trade
SGP nominates the following International Registration Designating Australia as
the basis for s 44
Registration
International Registration number
IRDA number
AquaRockBag
Class 19: Artificial fish reefs [not of metal]; tissue [not of metal] for
protection against erosion; woven geotextile for protection
against erosion;
erosion control fabric, mats and sheeting, not of metal [geotextiles]; nonmetal
textile, mats and lanes for bank
protection; woven geotextiles, aforementioned
goods also filled with stones; artificial bank protection [not of metal].
Class 22: Nets, aforementioned goods also filled with stones; net
receptacle of chemical fiber, knitted fabrics, mesh-woven fabrics,
polyurethane-tissue, synthetic fabrics/fibers, non-synthetic fabrics/fibers,
e.g. especially basalt, polylactic acid, glass fiber,
coconut fiber
Class 24: Chemical fiber fabrics; knitted fabric; mesh-woven fabrics;
tissue of polyurethane-tissue, synthetical fabric or fibers,
non-synthetical
fabric or fibers, e.g. especially basalt, polylactic acid, glass fiber, coconut
Priority date
Registration is owned by Roess Nature Group GmbH & Co. KG and is therefore
in the name of a person other than the Applicant.
The Registration has a
priority date which is earlier than the Relevant Date of the Trade Mark.
party made reasoned submissions with regard to either the similarity of the
respective goods or the marks. The first question,
and the most apt comparison,
is whether the Goods (plastic nets and netting) are the same, or of the same
description,
as the class 22 goods
of the Registration:
Nets, aforementioned goods also filled with
stones; net receptacle of chemical fiber, knitted fabrics, mesh-woven fabrics,
polyurethane-tissue,
synthetic fabrics/fibers, non-synthetic fabrics/fibers,
e.g. especially basalt, polylactic acid, glass fiber, coconut fiber
“nets ... also filled with stones” comprehends “nets”
(without qualification) and includes plastic nets
and netting, I find that the
goods are the same. I turn to the question of whether the trade mark of the
Registration is substantially
identical or deceptively similar to the Trade
Mark. Substantial identity requires a side-by-side comparison of the marks to
whether a total impression of resemblance or dissimilarity emerges,
having regard to the essential features of the trade
AquaRockBag
side-by-side there are obvious differences. Moreover, the single point of
commonality – the words “rock bag”
– are, within the
context of nets and netting, lacking the degree of distinctiveness they would
require to clearly stand out
as the essential feature of the marks. I do not
find the Trade Mark and the mark of the Registration to be substantially
10 provides that a trade mark is deceptively similar to another trade mark if it
“so nearly resembles that other trade
mark that it is likely to deceive or
cause confusion”. In
Shell Co (Aust) Ltd v Esso Standard Oil (Aust)
Windeyer J stated that:
On the question of deceptive
similarity a different comparison must be made from that which is necessary when
substantial identity
is in question. The marks are not now to be looked at side
by side. The issue is not abstract similarity, but deceptive similarity.
Therefore the comparison is the familiar one of trade mark law. It is between,
on the one hand, the impression based on recollection
of the plaintiff’s
mark that persons of ordinary intelligence and memory would have; and, on the
other hand, the impressions
that such persons would get from the
defendant’s [trade mark].
High Court in
Self Care IP Holdings Pty Ltd v Allergan Australia Pty
conveniently
stated the relevant principles, which were summarised in
The Agency Group
Australia Limited v H.A.S. Real Estate Pty
as follows:
(a) the resemblance between the two marks must be the cause of the likely
deception or confusion;
(b) in the trade mark comparison, the marks must be judged as a whole taking
into account both their look and their
(c) the marks should not be compared side by
(d) the effect of spoken description must be considered; if a mark is in fact or
from its nature likely to be the source of some
name or verbal description by
which buyers will express their desire to have the goods (or services), then
similarities both of sound
and of meaning may play an important
(e) the focus is upon the effect or impression produced on the mind of potential
customers of the goods (or services) in relation
to which the two marks are used
and in the case of the registered mark, allowing for ‘imperfect
recollection’;
(f) the notional buyer is a person with no knowledge about any actual use of the
registered mark, the actual business of the owner
of the registered mark, the
goods the owner produces, any acquired distinctiveness from the use of the marks
prior to filing, or
any reputation associated with the registered
(g) the correct approach is to compare the impression (allowing for imperfect
recollection) that the notional buyer would have of
the registered mark (as
notionally used on all of the goods or services covered by the registration),
with the impression that the
notional buyer would have of notional and normal
fair use of the opposed mark;
(h) “deceived” implies the creation of an incorrect belief or mental
impression; “causing confusion” may
merely involve “perplexing
or mixing up the minds” of potential customers;
(i) the usual manner in which ordinary people behave must be the test of what
confusion or deception may be expected, having regard
to the character of the
customers who would be likely to buy the goods in
(j) it is not necessary to establish actual probability of deception or
confusion, but a mere possibility of confusion is not enough.
There must a real,
tangible danger of deception or confusion occurring. It is enough if the
notional buyer would entertain a reasonable
doubt as to whether, due to the
resemblance between the marks, the two products come from the same source. Put
another way, there
must be “a real likelihood that some people will wonder
or be left in doubt about whether the two sets of products ... come
same source”;
(k) evidence of actual confusion is of great weight, but not essential, and lack
of such evidence may also be
(l) any intention to deceive or cause confusion may be a relevant consideration
but is not required.
specific submissions from the Opponent concerning deceptive similarity under s
44, I have distilled the statements of relevance
found in connection with s 60
(discussed in detail later) as follows:
... the overlapping goods
(erosion control mesh bags filled with stone), channels of trade (civil
contractors, government, engineering
consultants), and the strong reputation of
ROCK BAGS create a real risk of consumer confusion. The Opponent’s
evidence ...
demonstrates precisely such reputation. Here, contractors and
specifiers will not carefully dissect whether “Filter Units”
distinguishes the marks, the dominant impression will remain “Rock
Bags”. The Applicant’s use of is therefore likely
to deceive.
Consumers do not analyse minor differences but rely on dominant impressions. The
evidence shows that the dominant and
distinctive element is “Rock
my assessment, the starting point is to revisit the nature of the expression,
“rock bag”. I have said that it lacks
the level of distinctiveness
to constitute the essential feature of the marks, but what matters now is
whether the influence of those
words, in what are otherwise two quite different
trade marks, would result in a real likelihood that people who seek or observe
Goods would wonder whether the parties’ products came from the same
1 declares that the goods are mesh nets for use around bridges, roads, railways,
shorelines and rivers to protect and manage
erosion. Taken from the
Opponent’s website are the following statements:
The rock bag
was used for the first time in 1987 to protect the foundations of the great
bridge at Akashi (world’s longest span,
with a total length of
Rock bags are an innovative and proven netting solution for erosion and scour
management. So far, over 1.1 million rock bags have
been used in 24,000
civil projects worldwide.
Since 2016, we have supplied rock bags for an extensive number of government
and private sector projects. Our clients include local
government agencies, road
development authorities, ports, construction companies, and industrial
I observe from the evidence is (i) that the words “rock bags” are
used descriptively and almost exclusively without
any suggestion of trade mark
significance, sometimes in other descriptive combinations such as “rock
filter bags”, and
(ii) that customers for the goods are the type of buyers
familiar with the rock bag concept and not likely to treat those words,
as a guarantee of trade source.
the matter in the trade marks additional to the descriptive words, “rock
bag” – the word, “aqua”;
the term, “filter
units”; and the device of a bag of rocks – are either related to the
use or function of rock
bags or graphically depict a rock bag.
draw the reasonable inference that customers for the goods – as the
Opponent says, civil contractors, government, engineering
consultants –
are likely to employ tender processes to acquire them and would be astute to
small brand distinctions. When
I take account of the probable circumstances
surrounding of the purchase of the Goods, I find it is unlikely that use of the
Mark would lead to confusion or deception.
these reasons I find that the Trade Mark is not deceptively similar to the mark
of the Registration and so the s 44 ground of
Opposition has not been
established.
Section 58A
58A only applies to a trade
mark the application for registration of which has been accepted because of
s 44(4). Since s
44 has not been established and the Trade Mark was not
accepted under the provisions of s 44(4) it follows that s 58A has no traction.
The ground has not been established.
60 provides
mark similar to trade mark that has acquired a reputation in Australia
registration of a trade mark in respect of particular goods or services may be
opposed on the ground that:
another trade mark had, before the priority date for the registration of the
first‑mentioned trade
mark in respect of those goods or services, acquired
a reputation in Australia; and
because of the reputation of that other trade mark, the use of the
first‑mentioned trade mark would
be likely to deceive or cause
priority date
see section 12.
Accordingly,
the Opponent must demonstrate the existence of another trade mark which had
acquired a reputation in Australia before
the Relevant Date. The Opponent must
then establish that because of this reputation, use of the Trade Mark would be
likely to deceive
or cause confusion.
reputation in the other trade mark must be amongst a “significant or
substantial” number of Australian consumers but
this is tempered by the
nature of the relevant market.
The existence and extent of reputation must be established as a matter of fact
by the Opponent.
So far as s
60(a) is concerned, the SGP states that the Opponent:
acquired a reputation in the ‘Rock Bags’ Mark in relation to erosion
control products which are in the form of
flexible mesh bags made from plastic
and/or other polymeric materials.
Opponent’s submissions state that:
[t]he Opponent had a well
established reputation before the priority date of the Opposed Mark ... A
reputation-based claim under section
60 does not require actual deception, only
the likelihood of deception based on consumer perception.
Applicant’s written submission is that:
... [the Opponent] has
failed to show that “ROCK BAG” denoted its trade source as of June
2023. ... To the contrary, its
own evidence shifts between multiple descriptors
including “Kyowa Rock Bag”, “Rock Filter Bag” and
Filter Unit”, which undermines any claim that “ROCK
BAG” functioned as a single, distinctive badge of origin ...
have already observed the descriptive use of “rock bags” and I note
from the evidence as a whole multiple references
to “Kyowa rock
bags”, something which brings me to statements in Diemont 1, 2 and 3
concerning the relationship between
the Opponent and a Japanese company, Kyowa
1 declares that the Opponent “was established in 2004 and introduced
product under the mark Rock Bags in 2017 in Australia
[sic].” Diemont 2
declares that “[t]he Rock Bags brand is exclusively owned by [the
Opponent] in Australia. Kyowa,
..., acts solely as the manufacturer, producing
the units based on [the Opponent’s] import order. ... [and] ... [a]ny
to Rock Bags is a reference to the trade mark of [the Opponent] and
its commercial trading under that name in Australia which uses
manufactured for it by Kyowa.”
3 provides the only evidence of that arrangement, being a letter of so-called
“Authorization of exclusive distribution”
dated 18 October, 2024,
from Kyowa to the Opponent which states that on 18 October, 2016, Kyowa
authorised the Opponent “to
exclusively distribute Kyowa Filter Units (in
Australia to be known as Rock Bags) with the Kyowa brand name in Oceania
is difficult for me to accept that this letter is the only written evidence of
an almost decade long commercial relationship.
If it is, it leaves doubt about
many critical matters including intellectual property rights. It is clear
enough that the Opponent
is the exclusive distributor in the territory of Kyowa
made “filter units” bearing the Kyowa brand, but the document
unclear as to ownership of trade mark rights, if any, in Rock Bags.
Nonetheless, the Opponent baldly claims ownership of those
words and gives
evidence that on 4 December 2023 it filed Australian trade mark application
2410557 for ROCK BAGS and application
2410560 for the mark shown below
1 defines and thereafter uses the Logo Mark as “the Opponent’s
mark” albeit that the only use I could find
in the evidence of that mark
was at the head of the website maintained by the Opponent at
www.rockbags.com.au, which I note states
in its opening line of text:
Bags, by Kyowa, are innovative flexible mesh bags used for scour and erosion
. Later, at the same site, the text describes:
made by Kyowa and supplied by Bluemont
. The website otherwise prominently
uses the Kyowa name and logo.
2 annexes what it describes as a User Manual. The Manual is headed with the
ad trade mark rights in either ROCK BAGS or the Logo Mark before the Relevant
Date. However, as with s 44, s 60(a) requires
only the existence of
another trade mark which had acquired a reputation in Australia before the
Relevant Date; it does not require
the Opponent to own that trade mark.
said, the evidence presented by the Opponent of its use of ROCK BAGS from 2017
onwards is flawed by reason of use which (i) is
purely descriptive and fails to
qualify as trade mark use, and/or (ii) is presented together with the trade
mark, Kyowa, and/or (iii)
bar some inconsistent use of initial capitalisation,
is presented without indication that the words might have or claim trade mark
way of example, an invoice to Shoalhaven City Council dated 9 October 2017,
claimed as the evidence of first use of ROCK BAGS as
a trade mark in Australia,
carries the invoice reference “[name of council contact] 20 x 2t
Kyowa” and the product is
described as “2t Kyowa rock bag”.
Later invoices describe the product as “Kyowa rock bags” and
4 tonne recycled polyester Ecogreen rock bags and metal lifting
rings”. Even in the second quarter of 2024, almost a year
Priority Date, invoices still give the description: “Rock Bags – 4
tonne Eco-green plus lifting ring. Made
evidence includes confidential sales figures since 2017 which are continuous and
not insubstantial, but they are not supported
by proof of sale of product by
reference to ROCK BAGS as a trade mark and/or as a trade mark without other,
more obvious trade mark
matter. On balance, I cannot on the material before me
find for the purposes of s 60(a) that ROCK BAGS, or any other relevant trade
mark, had acquired a reputation in Australia. For these reasons the s 60 ground
of opposition has not been established.
Section 42(b)
42(b) provides that:
An application for the registration of a trade
mark must be rejected if:
(a) ... ; or
(b) its use would be contrary to law.
SGP states that:
The opponent has been continuously using its mark
Rock Bags for a substantial period of time before the opposed application was
... Until recently, ... there was no other company supplying rock bags
and opponent were [sic] sole suppliers for this type of erosion
As a result of the Opponents extensive use of the mark Rock Bags and in view
of the applicant’s knowledge of the opponent’s
Applicant’s use of the Opposed mark would be misleading or deceptive or,
is likely to mislead or deceive or, would
be a false or misleading
representation that the Applicant’s services are approved, provided by,
licensed by, endorsed by or
associated with the Opponent when they are not.
The Applicant’s use of the Opposed mark would be misleading or
deceptive and/or constitute false representations contrary to
Sections 18 and/or
29 of the Australian
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth). Such use may also
constitute common law passing off in respect of the Opponent’s reputation
and goodwill and would therefore
be contrary to law under
Section 42(b)
Opponent’s written submissions are that:
The Opponent had
established a reputation for its ROCK BAGS brand before the priority date of the
Opposed mark and provides similar
goods to those covered by the Opposed mark.
The Opposed Mark is deceptively similar to the Opponent’s ROCK BAGS brand,
had acquired a reputation in Australia before 14 June 2023 i.e. the
priority date of the Opposed mark.
The Applicant was aware of the Opponent’s established reputation and
made an attempt to ride on goodwill of the Opponent’s
mark by filing the
Opposed Mark. Due to the Opponent’s established reputation, the use of the
Opposed mark is likely to mislead
or deceive consumers. As a result, its use may
be considered misleading and deceptive conduct under
sections 18
the Australian Consumer Law.
is unclear from the written submissions whether the Opponent still presses
passing off as a basis for
but I can deal with both limbs –
passing off and the Australian Consumer Law – summarily in light of my
findings in relation
of the Australian Consumer Law provides that “[a] person must not,
in trade or commerce, engage in conduct that is misleading
or deceptive or is
likely to mislead or deceive.” Under
, the onus is on the
Opponent to establish that use of the Trade Mark by the Applicant would be,
rather than could be, contrary to
It has been held that the
test for misleading or deceptive conduct under
of the Australian
Consumer Law is a more stringent one than that for deception or confusion
Further, it
has been held that where use of a trade mark does not breach
Australian Consumer Law, neither will it offend
Furthermore,
when required to consider the relationship between passing off and s 52 of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(an essentially identical provision to s 18(1)
of the Australian Consumer Law), Justice Hill in Re
Equity Access Pty
Ltd v Westpac Banking Corporation
wrote that:
for the operation of
will thus be broader than that involved in the tort of passing off
so that in a case such as the present where the claim is for the
protection of
the reputation in a name against the use of that name by another, failure to
succeed under
will invariably mean that proceedings for passing off would likewise
slightly differently, proof of reputation is an essential element to a
successful passing off action and, for the reasons
given in connection with the
s 60(a) discussion above, I did not find reputation in any relevant mark.
Accordingly, there being no evidence of a tort, nor of a breach of the
Australian Consumer Law, I find nothing to show that use of
the Trade Mark would
be contrary to law and so the ground of opposition under s 42(b) has not been
established.
58 provides that:
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on
the ground that the applicant is not the owner of the trade mark.
SGP states that the “filing date of the [t]rade [m]ark detailed in Ground
[sic] under section 44, predates both the first
use by the [A]pplicant of the
opposed mark and the filing date of the opposed [A]pplication. ... The mark
referred to in the Table
above are [sic] substantially identical to the opposed
is no “Table” in the SGP and I understand from the Opponent’s
reference to s 44 that it means to rely on the
trade mark of the Registration
for the purposes of s 58. To succeed, the Opponent must establish, amongst
other matters, that the
trade mark of the Registration is identical or
substantially identical to the Trade
I have already found
AquaRockBag
is not identical or substantially identical to the Trade
would be entitled to end my consideration of s 58 here but for the fact that
Diemont 1 references trade mark applications made 4
December 2023 for ROCK BAGS
and the Logo Mark. Those applications postdate the Relevant Date by six months
but, putting to one side
the matter of whether either mark is substantially
identical to the Trade Mark, a question arises as to whether use of one or other
of those marks predated the Relevant Date.
is no evidence of first use of the Logo Mark. As to the word mark, all I need
observe is that although the Act does not define
trade mark ownership, what
matters is that ownership entails first adoption and use as a trade mark in
Australia and I have already
found that any use of “rock bags”
before the Relevant Date was not use as a trade mark.
Accordingly,
the s 58 ground of opposition has not been established.
Section 62A
62A provides that:
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed
on the ground that the application was made in bad faith.
phrase “bad faith” is not defined in the Act, but as explained by
Bennett J in
DC Comics v Cheqout Pty Ltd
Bad faith is a
combined test that involves subjective and objective elements. The subjective
element refers to the knowledge of the
relevant person at the time of making the
application. The objective element requires the decision-maker to decide
whether, in the
light of that knowledge, the relevant person’s behaviour
fell short of acceptable commercial
SGP states that:
The Applicant was aware of the Opponent at the date
of application, and seeks to register the opposed Trade Mark as part of a
of behavior engaged in by the Applicant of (a) attempting to pass itself
off as the Opponent, (b) gain commercial advantage from
the illusion that the
applicant is associated with the opponent and (c) make misrepresentations with
respect to services the applicant
actually provides to IP Australia that allowed
acceptance.
The Applicant’s conduct falls short of the standards of acceptable
behavior observed by reasonable and experienced persons in
the industry in which
the Applicant operates.
Opponent’s written submissions are difficult. In short, the reasoning
appears to be that:
the Opponent has
used “the ROCK BAGS brand” since 2017;
the Applicant
was aware of the Opponent’s reputation before the Relevant Date;
the Applicant
entered into some kind of agreement with Roess Nature Group GmbH & Co., the
owner of the Registration relied upon
by the Opponent for the purposes of s 44;
the Applicant
did not disclose that agreement to the Registrar during these proceedings;
the Applicant
had some years earlier filed a trade mark application for goods similar to the
Goods but for a dissimilar mark, and
to quote the
submissions:
In view of the above, it is clear that when
the Applicant failed to build its own reputation in the industry related to the
the Applicant combined elements of Kyowa mark’s i.e. Filter Unit
and the Opponent’s mark i.e. Rock Bags and filed the
Opposed mark ... on
14 June 2023. Therefore, the Applicant adopted substantially similar or at least
deceptively similar mark to
the Opponent’s mark to leverage the goodwill
of the Opponent built over the years since 2017.
itself, the Applicant’s knowledge of the Opponent and its use of
“rock bags” at the Relevant Date is not determinative.
The Opponent
has not proven rights of its own from an earlier point in time. Contrary to the
Opponent’s claims of exclusivity
in the use of that expression, the
evidence shows at the very least the Registration held by Roess Nature Group
GmbH & Co. since
2020 for a mark including the words, and also shows generic
use of those words more broadly. If the Applicant took time to settle
Trade Mark and adopted the same words as part of a composite mark, it is not
evidence which establishes that at the Relevant
Date the Applicant’s
conduct fell short of standards of acceptable commercial behaviour observed by
reasonable and experienced
am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the Application was made
in bad faith. The ground of opposition under s 62A
of the Act has not been
established.
55 relevantly
(1) Unless subsection (3) applies to the proceedings, the Registrar
must, at the end, decide:
(a) to refuse to register the trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations)
in respect of the goods and/or services
then specified in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
limitations
see section 6.
Opponent has not established a ground of opposition. Trade mark application
number 2364172 may proceed to registration not less
than one month from the date
of this decision. If the Registrar is served with a notice of appeal before
that time, I direct that
registration shall not occur until either the appeal is
withdrawn or discontinued. Otherwise, the disposition of the Application
be in accordance with the Court’s order or direction.
Applicant has sought costs. It is usual for costs to follow the event, and I
see no reason to depart from that principle. I award
costs against the Opponent
in accordance with s 221 of the Act, in the amounts set out in Schedule 8 of the
Regulations.
Debrett Lyons
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
Unless otherwise stated, each
reference to a section is a reference to a section of the
Trade Marks Act
’) and each reference to a regulation is
a reference to a regulation in the
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
Regulations
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and Jagot
Telstra Corporation
Limited v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
(Besanko, Jagot and Edelmann
Southern Cross
Refrigerating Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 82
,; 91 CLR 592, 595
(Kitto J) (‘
Southern Cross
or closely related services to
the Applicant’s Goods.
the Registration is a so-called, IRDA, the technical ground for rejection is
under reg 4.15A rather than
However, as the terms are substantively
identical for all relevant purposes, I have retained the reference to
this decision. References to
as considered should be taken to read reg
Section 14(1) of the
Shell Co of Australia
Ltd v Esso Standard Oil (Australia) Ltd
[1963] HCA 66
, [12] (Windeyer
[2023] HCA 8 (Kiefel
Gageler, Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson JJ).
[2023] FCA 482
(Jackman J).
Swancom Pty Ltd v The
Jazz Corner Hotel Pty Ltd
[2022] FCAFC 157
, [69] (Yates, Abraham and Rofe
Cooper Engineering Co Pty
Ltd v Sigmund Pumps Ltd
[1952] HCA 15
(1952) 86 CLR 536
, 538 (Dixon, Williams and Kitto
Australian Woollen Mills
Ltd v F S Walton & Co Ltd
[1937] HCA 51
(1937) 58 CLR 641
, 658 (Dixon
and McTiernan JJ) (‘
Australian Woollen Mills
C A Henschke & Co v
Rosemount Estates Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 1539
, [43] (Ryan, Branson and Lehane
Coca-Cola Company v
All-Fect Distributors Ltd
[1999] FCA 1721
, [39] (Black CJ, Sundberg and
Finkelstein JJ) quoting
Pioneer Hi-Bred Corn Co v Hy-Line Chicks Pty Ltd
[1978] 2 NZLR 50
, 62 (Richardson J).
Campomar Sociedad Limited
v Nike International Limited
[2000] HCA 12
, [83] (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron,
McHugh, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
Registrar of Trade Marks
v Woolworths Ltd
[1999] FCA 1020
, [50(ii)] (‘
(French J) restating principles from
Southern Cross
(n 4), 594 - 595.
Australian Woollen Mills
(n 14), 657.
Hashtag Burgers Pty Ltd v
In-N-Out Burgers Inc
([2020] FCAFC 23, [67] (Nicholas, Yates and Burley JJ)
Australian Woollen Mills
(n 14), 657.
Renaud Cointreau
& Cie v Cordon Bleu International Ltee
[2001] FCA 1170
, [75] (Moore,
Tamberlin and Goldberg JJ).
ConAgra Inc v McCain
Foods (Aust) Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 159
, [57] (Lockhart, Gummow and French
Advantage Rent-a-Car Inc
v Advantage Car Rental Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 683
, [28] (Madgwick J).
[2005] ATMO 47
(Hearing Officer Williams);
Parkdale Custom Built Furniture Pty Ltd v Puxu Pty
[1982] HCA 44
(1982) 149 CLR 191
, 198 (Gibbs CJ).
Pacific Publications Pty
Ltd v IPC Media Pty Ltd
[2003] FCA 104
, [107] (Beaumont J);
Professional Hair Care Products Ltd v Geagroup Invest SRL
[2014] ATMO 65
[50] (Hearing Officer Wilson).
[1989] FCA 506
Carnival Cruise Lines Inc
v Sitmar Cruises Limited
[1994] FCA 936
, [62] (Gummow J).
[2013] FCA 478
RTF format (5.04 MB)
Signed PDF/A format