Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Keolis Downer Northern Beaches Pty Ltd [2025] FWCFB 240 (24 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 240
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry
Keolis Downer Northern Beaches Pty Ltd
(C2025/8379)
VICE PRESIDENT GIBIAN
DEPUTY PRESIDENT BOYCE
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
SYDNEY, 24 OCTOBER 2025
Appeal against decision of Deputy President Wright at Sydney made on 12
August 2025 in matter number C2025/1612 – Application
to deal with a
dispute under the KDNB Bus Operations Enterprise Agreement 2021 –
Interpretation of enterprise agreement –
Employer proposes to increase the
length of rostered shifts to in excess of nine hours – Whether agreement
provides for a maximum
period of work on a shift of nine hours or only a maximum
of nine ordinary hours – Change affects considerable number of employees
– Decision of the Deputy President is correct – Permission to appeal
granted but appeal dismissed.
Introduction
Keolis Downer Northern Beaches Pty Ltd (
) has operated
public passenger bus services in the Northern Beaches area of Sydney since
October 2021. Prior to that time, public
bus routes on the Northern Beaches were
operated by the State Transit Authority of New South Wales (the
agency of the New South Wales Government. Many of the employees currently
working for KDNB were previously employed by the New
South Wales Government and
transferred to work for KDNB when it took over the operations in 2021.
Bus operators working in the Northen Beaches region have generally
been rostered to work shifts of between seven and nine hours in
duration both
when the services were operated by the STA and after KDNB took over the routes.
The present appeal arises from a dispute
concerning a proposal by KDNB to
increase the length of shifts beyond nine hours. The Australian Rail, Tram and
Bus Industry Union
) contends that clause 28.5 of the relevant
enterprise agreement, the
KDNB Bus Operations Enterprise Agreement 2021
KDNB Agreement
), does not permit that to be done. KDNB disagrees.
The dispute was referred to the Commission under clause 92.6 of the
KDNB Agreement for conciliation and, if necessary, arbitration.
The dispute was
not able to be resolved through conciliation, and the dispute was subject of an
arbitration conducted by Deputy President
Wright. The Deputy President handed
down her decision on 12 August
President concluded that clause 28.5 of the KDNB Agreement only restricts the
number of ordinary hours in a rostered shift
to nine ordinary hours and does not
limit the amount of overtime that can be performed as part of a
The RTBU says that the Deputy President erred in her interpretation
of clause 28.5 of the KDNB Agreement and seeks permission to appeal,
appeal, with respect to the decision. The dispute raises a question of
interpretation which is of significance to a substantial
workforce of bus
operators performing work providing an important public service. Permission to
appeal should be granted to permit
the Full Bench to examine the question.
However, for the reasons which follow, the decision of the Deputy President is
correct, and
the appeal must be dismissed.
Factual background
The background to the dispute may be briefly stated. The New South
Wales government has progressively privatised the operation of
buses on the
metropolitan bus network in Sydney. The process commenced with the operation of
bus routes in region 6 of the Sydney
Metropolitan Bus Service Contract in the
inner west of Sydney being taken over by Transit Systems in 2018. The New South
Wales Government
subsequently announced that competitive tender processes would
take place with respect to other regions. Tenders for the operation
of region 8,
which covers the Northern Beaches area, were released on 24 June 2020 and KDNB
was ultimately the successful tenderer.
Prior to privatisation, bus operators performing work for the STA
were covered by an award made by the Industrial Relations Commission
South Wales known as the
State Transit Authority Bus Operations Enterprise
(State) Award 2021
). The Divisional Secretary of the
Tram and Bus Division of the New South Wales Branch of the RTBU, David Babineau,
gave evidence
that the privatisation of operations in region 6 resulted in a
“two-tiered workforce” whereby employees who transferred
government employment retained the pay and conditions contained in the STA Award
and new employees were engaged by a different
corporate entity on different and
inferior conditions.
Mr Babineau gave evidence that the RTBU and its members were
determined to avoid a repeat of this “two-tiered debacle”.
KDNB taking over the operation of region 8, a memorandum of understanding was
entered into between the RTBU and Keolis Downer
in which, among other things,
Keolis Downer committed to negotiating an enterprise agreement which did not
seek to financially disadvantage
transferring employees, the RTBU committed to
negotiating a new enterprise agreement to facilitate an orderly transfer without
to normal services and Keolis Downer agreed that non-transferring
employees would be engaged based on the STA Award until a new enterprise
agreement was approved.
The RTBU developed a strategy which was approved by its members of
seeking that the tendering entity would agree to effectively “drag
drop” the provisions of the STA Award into an enterprise agreement to
apply after privatisation. If completed successfully,
the RTBU undertook not to
take protected industrial action. Mr Babineau gave evidence that the discussions
with KDNB were limited
to changes required by the movement from State to Federal
new employer. Mr Babineau said that Steve Schofield, lead negotiator for KDNB,
made a verbal commitment on several occasions
that there would be no major
operational changes that deviated from previous STA practice. The KDNB Agreement
was approved by a vote
of employees and later approved by the Commission on 17
February 2022.
On 25 February 2025, KDNB announced that it proposed to increase the
length of rostered shifts to in excess of nine hours on all days
of the week.
The correspondence, addressed to Peter Grech, RTBU Divisional President, stated:
Operational requirements are such that for KDNB to meet
operational demands we must re consider all options as contained in the
Agreement including rostering shifts beyond the current practice of
restricting rostered shifts to between 7 and 9 hours.
Through rostering shifts beyond the constraints of “ordinary
time” only we are better positioned to meet the needs operations
deliver reliable bus services to the public.
These arrangements are not outside of the enterprise agreement terms and as
such would like to seek your views on this coming into
effect for the March 2025
roster build for April 2025. While I acknowledge this approach is unlikely to
affect more than 12.5% of
the period roster, I invite the RTBU’s feedback
on the matter.
The matter was placed in dispute by the RTBU on 25 February 2025. By
email message sent on that day, a legal officer of the RTBU,
Jemimah Cooper,
sought that consultation take place with respect to the proposed change and
requested certain information in relation
to the change. The email also said:
I note the resolution of C2023/6264. At the time, the employer had no
intention of amending rostering practices on Monday - Saturday.
The Commission
noted the strict consultation obligations and access to arbitration in the event
of any future dispute.
The union believes the employer's proposal breaches clause 28.5 of the EA,
which reads:
28.5 Length of shift.
The ordinary hours of duty on any shift shall be no greater than nine
hours and no less than seven.
The union is also concerned that the proposed change constitutes an "extra
claim" by the employer, as prohibited by clause 6 of the
KDNB provided a substantive response on 28 February 2025. The
response indicated that KDNB proposed to roster shifts greater than
on all days of the week as required to meet the timetable. In relation to clause
28.5 of the KDNB Agreement, the response
The wording of Clause 28.5 is clear and free from ambiguity of
its intent to limit the rostering of “ordinary hours”,
understands and accepts the operation of this clause would result in employee
being rostered time that would be deemed as ‘overtime’.
KDNB is willing to discuss the RTBU’s concerns in relation to clause 6
of the Agreement, however we are of the view, the implementation
of shifts being
rostered beyond time that might be considered as “ordinary hours”,
is not an extra claim. Considering
there being no prescribed term of the
Agreement that restricts or limits the total shift duration (other than
fatigue), there is
no breach of a term of the Enterprise Agreement.
Ms Cooper responded on 5 March 2025 and indicated that, in light of
the degree of disagreement between the parties, the RTBU intended
to file the
dispute in the Commission today. The RTBU applied to the Commission for it to
deal with the dispute under s 739 of the
Act later that day.
The KDNB Agreement
The parties to the KDNB Agreement are listed in clause 5.1 to be
KDNB, employees of KDNB in relevant classifications and the RTBU.
relevant classifications listed in Table 1 of Schedule B is a bus operator which
is defined in clause 3.3 to be an employee
“who ordinarily drives an
Omnibus carrying paying passengers”.
Clause 8.1 provides that employees may be engaged on a permanent
full-time, permanent part-time, casual or temporary basis. Specific
provision is
made for casual bus operators (clause 11), permanent part-time bus operators
(clause 12) and temporary bus operators
(clause 13). With respect to casual bus
operators, clause 11.4 provides:
11.4 A casual Bus Operator will be employed for no less than
three hours and no greater than nine hours per day.
In relation to a part-time bus operator, clause 12.7 provides that
the employer “is required to roster a regular part-time Bus
Operator for a
minimum of three consecutive hours on any shift”. No specific provision is
made for the maximum shift length
of part-time bus operators in clause 12.
Clause 28 makes provision for hours of work and is central to the
present dispute and it is convenient to set out the clause in full.
28. Hours of Work
28.1 Subject to the provisions of this clause, a full-time Employee shall be
entitled to a minimum payment of 3 8 hours per week exclusive
allowances.
28.2 Where, through absence from duty on any day or part thereof, time short
of the standard hours of employment per week is worked,
payment shall be reduced
by the amount of lost time only.
28.3 Employees on a Six Day Roster:
28.3.1 The provisions of this subclause apply to all full-time Employees
covered under this Agreement, except those covered under
subclause 28.4.
28.3.2 Except as provided in 28.3.3, the ordinary hours of duty of each
weekly period, excluding Sunday, shall be 38 hours divided
into not more than
five shifts.
28.3.3 Ordinary hours of duty may be worked to provide for 152 hours work in
a four-week cycle, excluding Sundays. This enables Employees
to have one day off
duty during that cycle by accruing additional working time on other working
days. Such hours to be arranged within
shift limits specified in 28.5. Payment
in these circumstances is to be made on an averaging basis of 76 ordinary hours
a fortnight.
28.4 The provisions of this subclause apply to the classifications of Bus
Cleaner, Sign-on Clerk and Conductor.
28.4.1 Except as provided in 28.4.2, the ordinary. hours of duty of each
weekly period, including Sunday, shall be 38 hours divided
into not more than
five shifts,
28.4.2 Ordinary hours of duty may be worked to provide for 152 hours work in
a four-week cycle. This enables employees lo have one
day off duty during that
cycle by accruing additional working time on other working days. Such hours to
be arranged within shift
limits specified in 27.5. Payment in these
circumstances to be made on an averaging basis of 76 ordinary hours a fortnight.
28.5 Length of shift.
The ordinary hours of duty on any shift shall be no greater than nine hours
and no less than seven.
28.6 Length of shift - broken shifts.
On any broken shift portion the ordinary hours of duty shall be no greater
28.7 The maximum spread of hours on any broken shift shall be 12.
28.8 Interval between shifts.
No Employee shall be called upon to begin a new shift without having been off
duty for at least ten consecutive hours, and no deduction
of pay is to be made
for ordinary lime off duty occurring during this absence.
28.9 Hours of work before and after meal break - Straight and Broken shifts.
28.9.1 Straight shifts - where practicable a minimum of three hours shall be
performed on either portion before or after meal relief.
28.9.2 Broken shifts - where practicable a minimum of three hours shall be
performed on either portion of such shifts with no break
without pay in a day's
duty to be less than two hours.
28.10 "Penalty payments" - when time worked is subject to more than one
extra rate of payment, the employer shall not be obliged
to pay more than double
Consistent with the “drag and drop” approach the RTBU
says was adopted in bargaining, clause 28 of the KDNB Agreement
is in materially
the same terms as clause 27 of the STA Award.
The KDNB Agreement then deals with overtime in clause 31. Clause
31.1 provides that the employer “may require an Employee to
reasonable overtime at overtime rates”. Clause 31.3 provides for payment
as follows:
31.3 All time worked:
excess of eight hours fifteen minutes in any shift;
excess of 38 hours in any week; or
excess of 40 hours in any week when five shifts are worked, or in excess of 32
hours in any week when four shifts are worked, when
such hours are worked on the
basis of 152 hours/nineteen shifts in a four-week work cycle,
stand alone and be paid for at the rate of time and a half for the first three
hours and double time thereafter.
Clause 31 of the KDNB Agreement is in relevantly the same terms as
clause 30 of the STA Award.
Clause 32 of the KDNB Agreement permits bus operators to work
voluntary overtime subject to any statutory or regulatory limits on
hours and “clause 75 (Fatigue Management)”. The reference to clause
75 is an error. It should be a reference
to clause 78. Clause 78 deals with
fatigue management and is in the following terms:
78. Fatigue Management
78.1 Fatigue management principles apply to all employees covered by this
78.2 No employee will be permitted to work more than 12 hours in any 24-hour
78.3 An employee must have a total of 12 hours rest in every 24-hour period,
of which 10 hours must be consecutive between shifts.
78.4 No employee will work more than 24 days in a 28-day period.
78.5 No employee will work more than 12 days straight.
78.6 A 24-hour period commences from the time of the first sign on.
78. 7 No employee will work or be required to work more than five hours
straight without a break.
Clause 92 sets out the dispute settlement procedure for the purposes
of the KDNB Agreement. Clause 92.6 provides that, if a dispute
unresolved after procedures at the workplace have been followed, either party
may refer the matter to the Commission for
conciliation and, if necessary,
arbitration.
Decision of the Deputy President
The dispute was subject of a hearing conducted by the Deputy
President on 13 May 2025, and the Deputy President handed down her decision
12 August 2025. The Deputy President initially set out the background to the
dispute, the relevant provisions of the KDNB Agreement
and the STA Roster Guide
and Payroll Guide and the submissions of the parties. The reasoning of the
Deputy President was, in substance,
as follows:
(b) The Deputy President observed that the expression “ordinary hours of
duty” is used throughout clause 28 and found
that the expression means
“ordinary hours” at least when used in clauses 28.3.2 and 28.3.3.
The Deputy President noted
that it was possible for KDNB to roster an employee
for nine ordinary hours in a shift in accordance with clause 28.3.2 and 28.3.3
such that there was no reason to give the expression a different meaning in
clause 28.5.
(c) In relation to the interaction between clause 28.5 and clause 31.3, the
Deputy President observed that clause 31.3(a) requires
time worked in excess of
eight hours and 15 minutes in any shift to be paid at overtime rates. The Deputy
President concluded that
clause 31.1(a) does not mean that more than eight hours
and 15 minutes of ordinary hours can be rostered in a shift and only that
worked in excess of that period must be paid at time and a half or double time
as applicable.
(d) The Deputy President concluded that clause 31.3(a) merely prescribes
additional payments when work exceeds eight hours and 15
minutes and does not
limit the time which can be worked as part of a shift. Indeed, the Deputy
President concluded that the fact
clause 31.3(a) requires that time worked in
excess of eight hours 15 minutes in any shift being paid for at the rate of time
a half “for the first three hours and double time thereafter” is
inconsistent with the shift being capped at nine
(e) Finally, the Deputy President rejected the submission of the RTBU that the
fact clause 31.3(a) contemplates work beyond nine
hours is explained by the
provision for voluntary overtime in clause 32. The Deputy President accepted the
submission of KDNB that
“there is nothing in the text or structure of the
Agreement which distinguishes between voluntary and other overtime or supports
the RTBU’s contention that clause 28.5 permits voluntary overtime to be
worked in excess of nine hours but prohibits overtime
in excess of nine hours to
be rostered”.
The Deputy President stated her conclusion as
Taking into account the evidence before me and the submissions
of the parties, I find that the reference to ‘ordinary hours
duty’ in clause 28.5, having regard to the natural and ordinary meaning of
the words read as a whole and in context means
‘ordinary hours’ and
does not limit the amount of overtime that an employee may be required to
perform under clause 31
or choose to perform under clause 32.
The Deputy President noted that it appeared to her that the dispute
extends beyond the proper construction of clause 28.5 of the KDNB
Agreement and
to whether KDNB should roster shifts of greater than nine hours. The Deputy
President indicated that the dispute would
be listed for directions in order to
hear from the parties as to what steps should be taken to resolve the remainder
of the dispute.
Permission to appeal and nature of appeal
The sole ground of appeal is that the Deputy President erred in the
interpretation of clause 28.5 of the KDNB Agreement by concluding
“ordinary hours of duty” means “ordinary hours”, that
the Agreement does not limit daily ordinary hours
to eight hours and 15 minutes
and that, consequently, KDNB is permitted to roster shifts of greater than nine
hours on Monday to
Saturday. The proper construction of a legal instrument is,
obviously enough, a question of law to which there is only one true
As such, the
appeal is one to which the correctness standard
permission to appeal is granted, the question for the Full Bench is simply
whether the construction adopted by the Deputy President
is correct.
Clause 92.6 of the KDNB Agreement provides only that a dispute may
be referred to the Commission for conciliation and, if necessary,
arbitration.
The parties accept that the usual provisions of the Act dealing with appeals
should be taken to apply, including the
requirement in s 604(2) that permission
to appeal be obtained. We accept that permission to appeal should not
necessarily be granted
in every case involving the interpretation of an
enterprise agreement, or other industrial instrument, just because the
correctness
standard applies to the appeal. However, in this matter, we are
satisfied that permission to appeal should be granted. KDNB has proposed
introduce a significant change to the working arrangements of bus operators in
the Northern Beaches area. Permission to appeal
should be granted to allow the
Full Bench to consider whether the Deputy President’s decision is correct.
Consideration
The parties did not address, in any detail, the approach to be
adopted to the interpretation of an enterprise agreement. We do not
there to be a dispute as to the principles to be applied. In summary, enterprise
agreements are to be construed as practical
instruments that will apply to the
working conditions known to employers and employees who work in the
circumstances to which the
instrument will
words in an enterprise agreement are generally to be given their ordinary
meaning, read within the instrument as a whole
consideration of context cannot justify rewriting an
Interpretation remains a text-based
important to remember, however, that the ordinary meaning of a provision is not
to be discerned separately from, or disregarding,
the context in which the
provision is
Narrow or pedantic approaches to interpretation should be avoided.
The search is for the meaning intended by the framers of the document
objectively assessed, bearing in mind that the framers were likely of a
practical bent of mind. They may have been concerned with
expressing an
intention in ways understood in the context of the relevant industry or
industrial relations environment. The document
can be read to give effect to its
purpose, having regard to the industrial context despite inconsistencies which
might give rise
to a different
Construction of ambiguous terms should, where possible, favour a sensible and
practical industrial result.
In our view, the decision of the Deputy President is correct. Clause
28.5 of the KDNB Agreement does not prevent permanent full-time
or part-time bus
operators being rostered for a shift of longer than nine hours. Our reasons for
reaching that conclusion are as
, the text of clause 28.5 does not support the
submissions of the RTBU. The words “ordinary hours of duty on any
in clause 28.5 on their own are potentially ambiguous. The clause
does not just refer to “ordinary hours”, but to “ordinary
hours of duty”. However, any ambiguity is, in our opinion, resolved by the
remainder of clause 28. The phrase “ordinary
hours of duty” is used
in clauses 28.3.2, 28.3.3, 28.4.1 and 28.4.2. Clauses 28.3.2, 28.3.3, 28.4.1 and
28.4.2 which set out
the pattern according to which ordinary hours are to be
worked. In those clauses, the phrase “ordinary hours of duty”
unquestionably being used to refer to ordinary hours and not overtime hours. It
is inherently unlikely that the drafters of the
KDNB Agreement used precisely
the same words in the immediately following subclause, clause 28.5, intending
the expression to have
a different meaning.
It may be that the presumption that words are used consistently
throughout a document is likely to have less force in the case of
an enterprise
agreement than it will in relation to a
all, enterprise agreements “are not always drafted carefully by lawyers or
professional drafters” and the framers
of the agreement may not have paid
attention to “legal niceties and
However, where the same phrase is used repeatedly within the same clause of an
agreement when dealing with the same subject matter,
it is very difficult to
accept that a different meaning was intended to be given to the expression in
just one subclause. The only
reasonable inference to be drawn is that the phrase
“ordinary hours of duty” is used to refer to the ordinary hours of
an employee throughout clause 28.
The RTBU relied on two aspects of clause 28 to support its
construction. Clauses 28.3.3 and 28.4.2 require that ordinary hours of
“are to be arranged within shift limits specified in clause 28.5”
and the heading to clause 28.5 is “Length
of shift”. The RTBU
suggests that the reference to “shift limits” supports the view that
clause 28.5 limits the
total number of hours that can be worked in a shift. We
do not accept that submission. Although the reference to “shift
in clauses 28.3.3 and 28.4.2 could be read as the RTBU does, the
requirement that ordinary hours be arranged within the “shift
limits” in clause 28.5 is equally consistent with reading clause 28.5 as
limiting only the number of ordinary hours that may
be worked in any shift. That
is the better view given the repeated use of the phrase “ordinary hours of
duty” throughout
the clause. The heading to clause 28.5 is also consistent
with that view.
, the other aspects of the KDNB Agreement relied upon
by the RTBU are unpersuasive or inconclusive in relation to the proper
construction
of clause 28.5. Clause 11.4 provides that a casual bus operator
will be employed for no less than three hours and no greater than
nine hours per
day. Clause 25.1(e), in dealing with court attendance, provides that an employee
who is no longer required at court
and is directed to resume duty is to be
signed off not later than nine hours after the time of reporting to court. The
RTBU submits
that these provisions are consistent with construing clause 28.5 as
imposing a maximum period of work of nine hours.
These provisions cut both ways. On the one hand, it is perhaps
surprising that the KDNB Agreement would specifically provide a maximum
of work of nine hours for casual bus operators and for other employees after
attending court. On the other hand, clauses 11.4
and 25.1(e) demonstrate that,
in provisions which prescribe a maximum total period of work, explicit language
is used. Clause 78,
dealing with fatigue management, also uses explicit language
to prescribe a maximum period of work. Clause 78.2 to 78.5 each provide
maximum periods of work, or minimum periods of rest, in an unequivocal manner.
In the context of the Agreement as a whole, we
do not accept that clauses 11.4
and 25.1(e) support the view that clause 28.5 prescribes a maximum period of
work on a shift of nine
hours given the different language used in the
respective provisions.
, the primary aspect of the KDNB Agreement relied upon
by the RTBU to support its construction is clause 31.3(a). Clause 31.1(a)
that all time worked in excess of eight hours and 15 minutes shall
stand alone and be paid for at the rate of time and a half for
the first three
hours and double time thereafter. The RTBU submits that this means that ordinary
hours in a shift can only be a maximum
of eight hours and 15 minutes. The RTBU
submits, in substance, that if the maximum number of ordinary hours is eight
hours and 15
minutes, then the prescription of a maximum number of
“ordinary hours of duty” in clause 28.5 must be a reference to
total period of work and not only to ordinary hours.
As the Deputy President observed, it is possible to roster the
ordinary hours of a bus operator with shifts of nine ordinary hours
in a manner
that is consistent with the limitations in clause 28.3.2 and
clause 28.5, it would be possible for ordinary hours to be rostered for more
than nine ordinary hours in a shift. Although
it would be consistent with the
heading of clause 31 to regard any time worked beyond eight hours and 15 minutes
as overtime, the
language of clause 31.1(a) itself relates only to payment.
Clause 31.1(a) is capable of applying to ordinary hours worked beyond
hours and 15 minutes. The consequence of working nine ordinary hours in a shift
is that the final 45 minutes would be paid
at time and a half. Although the
outcome is unusual, it is not inconsistent with the text of clause 31.1(a).
, the RTBU relies on what is said to be a common
understanding between the parties that shifts were never to be rostered beyond
hours save for charter work or special events. Some differences of opinion
have been expressed in the authorities as to the extent
to which a court or
tribunal is entitled to take into account a common understanding of industrial
parties in relation to the operation
of an enterprise agreement or other
industrial instrument when construing its terms. It is generally accepted that,
where the parties
to an industrial instrument have, historically, adopted a
common understanding as to the meaning and effect of disputed provisions,
court or tribunal should not depart from that understanding when it comes to
construe the provisions at a later
At the level
of basic principle, such an approach is consistent with construing an industrial
instrument in context and having regard
to the circumstances that existed at the
time it was made.
However, as Gray J observed in
Health Services Union v Ballarat
Health Services
[2011] FCA 1256
, there are at least two reasons for care to
be observed when considering a suggestion of a common understanding as to the
reason is that there must be positive evidence of a common understanding as to
the operation of the relevant provisions
and it is necessary to distinguish
common inadvertence from common
understanding.
existence of an historical practice in relation to rostering or the payment of
contested entitlements might be equally consistent
with common inadvertence as
common understanding. Ordinarily, a failure to advance an argument as to the
effect of a particular provision
will not constitute such evidence. Similarly,
mere inaction or lack of complaint is likely to be insufficient to establish a
understanding.
The second reason for caution to be applied before accepting an
argument that effect should be given to the common understanding of
the parties
in construing an enterprise agreement is that enterprise agreements are now,
most commonly at least, made directly between
an employer and relevant
employees, albeit unions or other representatives may be involved in the
negotiation of the agreement as
bargaining representatives. In that respect,
Gray J said:
The second need for care arises in the context of the manner in
which industrial instruments are now created. In the days when an
award might be
negotiated between a union and an employer, and made by consent, the existence
of a common understanding between the
union and the employer as to the meaning
of terms might have had some role to play in their construction. Whatever were
of such an agreement, and whatever was their meaning, those terms were
imposed upon the employees who became bound by the award.
In the current era,
most industrial instruments are required to be put to a vote of the employees
whose work will be covered by them,
before they can be certified or approved so
as to become enforceable by statute. The union and the employer who negotiated
might have had a common understanding of the meaning of them, but that
understanding might not have been shared by all or some of
the employees who
voted for the operation of the agreement. They may have been entirely ignorant
of the common understanding. In
those circumstances, the occasions on which it
can be said that a party to an agreement who entered into it on a common
understanding
should not be allowed to resile from that understanding will be
rarer than they have been in the past.
Other than in the case of greenfields agreements, enterprise
agreements are not merely negotiated between industrial parties. They
agreements in a conventional sense at all. They are instruments which are made,
and have operation, by reason of mechanisms
prescribed by statute involving,
leaving greenfields agreements to one side, a vote of employees and approval by
the Commission.
Sheehan v Thiess Pty Ltd
[2019] FCA 1762
remarked that enterprise agreements generally and, relevantly to that case, a
greenfields agreement in particular, are
made to apply to future employees who
play no part in the making of the agreement. In that context, his Honour
regarded contextual
considerations known to bargaining representatives involved
in negotiating an agreement to be of limited assistance in construing
His Honour said:
... peculiar contextual matters that may have been commonly
known to representatives of Thiess and the Union when negotiating the
the Agreement are not matters to be brought to account. The Agreement is within
the category of instruments where it is
intended to apply to parties who were
not participants in the process by which the terms of the instrument were
formulated. In such
cases, it may not be appropriate for surrounding
circumstances to be brought to account unless they rise to the level of matters
that would be notorious or known to those intended to be bound by the instrument
who did not participate in the negotiations or dealings
by which the terms were
formulated: see, for example,
Allandale Blue Metal Pty Ltd v Roads and
Maritime Services
[2013] NSWCA 103
(a case concerned with planning
Lion Nathan Australia Pty Ltd v Coopers Brewery Ltd
[2006] FCAFC 144
(2006) 156 FCR 1
, [73] (Weinberg J),
[225]-[226] (Lander J), cp [123]-[124] (Kenny J) (a case concerned with company
constitutions) and
Westfield Management Limited v Perpetual Trustee Company
[2007] HCA 45
(2007) 233 CLR 528
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Kirby, Hayne and Heydon JJ) (a case concerned with easements).
For our part, we would not go so far as to suggest that the fact
that an enterprise agreement is made so as to apply to future employees
within its coverage does not, in itself mean that contextual considerations are
irrelevant. In
Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information,
Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia v Endeavour
Network Management Pty Ltd
[2025] FCA 1202
, for example, Kennett J observed
that the process of making an enterprise agreement involves the employer
proposing an agreement
to relevant employees, employees having an entitlement to
be represented in the bargaining process and employees approving the agreement
by a majority vote in circumstances in which they have been properly informed
Integral to that process is the drafting and consideration (and
potentially the refinement during bargaining) of a text which is put
employees and voted on by them. The process is very different from a contractual
negotiation or the passage of legislation; however,
like those processes, it
involves people drafting, discussing and adopting a text. The factual matrix in
which these steps occur,
at least to the extent that it is known or reasonably
knowable by the persons to whom the FW Act affords a role in the process, is
logically capable of shedding light on the meaning of words that appear in the
text. The fact that an enterprise agreement will bind
future employees, who have
played no part in its development and approval, does not gainsay this point: the
same is obviously true
of legislation, and does not dissuade the courts from
of the legislature.
There is some tension between the views expressed by Colvin J and
Kennett J in the two passages we have set out. Colvin J would only
matters which are notorious or known to those intended to be bound by the
instrument to be relevant. Kennett J treated matters
known or reasonably
knowable by representatives authorised to participate in bargaining as being
capable of shedding light on the
meaning of the text of an enterprise agreement.
What can be drawn from the authorities to which we have referred is
that the factual matrix in which an enterprise agreement is negotiated
on by employees may be relevant to the construction of its terms. However, the
nature of an enterprise agreement and the
process through which such an
agreement is made affects the weight that can be attached to evidence arising
from the negotiation
or past conduct of the employer or relevant industrial
parties. Generally speaking, matters that are known or likely to be known
those intended to be bound by the instrument will be most relevant although the
factual circumstances surrounding the making of
a particular agreement, or the
manner in which industrial relations is conducted in the particular workplace,
may mean that assistance
can be derived from matters known to the
representatives involved in the bargaining process.
We do not consider that the evidence in this matter establishes a
relevant common understanding in relation to the construction of
clause 28.5 of
the KDNB Agreement. The RTBU primarily relies on evidence which suggests that
shifts for bus operators have historically
not been longer than nine hours. That
fact alone is, in our opinion, insufficient to support a conclusion that there
was a common
understanding that the equivalent provision to clause 28.5 in the
STA Award prohibited shifts of more than nine hours being worked.
In any event,
the evidence did not suggest that shifts were never rostered for more than nine
hours. The evidence of Lance Fenner,
a bus operator who gave evidence for the
RTBU, was that all shifts were shown on a roster, and all shifts were between
nine hours. However, Mr Fenner indicated that charter work and other
atypical events such as rail replacement work, easter show shifts,
events could involve shifts of more than nine hours.
, the RTBU made a related submission arising from the
policies applied by the STA in relation to rostering prior to KDNB taking over
the operation of services on the Northern Beaches. Mr Babineau gave evidence
that the STA Award was designed over decades to work
in conjunction with the STA
Roster Clerk Guide and the STA Payroll Manual. Mr Babineau said that the parties
to the STA Award understood
this clearly and the provisions in the Award were
designed to align with the Roster Guide and the Payroll Manual. The RTBU submits
that, in circumstances in which the intention of drafting the KDNB Agreement was
to “drag and drop” existing conditions
into the new agreement,
clause 28.5 should be construed in a manner that is consistent with Roster Guide
and the Payroll Manual.
As we have observed, relevant provisions of the KDNB
Agreement and the STA Award are in substantially the same terms.
There are a number of difficulties with the submission. The evidence
of Mr Babineau is no more than his subjective understanding of
the intention
underlying the STA Award. The STA Award does not itself refer to, or
incorporate, the Roster Guide or the Payroll Manual
and we do not consider that
the terms of those documents permit the Commission to disregard the language
used in the KDNB Agreement
itself. In any event, the Roster Guide or the Payroll
Manual do not clearly present a picture that rostering of more than nine hours
is necessarily prohibited. Clause 2.3 of the Roster Guide provides for three
duty. After setting
out the types of duty, the Roster Guide says:
“All duties can only work a maximum of 5 hours in any one
portion. Base Duties can work up to a maximum of 9 hours’ work
Charter Shifts can work over 9 hours and up to 12 hours on Bus Hiring or
Special Events.”
Although “base duties” are said to be worked up to a
maximum of nine hours work time, no definition of “base duties”
contained in the Roster Guide, and it is not entirely clear what the term is
intended to mean. With respect to “straight
duty”, the Roster Guides
Straight Duties
Shifts, Midday’s, P.m.’s & All Nighters;
Operate every
day of the week.
Can be rostered
with a paid meal (crib) or with an unpaid meal of between 40 and 50
Charters Shifts
can work over 9 hours to a maximum of 12 hours spread (sign on to sign off)
It may be that “base duties” are contrasted with charter
work or special events. To the extent that the Roster Guide distinguishes
between ordinary route work and charter work or special events so far as maximum
shift length is concerned, no such provision is
made in the KDNB Agreement or
was made in the STA Award. Clause 52 of the KDNB Agreement and clause 51 of the
STA Award make provision
for charter work, but provides only that “maximum
shift portions on Charter Work are to be of five hours duration” and
“[w]here the total timetabled roadwork is to be in excess of eight and a
half hours in a given shift, the circumstances
are to be discussed with the
Unions”. However, in dealing with hours of work, clause 28 of the KDNB
Agreement and clause 27
of the STA Award do not distinguish between charter work
and special events and other working time.
The RTBU also referred to the part of the Roster Guide referring to
the rostering of part-time bus operators. Clause 4.8.3 of the
Roster Guide
Part-time positions exist at most Depots. The duties can be
constructed between a minimum of 3 hours and a maximum of 9 hours per
Monday to Saturday. A part-time Bus Operator can be rostered for a maximum (146
hours per 4 weekly period, 36.5 hours per week).
A part time duty can operate at
various times.
Except in an emergency or other agreed circumstance, a part time Bus
Operator shall not work overtime (i.e. daily overtime, DOC or
The indication that part-time bus operators are to have duties
constructed to a maximum of nine hours per day is of limited assistance
present matter. The limit appears to be associated with the prohibition on
part-time bus operators working overtime. It does
not, in itself, suggest that
there is otherwise a restriction on working periods exceeding nine hours.
The Payroll Manual contains a number of provisions which indicate
that the drafters of that document understood that time worked beyond
hours and 15 minutes in a day would be overtime. Section 2 deals with the
ordinary hours of bus operators and, among other
things, provides:
Maximum shift
length before
The maximum number of ordinary hours worked before overtime is payable is 8
hours and 15 minutes.
In dealing with guaranteed payments, the Payroll Manual says:
Weekly Guarantee
Full time employees are guaranteed 40 hours per week plus any time worked
beyond 8 hours 15 minutes per day Monday to Saturday,
less any time lost.
The guidance provided in relation to shift penalties in the Payroll
Manual indicates that “[t]he shift payment is applied up
to the first 8
hours 15 minutes of the normal rostered shift” and the guidance provided
in relation to overtime indicated that
“[t]ime worked beyond 8 hours 15
minutes in any shift is paid at the rate of: 150% for the first 3 hours [and]
200% for time
worked in excess of the first 3 hours”.
Whilst those provisions suggest the drafters of the Payroll Manual
generally understood work beyond eight hours and 15 minutes to
be overtime, we
do not consider that the context provided by the document is persuasive in
relation to the present matter. The guidance
may reflect the common practice or
understanding within the STA. It does not permit setting aside the terms of the
KDNB Agreement.
In that regard, we note that the introduction to the Payroll
Manual states:
This document has been prepared to assist employees with
explanations on the procedural application of the conditions of employment.
The content is expressed as an explanation and interpretation of the relevant
awards and conditions of employment. Where any inconsistency
exists, the
organisation policy, award or enterprise agreement will prevail. For full
details on all subject matters reference should
be made to the particular HR
Policy documents on the BMS or the relevant awards and agreements.
The language used in clause 31.3(a) of the KDNB Agreement only
provides that time worked in excess of eight hours and 15 minutes is
at time and a half or double time. That provision is not inconsistent with the
construction of clause 28.5 adopted by
the Deputy President.
For these reasons, the Deputy President was correct to conclude that
the maximum of nine hours referred to in clause 28.5 of the KDNB
relates to ordinary hours of duty rather than all work time. Clause 28.5, in
itself, does not prevent KDNB from requiring
a bus operator to work more than
nine hours in a shift incorporating a period of overtime. As the Deputy
President observed, other
aspects of the KDNB Agreement, or potentially of the
Act, might prevent KDNB from rostering bus operators on shifts in excess of
hours either generally or in specific circumstances. It may be that the dispute
settlement procedure in clause 92 of the KDNB
Agreement permits the Commission
to arbitrate a dispute as to the appropriateness of the proposed roster change
more generally. Those
questions are scheduled to be subject of further
proceedings before the Deputy President. That should occur.
Permission to appeal should be granted, but the appeal should be
dismissed. The dispute proceedings should continue before the Deputy
The Full Bench makes the following orders:
(a) Permission
to appeal is granted; and
(b) The appeal
is dismissed.
VICE PRESIDENT
Appearances
, of counsel, instructed by Jemimah Cooper, Industrial
Officer, for the appellant.
, of counsel, instructed by
Kingston Reid for the respondent.
Hearing details:
14 October 2025.
Sydney (in person).
Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Keolis Downer Northern Beaches Pty Ltd
Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Keolis Downer Northern Beaches Pty Ltd
Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Keolis Downer Northern Beaches Pty Ltd
Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Keolis Downer Northern Beaches Pty Ltd
Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Keolis Downer Northern Beaches Pty Ltd
Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Keolis Downer Northern Beaches Pty Ltd
Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Keolis Downer Northern Beaches Pty Ltd
Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Keolis Downer Northern Beaches Pty Ltd
Manufacturing Pty Ltd v BlueScope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWCA 27
(2013) 85 NSWLR 1
(Allsop P).
for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR
and [48]-[49] (Gageler J);
FreshFood Management Services Pty Ltd
v Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries
Linfox Armaguard Pty Ltd T/A Linfox Armaguard v
Transport Workers’ Union
Thiess Pty Ltd
[2019] FCA 1762
(Colvin J) (
WorkPac Pty
Ltd v Skene
[2018] FCAFC 131
(2018) 264 FCR 536
(Tracey, Bromberg
and Rangiah JJ);
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v
Hay Point Services Pty Ltd
[2018] FCAFC 182
(Reeves, Bromberg and
O'Callaghan JJ).
Automotive,
Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union v Berri Pty
(2017) 268 IR 285
Amcor Ltd v
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (Amcor)
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR 241
Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing
and Allied Services Union of Australia v Endeavour Energy
Network Management Pty
[2025] FCA 1202
(Kennett J).
(1996) 66 IR 182 at 184 (Madgwick J);
Transport Workers’ Union
of Australia v Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 148
(Siopis, Buchanan and Flick JJ).
Trading Limited T/A Metcash v United Workers’ Union
James Cook University
[2021] HCA 32
(2021) 274 CLR 495
(Kiefel CJ,
Gageler, Keane, Gordon and Edelman JJ);
Hempel (Wattyl) Australia Pty Ltd v
United Workers’ Union
[2024] FCAFC 298
(Rangiah, Snaden
and Abraham JJ).
Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Keolis Downer Northern Beaches Pty Ltd
Liquor, Hospitality and Miscellaneous Workers’ Union v Prestige Property
Services Pty Ltd
[2006] FCA 11
149 FCR 209 at
Transport Workers’ Union of Australia v Linfox Australia Pty
[2014] FCA 829
(Tracey J).
Services Union v Ballarat Health Services
[2011] FCA 1256
Liquor, Hospitality and Miscellaneous Workers Union v Prestige Property Services
[2006] FCA 11
(2006) 149 FCR 209
Distributive and Allied Employees’ Association v Woolworths Ltd
(2006) 151 FCR 513
Manufacturing Workers’ Union v EnergyAustralia Yallourn Pty Ltd
(2017) 262 IR 300
Services Union v Ballarat Health Services
[2011] FCA 1256
Motor Corporation Australia Ltd v Marmara
[2014] FCAFC 84
(2014) 222 FCR
(Jessup, Tracey and Perram JJ).
Thiess Pty Ltd
[2019] FCA 1762
Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing
and Allied Services Union of Australia v Endeavour Energy
Network Management Pty
[2025] FCA 1202
(Kennett J).
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (4.51 MB)
Signed PDF/A format