Construction, Forestry, Mining & Energy Union v Hume Highway Constructions Pty Ltd & Anor [2013] FMCA 154 (5 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
CONSTRUCTION, FORESTRY,
MINING & ENERGY UNION v HUME HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LTD &
[2013] FMCA 154
INDUSTRIAL LAW – Right of entry –
hindering or obstructing – refusing or unduly delaying.
WORDS & PHRASES – “Exercising rights” –
“refuse” – “unduly”.
Fair Work Act 2009
Occupational Health & Safety Act 2000 (NSW
Fair Work Regulations 2009
Crimes Act 1914
Darlaston v Parker
[2010] FCA 771
(2010) 189 FCR
Clare & Gilbert Valleys Council v Crawford
[2005] SADC
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
CFMEU v Safety Glass Pty
[2010] FCA 989
R v Loughnan
[1981] VicRp 43
[1981] VR 443
[2005] FCA 977
Innes v Rail Corporation of New South Wales
[2013] FMCA 36
Michaels v R
[1995] HCA 8
(1995) 184 CLR 117
Control of Michigan Technical University v Deputy Commissioner of Patents
[1981] FCA 39
(1981) 53 FLR 26
CONSTRUCTION, FORESTRY, MINING & ENERGY UNION
First Respondent:
HUME HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LTD ACN 147 946
Second Respondent:
ANTHONY JOHN GITTANY
File Number:
SYG 892 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing dates:
7 & 8 February 2013
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Mr I Latham
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Ms L Charlson, Construction, Forestry, Mining & Energy Union
Solicitors for the Respondents:
Joe Weller & Associates
(1) The application be
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
CONSTRUCTION, FORESTRY, MINING &
ENERGY UNION
HUME HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LTD ACN 147
First Respondent
ANTHONY JOHN GITTANY
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(As Corrected)
Introduction
6 December 2011 three of the applicant’s employees attended the first
respondent’s construction site in order, they
said, to investigate
suspected breaches by the respondents of their obligations under the
Occupational Health & Safety Act 2000 (NSW
Act”). The applicant (“CFMEU”) alleged that although the
OH&S Act and the
Fair Work Act 2009
(“FWA”) authorised
its three employees to enter those premises, in contravention of
of the FWA respectively, the respondents refused and/or unduly delayed that
entry and intentionally hindered or obstructed them in
the exercise of their
rights to investigate health and safety concerns. The CFMEU sought declarations
to this effect and the imposition
of pecuniary penalties in respect of those
contraventions.
second respondent, Mr Gittany, is a shareholder of the first respondent, Hume
Highway Constructions. The CFMEU alleges that Hume
Highway Constructions was
responsible for the conduct of Mr Gittany and that Mr Gittany had
accessorial liability under
of the FWA for the alleged contraventions of
Hume Highway Constructions.
the reasons which follow, the application will be
Relevant legislation
77 of the OH&S Act (which has since been repealed by the
Work Health
& Safety Act 2011 (NSW)
) permitted an authorised representative of an
industrial organisation to enter a place of work in the following circumstances:
of entry of places of work
authorised representative of an industrial organisation of employees may, for
the purpose of investigating any suspected breach
of the occupational health and
safety legislation, the
Coal Mine Health and Safety Act 2002
Mine Health and Safety Act 2004
, enter any premises the
representative has reason to believe is a place of work where members of that
organisation (or persons who
are eligible to be members of that organisation)
the OH&S Act an authorised representative was a person who had been issued
with an authority by the NSW Industrial Registrar
under pt.7 of chp.5 of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
: s.79(1) of the
permits could also be issued under s.512 of the FWA by what was then Fair Work
Australia. At the relevant time that section
may issue entry permits
FWA may, on
application by an organisation, issue a permit (an entry permit) to an official
of the organisation if FWA is satisfied
that the official is a fit and proper
person to hold the entry permit.
official who has been granted an entry permit under s.512 of the FWA may,
pursuant to s.494 of that Act, exercise what that section
describes as a
“State or Territory OHS right”. Section 494 relevantly provides:
Official must be permit holder to exercise State or Territory OHS right
must be permit holder
official of an organisation must not exercise a State or Territory OHS right
unless the official is a permit holder.
State or Territory OHS right
right to enter premises, or to inspect or otherwise access an employee record of
an employee that is on premises, is a
State or Territory OHS right
right is conferred by a State or Territory OHS law, and:
premises are occupied or otherwise controlled by any of the following:
constitutional corporation;
State or Territory OHS law
State or Territory OHS law
is a law of a State or a Territory prescribed
by the regulations.
the relevant time the OH&S Act was prescribed by reg.3.25 of the
Work Regulations 2009
for the purposes of s.494(3) of the FWA.
of the FWA provide:
Person must not refuse or delay entry
must not refuse or unduly delay entry onto premises by a permit holder who is
entitled to enter the premises in accordance
with this Part.
Person must not hinder or obstruct permit holder
person must not intentionally hinder or obstruct a permit holder exercising
rights in accordance with this Part.
Without limiting subsection (1), that subsection extends to hindering or
obstructing that occurs after an entry notice is given
but before a permit
holder enters premises.
(1) are civil remedy provisions: s.539 of the FWA. The maximum
penalty for a contravention of
is 60 penalty units for an
individual and 300 penalty units for a corporation: ss.539 and 546(2). At the
relevant time a penalty
unit was worth $110: ss.4AA, 4F
Applicant’s allegations
CFMEU alleged that on 6 December 2011 three of its employees, Brian Miller,
Chikmann Koh and Mansour Razaghi, sought to enter
a construction site in
Yagoona, New South Wales which was controlled or occupied by Hume Highway
Constructions (“Premises”),
to investigate suspected breaches of the
OH&S Act. It submitted that Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi were, at all
material times,
authorised representatives under the OH&S Act and permit
holders under the FWA and therefore entitled to enter the Premises.
Contravention of s.502
CFMEU alleged that while Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi were inspecting a
concrete pump, Mr Gittany, acting for himself and on
behalf of Hume Highway
Constructions, verbally abused them by saying words to the effect of “get
the fuck off the job”
and “I’ve called the police”. The
CFMEU alleged that Mr Gittany then turned to individuals it described as
of Hume Highway Constructions and said words to the effect
by 2s and we will get them off the job.
CFMEU alleged that, in response, the individuals it described as employees of
Hume Highway Constructions shouted at Messrs Miller,
Koh and Razaghi to
“fuck off”.
CFMEU also alleged that Stephen Jeitani, whom it alleged was an associate of
Mr Gittany, walked over to Mr Miller, took off his
jacket and repeatedly
shouted “get the fuck off the job”. It alleged that Mr Jeitani
then forcefully pushed Mr Miller’s
right shoulder. When Mr Miller
accused Mr Jeitani of assault, the latter responded “I don’t give a
fuck. Just get off
the job”. The CFMEU alleged that Mr Jeitani was later
convicted of common assault on Mr Miller.
CFMEU alleged that the respondents intentionally hindered or obstructed Messrs
Miller, Koh and Razaghi in the exercise of their
rights under s.494 of the FWA
and that they thereby contravened s.502 of the FWA.
Contravention of s.501
CFMEU alleged that after the assault on Mr Miller, he and Messrs Koh and Razaghi
waited outside the Premises for the police to
arrive. The CFMEU alleged that Mr
Gittany, acting for himself and on behalf of Hume Highway Constructions, did not
permit them to
re-enter the Premises to complete their investigation. The CFMEU
alleged that by refusing or delaying their entry into the Premises,
respondents contravened s.501 of the FWA.
Mark Cunningham
Cunningham deposed that he works at the CFMEU’s office in Lidcombe, New
South Wales as the Counter Organiser. He deposed
that he handles general
enquiries from the public and from the CFMEU’s members.
Cunningham deposed that on 6 December 2011 he received a report from an
anonymous caller who stated that the Premises had no amenities,
no evacuation
plan and no first aid but did have electrical problems and unsafe scaffolding.
Mr Cunningham deposed that following
this conversation he notified Mr Miller,
the State Organiser responsible for Yagoona, who told him that he would try to
site “straight away”. Mr Cunningham deposed that he also
telephoned WorkCover to advise them of the complaint.
Brian Miller
Miller is employed by the CFMEU as a State Organiser in its New South Wales
branch. He deposed that he holds a state right of
entry permit as well as a
federal right of entry permit.
Miller deposed that on 6 December 2011 he was advised by Mr Cunningham that
the latter had received a “call in” about
various safety issues at
the Premises. At about 8am, Mr Miller attended the site with two other State
Organisers, Mr Koh and Mr
Razaghi. He deposed that when they arrived at the
site he had a conversation with Mr Gittany to the following effect:
We have had calls to our office about some safety problems, including workers
working in the rain, inadequate amenities,
electrical problems, first aid
problems, danger of falls from heights, and no evacuation plan. We are here
under our state right
of entry. We need to do a safety walk.
Gittany: I am too busy. I will get Mitch to walk you through the site.
Miller said that Mr Gittany also told him that he was in charge of the job.
Miller said that after inspecting the amenities room he and Messrs Koh and
Razaghi moved on to the first aid area, after which
they went to a car park
outside the Premises to check the scaffold which went around the outside of the
building but which also stood
in that car park. Mr Miller deposed that the
first stage of the inspection took about fifteen minutes.
Miller could not remember saying to Messrs Koh and Razaghi, at the conclusion of
the first stage of the inspection, words to the
effect of “Come on,
we’re all leaving now.” He said that he could not recall whether
somebody suggested they all
go to the car park but they had to go to there
because that was where the scaffold was.
that time, a concrete pump associated with the building work was located in the
car park. Mr Miller deposed that he checked the
pump’s paperwork and saw
that the workers compensation policy was out of date and insufficient. He
discussed this with the
pump operator who said that he would check with his
office. Mr Miller deposed that the pump operator spoke to someone on the
and started to pack up shortly afterwards. Mr Miller said that
neither he nor his colleagues told the pump operator to leave and
the operator
made the decision himself after having made some telephone calls.
Miller’s evidence was that, once in the car park, he and Messrs Koh and
Razaghi attended to different tasks, including looking
at the pump itself, and
it was possible that the latter were not close enough to him to hear what he
said to the pump operator but
it was also possible that they could have, because
they did move around the pump area.
to a statement to police made by Mr Miller and dated 6 December 2011, a
copy of which was annexed to his affidavit affirmed
23 July 2012, Messrs Miller,
Koh and Razaghi were checking the concrete pump when Mr Gittany approached
them, along with four or
five other site workers, and started to abuse them,
saying things like “get the fuck off the job” and “I’ve
called the police”. When Mr Miller responded that they were not on the
site, would not leave and would wait for the police
to arrive, Mr Gittany turned
to his workers and said “get the 4 by 2’s and we will get them off
the job”. A male,
whom Mr Miller later identified as Stephen
Jeitani, then walked over to him, took his jacket off and shouted repeatedly
the fuck off the job”. Mr Jeitani then pushed Mr
Miller’s right shoulder. Mr Miller deposed that when he accused
Jeitani of assaulting him, the latter responded “I don’t
give a fuck just get off the job”. Mr Miller said when
confronted with
the angry building workers, he did have some concern for the physical welfare of
his colleagues.
Miller disputed the contention put to him that the workers who approached him
were angry because the concrete pour had stopped.
He said that they were angry
because Mr Gittany had stirred them up with a view to getting the CFMEU
officials off the site. He
said that there was a constant stream of abuse and
that most of it came from Mr Gittany. Mr Miller said that did not know who
men worked for but that quite a few of them agreed with Mr Gittany
and his order that the CFMEU officials leave the site.
deposed that after Mr Jeitani pushed him, the building workers walked to the
other side of the car park while he and Messrs
Koh and Razaghi waited near the
entrance for the police. He thought that it took the police more than fifteen
minutes to arrive.
He deposed that they were not permitted to re-enter the site
to continue their safety inspection before the police and an inspector
WorkCover arrived.
Miller said that he believed that either Mr Koh or Mr Razaghi had called the
police or possibly it had been his supervisor because
Mr Miller thought
that he had called him. He said that he could not exactly remember who had
telephoned the police but as far as
he recalled, the police had been called by
one of the organisers and possibly his supervisor as well.
Miller agreed that once the police arrived things calmed down quite a bit.
Miller deposed that he identified several safety issues during the second stage
of his inspection and took some photographs which
he annexed to his affidavit.
He deposed that WorkCover later issued improvement notices, prohibition notices
and penalty notices
in relation to the Premises.
Chikmann Koh
Koh is employed by the CFMEU as a State Organiser in its New South Wales branch.
He deposed that he holds both a state right of
entry permit and a federal right
of entry permit.
Koh deposed that he attended the Premises with Messrs Miller and Razaghi on 6
December 2011. Mr Miller was leading the group.
According to a police
statement which he made on that day, and which he annexed to his first
affidavit, Mr Koh and his co-workers
were met at the site by Mr Gittany who
then instructed his foreman to walk them through the Premises. In his oral
evidence Mr Koh
said that from the beginning Mr Gittany shouted and yelled.
his second affidavit, affirmed on 6 November 2012, Mr Koh deposed that he had
previously inspected the Premises in September, October
and November 2011 and
found “that safety conditions on the site were terrible”. He went
on to depose that when he and
Messrs Miller and Razaghi arrived at the site on 6
December 2011, Mr Miller said words to the following effect to Mr
organisers have previously visited and given you time to fix the safety
problems. It looks like the site is still a mess.
We want to come on and do a
safety inspection.
Koh stated that after briefly walking through the interior of the building site
they moved to the car park to assess a concrete
pump. In his affidavit of 6
November 2012, Mr Koh put it this way:
we entered the site, I estimate that we spent approximately 10 minutes looking
at the lunch shed. The lunch shed was terribly
dirty. The refrigerator was old
and disused. Some of the electrical tools had no tags at all, and some tags had
expired. ... We
discussed these problems with the person who Tony Gittany had
asked to show us around the site. We then came to the car park where
concrete pump was installed.
In his oral evidence Mr
Koh said that before going out to the car park because there was a concrete pump
in operation there, he and
Messrs Miller and Razaghi had been in the amenities
room with the foreman who had been accompanying them. In his oral evidence Mr
Koh initially said that he thought that Mr Miller had told them to leave the
amenities block because they heard the concrete pump
pumping but later said that
he could not clearly remember what Mr Miller had said or why he had told them to
leave the room.
Koh deposed that the planned concrete pour was temporarily paused while they
spoke to the operator and in his affidavit of 6 November
recounted what he had heard Mr Miller say to the pump operator. By contrast, in
his oral evidence Mr Koh said that he was
not close enough to Mr Miller when the
latter was talking to the pump operator to hear what those two men said and did
not have any
idea about whether Mr Miller had told the operator to pack up and
leave. When it was pointed out to him that this evidence contradicted
affidavit, Mr Koh said that he had understood some of the conversation between
Mr Miller and the pump operator but not other
parts and that in any event he was
not concerned with the conversation so did not pay attention to it.
Koh said in his police statement that when he and his colleagues were talking to
the pump operator, Mr Gittany and seven or eight
workers surrounded them. One of them had a hammer in his hand. Mr Koh
stated that Mr Gittany said to them:
get out of the building site. I’m giving you 10 minutes to
while the building workers also yelled and told
them to “fuck off”. In his oral evidence he said that he clearly
that Mr Gittany had said this. Mr Koh stated that a male from the
group then approached Mr Miller, told him to “fuck off,
get out of the
job” and pushed him. Mr Koh stated that he stepped in at that point and
told Mr Gittany to calm down. He stated
that several of the workers then
came closer to him and began to yell and swear at him. Mr Koh stated that some
of the workers took
Mr Gittany away as he was becoming aggressive. He
recalled Mr Gittany saying that he would call the police. They arrived a short
time, perhaps thirty minutes, later.
the men approached them at the concrete pump, Mr Koh had some concern for his
Mansour Razaghi
Razaghi is also employed by the CFMEU as a State Organiser in its New South
Wales Branch. He deposed that he holds a state right
of entry permit as well as
a federal right of entry permit.
Razaghi deposed that on 6 December 2011 he attended the Premises with Messrs
Miller and Koh. Mr Razaghi also deposed that he had
visited the site once
before, in late 2011, and found major safety problems, poor amenities and other
deficiencies.
Razaghi annexed to his affidavit a copy of a police statement which he deposed
he made on the day of the events at the Premises
but which was in fact dated the
next day. According to that statement, upon arrival at the Premises he and his
co-workers made themselves
known to the site manager, Mr Gittany, who then
instructed “Mitch” to take them on a safety walk through the site.
started at the amenities block where they found several breaches.
Razaghi stated that a short time later, while they were in the site office
discussing with Mr Gittany some of the safety breaches
that had been identified,
the latter became verbally aggressive and started shouting and swearing. Mr
Razaghi said that he believed
that Mr Gittany’s reaction to them was
a result of the deficiencies which they had identified. He said that Mr Gittany
that he did not want the inspection to go any further. Although Mr Razaghi
did not remember everything that Mr Gittany may have
said, he did recall him
swearing at them and telling them to “get out”.
this point, because it was a heated situation, Mr Miller asked him and Mr Koh to
leave the site and go to the adjoining car park.
He left the site because Mr
Miller told him and Mr Koh to.
Razaghi deposed that once in the car park he and Mr Miller saw a concrete pumper
there which was being set up for operation. They
decided to check the
driver’s paperwork and found that the workers compensation policy was out
of date and had an incorrect
classification. Mr Razaghi said that he could hear
what Mr Miller said to the pump operator in relation to whether he had current
workers compensation insurance but did not remember him telling the operator to
pack up and leave. He deposed that when the workers
compensation insurance
issue was raised with the pump operator, the latter said that he was “not
going to risk it” and
started to pack up.
Razaghi stated that a short time after he and his colleagues spoke to the pump
operator they were approached by Mr Gittany and
five or six building workers.
Mr Gittany proceeded to yell at him to get back into the car and to leave the
jobsite or he would
call the police. Mr Razaghi was pleased that Mr Gittany
spoke of calling the police because he was concerned for the safety of himself
and his colleagues. Mr Gittany also said that he would have all persons
who were part of the union forced off the job site. A short
time later he saw
an unknown male approach Mr Miller and push him on the shoulder.
time after the confrontation another CFMEU colleague, Mr Ratana, came and
spoke to Mr Gittany but Mr Razaghi did not hear what
Because Mr Ratana did not say that they could go back on the site he
concluded that they were not allowed to. However,
they did return to the site
Razaghi said that things calmed down after the police arrived. The police
stayed for about fifteen minutes. An inspector from
WorkCover also arrived
while the police were there. When the police left, the CFMEU officials and the
WorkCover inspector went onto
the site unimpeded.
Joseph Ratana
Ratana deposed that he has been employed by the CFMEU as a State Organiser since
2001 and holds both a state and a federal right
of entry permit.
Ratana deposed that he had attended the Premises on approximately three
occasions in about November 2011 and had identified to
Mr Gittany a number
of serious safety hazards on the site which Mr Gittany agreed to fix.
Ratana deposed that on 6 December 2011 he attended the Premises at the request
of Mr Miller. When he arrived at approximately
10am, he saw that Messrs Miller,
Koh and Razaghi were standing in the car park next to the Premises. Mr Ratana
deposed that he approached
Mr Gittany and that they had a conversation to
the following effect:
Ratana: What’s going on?
Gittany: They have gone for a safety walk. We are trying to fix the
Ratana: It should have been fixed a long time ago because we already pointed it
out to you. You need to let them on. They are
entitled to come on.
Gittany: Why?
Ratana deposed that, at that point, Mr Koh and Mr Razaghi arrived at the site
gate and that Mr Gittany shouted:
site! What are you doing here? Get out.
and that Mr
Razaghi subsequently walked away. Mr Ratana deposed that in order to diffuse
the situation he instructed Mr Koh to leave
the site as well. He deposed that
Mr Gittany said “they are not coming in”.
Ratana deposed that when he left the site shortly afterwards, Messrs Miller, Koh
and Razaghi remained in the car park as Mr Gittany
refused to allow them
back onto the site.
Ratana said that he left the site before the police arrived.
Anthony Gittany
Gittany said that he was the foreman on the site, working with
Construction Pty Ltd. He deposed that his company managed the Yagoona project
on behalf of Hume Highway Constructions
and that his company had no employees,
only subcontractors.
denied that he was an employee of Hume Highway Constructions, saying that his
company was. When this nomenclature was queried,
Mr Gittany corrected
himself and said that his company was a contractor to Hume Highway
Constructions. He said that he was employed
by AG & CG Construction which
had a contract with Hume Highway Constructions. Mr Gittany agreed that he was a
shareholder in
Hume Highway Constructions but said that his wife was the real
owner of the shares because it was she who had invested in the company.
Gittany said that the two principal shareholders in Hume Highway Constructions
gave the orders on site but on 6 December 2011,
they were not there. He said
that on that day he was the only person on site representing Hume Highway
Constructions.
relation to the morning of 6 December 2011, Mr Gittany deposed that he delegated
one of the workers on the site to show the CFMEU’s
officials around.
After that, the officials walked approximately ten metres onto the site and then
walked straight out again. He
said that it did not take them even a minute to
walk in and out and, in that period, they said nothing about safety hazards they
had identified. He said:
They walked
straight out onto the driveway then onto the car park and straight to the
concrete pump.
deposed that at that time there was a concrete truck near the Premises which was
being operated by an independent third party whom
he had arranged to supply
concrete for the job. Mr Gittany deposed that a concrete pour was about to
commence when the CFMEU’s
officials approached the truck. When he went,
alone, to see what was going on he heard Mr Miller say to the truck driver
the effect of:
Turn around
and go back there is going to be no pour today.
oral evidence, Mr Gittany said that Mr Miller told the operator to “pack
up and go home.” Mr Gittany said that
the operator said:
They’re saying all this bullshit, they want me to pack up and go
He denied the CFMEU’s assertion that Mr Miller
spoke to the operator about his workers compensation insurance coverage,
I had his workers comp – by law, whoever works on the site has to give
us a work methods statement, workers comp, any other
insurances. When they come
to start the job, at any time, as soon as they come onto site to start, they
have to give us those papers,
and his papers were up to
Gittany explained the situation in the following terms:
issue it was with the union and the truck driver; they wanted them to stop
working on that day because it’s RDO.
They didn’t want anybody to
[recte: they]
– the union, all they do – go and push
their weight on the builders and on other people to make sure they stop working.
But by law, they can’t stop anybody from working.
Gittany deposed that he told Mr Miller that he could not interfere in the
running of the site but was ignored. He deposed that,
shortly afterwards, the
workers who were supposed to be involved in the concrete pour came up and
complained about the job being
terminated. Mr Gittany said that the workers,
being the people doing the pour and the linesmen working with the boom pump,
complaining loudly because they were going to lose a lot of money if the
day’s work was stopped. Mr Gittany said that he did
not know the names of
these men although he knew the companies for whom they worked. He remembered
them saying words to the effect
not supposed to be doing this. They’re supposed to be helping us. The
union is supposed to be on our side,
not fucking us up. We’re supposed to
be getting $750 each a day today, because it’s not a roster day, and all
was fuck us around, and now we have to go home.
Gittany said that all these men were doing the same job and were large men. He
said they “kicked up such a big fuss”
and deposed that in an effort
to defuse the situation he told Mr Miller to “get off the job”.
He also told Mr Miller
that he had called the police. Mr Gittany deposed that,
at the time, he was also of the view that the CFMEU’s officials’
interference with the contract with the concrete supplier was not a genuine
exercise of their legitimate right to inspect the site
and he assumed that the
police would not only be able to restore some order but assist him in addressing
their rights to inspect
Gittany deposed that he did not swear or become aggressive, nor did he say
anything to anyone about “4 by 2s”. He
also deposed that he did not
direct anyone on the site to “get them off the job” or words to that
was said in cross-examination:
Latham: Mr Gittany, you said at this stage, didn’t you, that you would
have all persons who were members of the union forced
Mr Gittany: That’s right.
Mr Latham: You did say that, didn’t you?
Mr Gittany: Say what?
Latham: What I just said to you, that you would have all persons who were part
of the union forced off the job site?
Mr Gittany: Forced off?
Mr Latham: Yes?
Mr Gittany: Not only that were part of the union – everybody.
Mr Latham: Sorry?
Gittany: They shut the job down. They – they shut the whole job done,
because of the – there was going to be a big
fight, so all the trades just
packed up and left.
Mr Latham: And you said, “Get them off the site,” didn’t
Gittany: Of course I wanted them off the site; what do you
Mr Latham: “Get them off the job,” you said, didn’t
Mr Gittany: Yes
Latham: And you said to them, “Get out. You have to get off my
Mr Gittany: That’s right.
Mr Latham: I see?
Gittany: Because there going to – there was going to be a big fight and
somebody going to end up getting killed.
Latham: But there wasn’t any big fight at this stage at all, was
Mr Gittany: No. Yes, there was.
Mr Latham: And you said?
Gittany: Mr Miller had nearly a fight with one bloke there. They were right up
against each other. There was no fist thrown,
but they were right up against
each other.
Mr Latham: Well, just ---?
Gittany: And they had another eight blokes surrounded them. What do you think
going to happen.
Latham: Just wait one moment, Mr Gittany. We will get to that. And you started
shout at them, saying “Get the fuck off
Mr Gittany: No, I said, “Get off the job.”
Latham: And Mr Miller said to you, “We’ve got a right to be
Gittany: He has got a right to be on the site, on the job, not next-door
neighbours.
Latham: And then, by this stage, there were a number of other people –
workers from the site – who had turned up at
the car park there,
weren’t there?
Mr Gittany: Yes, the people who were doing the
concreting.
Latham: Yes. And some of those people were saying the same sorts of things that
you had already said, weren’t they?
Gittany: Those people came down – they were really upset. Each one of
those person was going to earn about 750, 800 dollars
Gittany deposed that he witnessed the confrontation between Mr Miller and
Mr Jeitani. He deposed that they stood chest to chest
but that Mr Jeitani did
not push Mr Miller, although he did hear Mr Miller asserting that he had
been assaulted. Mr Gittany deposed
that Mr Jeitani was not employed by him
or by Hume Highway Constructions and was not a subcontractor. It was his
understanding that
Mr Jeitani was an employee of a subcontractor to the project.
Gittany deposed that after the police arrived, Mr Ratana, who was known to him,
came to the site. They had a discussion and he
subsequently agreed to let
Mr Miller, Mr Koh and Mr Razaghi back onto the site to finish their
inspection.
Gittany said that he had told the CFMEU’s officials to “Just stay
there”. He said that that was the only thing
he said or did which
intentionally stopped them from going onto the site. Mr Gittany said that
he prevented them from re-entering
the site for a while and let them in
Gittany said that once the police defused the situation and there were no longer
any workers on the site, Messrs Miller, Koh and
Razaghi completed their
inspection. He conceded that, until that point, he had refused them entry but
said that he had done so because
if he had not there would have been a very big
Gittany said that he made enquiries about obtaining evidence from the witnesses
to the relevant events but he deposed that he had
been unable to locate the
workers who had been on site on the day. Later he said that he had the contact
details for their employers
and that none of the workers wanted to come and give
evidence against the union.
Submissions
Applicant’s submissions
CFMEU submitted that it had been proved or admitted that:
Highway Constructions controlled or occupied the Premises;
approximately 8am the respondents permitted Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi to
enter the Premises for the purposes of undertaking
a safety inspection;
Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi left the Premises and entered the car park, the
respondents did not permit them to re-enter the
Premises until the police and
WorkCover arrived.
CFMEU submitted that the effect of the evidence was that Mr Gittany began
shouting and swearing at its officials, told them to
get off the Premises,
threatened them and incited other workers on the site to threaten them and
refused to allow them back onto
the Premises.
Darlaston v Parker
[2010] FCA 771
(2010) 189 FCR 1
, the CFMEU submitted that
the reference in s.502 of the FWA to “intentionally hinder or
obstruct” is a reference to any
appreciable act or conduct, other than an
act or conduct which is accidental, that makes it more difficult for the person
“hindered or obstructed” to discharge his or her functions.
It submitted that “unduly” means “without
due cause or
justification; unrightfully, undeservedly; to excess, beyond the due
Clare & Gilbert Valleys Council v Crawford
[2005] SADC
was submitted that all that was required to contravene s.502 was that there be
hindrance or obstruction of a permit holder, whether
or not the relevant conduct
occurred upon the premises in question. The CFMEU submitted that Mr
Gittany’s shouting and swearing
amounted to intentional hindrance or
obstruction because it prevented Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi from re-entering
the Premises
and thus from going about their proper duties in an unimpeded way.
CFMEU submitted that it did not matter whether Mr Gittany was an employee or a
shareholder of Hume Highway Constructions, the
question was simply whether he
acted as its representative on the day. It was submitted that Hume Highway
Constructions had the
right to exclude people from its property and if its
representative did exclude people then Hume Highway Constructions had to take
responsibility for its representative’s actions. The CFMEU also submitted
that it did not have to prove a formal request to
re-enter the Premises on the
basis that it was sufficient that Mr Gittany told them to stay away.
CFMEU also submitted that the Court was entitled to draw
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
inferences against the respondents given their failure
to call any material witnesses other than Mr Gittany and what was said to have
been their lack of a satisfactory explanation for that failure. It was
submitted in this connection that Mr Gittany gave two inconsistent
explanations for not having called additional witnesses. In this regard, the
CFMEU pointed to the fact that at one point Mr Gittany
said that he was not able
to contact witnesses who might be called for the respondents and secondly that
when he did contact them
they did not want to appear. It was submitted that as
he was able to contact the witnesses, he should have called them. It was
observed that he had not produced the concrete pump’s insurance documents
which he said he had been given.
CFMEU submitted that the respondents had mounted a defence of necessity,
although this had not been pleaded and was therefore
not available. However, it
was submitted that, if the Court were to permit the defence to be mounted, it
was nevertheless not available
under the FWA because:
such defence existed in the FWA;
FWA provided a civil, not a criminal regime and the defence of necessity was a
defence to a criminal charge;
law defences did not apply in the circumstances;
FWA set out a comprehensive code as to right of entry;
the basis of entry was established, the permit holder was entitled to
“unimpeded access”:
CFMEU v Safety Glass Pty Ltd
FWA provided other mechanisms for dealing with an abuse of the right of
CFMEU submitted that Mr Gittany’s evidence was unsatisfactory, internally
inconsistent, conflicted with independent third
party evidence on matters such
as his shareholdings and the weather on the day and that he had been
argumentative. It was also submitted
that in the giving of his evidence he gave
a fair example of the sort of argumentative and emotional figure that the
officials described in connection with their site visit on 6
December 2011.
Respondents’ submissions
respondents submitted that there was no evidence that Hume Highway Constructions
controlled the Premises and, further, that it
was far from clear whether it
occupied them. The respondents noted that the CFMEU’s case was narrowed
to an allegation that
Hume Highway Constructions was the occupier of the
Premises, while the evidence was that although Hume Highway Constructions owned
the site it was the builder who occupied it.
also submitted that Hume Highway Constructions was not present on the Premises
at the relevant time. In this connection the
respondents submitted that Mr
Gittany was not a director or an employee of Hume Highway Constructions but was,
instead, a director
and employee of AG & CG Construction Pty Ltd which
managed the project on behalf of Hume Highway Constructions. It was submitted
that an inference could be drawn that Mr Gittany was neither the owner of
the land nor the developer nor the builder and that the
evidence indicated that
he was not an employee of Hume Highway Constructions, notwithstanding the
admission which had been made to
that effect in the defence and again in the
Notice Disputing Facts.
further submitted that, in any event, the alleged events were said to have
occurred on land that was not part of the site and
was not owned by Hume Highway
Constructions. The respondents submitted that the allegation in the pleadings
was that the events
occurred at the Premises, which was not the case. They
argued that it was an impossibility on the pleadings for a contravention
occurred because what was alleged concerned entry to the Premises, a place to
which the CFMEU officials had been given access
at 8am, while the argument
turned on events which happened elsewhere.
was further submitted that s.502 of the FWA presupposes that a permit holder is
exercising his rights of entry at the time he is
hindered or obstructed and
that, in this case, Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi were not exercising their
rights because they were
in the car park and not on the Premises. It was also
argued that, after the confrontation, Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi did not
request re-entry to the Premises, or seek to exercise a right of re-entry which
was hindered or obstructed, but waited in the car
park for the arrival of the
police, which occurred possibly as little as fifteen minutes after Mr Gittany
called them. It was submitted
that standing around in the car park was not an
attempt to exercise a right of entry.
respondents pointed to the fact that s.501 said that an occupier or controller
must not unduly delay entry and implied that the
second entry was not unduly
delayed in the circumstances, arguing that, given the circumstances, the delay
was not undue but prudent
and cautious and what a reasonable person would do.
It was said that, although there were different versions of who caused the
pour to be prevented, the fact was that it was stopped and the idea
that the workers were angry about this had the ring of truth
regard, it was submitted that even on Mr Miller’s evidence, the workers
came down to the pump area after
the driver of the truck agreed to pack up. It
was submitted that it was credible that Mr Razaghi held certain concerns for his
upon being confronted by a crowd of angry workers. It was submitted that
Mr Gittany’s actions in effectively suspending everything
arrival of the police, by telling Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi to leave the
job pending the police’s arrival, was
a commonsense thing to do,
particularly in circumstances where an assault did occur.
R v Loughnan
[1981] VicRp 43
[1981] VR 443
, the respondents also submitted that they
had a defence of necessity. It was further submitted that although the
proceedings were
civil in nature, at their core they were criminal proceedings
involving the potential imposition of a penalty.
respondents submitted that it was not incredible that their potential witnesses
would not wish to give evidence. Similarly, it
was not incredible that Mr
Gittany did not know the identities or the telephone numbers of the workers
employed by the subcontractors
and that he could only contact them through their
employing subcontractors. For those reasons, it was submitted that a
inference should not be drawn.
respondents made various submissions in relation to the way the CFMEU’s
case was pleaded and, in particular, whether certain
allegations were
duplicitous.
Consideration
Preliminary matters
find that Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi were permit holders pursuant to s.512
of the FWA and entitled to enter the Premises pursuant
to “State or
Territory OHS rights” to check for occupational health and safety
also find that, as the owner of the Premises, Hume Highway Constructions had
authority to exclude persons from the site subject
to, relevantly, the rights of
entry possessed by Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi as permit holders. Exactly
who had occupation and
control of the Premises at the relevant time was far from
clear but, at least for the purposes of the concrete pour and in the absence
the principals of Hume Highway Constructions and the builder, I infer that
Mr Gittany and his company had, at least, control of
the Premises.
further find that the workers who confronted Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi were
not employees of Hume Highway Constructions. Accepting
only for the purpose of
determining the status of those workers on the site that Mr Gittany was not an
employee of Hume Highway Constructions,
I also find that they were not employees
of Mr Gittany’s company AG & CG Construction Pty Ltd. I conclude
that they were
employees of (other) subcontractors or were subcontractors
themselves.
Relevant events
was no disagreement between the parties that when Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi
requested entry to the site at 8am on 6 December
2011, they were granted it
and then entered the site with a person whom Mr Gittany directed accompany them.
It was also agreed, in
very general terms, that Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi
had not completed an inspection of the site before they left it and went
adjacent car park, which was not part of the Premises, where, after an exchange
between one or more of the CFMEU officials
and its operator, a concrete pump
ceased operation, an event which was close in time to a physical confrontation
at which Messrs
Miller, Razaghi, Koh and Gittany were present as were a number
of building workers who had, until then, been working in the Premises.
of stand-off then ensued pending the arrival of the police and an inspector from
WorkCover, after whose arrival the safety
walk recommenced and was
on these events, and specifically what it asserted as the detailed facts
surrounding them, the CFMEU alleged that the respondents
s.502 of the FWA because they hindered or obstructed Messrs Miller, Koh and
Razaghi while they were in the car park; and
s.501 of the FWA because they refused or unduly delayed Messrs Miller, Koh and
Razaghi’s return to the Premises from
Section 502 – hindering and obstructing
CFMEU’s case alleging a breach of s.502 was not presented clearly. In its
points of claim it alleged that Messrs Miller,
Koh and Razaghi were hindered and
obstructed in the exercise of an unspecified right while in submissions it
argued that hindrance
and obstruction by Mr Gittany prevented Messrs Miller, Koh
and Razaghi from re-entering the Premises. Two potential rights appear
asserted by the points of claim and the submissions, one being associated with
the car park, presumably inspection of the concrete
pump, and the other being an
entitlement “to enter the premises”, which presumably meant the
relation to the former characterisation of the CFMEU’s claim, it was not
demonstrated that pt.3-4 of the FWA provided Messrs
Miller, Koh and Razaghi with
an enforceable right to enter the car park or, indeed, to inspect the concrete
respondents sought to draw a distinction between the Premises and the car park,
characterising the car park as not being part
of the Premises, a submission
supported by the weight of the evidence which was to the effect that the car
park was a public car
park of sorts and not part of the Premises. In this
regard, the CFMEU’s witnesses appeared to agree that the car park was
part of the work site, even if some scaffolding stood on it, and
Mr Gittany’s evidence was that it was owned by “the
door”. Certainly, it has not been demonstrated that the car park was
owned or occupied by Hume Highway Constructions.
In the circumstances I find
that the car park was not part of the Premises but was separate premises.
the car park was separate premises, the question whether a federal “State
or Territory OHS right” applied to it
must be addressed separately from
the question whether a federal “State or Territory OHS right”
applied to the Premises.
As a federal right, a “State or Territory OHS
right” will only exist if certain constitutional criteria found in s.494
of the FWA are satisfied. The criterion relevant for this case was whether the
car park was occupied or controlled by a constitutional
corporation - the CFMEU
did not seek to demonstrate any other circumstance which might have satisfied
the Constitution-based criteria
evidence was adduced to show that the car park, or even the part of it where the
pumping equipment was located, was occupied or
controlled by a constitutional
corporation, whether Hume Highway Constructions or some other company, and it
has not been demonstrated
that it was. For instance, although the particulars
of the allegation of breach of s.502 described the concrete pump as belonging
Hume Highway Constructions, that particular was not supported by the evidence;
the burden of what Mr Miller said was that the
pump operator answered to someone
other than Hume Highway Constructions and Mr Gittany said that it was operated
by a third party.
Moreover, it has not been demonstrated that the placement of
pumping equipment amounted to the occupation or control required by
such circumstances I am not persuaded that on 6 December 2011 in the car park
adjacent to the Premises, any “State or Territory
OHS right” was
enlivened in association with Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi’s inspection
of the concrete pump. Consequently,
any hindrance or obstruction which they
allege was associated with that inspection did not amount to a contravention of
to the extent that the CFMEU asserted that Mr Gittany’s conduct in the car
park amounted to a hindrance or obstruction
of a right purportedly held by
Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi to enter the Premises, that was not a right which
was in the course
of being exercised while those officials were in the car park.
Section 502 says that a person must not intentionally hinder or obstruct
permit holder “exercising rights” in accordance with pt.3-4 of the
FWA. That wording implies that at the time the
obstruction or hindrance occurs
the permit holder is in the course of exercising rights provided by pt.3-4, a
situation to be distinguished
from a permit holder “seeking to
exercise” such rights, as referred to in s.501. The fact that there is a
distinction
between the two situations is made apparent by s.500, which refers
to a permit holder “exercising, or seeking to exercise,
accordance with this Part”. Moreover, ss.501 and 502 are relevantly
identical to a predecessor section considered
Pine v Doyle
where Merkel J said at [15] that a provision which spoke of a person
“exercising powers” of entry required that the power
be exercised as
a matter of fact, rather than as a matter of law, whereas a provision which
spoke of a person being “entitled
to enter” was a reference to the
exercise of the statutory power as a matter of law. That is to say, while s.501
the assertion of a right, s.502 concerns its actual exercise in the
sense of it being put into practical effect.
initial exercise of Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi’s rights of entry to
the Premises concluded when they left the Premises
for the car park. They might
have asserted a right to enter the Premises for a second time once they had
completed their dealings
with the concrete pump operator but they did not embark
upon the exercise of the right until they had actually re-entered the Premises.
Consequently, any hindrance or obstruction in the car park of their right to
re-enter the Premises did not affect a right which
was in the course of being
exercised or amount to a contravention of s.502.
these reasons I conclude that no breach of s.502 of the FWA has been made
Section 501 – refusal or unduly delaying entry
evidence given by Messrs Miller and Koh concerning the events shortly after
their arrival at the Premises on 6 December 2011 was
reasonably consistent. It
was to the effect that upon their arrival they were met by Mr Gittany who gave
them access to the Premises
and allocated a person to accompany them on their
safety walk.
said that they inspected the amenities or lunch room and perhaps the first aid
room following which they went into the car park.
Mr Koh said they spent
approximately ten minutes in the lunch room and Mr Miller said that this
first stage of the inspection took
discussed the problems which they had identified during this part of the
with the person accompanying them.
Miller said that they went to the car park to inspect scaffolding and Mr Koh
said that they went to the car park because they heard
the concrete pump in
operation, although he later said he could not remember that. In his police
statement Mr Koh said that they
left the Premises “to assess the concrete
pump”. Mr Koh said that Mr Miller told them to leave the amenities block
Mr Miller did not remember that.
Razaghi’s recollection was significantly different and provides a third
and very dramatic reason why he and his colleagues
left the Premises and went to
the car park. In his police statement arising out of the assault on Mr Miller
which, notwithstanding
what he deposed in his affidavit of 23 July 2012
appears to have been made one day after the statements made by Messrs Miller and
Koh, Mr Razaghi said that after the initial stage of the inspection they
were in the site office where they raised their concerns
with Mr Gittany who
then became aggressive, shouted, swore and told them to “get out”.
Mr Razaghi said in cross-examination
that Mr Miller then told him and Mr
Koh to leave the Premises because the situation had become heated.
inconsistencies are not insignificant. Neither Messrs Miller nor Koh referred
to the allegedly egregious conduct of Mr Gittany
which Mr Razaghi said was the
reason for the three of them removing to the car park. It is not credible,
given the allegations concerning
Mr Gittany’s subsequent conduct in
the car park, that such early misbehaviour would not have been remembered and
remarked upon
by all three men. In this connection I have not overlooked Mr
Koh’s oral evidence that Mr Gittany had shouted and yelled from
beginning but I am not persuaded, had Mr Gittany conducted himself in that
fashion, that it would not have been mentioned in
Mr Koh’s police
statement or in one of his affidavits. This is particularly so given that in
his second affidavit Mr Koh said
that the site deficiencies were discussed with
the person who accompanied them on the safety walk.
to the events which took place once Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi reached the
car park, Mr Miller said that he pointed out to
the operator of the concrete
pump that his workers compensation policy was out of date and insufficient and
that it was on the strength
of that that the operator packed up and left. Both
Mr Koh and Mr Razaghi deposed that they heard Mr Miller discussing the pump
workers compensation insurance issue although in
cross-examination Mr Koh said that he had not and then provided an unconvincing
explanation for this inconsistency. Mr Miller said in cross-examination
that he and Messrs Koh and Razaghi attended to different
tasks and it was
possible that the latter were not close enough to him to hear what he said to
the pump operator although it was
also possible that they could have. In his
police statement Mr Razaghi said:
decided to check the driver’s paperwork for the concrete pumper
which suggests that all three of them inspected the
paperwork. Indeed, although Mr Miller said that they performed different tasks,
including inspecting the pump itself, neither Mr Koh nor Mr Razaghi indicated
that they had performed any other tasks, with Mr Koh
going so far as to say that
his role was restricted, supplementary and not very active. The CFMEU’s
witnesses’ accounts
of what happened at the concrete pump were
sufficiently different to be unconvincing.
Miller said that it was while they were concerning themselves with the concrete
pump that he and Messrs Koh and Razaghi were approached
by Mr Gittany who was
accompanied by workers from the site. He said that Mr Gittany started to
abuse and swear at them, ordered
them away and said that he had called the
police. Mr Miller said that Mr Gittany said to the workers
by 2’s and we will get them off the job.
workers were angry and yelling at the CFMEU officials. Mr Koh said that they
were surrounded by the angry workers. At some point
during this fracas, Mr
Miller was assaulted by Mr Jeitani who said to him
Get the fuck off the job.
Each of Messrs Miller, Razaghi
and Mr Koh said that they were concerned for their safety.
thesis implicitly advanced by the CFMEU was that when it came to safety
breaches, the respondents were repeat offenders and that
Mr Gittany wanted
to prevent the CFMEU and its officials from investigating any breaches which the
Premises might have evidenced.
Even if that were the case, the applicant did
not contradict Mr Gittany’s evidence that the workers who confronted
Miller, Koh and Razaghi were not his employees and it did not attempt to
explain why subcontractors and employees of subcontractors
would follow
Mr Gittany into a confrontation with the union which covered their
the other hand, Mr Gittany did advance an explanation for the workers’
anger and one which I find persuasive. This was that
the workers were angry at
the cessation of work because they would lose a day’s pay. In this
connection I found Mr Gittany
to be a very candid and direct witness whose
evidence I accept. By contrast, Mr Miller was, in my view, less than frank
and demonstrated
a disinclination to give straightforward answers in
cross-examination. I also take into account the significant difference between
Mr Razaghi’s account of what happened at the Premises before the car park
inspection and Mr Koh’s unimpressive explanation
in cross-examination
for the inconsistency between his affidavit and oral evidence. Overall, where
Mr Gittany’s evidence differs
from that of Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi,
I prefer his evidence.
that Mr Gittany freely admitted to refusing to allow Messrs Miller, Koh and
Razaghi to return to the Premises until the police
arrived, I do not find that
Mr Ratana’s account of what he and Mr Gittany said substantively
contradicts Mr Gittany’s
version of events or provides a substantive basis
to doubt the correctness of Mr Gittany’s evidence. In those
circumstances,
the question of
Jones v Dunkel
inferences does not
Consequently,
I find that Mr Gittany did not threaten Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi or
endeavour to keep them from re-entering the
Premises in the manner alleged by
the CFMEU or for the reason implicitly advanced by the CFMEU as the motivation
for such conduct.
Further, because I have concluded that the building workers
who confronted Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi were not employees of
Hume Highway
Constructions or of AG & CG Construction Pty Ltd, any aggressive actions
taken by Mr Jeitani were not ones for which
Hume Highway Constructions or AG
& CG Construction Pty Ltd were responsible.
Nevertheless,
all parties agreed that Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi were prevented from
re-entering the Premises for a period as
they awaited the arrival of the police.
This raises the question whether the delay, which all parties agreed was at
Mr Gittany’s
insistence, amounted to a refusal of entry or to an
undue delay to entry in breach of s.501 of the FWA. It also raises the question
of the proper meanings of “refuse” and “unduly” where
they appear in s.501.
the evidence does not support a finding that Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi
expressly asked to re-enter the Premises, it
can be accepted that Mr Gittany
understood that they wished to. For present purposes I will assume, without
deciding, that a failure
to afford entry in such circumstances can amount to a
breach of s.501.
word “refuse” in s.501 is undefined and there is no reason to
suppose that it is used in any sense other than the
one it has in ordinary
speech. In this connection, the
Macquarie Dictionary
ed.) relevantly defines “refuse” to
to decline to give; to deny (a request, a demand, etc).
to express a determination not (to do something).
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
relevantly defines “refuse” as:
. Deny (a person) permission to do something; prohibit from,
forbid that.
. Decline to give or grant; deny (something) to a person;
decline to give (a person) something requested.
authorities also indicate that a refusal requires an act of will: see the cases
discussed in
Innes v Rail Corporation of New South Wales
[2013] FMCA 36
juxtapositioning in s.501 of “refuse” and “unduly delay”
indicates that a denial of entry which involves
a refusal is something more than
a denial of entry which involves undue delay. This reflects the fact that a
denial may be conditional
or unconditional. The only denial of entry which,
realistically, is more adverse to a right of entry than one involving undue
is one where access will not be afforded. That is to say, in s.501
“refuse” is intended to mean an unconditional denial
whereas a conditional denial of entry, where entry will not be denied once a
condition is satisfied, is not a refusal for
the purposes of s.501 although it
may amount to undue delay.
this case I find that Mr Gittany’s denial of Messrs Miller, Koh and
Razaghi’s rights of entry was not unconditional
but conditional, the
condition for entry being the arrival of the police. I therefore find that on
6 December 2011 the respondents
did not refuse entry to Messrs Miller, Koh
and Razaghi contrary to s.501.
I have found that entry was not refused, the question becomes whether the
conditional denial of entry unduly delayed Messrs
Miller, Koh and Razaghi in the
exercise of their rights of re-entry to the Premises.
with “refuse”, the word “unduly” is undefined and again
there is no reason to suppose that it is used in
any sense other than the one it
has in ordinary speech. In
Clare & Gilbert Valleys Council v
it was held at [73] that:
As a matter
of ordinary language unduly means “Without due cause or justification;
unrightfully, undeservedly; To excess; beyond
the due degree”:
Oxford Dictionary
However, in s.501, where
“unduly” qualifies “delay”, it would be better
understood to mean an interval of
time which is excessive, unreasonable or
unnecessary in the circumstances:
Michaels v R
[1995] HCA 8
(1995) 184 CLR 117
Board of Control of Michigan Technical University v Deputy Commissioner of
[1981] FCA 39
(1981) 53 FLR 26
at 33. That is the meaning which I conclude it has
in s.501 of the FWA.
Gittany’s explanation for not permitting Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi to
re-enter the Premises before the arrival of the
police was that until then the
situation presented too much of a risk to public order for him to permit it. I
accept that explanation,
noting that Messrs Miller, Koh and Razaghi all said
that they had concerns for the safety of their group arising out of the
behaviour of the angry building workers. In my view a delay of this
sort, and for the reason identified by Mr Gittany, was prudent
and appropriate
and for that reason I conclude that it did not amount to an undue delaying of
entry. In the latter respect, it appears
that the police did not take long to
arrive at the Premises, possibly no more than thirty minutes.
those reasons, and in the particular circumstances of this case where the need
for the delay was not caused or provoked by the
respondents, I conclude that the
respondents did not contravene s.501 of the FWA.
Other matters
light of my conclusion that the alleged contraventions of the FWA have not been
made out, it is not necessary to consider the various
other matters raised by
the parties such as the respondents’ responsibility or liability for each
others’ conduct, whether
a defence of necessity was available, whether the
evidence contradicted Mr Gittany’s admission to have been employed by
Highway Constructions and whether a number of pleading issues raised by the
respondents would have any significance for the disposition
I have concluded that the FWA was not contravened as alleged, the application
will be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
twenty (120) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Cameron
Date: 5 April 2013
CORRECTIONS
88 line 4 – delete “to”.
111 line 1 – delete “Althought” insert
“Although”.
RTF format (342 KB)
Signed PDF/A format