Rindeklev v Comcare & Anor [2025] HCASJ 29 (2 September 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
BEECH-JONES J
GUNILLA RINDEKLEV PLAINTIFF
ANOR DEFENDANTS
[2025] HCASJ 29
Date of Judgment: 2 September
P27 of 2025
plaintiff's application for a constitutional or other writ filed on 25 June
2025 is dismissed.
plaintiff pay the first defendant's costs of and incidental to the
application.
Representation
The plaintiff is unrepresented
first defendant is represented by Moray & Agnew Lawyers
appearance for the second defendant
BEECH-JONES J.
The plaintiff, Ms Rindeklev, applies for constitutional or other writs
directed to the Federal Court of Australia (the
second defendant to the
plaintiff's application). The relief sought concerns two decisions of the
Federal Court relating to her application
for leave to commence proceedings
against Comcare
("the first
defendant"), alleging it engaged in unlawful discrimination.
Rule 25.09.1
High Court Rules 2004
(Cth) provides that an application for
a constitutional or other writ may be determined by the Court or a Justice
without the application
being listed for a hearing. Rule 25.09.2 enables a
Justice to make an order under r 25.09.1 and publish reasons for doing so
than in open Court. Rule 25.09.3(c) enables the Court or Justice to
determine finally the whole or part of an application.
plaintiff's application for a constitutional writ does not depend on any
contested issue of fact but instead only involves an
analysis of the Federal
Court decisions the subject of the application. Both the plaintiff and the first
defendant have provided
useful written submissions addressing and responding to
the points raised, respectively. No question of principle is raised by the
application. In those circumstances it is appropriate that the whole of the
matter be finally determined without the matter being
listed for hearing and to
publish reasons other than in open court. Further, for the reasons set out below
the whole of the matter
should be dismissed.
March 2023, the plaintiff lodged a complaint with the Australian Human Rights
Commission ("the AHRC"), alleging "unlawful
discrimination"
behalf of the first
On or about
10 January 2024, the delegate of the President of the AHRC concluded that
the complaint was "misconceived and/or lacking
in substance" and terminated the
plaintiff then sought to apply to the Federal Court for redress for the alleged
unlawful discrimination.
Given the basis for the termination of her complaint to the AHRC, the plaintiff
required a grant of leave from the Federal Court
to make the
application.
23 July 2024 Colvin J refused the plaintiff leave to make the
application.
2025 Feutrill J, exercising the appellate jurisdiction of the Federal
dismissed an
application for leave to appeal from Colvin J's decision and ordered that
the plaintiff pay the costs of that
application.
No appeal can
be brought to this Court against that refusal of leave to
decision of the delegate identified the "unlawful discrimination" the subject of
the plaintiff's complaint as alleged sexual
harassment contrary to the
Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth) ("the SDA"). The conduct the subject of
the complaint concerned the filing in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, and
upon the plaintiff, of a statement from a former co‑worker to the
effect that the plaintiff had previously undertaken sex work.
The statement was
filed by lawyers retained on behalf of the first defendant who was the
respondent to those
proceedings.
plaintiff sought workers compensation in respect of an injury arising out of her
employment by a Commonwealth agency. The plaintiff
strongly disputes that the
evidence had any relevance to the proceedings.
refused the plaintiff leave to commence proceedings on the basis that the
proposed application lacked merit. His Honour
found that the conduct the subject
of the complaint could not constitute "sexual harassment" within the meaning of
relevant part of the definition of sexual harassment required that the conduct
the subject of the complaint constitute "unwelcome
conduct of a sexual nature"
in relation to the person harassed, "in circumstances in which a reasonable
person, having regard to
all the circumstances, would have anticipated the
possibility that the person harassed would be offended, humiliated or
intimidated".
Colvin J accepted that the conduct of the first defendant by its lawyers in
presenting the witness statement may have been "unwelcome"
and may have occurred
in circumstances in which a reasonable person would be offended and
humiliated.
However, his
Honour found that the conduct was not of a sexual nature given its character and
the context in which it occurred; namely,
proceedings in a tribunal. His Honour
reasoned that the conduct was "depersonalised", did not involve "acting in a
sexual way" or
in a manner "which involves a form of communication that might be
described as containing sexualised or gender‑based insults
Feutrill J's
refusing leave to appeal, Feutrill J identified the two interrelated
factors governing the plaintiff's application for leave to
appeal as being:
(a) whether the decision of Colvin J was attended with sufficient
doubt to warrant it being reconsidered; and (b)
whether a substantial
injustice would result if leave were
As the practical
effect of Colvin J's orders was to determine finally the plaintiff's claim,
Feutrill J focussed on the first factor,
namely whether Colvin J's
decision was attended with sufficient doubt to warrant a grant of leave to
characterised the plaintiff's argument as being that Colvin J erred in
undertaking a "detailed evaluation of the merits"
of the plaintiff's claim and
analysing whether the relevant conduct was capable of satisfying the definition
of sexual harassment
by reference to an "unduly narrow set of facts and not the
full and complete facts with greater context and nuance" as would occur
following a full hearing.
However, Feutrill J found that Colvin J had not erred in principle
because his Honour had, in "making all assumptions of fact most
favourable to
the [plaintiff]", conducted an evaluation of the merits of the plaintiff's claim
"without resolution of contested
Feutrill J concluded that it was not reasonably arguable that Colvin J
misconstrued the relevant provisions of the
application for a constitutional or other writ
principal relief sought by the plaintiff in her application to this Court
included a writ of certiorari directed to the "quashing"
of the judgment of
Colvin J, a declaration that the decision of Feutrill J is "null or
without legal effect" insofar as it relies
upon the judgment of Colvin J
and a writ of mandamus "directing the Federal Court of Australia to determine
the plaintiff's application
for leave to appeal".
Federal Court is a superior court of
and its decisions
are valid unless and until set aside on appeal or by relief granted under
Constitution
even if the relevant decision is made
without jurisdiction.
stated, there is no appeal from the judgment of Feutrill J. Nevertheless,
the Judges of the Federal Court are officers of the
Commonwealth amenable to
this Court's jurisdiction under
Constitution
including writs of mandamus compelling the performance of a duty imposed on the
Federal Court by law and, ancillary to that relief,
certiorari.
However, such
relief is only available in the event that the Federal Court exceeds the limits
of its jurisdiction,
including mistakenly denying
quashing a decision to refuse leave to appeal, such as the decision made by
Feutrill J, was granted by this Court in
follows that, to secure either a rehearing of her application for leave to make
a claim for unlawful discrimination or her application
for leave to appeal, the
plaintiff must first obtain a writ of certiorari to quash Feutrill J's
decision. I will treat her application
for declaratory relief as being an
application to that effect and her complaints about error on the part of
Colvin J as complaints
that Feutrill J did not accept that Colvin J erred.
plaintiff's application and supporting affidavit identified four grounds upon
which it is said that the writs should issue. First,
it is contended that
Colvin J failed to assess the plaintiff's complaint as made to the AHRC in
that the complaint described by Colvin
J is said not to correspond with the
subject matter of the terminated complaint. This contention is without
substance. Colvin J's
analysis of the conduct the subject of the complaint
corresponds with that made to and addressed by the AHRC.
it is contended that Colvin J accepted that the conduct the subject of the
complaint was "a breach" of the SDA but required
"something more" to be
demonstrated. This ground mischaracterises his Honour's reasons. As noted, his
Honour accepted that the conduct
complained of may have been "unwelcome",
humiliating and
but his Honour
did not accept that it was "conduct of a sexual nature" within the definition of
sexual harassment in the SDA.
it appears to be contended that Colvin J erred in failing to set out the
relevant statutory provisions and therefore failed
to "integrate and deliberate
on the opposing contentions". There was no obligation on his Honour to set out
the entire text of the
legislative provisions. His Honour stated the effect of
the definition of "sexual harassment" in the SDA correctly.
the plaintiff contends that Colvin J erred in "requiring evidence from the
[p]laintiff" which was "outside the bounds of
[an application for] leave to
appeal" and "exceeded ... jurisdiction by mischaracterising the proceeding as a
merits review rather
than a leave application". This ground appears to be a
restatement or refinement of the argument advanced before Feutrill J to the
effect that Colvin J addressed the merits of the plaintiff's complaints too
closely when refusing leave to commence proceedings (and
that Feutrill J
erred in refusing to accept that contention).
contention does not raise a complaint of jurisdictional error on the part of
either Colvin J or Feutrill J. In refusing the
plaintiff leave to
commence proceedings against the first defendant, Colvin J was exercising
the original jurisdiction of the Federal
as vested in that
Court by the
Australian Human Rights Commission Act
of the statutory provisions conferring or governing the exercise of the Federal
Court's jurisdiction, authority or power to
grant or refuse a person leave to
make an application alleging unlawful discrimination was dependent on the Court
either correctly
analysing the merits of a claim for unlawful discrimination or
investigating those merits at a particular level of abstraction. Thus,
Colvin J erred in the manner contended for by the plaintiff, which I do not
accept, such an error was wholly within
in refusing the plaintiff leave to appeal from Colvin J's decision,
Feutrill J was exercising the appellate jurisdiction
of the Federal
which, in the case
of an appeal from an interlocutory
grant of leave to appeal
and which jurisdiction could be exercised by a single
There is no basis
to conclude that Feutrill J misconceived the nature of the function that
was to be performed in considering whether
to grant leave to
the absence of demonstrating a jurisdictional error on the part of Colvin J
or Feutrill J, no basis for any of the forms of relief
sought is made
following orders should be made:
(1) The plaintiff's application for a constitutional or other writ filed on
25 June 2025 is dismissed.
(2) The plaintiff pay the first defendant's costs of and incidental to the
application.
Comcare is established under
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Australian Human Rights
Commission Act 1986
(Cth) ("AHRC Act"),
In contravention of
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth). See also
Discrimination Act
(definition of
"unlawful discrimination").
ss 46PF(1)(b)
s 46PO(3A)(a).
Rindeklev v Comcare
("Primary Decision")
[2024] FCA 804.
Federal Court of Australia Act
s 25(2)(a).
Rindeklev v Comcare
("Appeal Decision")
[2025] FCA 291.
Federal Court of Australia
ss 25(2)(a)
Primary Decision
[2024] FCA 804
Primary Decision
[2024] FCA 804
, [38], [50].
Sex Discrimination Act
See also Primary Decision
[2024] FCA 804
Primary Decision
Primary Decision
[2024] FCA 804
Appeal Decision
[2025] FCA 291
Décor Corp Pty Ltd v Dart Industries Inc
at 398-399.
Appeal Decision
[2025] FCA 291
Appeal Decision
[2025] FCA 291
Appeal Decision
[2025] FCA 291
See Appeal Decision
Sex Discrimination Act
s 28A(1)(b).
Federal Court of Australia
Cameron v Cole
[1944] HCA 5
Re Macks; Ex parte Saint
(2000) 204 CLR 158
185-186 [53];
New South Wales v Kable
(2013) 252 CLR 118 at 133 [32];
Queensland v Stradford
[2025] HCA 3
(2025) 99 ALJR 396
421 ALR 376
(2000) 204 CLR
at 210 [136].
Edwards v Santos
242 CLR 421
at 441 [53].
Ex parte Marsh
[1985] HCA 67
(1985) 157 CLR 351
(2011) 242 CLR
at 439 [46].
(2011) 242 CLR 421
Primary Decision
[2024] FCA 804
Federal Court of Australia
Re McJannet; Ex parte
Minister for Employment, Training and Industrial Relations
(1995) 184 CLR
620 at 644.
Federal Court of Australia
s 24(1)(a).
The judgment of Colvin J
was an interlocutory judgment: see, eg,
Weir v Telstra Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 196
(2023) 301 FCR
Federal Court of Australia
Federal Court of Australia
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2025] HCA 29
RTF format (242 KB)
Signed PDF/A format