1409352 [2015] MRTA 795 (10 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 795
(10 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
Mr Shoaib Iqbal
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
CLF2011/16015 CLF2014/81137
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Lisa Lo Piccolo
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant
a Partner (Residence) (Class BS) visa.
Statement made on 10 June 2015 at 4:22pm
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration on 6 May 2014 to refuse to grant
the applicant a Partner
(Residence) (Class BS) visa under
Migration Act 1958
applicant applied for the visa on 17 January 2011 on the basis of his
relationship with his sponsor. At that time, Class BS contained
subclass: Subclass 801 (Partner). The criteria for the grant of this visa are
of Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
Regulations). The primary criteria must be satisfied by at least one applicant.
Other members of the family unit, if any, who
are applicants for the visa need
satisfy only the secondary criteria. Relevantly to this matter the primary
criteria include cl.801.221.
delegate refused to grant the visa on the basis that the applicant did not
satisfy cl.801.221(2) because the delegate was not
satisfied that the applicant
and the sponsor live together in a genuine and continuing relationship, and
accordingly, do not meet
the definition of a spouse or de facto partner as
defined in section 5F and 5CB.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 10 June 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments.
the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the under review should
be affirmed.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
issue in the present case is whether at the time of decision the applicant
continues to be the spouse or de fact partner of the
Whether the parties are in a spouse or de facto relationship
to this matter, cl.801.221(2)(c) requires that at the time of this decision, the
applicant is the spouse of the ‘sponsoring
partner’, who must be an
Australian citizen or Australian permanent resident or an eligible New Zealand
citizen who was specified
in the related Subclass 820 visa application as the
spouse or de facto partner of the applicant. In the present case the applicant
claims to be the spouse of the sponsor who is an Australian citizen and was
identified in the Subclass 820 visa application. On the
evidence before it, the
Tribunal is satisfied that the sponsor is the ‘sponsoring partner’
of the applicant.
is defined in s.5F of the Act and provides that a person is the spouse of
another where the two persons are in
a married relationship. Persons in a
married relationship must be married to each other under a marriage that is
valid for the purposes
of the Act, there must be a mutual commitment to a shared
life as husband and wife to the exclusion of all others, the relationship
be genuine and continuing, and the couple must live together, or not live
separately and apart on a permanent basis: s.5F(2)(a)
- (d). In forming an
opinion as to these matters, regard must be had to all of the circumstances of
the relationship. This includes
evidence of the financial and social aspects and
the nature of the visa applicant’s and sponsor’s household and their
commitment to each other as set out in r.1.15A(3), which is extracted in the
attachment to this decision.
Are the parties validly married?
the present case, if the parties are validly married, they may meet the
requirements of a spousal relationship, but not a de facto
relationship. The
applicant and his sponsor were married in Melbourne on 12 October 2010. A
certified copy of the marriage certificate
appears on the Department’s
file. On the evidence, the parties were married to each other under a marriage
that is valid for
the purposes of the Act as required by
s.5F(2)(a).
Are the other requirements for a spousal relationship met?
applicant is a 27 year-old male. He is a citizen of Pakistan. He first came to
Australia on 12 October 2005 as the holder of
a student visa. The visa
application showed that her parents and siblings live in Vietnam. The sponsor
is a 25 year old Australian
citizen of Vietnamese descent.
is stated in the visa application that the parties first met on 15 November 2009
and married on 12 October 2010.
Partner (Temporary) Subclass 820 visa was granted to the applicant on 23 January
2012. On 6 May 2014, the delegate refused to
grant the applicant a Partner
(Residence) (Class BS) visa.
applicant informed the Tribunal that the relationship between him and his
sponsor has ended. The sponsor did not attend the hearing.
Tribunal has had regard to all the circumstances of the applicant’s
relationship with the sponsoring partner at the time
of its decision, including
in particular the considerations set out in r.1.09A for de facto relationships.
These considerations relate
to the financial aspects of the relationship, the
nature of the household, the social aspects of the relationship and the nature
of the persons’ commitment to each other.
The financial aspects of the relationship
is no evidence before the Tribunal that the applicant and the sponsor have any
joint financial assets.
The nature of the household
applicant gave evidence that his relationship with his sponsor experienced a
number of problems in their marriage which resulted
in them separating in or
few months. The applicant
gave evidence that they separated permanently when he
moved out of the house in August 2014. They have not lived together since
time and the applicant is in the process of applying for divorce.
Tribunal accepts that the applicant has not lived with the sponsor since August
2014. The Tribunal therefore finds that the applicant
and the sponsor do not
maintain a household together.
The social aspects of the relationship
Tribunal finds that the applicant and her sponsor do not plan and undertake
joint social activities. They have not represented
themselves as being in a
married relationship since their permanent separation in August 2014. The
Tribunal is satisfied that the
applicant does not represent himself to other
people as being married to the sponsor.
The nature of the persons' commitment to each other
the evidence before the Tribunal, the relationship broke down during May 2014
and finally ceased in August 2014. The applicant
and the sponsor separated
permanently in August 2014. The sponsor did not appear at the hearing.
Tribunal finds that at the time of decision the applicant and the sponsor are
not in a continuing relationship, and do not have
a mutual commitment to a
shared life to the exclusion of all others.
CONCLUSIONS
Tribunal is not satisfied that at the time of decision the applicant and the
sponsor have a mutual commitment to a shared life
as husband and wife to the
exclusion of all others. The Tribunal is not satisfied that the relationship is
genuine and continuing.
They therefore do not meet the requirements of s5F(2)(b)
for spouse relationship.
Additionally,
the Tribunal is not satisfied that at the time of decision the applicant and the
sponsor live together or do not live
separately and apart on a permanent basis.
Accordingly, they do not meet the requirements of s5F(2)(d) for a de facto
relationship.
Tribunal therefore finds that at the time of the decision the applicant is not
the spouse of the sponsor, who is the person who
was specified as the
applicant's spouse in the Subclass 820 application. Therefore, the Tribunal
finds that the applicant does not
meet the criterion contained in
cl.801.221(2)(c) for the grant of a Subclass 801 visa.
Furthermore,
the provisions of cl.801.221(2A) do not apply as the applicant was not granted a
subclass 820 visa by the Minister and
she is not the spouse or de facto partner
of her sponsoring partner.
cl.801.221(3) or cl.801.221(4) apply as the applicant was not granted a subclass
820 visa under subclause 820.221(2) or (3).
the sponsor has not died, cl.801.221(5) does not apply.
there is no dependent child of the relationship and as there is no evidence of
family violence of the form required by the Regulations
before the Tribunal, the
alternative provisions contained in cl.801.221(6) do not apply. Neither is the
alternative criterion in
cl.801.221(8) applicable in this case.
the applicant does not meet the prescribed criterion contained in cl.801.221(1)
and cannot be granted a Subclass 801 visa.
the reasons above, the applicant does not satisfy the criteria for the grant of
Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant a Partner (Residence)
(Class BS) visa.
Lisa Lo Piccolo
ATTACHMENT - Extract from
Migration Regulations 1994
1.15A Spouse
(1) For subsection 5F (3) of
the Act, this regulation sets out arrangements for the purpose of determining
whether 1 or more of the
conditions in paragraphs 5F (2) (a), (b), (c) and (d)
of the Act exist.
(2) If the Minister is considering an application for:
(a) a Partner (Migrant) (Class BC) visa; or
(b) a Partner (Provisional) (Class UF) visa; or
(c) a Partner (Residence) (Class BS) visa; or
(d) a Partner (Temporary) (Class UK) visa;
the Minister must consider all of the circumstances of the relationship,
including the matters set out in subregulation (3).
(3) The matters for subregulation (2) are:
(a) the financial aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) any joint ownership of real estate or other major assets; and
(ii) any joint liabilities; and
(iii) the extent of any pooling of financial resources, especially in
relation to major financial commitments; and
(iv) whether one person in the relationship owes any legal obligation in
respect of the other; and
(v) the basis of any sharing of day to day household expenses; and
(b) the nature of the household, including:
(i) any joint responsibility for the care and support of children; and
(ii) the living arrangements of the persons; and
(iii) any sharing of the responsibility for housework; and
(c) the social aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) whether the persons represent themselves to other people as being married
to each other; and
(ii) the opinion of the persons’ friends and acquaintances about the
nature of the relationship; and
(iii) any basis on which the persons plan and undertake joint social
activities; and
(d) the nature of the persons’ commitment to each other, including:
(i) the duration of the relationship; and
(ii) the length of time during which the persons have lived together; and
(iii) the degree of companionship and emotional support that the persons draw
from each other; and
(iv) whether the persons see the relationship as a long term one.
(4) If the Minister is considering an application for a visa of a class other
than a class mentioned in subregulation (2), the Minister
may consider any of
the circumstances mentioned in subregulation (3).
RTF format (154 KB)
Signed PDF/A format