Catterall & Catterall [2013] FMCAfam 336 (10 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
CATTERALL &
[2013] FMCAfam 336
FAMILY LAW – Parenting – application
to dismiss parenting application – relying upon principles set out in
Rice v Asplund
Family Law Act 1975
Rice & Asplund
Marsden & Winch
(2009) FamCAFC 152
SPS and PLS
[2008] FamCAFC 16
Goode & Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
King v Finneran
[2001] FamCA 344
(2001) FLC 93-079
[2012] FamCAFC 5
Langmeil & Grange
[2013] FamCA FC 31
(1981) 6 FamLR 862
King v Finneran
[2001] FamCA 344
Reid & Lynch
[2010] FamCA FC 184
MS CATTERALL
Respondent:
MR CATTERALL
File Number:
MLC 3374 of 2011
Judgment of:
O'Sullivan FM
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
The Applicant:
Appeared in person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Hutchins
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Nevin Lenne & Gross
(1) The interim application of the father be
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment under the
Catterall & Catterall
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
MLC 3374 of 2011
MS CATTERALL
MR CATTERALL
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Catterall (“the mother”) and Mr Catterall (“the father”)
are the parents of X born (omitted) 2009 (“the
mother is 37 years of age and employed by (omitted). The father is 42 years of
age and was employed as an (occupation omitted).
The father is currently in
receipt of Centrelink benefits and says he is studying (omitted). The parties
were married on (omitted)
2009, separated on 13 March 2011. A divorce order was
made on 14 February 2013.
the father commenced proceedings in the Family Court of Australia in 2011 the
parties made application for consent parenting
orders in the Family Court of
Australia. A Registrar of the Family Court of Australia made final parenting
orders by consent on 12
October 2011 (“the Orders”) which provided
Consent Orders made 9 May 2011 be hereby discharged.
parties have equal shared parental responsibility for X born (omitted) 2009
(aged 1 year) (“the child”).
until the child commences primary school the child:
with the Father in a two week cycle as follows:
9.30 am Sunday to the commencement of childcare/kindergarten/school or 8.30 am
the conclusion of childcare/ kindergarten/school or 8.30 am on Friday;
9.30 am on Saturday until the commencement of childcare/kindergarten/school or
8.30 am on Monday;
the conclusion of childcare/ kindergarten/school or 6.00 pm on Wednesday until
the commencement of childcare/ kindergarten/school
with the Mother at all other times.
4. Notwithstanding
paragraph 3 herein each party be at liberty to take the child on three one week
holidays per year PROVIDED THAT:
holiday does not prevent either party’s contact with the child during the
Christmas period pursuant to paragraphs 6(a)
to 6(d) herein;
holidaying parent provides the non-holidaying parent with 45 days written notice
of their intention to take the holiday with
the child, the proposed travel
dates, itinerary and contact phone numbers; and
during the same calendar day at times to be elected
by the non-holidaying
and from the child’s commencement at primary school:
child live equally between the parties at times to be agreed between the parties
three months prior to the child commencing
primary school and in default of
agreement, on a week about basis with each parent with handover to occur at the
conclusion of school
(or 3.30 pm if a non-school day) each Friday.
child shall spend equal time with each the Mother and the Father during all
school term and long summer school holidays at
times to be agreed between the
parties and in default of agreement:
child live with the Father for the first half of the school term and long summer
school holidays in all even numbered years;
child live with the Father for second half of the school term and long summer
school holidays in all odd numbered years.
child live with the Mother for the first half of the school term and long summer
school holidays in all even numbered years;
child live with the Mother for the second half of the school term and long
summer school holidays in all even numbered years.
6. Notwithstanding
paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 herein:
2011 year and each alternate year thereafter the child spend time with the
Father from 5.00 pm, 24 December to 2.00 pm,
25 December;
2012 year and each alternate year thereafter the child spend time with the
Father from 2.00 pm, 25 December to 5.00 pm,
26 December;
2011 year and each alternate year thereafter the child live with the Mother from
2.00 pm, 25 December to 5.00 pm, 26 December;
2012 year and each alternate year thereafter the child live with the Mother from
5.00 pm, 24 December to 2.00 pm, 25 December;
Mother’s Day falls on a weekend that the child is not otherwise living
with the Mother, then the child be returned to
the Mother from 5.00 pm on the
day before Mother’s Day until 5.00 pm on Mother’s Day;
Father’s Day falls on a weekend when the child is not otherwise spending
time with the Father, the child be returned
to the Father from 5.00 pm on the
day before Father’s Day until 5.00 pm on Father’s Day.
child or the Mother’s birthday falls:
weekend, public holiday or school holiday when the child is not living with the
Mother, then the child is to be returned
to the Mother for a minimum period of
five (5) hours on the child or the Mother’s birthday at times to be agreed
between the
parties or failing agreement between 9.30 am and 2.30 pm;
school day when the child is not living with the Mother then the child is to be
returned to the Mother for a minimum period
of two (3) hours at times on the
child or the Mother’s birthday at times to be agreed between the parties
or failing agreement
from the 3.30 pm until to 6.30 pm;
child or the Father’s birthday falls:
weekend, public holiday or school holiday when the child is not living with the
Father, then the child is to be returned to
the Father for a period of five (5)
hours on the child or the Father’s birthday at times to be agreed between
the parties,
or failing agreement between 9.30 and 2.30 pm.
school day when the child is not living with the Father, then the child is to be
returned to the Father for a minimum period
of two (3) hours at times on the
child or the Father’s birthday at times to be agreed between the parties
or failing agreement
from the 3.30 pm until to 6.30 pm.
Mother is unable to care for the child on a public holiday due to work
commitments, the Father agrees to care for the
child during these times provided
he is given reasonable notice by the Mother that he is required to do
7. That the
parties give each other 24 hours notice of any change to the contact
arrangements.
the event that one party is unable to care for the child for a period of 24
hours or more they will inform the other and
give that party the first option
for caring for the child. If the other party is unable to care for the child the
child shall be
cared for by an immediate maternal or paternal family member only
unless the consent of the other parent is obtained.
changeovers which do not take place at the child’s childcare centre,
kindergarten or school, the Mother will drop
off and collect the child at the
Father’s residence at the beginning and conclusion of contact.
parties are restrained by themselves, their servants or their agents
(a) denigrating
the other party to or in the presence or hearing of the child; and
(b) enrolling
or committing the child to any activity during the other party’s contact
time without first obtaining the other
party’s consent to such an
parties are restrained from consuming alcohol to excess 24 hours prior to or
during any period the child is in their care.
Father is to follow all prescribed medical treatment at all time and is not to
consume alcohol in combination with medication
if so advised by his treating
parties each be at liberty to communicate with the child by telephone at all
reasonable times when the child is in the care
of the other parent and at such
times as the child may request.
parties shall communicate with each other via phone, email or text message to
discuss child related matters.
the parties shall forthwith commence a communication book to travel with the
child at contact changeovers in which each
parent will record relevant issues
regarding the child’s activities, commitments and health.
party shall immediately inform the other of any serious illness or injury
sustained by the child whilst in their care, and
further provide particulars of
any treatment required or received by the child together with the name and
address of the treatment
provider and/or location at which the child is a
parties be at liberty to approach the school or education institutions attended
or to be attended by the child to obtain
copies of school reports, photographs,
newsletters notices and the like, and further, each party shall be at liberty to
attend parent/teacher
nights, school concerts, prize and special nights,
sporting events and like functions.
parties agree that the child’s childcare centre, kindergarten and school
shall be no more than a distance of 25 kilometres
from either of the parties
the Mother, her servants and/or agents be restrained from removing or attempting
to remove the child from the Commonwealth
of Australia without an order of the
Court request that the Commissioner of the Federal Police take all necessary
steps to immediately place the child’s
name on the Watch List at all
points of international departure from Australia for the purpose of preventing
the removal of the child
from Australia in breach of these orders.
Marshall of the Family Court of Australia at Melbourne and all officers of the
Australian Federal Police and the (omitted)Police
Forces and Services of the
various States and Territories of Australia are required and empowered to give
effect to these orders
and to take all necessary steps to restrain MS CATTERALL
from removing the said child from the Commonwealth of Australia.
Marshall of the Family Court of Australia at Melbourne and all officers of the
Australian Federal Police and the (omitted)Police
Forces and Services of the
various States and Territories of Australia are required and empowered to give
effect to these orders
and to take all necessary steps to restrain MR CATTERALL
from removing the said child from the Commonwealth of Australia.
23. Pursuant
, the particulars of the obligations these orders create
and the particulars of the consequences that may follow if a person contravenes
these orders and details of who can assist the parties adjust to and comply with
an order are set out in the Fact Sheet attached
hereto and these particulars are
included in these orders.
24. For the
avoidance of doubt, to the extent that these Orders conflict with Intervention
Orders, these Orders shall
Current proceedings
5 November 2012 the mother filed an initiating application seeking to discharge
the Orders made on 12 October 2011. That application
was also accompanied by an
affidavit sworn on 2 November 2012 and a Form 4, Notice of Risk.
matter came before the Court on 10 December 2012. The father was granted leave
in Court that day to file his response and affidavit
sworn on 6 December 2012.
The mother’s application seeks to discharge or change the Orders for the
child made in 2011. That
application is opposed by the father. At the first
Court date the father made clear he was seeking orders for the dismissal of the
mother’s application based upon the principals set out in
(1979) FLC 90-725
Rice & Asplund
10 December 2012 the Court made the following orders:
COURT ORDERS THAT:
Applicant file and serve any further material upon which she seeks to rely upon
by 4 March 2013.
Respondent file and serve any further material upon which he seeks to rely upon
by not later than 11 March 2013.
matter be adjourned for hearing on the respondent’s argument that the
application filed 5 November 2012 should be dismissed
in reliance on the Rule in
Rice & Asplund on 20 March 2013 at the Federal Magistrates Court of
Australia at Dandenong commencing
Hearing on 20 March 2013
proceedings returned to Court on 20 March 2013. The mother appeared in person
and the father was represented by Mr Hutchins of
accordance with the orders of 10 December 2012 the mother filed the following
affidavits in support:
mother’s affidavit sworn on 28 February 2013 and filed on 28 February
affidavit on behalf of her partner Mr J also filed on 28 February
father filed another affidavit sworn on 12 March 2013.
20 March 2013 the Court heard the parties oral submissions and at the end of the
interim hearing the Court reserved its decision.
Application
the background of the Orders the Court notes that the mother’s
application
the following orders:
orders sought
the husband and the wife have equal shared parental responsibility of the child
X born (omitted) 2009 (aged almost 3 years).
2. That the
said child live with the wife.
3. That the
child spend time with and communicate with the husband as
(a) on each
alternate weekend from the conclusion of child care or school on Friday to the
commencement of childcare or school on
child is attending pre-prep3, pre-prep4 and then on to school, upon the husband
having leave from his employment and being
in substantial attendance then for
one half of each of the school term and long summer holidays;
child’s birthday and the husband’s birthday if it is a school day
from 4pm until 6pm and if it is a weekend
day, then from 10am until
Christmas 2012 and each alternate year thereafter from 5pm on Christmas Day
until 5pm on Boxing Day;
Christmas 2013 and each alternate year thereafter from 5pm Christmas Eve until
5pm Christmas Eve;
Father’s Day if it is not a time when the children are in the care of the
father, then from 5pm on the Saturday prior
to Father’s Day until delivery
to day-care/school on Monday;
telephone on a reasonable basis;
further or other times as may be agreed between the parties in
husband’s time with the children be suspended as
5pm on the Saturday prior to Mother’s Day;
child’s birthday and the Mother’s birthday during the times the
child is with the father from 4pm until 6pm
on a weekday and from 10am until 2pm
if it is a weekend day;
5pm on Christmas Eve until 5pm on Christmas Day in 2012 and each alternate year
thereafter;
5pm on Christmas Day until 5pm on Boxing Day in 2013 and each alternate year
thereafter;
other or further orders as this Honourable Court deems
appropriate.
family report be prepared to assist the court in determining the best interests
of the child.
5. That the
father attends and completes a Parenting After Separation Course before the
final hearing.
Final orders sought
1. That the
husband and the wife have equal shared parental responsibility of the child X
born (omitted) 2009 (aged almost 3 years).
2. That the
said child live with the wife.
3. That the
child spend time with and communicate with the husband as
(a) on each
alternate weekend from the conclusion of child care or school on Friday to the
commencement of childcare or school on
child is attending pre-prep3, pre-prep4 and then on to school, upon the husband
having leave from his employment and being
in substantial attendance then for
one half of each of the school term and long summer holidays;
child’s birthday and the husband’s birthday if it is a school day
from 4pm until 6pm and if it is a weekend
day, then from 10am until
Christmas 2012 and each alternate year thereafter from 5pm on Christmas Day
until 5pm on Boxing Day;
Christmas 2013 and each alternate year thereafter from 5pm Christmas Eve until
5pm Christmas Eve;
Father’s Day if it is not a time when the children are in the care of the
father, then from 5pm on the Saturday prior
to Father’s Day until delivery
to day-care/school on Monday;
telephone on a reasonable basis;
further or other times as may be agreed between the parties in
That the husband’s time with the children be suspended as
5pm on the Saturday prior to Mother’s Day;
child’s birthday and the Mother’s birthday during the times the
child is with the father from 4pm until 6pm
on a weekday and from 10am until 2pm
if it is a weekend day;
5pm on Christmas Eve until 5pm on Christmas Day in 2012 and each alternate year
thereafter;
5pm on Christmas Day until 5pm on Boxing Day in 2013 and each alternate year
thereafter;
other or further orders as this Honourable Court deems
appropriate.”
the hearing on 20 March 2013 the mother relied on her application and affidavit
material referred to earlier.
the background of the orders and the mother’s subsequent application the
father filed a response on 10 December 2012
seeking the following
the Orders made by the Family Court of Australia at Melbourne on 12 October 2011
continue in full force and effect.
2. That the
Application of the wife filed on 5 November 2012 be dismissed.
3. That the
Wife pay the Husband’s costs of and incidental to these
proceedings.
further or other Orders as deemed necessary by the Honourable
noted earlier the father opposed the orders sought by the mother and wanted the
application dismissed relying on the principles
Rice & Asplund
The father relied on his affidavits sworn 16 December 2012,
affidavit filed 12 March 2013 and Counsel’s submissions made on
mother referred to the family report dated 22 August 2011 prepared on behalf of
the parties before the Orders made. To the extent
that the report can be relied
on it would only be to obtain some understanding of the background against which
the Orders were made.
Family Report
report observed:
living Situations
Catterall is a 37 year old woman. She lives in (omitted) in the former family
for 7 years and
recommenced working in March 2011, just before the parties’ separation.
She works part time three days per
week as a (omitted)) at a (omitted) in
(omitted). She explained that her work involves (omitted) and has just
commenced working
in a (omitted) and (omitted).
Catterall is a 41 year old man, who is employed as a (occupation omitted) in the
(omitted) industry. He now lives in (omitted)
on his own but spends his time in
(omitted) with his mother when X stays overnight.
‘Kidstime’ childcare in (omitted)(omitted) each Monday, Wednesday
and Friday on the days her mother is working.
parents said that they had not repartnered.
The parties
met through an internet dating site. They had a short relationship before moving
in to live together from (omitted) 2008.
They married (omitted) 2009 and
separated 13 March 2011.
report recommended:
and Recommendations
The parents
in this dispute have had a relatively brief relationship and they became parents
very soon after it began.
Catterall expresses worries that Mr Catterall has a mental illness and shows
poor judgement and decision-making. She believes
that there are some risks to X
in unsupervised time with her father and alleges that Mr Catterall is
unpredictable in his moods and
behaviour and drinks heavily which further erodes
his capacity to properly care for their daughter. She describes Mr Catterall as
aggressive and intimates that he has a long undisclosed history of aggression
and violence against others.
assessment, Ms Catterall seemed to present as reasonable and not inclined to
exaggeration. Sometimes, her comments suggested
that she may not be taking into
account the heightened emotions and conflict that may be present around parental
separation and attributing
this to pathological causes in Mr Catterall. Ms
Catterall also seems to have been through some very strange and frightening
experiences
with Mr Catterall, so it not surprising that her fears are
heightened. Psychometric testing indicated that she may be sensitised
conflict and have little insight into how her own behaviour contributes to it
and exacerbates it.
assessment of Mr Catterall, his presentation was free of symptoms of mental
health problems and psychometric testing did not
indicate the presence of any
psychopathology and even more specifically mood problems. I had some concerns
reports that he now has few mood fluctuations on
medication but he also identified some periods when he reported mood changes. I
noted too that Ms Catterall’s report of their honeymoon period also
resembled Mr Catterall’s admitted behaviour when
feeling an elevated mood.
Mr Catterall’s responses around his alcohol use also suggested some
However, on
the information available to me there was little information to suggest that Mr
Catterall’s psychiatric diagnosis
presents as risk factor in his care of
X. Mr Catterall’s treating psychiatrist reports that he is compliant with
cooperative to therapy, that she has never seen him with an elevated
mood, and that his drinking appeared to be associated with a
time of significant
relationship problems.
assessment of Mr Catterall with X the interactions between them and X’s
presentation suggested that X has a close, loving
and secure relationship with
her father. It might be expected that if Mr Catterall’s mood was
fluctuating this would create
some problems for X and it is not uncommon for
children in these circumstances to show wariness or some problems with
because they find the parent’s behaviour unpredictable or
aversive. This was not the case.
the side of caution and because of X’s age and stage of development and
the particular risk for young children in
the care of someone who may be
psychiatrically unwell and making poor decisions, I would recommend that Mr
Catterall undergo an independent
psychiatric assessment. To provide a balanced
approach, Ms Catterall should also attend.
approach would also suggest that it is better to continue with the present
arrangement dependent on the outcome of such
an assessment and with X’s
care with her father to have some continued monitoring by her paternal
grandmother.
in agreement with Mr Catterall that the present schedule of time with him would
likely suit X‘s stage of development.
Her happy, contented secure outlook
was also a strong argument to suggest that the present arrangement suits her
needs for now.
Catterall claims that she is fearful of Mr Catterall and that she is a victim of
family violence. It is my assessment that issues
of aggression between the
parties, and they both accuse the other of being the instigator, might be
attributable to their relationship
problems and the stress arising from it.
However, I consider that that X’s transitions between her parents should
carefully to ensure Ms Catterall feels safe and supported and the
risk that X’s exposure to conflict and/ or violence is reduced.
changeovers occur from X’s childcare centre may be one way to achieve this
and also allow X a psychological and emotional
buffer between her time with each
that in testing the evidence before the court new information emerges about the
issues in this dispute. My opinions and
conclusions may change
accordingly.”
Submissions
mother understood the burden fell to her to demonstrate changed circumstances.
The mother’s submissions attempted, by reference
to her material, to
identify the
“significant changes”
since the Orders were
mother who was unrepresented when the Orders were made claimed she was under
strain at that time. The mother referred the Court
to the decision in
(1981) 6 FamLR 862.
mother referred to concerns she maintained were held for the child’s
development by
the maternal and child health care nurse and
(omitted) Hospital. The mother submitted that even allowing for delays due to
the child’s
hearing problems, the child wasn’t coping with the
current arrangements provided for in the Orders.
mother submitted that she had been unable to discuss issues such as whether
there should be a new report, schooling and moving
the child care arrangements
with the father.
mother submitted the child had no security, no stability under the Orders and
was not coping. The mother argued there should be
a new family report to
identify whether given the issues she referred to, the Orders should be changed.
for the father submitted that in
“short compass the
application was ill fated”
“indicate any significant change.”
Counsel for the father
submitted that at best the mother’s case was that the mother thinks the
Orders are too strict and unworkable.
for the father urged the Court not to entertain the mother’s application
which it was submitted did not demonstrate
significant change as it was
submitted there was nothing out of the ordinary course of events.
for the father contended that the mother had for the last 9 months been
“agitating for all manner of changes”
and submitted the child
shouldn’t be affected by the mother trying to make things more convenient
for herself.
for the father submitted that whilst the Orders had operated since they were
made, albeit
“not without difficulty,”
the mother’s
position was in reality they were inconvenient for her.
submissions before the Court, Counsel for the father whilst acknowledging there
had been developmental issues and separation anxiety
for the child, submitted
they had been dealt with.
so far as the mother relied on the assessment of the child at
(omitted) Hospital and childcare as warranting the Orders being revisited,
Counsel for the father submitted Annexure BC-05 to the
mother’s affidavit
did not make out that claim.
that the mother had the burden to establish changed circumstances, Counsel for
the father submitted it was telling given the
grounds relied on by the mother
that there were no material from the child’s paediatrician.
Relevant principles
of the parties submissions addressed the authorities that have considered the
principles in
Rice & Asplund
(supra). In relation to those principles
Marsden & Winch
(2009) FamCAFC 152
the Full Court of the Family
Court said:
J in SPS & PLS
[2008] FamCA FC 16
(2008) FLC 93-363
In the Marriage of Rice and Asplund
where there has already been a final order in respect of parenting issues,
before the court embarks on a rehearing of those
issues, the applicant must
establish a significant change of circumstance – is certainly useful, if
not essential. But it is
not the primary principle in applications for parenting
orders. Nor is its utility or weight uniform across cases in which it might
applied. In particular, those attributes vary, according to whether the rule is
applied at the outset of or at the end of a hearing.
application of the rule was again described by Warnick J in [45] – [49]
inclusive. Before turning to what Warnick J
said of it, it is useful to recall
Rice & Asplund
involved an appeal from custody orders which
reversed an order made nine months beforehand. In her reasons for judgment (at
Evatt CJ said of the position of a court confronted with an application
to change an earlier order that:
It should not
lightly entertain an application to reverse an earlier custody order. To do so
would be to invite endless litigation
for change is an ever present factor in
human affairs. Therefore, the court would need to be satisfied by the applicant
quote Barber J., there is some changed circumstance which will justify
such a serious step, some new factor arising or, at any rate,
some factor which
was not disclosed at the previous hearing which would have been
CJ went on to say that the threshold question was not necessarily one for
preliminary determination.
Warnick J discussed, the purpose of the “rule” is to discourage
“endless litigation” In addition,
as Nygh J said
(1980) FLC 90-866
principle that there be an end to litigation has equal force in custodial
disputes and in some respects may have even greater
force in custodial disputes.
The last thing, of course, that this court would wish to see would be a
perennial football match between
parents who because the strict principles of
res judicata are not applicable might seek to canvass again and again the
question of
custody of a child with the enormous psychological harm which they
would be inflicting not only upon each other but especially upon
45. Warnick J opined in SPS & PLS (supra) that:
58. Another
end served by the rule is that it avoids one judge substituting his or her
opinion of what is in the best interests of
a child for that of another judge,
though both opinions are based on the same or similar facts. This "evil" is
avoided by a requirement
that the previous order should not be altered unless
there has been a change of circumstances sufficient to justify that
46. Warnick J had earlier said at [48]:
In my view,
reflection on the rule shows that:
(i) What the
application of the rule can achieve if dealt with as a preliminary matter is
different from what it can achieve if
dealt with at the end of a full
(ii) In its
original formulation, the rule is directed to application as a preliminary
matter. Yet, contemporaneously with that formulation
the court in Rice and
Asplund determined that the rule could equally be applied at the end of a full
custody hearing. The consequences
of that determination have received little
whatever stage of a hearing the rule is applied, its application should remain
merely a manifestation of the "
best interests principle
(iv) Discussion
in terms that the rule may be applied as a "
preliminary matter
primary application be first heard "on the merits" may be unhelpful,
particularly because of the implication that, if the
rule is applied as a
preliminary matter, the parenting application is not then dealt with "on the
application of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree of,
change sought to the earlier order.
statements of the rule may contribute to its misapplication.
application of the rule must now measure the evidence against the principles set
of the Act, in particular the objects of the Part, the
presumption of equal shared parental responsibility and the steps required
the Act consequent upon an order made or to be made in that
47. We agree with those observations. Warnick J went on to consider each of
these observations, recognising (at [74]) that once a
court refrains from
applying the rule as a preliminary matter and embarks upon a hearing the rule
should not necessarily be cast
aside although its force might be diminished.
Importantly, Warnick J made the point that the implication should be avoided
the rule is applied as a preliminary matter the parenting application is
not dealt with on the merits. In particular, he noted that
paramountcy principle
” still applies to the decision to
dismiss an application to vary
Newling & Mole
[1987] FamCA 21
(1987) FLC 91-856
(1987) FLC 91-813
; McEnearny (supra)). We agree
with the conclusion reached by Warnick J (at [81]) that:
...when the
threshold question described in Rice and Asplund is determined as a preliminary
matter, it remains a determination “on
the merits”. Where an
application is dismissed at a preliminary stage, it is not dismissed for some
technical reason, such
as the failure of a party to appear or some lack of
compliance with form and procedure but rather because, assuming the evidence
the applicant is accepted, there is an insufficient change of circumstance shown
to justify embarking on a hearing. Though sometimes
unstated, the underlying
conclusion will or ought be that the interests of the child in not being the
subject of further litigation
is more powerfully in the child’s welfare
than to allow the application to continue.
48. In summary, the best interests issue arises because there are so many
changes in the lives of families that the changed circumstances
permissibly allow re-litigation of a decision must be circumscribed, otherwise
there would exist in some cases the spectre
of endless litigation finalising
only when the child attains 18 years of age and the courts no longer have
49. However, even that simple formulation must be subservient to the nature
of the application itself. This is the genesis of the
Rice & Asplund
and as Warnick J says it is founded on the notion
that continuous litigation over the child or children is not generally in their
interests. It is usually hoped that the determination of a controversy
concerning children by a court will result in at least a reasonable
stability of those arrangements and freedom from the stressful and conflictual
effects of litigation on both parents and
children. In addition, recent research
demonstrates that conflict between parties is itself harmful to
50. Nevertheless, there are significant changes that occur and which do
require a court to reconsider decisions previously made.
Whether in a particular
case a court should be willing to embark upon another hearing concerning the
child and parent, or whether
to do so would itself be demonstrably contrary to
the best interests of the child, is a decision to be made in each particular
How is that decision to be made? The court must look
(1) The past
circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon
which it was based.
(2) Whether
there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result
of a new hearing.
(3) If there
is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against
the potential detriment to the child
or children caused by the litigation
itself. Thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to
compensate for the
disruption caused by significant
re-litigation.
have been more recent Full Court decisions that have considered the rule in
Rice & Asplund (supra).
Langmeil & Grange
[2013] FamCA
the Full Court Said:
Rice & Asplund
was recently considered in
[2012] FamCAFC 5
(2012) FLC 93-496
per May, Thackray &
Strickland JJ.
as enacted immediately prior to the
Law Legislation Amendment (Family Violence and Other Measures) Act
The amendments do not affect the manner in which the rule
operates. It follows that their Honours remarks in
to proceedings to which the current
applies. Their Honours in DL & W correctly recorded that the
“rule” has its genesis in remarks by Evatt CJ in
at [78,905-06]:
The principles
which, in my view, should apply in such cases are that the court should have
regard to any earlier order and to the
reasons for and the material on which
that order was based. It should not lightly entertain an application to reverse
custody order. To do so would be to invite endless litigation for
change is an ever present factor in human affairs. Therefore, the
court would
need to be satisfied by the applicant that ... there is some changed
circumstance which will justify such a serious step,
some new factor arising or,
at any rate, some factor which was not disclosed at the previous hearing which
would have been material.
CJ continued:
These are not
necessarily matters for a preliminary submission, but they are matters that the
judge should consider in his reasons
for decision. It is a question of finding
that there are circumstances which require the court to consider afresh how the
of the child should best be served. These principles apply whether the
original order is made by consent or after a contested hearing.
The way they
apply and the factors which will justify the court in reviewing a custody order
will vary from case to case.
, their Honours pointed out that:
debilitating effect of ongoing litigation on children and parents alike was
emphasised by Strauss J in this passage in Freeman
and Freeman [1986] FamCA 23
[1986] FamCA 23
(1987) FLC 91-857
at 76,470–71:
“Continuing
and seemingly endless and inconclusive litigation is usually emotionally
damaging to the litigants and is likely
to affect the children adversely. It
impairs the ability of the custodian, in this case the wife, to deal with the
present and plan
for the future of the family. It is financially burdensome. ...
The welfare of the children is, in this case, as in any others concerning
custodial arrangements, the paramount consideration. But once the court, either
after a full hearing or by a consent order, has settled
the question of custody,
it is usually in the interests of the children that the order made by the court
is treated as determining
the dispute and be given the necessary support.
Stability in the lives of children and also in the lives of adults is an
prerequisite to their well-being.
Langmeil & Grange (supra)
the Full Court noted the remarks made in
[2012] FamCAFC 5
(2012) FLC 93-496
also apply to proceedings to which the
of the Act applies. In
Full Court said:
Evatt CJ said in
Rice and Asplund
, a court “should not lightly
entertain” an application to reverse earlier parenting orders. The stated
rationale of
the then Chief Justice was the avoidance of the “endless
litigation” that might otherwise ensue, since “change
present factor in human affairs”.
have earlier recorded, Evatt CJ suggested (at 78,905) that a court would only
hear an application to vary an earlier order
if it were satisfied that
changed circumstance which would justify such a serious step, some new factor
arising or, at any rate, some factor which
was not disclosed at the previous
hearing which would have been material...
CJ acknowledged the infinite variety of circumstances that would warrant
application of the principle she had stated, and
she also effectively found
there was no “right” time for it to be considered. This is apparent
from what her Honour
said in the following passage (at
78,905-78,906):
These are not
necessarily matters for a preliminary submission, but they are matters that the
judge should consider in his reasons
for decision. It is a question of finding
that there are circumstances which require the court to consider afresh how the
of the child should best be served. These principles apply whether the
original order is made by consent or after a contested hearing.
The way they
apply and the factors which will justify the court in reviewing a custody order
will vary from case to case.
CJ’s views were endorsed by the other members of the bench in
and have been routinely followed ever since, including after the 2006
amendments to the Act. For recent discussions of the “rule”
Full Court see
Reid & Lynch
[2010] FamCAFC 184
(2010) FLC 93-448
[2009] FamCAFC 103
Marsden v Winch
[2009] FamCAFC 152
Caracini & Paglietta
[2009] FamCAFC 188
[2009] FamCAFC 3.
policy considerations underpinning the “rule” were explained in
McEnearney and McEnearney
(1980) FLC 90-866
, where Nygh J said at
principle that there be an end to litigation has equal force in custodial
disputes and in some respects may have even greater
force in custodial disputes.
The last thing, of course, that this court would wish to see would be a
perennial football match between
parents who because the strict principles of
res judicata are not applicable might seek to canvass again and again the
question of
custody of a child with the enormous psychological harm which they
would be inflicting not only upon each other but especially upon
debilitating effect of ongoing litigation on children and parents alike was
emphasised by Strauss J in this passage in
Freeman and Freeman
[1986] FamCA 23
at 76,470-71:
Continuing and
seemingly endless and inconclusive litigation is usually emotionally damaging to
the litigants and is likely to affect
the children adversely. It impairs the
ability of the custodian, in this case the wife, to deal with the present and
plan for the
future of the family. It is financially burdensome. ...The welfare
of the children is, in this case, as in any others concerning
arrangements, the paramount consideration. But once the court, either after a
full hearing or by a consent order, has
settled the question of custody, it is
usually in the interests of the children that the order made by the court is
treated as determining
the dispute and be given the necessary support.
Stability in the lives of children and also in the lives of adults is an
prerequisite to their well-being. ...
likely adverse impact of litigation on children has also been recognised in the
High Court. In
[1998] HCA 67
(1998) 197 CLR 172
McHugh, Gummow
and Callinan JJ (albeit in a different context) said:
... So too the
public and private interest in the finality of litigation must be given some
weight even in cases of this kind. The
important private interests of children
are unlikely, save in special circumstances, to be served by frequent
displacements of them
and the uncertainty of prolonged and repetitive
proceedings.
legislation itself now expressly directs judicial officers to have regard to the
potential impact of proceedings on the welfare
of children. As the Full Court
pointed out in
Miller & Harrington
[2008] FamCAFC 150
(2008) FLC 93-383
, the provisions
of 69ZN of the Act, which prescribes “principles for conducting
child-related proceedings”, apply to
a hearing in which Rice and Asplund
is invoked. Subsection 69ZN(3) provides (our emphasis):
principle is that the
is to consider the needs of the
concerned and the impact that the conduct of the
proceedings
may have on the
in determining the conduct of the
proceedings
are, of course, cases where it is necessary, in the interests of the child, for
a court to revisit “final orders”,
whether made by consent or
following a defended hearing. As Evatt CJ said in
Zabaneh and Zabaneh
[1986] FamCA 18
(1986) FLC 91-766
at 75,587 (Fogarty and Renaud JJ
The welfare of
children may ultimately demand that issues concerning access, custody and so
forth, and so on, be reconsidered, but
only when there is some evidence of an
underlying change in the circumstances, whether that be in the attitudes of the
parties, or
the needs or circumstances of the children. The fact that time has
elapsed or a considerable time, may be relevant, but it is not
the only factor
to take into account.
Federal Magistrate noted, the
Rice and Asplund
authorities were reviewed
SPS and PLS
, where Warnick J recognised that the purposes that can be
served by the “rule” differ depending upon the stage of the
proceedings at which it is sought to be applied. For example, in the event it
is addressed as a preliminary matter it is clearly
more effective in
discouraging “endless litigation” than if it is applied at the
conclusion of the hearing.
70. Warnick
J observed (at 87,451) that “at whatever stage of a hearing the rule is
applied, its application should remain
merely a manifestation of the ‘best
interests principle’”. His Honour also recognised that “the
application
of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree of,
change sought to the earlier order”. We respectfully adopt
observations, with the latter being of particular importance in the
determination of this appeal.
71. Warnick
J’s views were also endorsed by the Full Court in
Marsden v Winch
(supra at 19 [47]), where Bryant CJ, Finn and Cronin JJ went on to say
(footnotes omitted):
summary, the best interests issue arises because there are so many changes in
the lives of families that the changed circumstances
that will permissibly allow
re-litigation of a decision must be circumscribed, otherwise there would exist
in some cases the spectre
of endless litigation finalising only when the child
attains 18 years of age and the courts no longer have jurisdiction.
49. However,
even that simple formulation must be subservient to the nature of the
application itself. This is the genesis of the
“rule” in Rice &
Asplund and as Warnick J says it is founded on the notion that continuous
litigation over the child
or children is not generally in their interests. It is
usually hoped that the determination of a controversy concerning children
court will result in at least a reasonable period of stability of those
arrangements and freedom from the stressful and conflictual
litigation on both parents and children. In addition, recent research
demonstrates that conflict between parties is itself
harmful to children.
50. Nevertheless,
there are significant changes that occur and which do require a court to
reconsider decisions previously made.
Whether in a particular case a court
should be willing to embark upon another hearing concerning the child and
parent, or whether
to do so would itself be demonstrably contrary to the best
interests of the child, is a decision to be made in each particular case.
that decision to be made? The court must look at:
past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon
which it was based.
(2) Whether
there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result
of a new hearing.
there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed
against the potential detriment to the child
or children caused by the
litigation itself. Thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient
benefit to compensate for the
disruption caused by significant
re-litigation.
Honours continued:
that the application of the rule should always remain a manifestation of the
best interests principle, we do not think
that that principle can be given its
full weight by restricting the application of the rule in Rice to two choices,
either application
of the rule by taking the applicant’s case at its
highest, or a full hearing.
view, depending upon the facts of each case, a broader range of processes should
always be considered. This is because
the decision is one which must be made in
the best interests of the child but may also be because of the need to provide
fairness in the manner in which the court determines how the rule
will be applied. ...
Full Court then described a two step process to be followed when the
and Asplund
“rule” is invoked. Their Honours
58. ...there
is a requirement:
(1) for a prima facie case of
changed circumstances to have been established; and
(2) for a consideration as to whether that case is a sufficient change of
circumstances to justify embarking on a hearing.”
Langmeil & Grange (supra)
the Full Court said:
and Marsden v Winch
[2009] FamCAFC 152
(2009) 42 Fam LR 1
, per Bryant CJ, Finn and
Cronin JJ, their Honours endorsed, as do we, Warnick J’s approach to
Rice & Asplund
referred to in
[2008] FamCAFC 16
(2008) FLC 93-363.
In particular, that the rule
is a manifestation of the best interests’ principle and founded on the
notion that continuous
litigation over a child or children is generally not in
their interests. Also, that the application of the rule is connected with
nature and degree of change sought to the earlier
Consideration
matter proceeded on the papers with the assistance of submissions made on behalf
of each of the parties. In considering the mother’s
application I have had
regard to the material on which the parties rely.
child was around 18 months old when the parties separated. At the time the
Orders were made the child was around 2 years old.
the time the Orders were made the parties had mutual intervention orders. These
have since lapsed. At the time the Orders were
made the parties were both
working and lived only 5 kilometres apart. The mother now lives in (omitted) and
the father in (omitted).
The mother’s workplace has moved from (omitted)
and the father is no longer working. Since the Orders were made the child has
had grommets fitted and seen several medical practitioners for
developmental and other health issues.
the report made recommendations about psychiatric assessments of both parties
there is no evidence this was done. At the time
the report was done the father,
who is bipolar, was seeing a psychiatrist and he deposes he continues to do
relation to the mother’s argument concerning when the Orders were made, I
note what was said in
Reid & Lynch
[2010] FamCA FC 184
orders when no attack has been made on the validity of consent orders or where
such orders have not been appealed. This
Court is entitled to assume they were
properly made and in the best interests of the child.
Orders required the parties to exercise equal shared parental responsibility.
The mother’s case is that the parties are
unable to do this on medical
issues and child care in such a way that disputes between the parties
don’t impact on the
mother points to the distance travelled each day by the child to child care and
when added to the diagnosed developmental difficulties
leads to the child not
coping with the current spend time arrangements in the Orders.
the father’s criticism of the mother’s application were that the
problems identified with the Orders were identified
as they didn’t suit
the mother, the evidence led on behalf of the mother did give rise to concerns
the arrangements in the Orders and whether they were in
the child’s best interests.
for the father acknowledged there had been issues identified in relation to the
child since the Orders were made, but submitted
these had been dealt with and/or
and a child of this age would inevitably
have issues. Whilst there is a beguiling simplicity to this submission I am not
is the case.
submissions made on behalf of the father were to the effect that to allow the
Orders to be revisited would reward the mother for
what was claimed to be bad
behaviour by the mother.
that is the case or not isn’t the issue. There is attached to the
mother’s material, documentation that suggests
the child is presenting
with problems and the father agrees this is the case and those issues
weren’t foreseen when the Orders
mother and father’s material contains a litany of pathetic claims and
turgid recitations of confrontations between them
before and after the Orders
were made where they both seek to cloak themselves with the moral authority of
the parent most concerned
with the child’s best interests. The disparate
accounts they present can only be explained if one of the parties is being
untruthful.
father agrees the child has suffered hearing loss and delays in speech
development and that the child in the father’s words
has developmental and
emotional challenges.
allowing for the period of time since the Orders were made, the child has
undergone significant change and is at a critical time
in her development where
she is presenting with problems that weren’t foreseen in the context of a
routine provided for in
the Orders.
problems the child is presenting with as noted by the current child care
provider or as have been diagnosed weren’t foreseen
at the time the Orders
Orders were made against the background of the report. To the extent that report
contained a recommendation/s on whether the time
spent arrangements then
occurring should continue it could only be seen as provisional. There was
certainly no definitive examination
or recommendation that the arrangement that
now pertains was developmentally appropriate for the child now regardless of the
that have been identified since.
the Orders were made the child had grommets fitted, seen several medical
professionals for various issues, been diagnosed with
developmental delays, been
assessed as suitable for an aide at childcare and continues on the
mother’s case to present with
coping difficulties.
problems the child is now presenting with were not identified in the report or
in the Orders. The nature of those issues, even
those acknowledged by the
father, mean that there’s a likelihood that the spend time arrangements
need to be revisited and
could be varied in a significant way and the
requirement to do so outweighs any detriment caused by re-opening the litigation
the mother and the father.
complexity of the issues it is agreed the child is/and has been presenting with
does not make this matter one amendable to being
determined on the basis of the
Court’s consideration of the parties submissions and on the papers. The
issues referred to above
weren’t identified at the time of the Orders and
when they are taken collectively there is a likelihood the Orders could be
varied in a significant way. The detriment of a rehearing to the child
doesn’t outweigh the need to consider the child’s
best interests
material of the mother taken at its highest;
past circumstances;
the Court is satisfied there is a likelihood the
Orders could be varied in a significant way and the potential detriment to the
caused by embarking on a rehearing does not outweigh the need to consider
father’s interim application should be dismissed. I will hear the parties
on appropriate further directions.
I certify that the fifty-four
(54) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of O'Sullivan
Date: 10 April 2013
application filed on 5 November
example paragraphs 28-32 and 33-38 of mother’s affidavit filed 5 November
RTF format (315 KB)
Signed PDF/A format