Khatri & Barber (No. 2) [2021] FamCAFC 158 (23 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Khatri & Barber (No. 2)
FamCAFC 158
Appeal from:
FCoA orders dated 26 March 2021;
Barber & Khatri (No. 2)
[2021] FamCA 296
Appeal number(s):
SOA 20 of 2021;
SOA 32 of 2021
File number(s):
MLC 9649 of 2018
Judgment of:
STRICKLAND, ALDRIDGE & TREE JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – Appeals
against interim parenting orders and refusing a stay of those orders –
Where parenting orders
are inconsistent with a family violence order –
Procedural fairness – Where the primary judge considered the relevant
family violence order provisions of the
Family Law Act 1975
Weight challenge – No ground of appeal established – Application in
an Appeal to adduce further evidence
allowed in part – Appeal dismissed
– No order as to costs.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Aldridge & Keaton
(Stay Appeal
[2009] FamCAFC 106
Concrete Pty Ltd v Parramatta Design and Developments Pty Ltd
229 CLR 577
[2006] HCA 55
De Winter v De Winter
(1979) 23 ALR 211
Gronow & Gronow
(1979) 144 CLR 513
[1979] HCA 63
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Heard in Melbourne, delivered in Cairns
The Appellant:
Litigant in person
The Respondent:
Litigant in person
Solicitor for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Victoria Legal Aid (did not participate)
SOA 32 of 2021
MLC 9649 of
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
STRICKLAND, ALDRIDGE & TREE JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERED ON 11 AUGUST 2021 THAT:
1. The appellant mother be granted leave to rely on her Amended Summary of
Argument filed on 10 August 2021.
2. The appellant mother’s Amended Application in an Appeal filed on 10
August 2021 be granted only insofar as it seeks leave
to adduce the further
evidence comprising the transcript of the hearing before a magistrate at the
Suburb B Magistrates’ Court
on 18 March 2021.
3. The appellant mother’s Amended Application in an Appeal filed on 10
August 2021 be otherwise dismissed.
4. The appeals be dismissed.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Khatri & Barber (No. 2)
has been approved
by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
STRICKLAND, ALDRIDGE & TREE JJ:
INTRODUCTION
1 By her Notice of Appeal filed on 20 April 2021, Ms
Khatri (“the mother”) appeals from interim parenting orders made
26 March 2021 by a judge of the Family Court of Australia (“the first
appeal”). Relevant to this appeal, those orders
provided for the
parties’ then 10 year old only child to spend overnight time with Mr
Barber (“the father”).
2 Following the orders made on 26 March 2021, the mother filed an application
to stay them pending the hearing of the first appeal,
which application was
dismissed by the primary judge on 13 May 2021. The mother then filed a Notice of
Appeal on 28 May 2021 from
that order (“the second appeal”) which
has been consolidated with the first appeal.
3 The father opposes both appeals. The Independent Children’s Lawyer in
the parenting proceedings did not participate in the
4 On 11 August 2021, at the conclusion of the hearing, we dismissed both
appeals for reasons to be published in due course. These
are those reasons.
5 The parenting proceedings from which both appeals
spring were first commenced by the father in 2018.
6 On 23 April 2020, after a defended interim hearing, a Senior Registrar made
orders for the child to live with the mother during
school terms and to spend
four nights a fortnight and half of school holidays with the father.
7 On 22 May 2020, the mother filed an application to review the Senior
Registrar’s orders. After a hearing on 1 September 2020,
the primary judge
affirmed the Senior Registrar’s decision, save to the extent that the
issue of the time which the child was
to spend with the father during school
holidays was reserved to the then imminent trial. No appeal was brought from
those orders.
8 The trial commenced before the primary judge on 14 October 2020 but was
unable to be concluded in the time then allocated to it.
Thereafter it
intermittently proceeded, presumably as and when time became available.
9 Throughout the first two months of the trial the mother contended that the
child should not spend any overnight time with the father,
and there were a
number of attempts by her to vary the interim parenting orders to reflect this.
Those applications were all unsuccessful.
10 On 4 January 2021, interim orders were made by consent providing for the
child to spend block time with the father during the 2021
summer school
holidays, including overnight time, but otherwise the orders of 23 April 2020
(and 1 September 2020) were to remain
in full force and effect. The mother
simultaneously gave an undertaking to the Court to comply with all parenting
orders made pursuant
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the
Act”) concerning the child.
11 On 3 February 2021, being the day before the trial was due to again
resume, the mother filed an affidavit in which she set out
allegations that the
father had physically disciplined the child whilst he was in the father’s
care. On 4 February 2021, the
mother argued that on the basis of that affidavit,
the child’s time with the father should revert to daytime only. The
judge made an order by consent restraining the father from
“physically chastising the child” (noting that the father
to the order under cover of a denial), but otherwise did not accede to the
mother’s submissions.
12 Although it is unnecessary to detail their history, during the currency of
the Family Court parenting proceedings, the parents
had also been litigating
family violence proceedings in the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria. On 18
March 2021, upon the mother’s
application to vary a final intervention
order made on 11 February 2020, that Court made the following order:
10. At the time of making this interim intervention
order, the Court has also made an order under
section 68R
Family Law Act
. The court has ordered that the parenting order made on 23/04/20 is:
VARIED NOT TO ALLOW [THE CHILD] TO SPEND OVERNIGHT TIME WITH HIS FATHER.
(Annexure 4 to the mother’s affidavit filed 23 April 2021) (As per the
13 As found by the primary judge, that application was made in the absence of
the father, on an ex parte basis and according to the
mother, the hearing lasted
between 5 to 10 minutes.
14 On 23 March 2021, the father first became aware of the Magistrates’
Court order made on 18 March 2021. His legal representatives
immediately
enquired with the Melbourne family law registry how to list the parenting
proceedings urgently before her Honour. As
a result of that enquiry, the
chambers of the primary judge advised an urgent listing for 26 March 2021. At
that hearing, each party
was represented by counsel, who made lengthy
submissions before her Honour. Following that hearing, her Honour made interim
for time between the child and father (including overnight time) in the
same terms as had been in place prior to the interim intervention
order of 18
March 2021. Relevantly, the 26 March 2021 orders provided:
1. That [the child] ... spend time and communicate with
[the father] as follows:
(a) during school terms, each Wednesday and alternate Friday commencing 19 March
2021 when the child is not spending overnight time
with [the father], from the
conclusion of school until 6:30pm, with [the father] to collect and deliver the
child from school or
C Resources Centre;
(b) during school terms, from the conclusion of school Friday until 6:00pm
Sunday of each alternate weekend, commencing the 26 March
2021, with changeover
to occur at the C Resources Centre on the Sunday;
(c) such further or other times as agreed between the parties in writing
(including by text message).
2. That for half of all the school term holidays, the child spend time and
communicate with [the father] on a week about basis as
agreed between the
parents, and in default of agreement, as follows:
(a) for the first half of each school term holiday, from the conclusion of
school to 6:00pm a week later; and
(b) for the first week of long summer school holidays, and each alternate week
thereafter during these holidays.
3. Pursuant to
Family Law Act
IT IS NOTED THAT these Orders are
inconsistent with a family violence Order made on 18 March 2021 by the
Magistrates’ Court
of Victoria ... AND IT IS DECLARED THAT to the extent
of any inconsistency the family violence Order is invalid.
15 As we have indicated, those orders are challenged by the first appeal.
16 On 23 April 2021, the mother filed an Application in a Case seeking a stay
of the orders of 26 March 2021 pending the determination
of the first appeal,
and further, that the orders made by the magistrate on 18 March 2021 be given
full force and effect, and that
the trial in relation to the parenting
proceedings be adjourned pending the outcome of the first appeal.
17 On 13 May 2021, the primary judge dismissed the mother’s
application, which of course is the subject of the second appeal.
18 After a total hearing time of some 12 days, the evidence in the trial
before the primary judge has recently concluded, with a timetable
being ordered
for written submissions, after which her Honour’s decision in relation to
the final parenting orders is reserved.
APPLICATION TO ADDUCE FURTHER EVIDENCE
19 On 10 August 2021, the mother filed an Amended
Application in an Appeal which sought leave to adduce further evidence in the
and to file an Amended Summary of Argument. The further evidence in part
comprises of a supplementary appeal book, which includes
additional documents
from the court file. The mother also seeks to rely upon two further affidavits
sworn by her on 27 July 2021
and 9 August 2021, albeit the latter wholly
encompasses the former, which annex transcript for earlier parts of the
proceedings and
the transcript of the 18 March 2021 hearing in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria.
20 On 11 August 2021 we gave leave for the mother to rely upon her Amended
Summary of Argument, and the 18 March 2021 Magistrates’
Court transcript.
However the remaining documents contained in the supplementary appeal book and
the mother’s affidavits, including
the previous transcript of the
parenting proceedings, were rejected, as they were not relevant to the
mother’s appeals.
THE APPEALS GENERALLY
21 At the outset, we should say that the imminent
final judgment arising from the trial before the primary judge renders both
futile, as no matter their outcome, they will soon be overtaken by the
final orders, which shall supersede both the 26 March 2021
orders and the 13 May
2021 orders. The second appeal is also now otiose and it is unnecessary to
consider it given that the stay
was pending the determination of the first
appeal, and that determination has now taken place. However, we shall
nonetheless briefly
address the grounds advanced in both appeals, all of which
challenge orders made in the exercise of the primary judge’s discretion.
22 The constraints upon appellate interference with such orders are
well-known and of long standing. In
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
”) at 504–505 the High Court said:
The manner in which an appeal against an exercise of
discretion should be determined is governed by established principles. It is
enough that the judges composing the appellate court consider that, if they had
been in the position of the primary judge, they
would have taken a different
course. It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the
discretion. If the judge acts
upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or
irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does
not take into account some material consideration, then his determination should
be reviewed and the appellate court may exercise
its own discretion in
substitution for his if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how
the primary judge has reached
the result embodied in his order, but, if upon the
facts it is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that
in some way there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which
the law reposes in the court of first instance. In
such a case, although the
nature of the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is
reviewed on the ground that
a substantial wrong has in fact
THE FIRST APPEAL
23 The mother agitates only two grounds of appeal
against the 26 March 2021 orders. The first ground provides:
1. The Trial Judge erred by failing to consider the
provisions of
section 68R
of the family law act and its intersection with the
family violence legislation.
(As per original)
24 Although not explicitly advanced by this ground itself, nonetheless under
cover of it the mother contends that the primary judge
“ought to have made
procedural orders requesting [the father] to make an application he seeks to
make arising from the intervention
order proceedings and [the mother] should
have been afforded procedural fairness to respond” (mother’s Amended
of Argument filed 10 August 2021, paragraph 3).
25 This aspect of the challenge advanced under this ground shall be
considered first (
Concrete Pty Ltd v Parramatta Design and Developments Pty
[2006] HCA 55
(2006) 229 CLR 577).
26 We have already outlined how the matter was listed before her Honour on 26
March 2021 at [14] of these reasons. In her written
submissions to the primary
judge filed 26 March 2021, the mother sought that the father be required to make
a formal Application
in a Case within seven days, and she respond to it within
14 days, including by filing any affidavits in response, and that the
application
be thereafter heard “not less than 21 days” hence.
27 To refute the contention that her Honour erred in some way by not doing
that which the mother asked, it only needs to be repeated
that each party was
represented by counsel at the hearing on 26 March, who each made submissions to
her Honour as to the orders sought
as a result of the intervention order,
including the 13 page written submissions provided by the mother’s then
counsel. As
the primary judge commented at the 26 March hearing, the
mother’s counsel clearly had sufficient time to draft these submissions
the day of the hearing. Further, clearly the mother was well aware of the issues
at play and the father’s position before
the Court, given the recent
interim hearing on 4 February 2021. Additionally, the orders sought by the
father as at 26 March 2021
were the very same orders for time between the child
and father which had been in place since 23 April 2020. The body of his
filed on 24 March 2021 was only one and a half pages long, and the
annexures to it were all documents with which the mother must
familiar. How the mother was precluded from adequately responding to it remains
unclear, as is why she needed a further
14 days to do so.
28 To the extent it is raised by Ground 1, we reject any suggestion that the
mother was not afforded procedural fairness at the 26
March 2021 hearing.
29 As to the balance of this ground, the relevant provisions of the Act in
relation to family violence orders to which this ground
relates, are as
68P Obligations of court making an order or granting
an injunction under this Act that is inconsistent with an existing family
(1) This section applies if:
(i) makes a parenting order
that provides for a child to spend time with a person, or expressly or impliedly
requires or authorises
a person to spend time with a child;...
(b) the order made ... is inconsistent
with an existing family violence order.
(2) The court must, to the extent to which the order
or injunction provides for the child to spend time with a person, or expressly
or impliedly requires or authorises a person to spend time with the
(a) specify in the order ...
that it is inconsistent with an existing family violence order; and
68Q Relationship of order or injunction made under
this Act with existing inconsistent family violence
(1) To the extent to
(a) an order ... mentioned in
paragraph 68P(1)(a) is made or granted that provides for a child to spend time
with a person, or expressly
or impliedly requires or authorises a person to
spend time with a child; and
(b) the order ... is inconsistent with an existing family violence
the family violence order is invalid.
68R Power of court making a family violence order to
revive, vary, discharge or suspend an existing order, injunction or arrangement
under this Act
(1) In proceedings to make or vary a
family violence order, a court of a State or Territory that has jurisdiction in
relation to
this Part may revive, vary, discharge or
(a) a parenting order, to the
extent to which it provides for a child to spend time with a person, or
expressly or impliedly requires
or authorises a person to spend time with the
(2) The court may do
(a) on its own initiative;
(b) on application by any
Limits on power
(3) The court must not do so
(a) it also makes or varies a
family violence order in the proceedings (whether or not by interim order);
(b) if the court proposes to revive, vary, discharge or suspend an order ...
mentioned in paragraph (1)(a), (b) or (c)—the
court has before it material
that was not before the court that made that order...
Relevant considerations
(5) In exercising its power under
subsection (1), the court must:
(a) have regard to the
purposes of this Division (stated in
section 68N)
(b) have regard to whether spending time with both parents is in the best
interests of the child concerned; and
(c) if varying, discharging or suspending an order ... mentioned in paragraph
(1)(a), (b) or (c) that, when made or granted, was
inconsistent with an existing
family violence order—be satisfied that it is appropriate to do so because
a person has been
exposed, or is likely to be exposed, to family violence as a
result of the operation of that
68S Application of Act and Rules when exercising section 68R
(1) The following provisions do not apply
to a court exercising the power under section
(c) section 60CG (court to consider risk of family violence);
(e) any provisions (for example, section 60CA) that would otherwise make the
best interests of the child the paramount consideration;
Note: Even though the best interests of the child are not paramount, they
must still be taken into account under paragraph
(f) any provisions of this Act or the applicable Rules of Court specified in
the regulations.
30 From the above provisions, it can be seen that, to the extent of any
inconsistency with orders made under Pt VII of the Act, a
family violence order
is invalid. Further, subject to the limitations imposed by s 68S, a state or
territory court with jurisdiction
under Pt VII of the Act (which includes all
Local Courts and hence the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria), may, amongst
things, vary, discharge or suspend a Pt VII order if it also makes or
varies a family violence order, and has before it evidence
that was not before
the court which made the Pt VII order (ss 68R(1) and 68R(3)).
31 In her Amended Summary of Argument, the mother contends in relation to
this ground that “there is a question of law (and
its interpretation) to
be considered by the court of appeal”. However she does not provide any
particulars as to the question
of law raised, and it is unclear from the
mother’s written submissions how her Honour “failed to consider the
32 It is plain that her Honour did consider s 68R of the Act. Although her
Honour did not provide written reasons for the orders made
on 26 March 2021, the
transcript of the hearing makes it clear that s 68R and its allied provisions
were the subject of detailed
submissions from both parties’ counsel, even
to the point that the relevant provisions of the Act were annexed to the
counsel’s written submissions. Further, although it is
unnecessary to recite extracts of the transcript, her Honour engaged
mother’s arguments in relation to those provisions and the powers
emanating from them.
33 The mother’s contention that the primary judge did not consider s
68R or “its intersection with the family violence
legislation” is
patently incorrect.
34 This ground fails.
35 The second ground of appeal contends:
2. In the alternative, the Trial Judge placed no weight
on the power of the learned magistrate to consider the family violence
implications
that were before him.
(As per original)
36 An appeal which challenges the weight given to a relevant consideration
faces enormous difficulty, as it is quintessentially a
matter for the primary
Gronow & Gronow
[1979] HCA 63
(1979) 144 CLR 513).
This is sufficient to
reject the challenge raised by this ground.
37 Even if the ground was intended to contend that the primary judge failed
at all to address “the power of the learned magistrate
to consider the
family violence implications that were before him” that must also be
rejected, as the transcript of the proceedings
of 26 March 2021 are replete with
examples of the primary judge demonstrating that she was well aware of the
context in which the
magistrate was persuaded to make the 18 March orders. True
it is that her Honour was somewhat scathing that orders which she had
as recently as 4 February 2021, during the course of the still part-heard trial,
were varied by the Magistrates’ Court
after a very brief hearing, but
nonetheless it simply cannot be said that she took no cognisance whatsoever of
the family violence
context against which the intervention order was made.
38 This ground is without merit and fails.
THE SECOND APPEAL
39 This appeal extends to only one ground, as
1. That [the primary judge] erred in her decision to not
stay her orders on 4 May 2021 based on her interim judgement delivered on
2021 pending hearing of the Notice of Appeal filed on 20 April 2021.
(As per original)
40 Unfortunately not only is the nature of the error not specified in the
ground of appeal, but it is unable to be clearly discerned
either from the
mother’s Amended Summary of Argument or her oral submissions advanced at
the hearing of the appeal.
41 True it is that in her Amended Summary of Argument filed 10 August 2021,
one slender factual error is raised, as to the primary
judge not correctly
articulating the extent of time which the orders of 23 April 2020 afforded the
child to spend time with the father,
but it is unnecessary to consider that
further, as even if there were some error, it is clearly immaterial (
Winter v De Winter
(1979) 23 ALR 211).
42 Otherwise, doing the best we can, it appears as though the error which the
mother likely asserts is that the primary judge ought
to have been persuaded
that the risk of harm to the child from overnight time with the father, in the
context of a high conflict
parenting relationship, justified the conclusion that
the child should not be spending such time with the father pending the hearing
of the appeal, and in that sense contends that the primary judge wrongly
concluded that the child’s best interests lay in there
being no stay. If
that be the challenge which the mother in fact seeks to advance under this
appeal, then it is misconceived. As
makes clear, the challenges
which may be legitimately advanced against the exercise of a discretionary
judgment are limited, and
the fact that the appellate court may not have reached
the same conclusion on the same material does not justify its intervention.
43 Moreover as the primary judge recognised at [27] of her reasons, the
relevant principles relating to stay applications were stated
(Stay Appeal
[2009] FamCAFC 106
as follows:
[18] The principles to be applied in determining an
application for a stay of orders both in the general law and in respect of
proceedings are also well known. The authorities stress the
discretionary nature of the application which should be determined on
merits. Principles relevant to this matter include the
the onus to
establish a proper basis for the stay is on the applicant for the stay. However
it is not necessary for the applicant
to demonstrate any “special”
or “exceptional” circumstances;
a person who has
obtained a judgment is entitled to the benefit of that judgment;
a person who has
obtained a judgment is entitled to presume the judgment is correct;
the mere filing
of an appeal is insufficient to grant a stay;
the bona fides
of the applicant;
a stay may be
granted on terms that are fair to all parties - this may involve a court
weighing the balance of convenience and the
competing rights of the
a weighing of
the risk that an appeal may be rendered nugatory if a stay is not granted
– this will be a substantial factor
in determining whether it will be
appropriate to grant a stay;
some preliminary
assessment of the strength of the proposed appeal – whether the appellant
has an arguable case;
the desirability
of limiting the frequency of any change in a child’s living
arrangements;
the period of
time in which the appeal can be heard and whether existing satisfactory
arrangements may support the granting of the
stay for a short period of time;
interests of the child the subject of the proceedings are a significant
consideration.
(Citations omitted)
44 Proceeding in an entirely orthodox way, the primary judge addressed each
of those discretionary considerations at [31]–[48]
and, significantly,
concluded at [47] as follows in relation to the child’s best
47 Finally, the best interests of the child are served
by him continuing to spend time with his father in accordance with the orders
26 March 2021. The evidence of Ms H, the child’s treating psychologist,
was fervently in favour of [the child] spending
overnight time with his father
and that the time should not be reduced to daytime only, as sought by the
45 We can discern no error in her Honour’s approach or conclusion, and
accordingly this ground of appeal fails.
46 No ground of appeal is established in either
appeal and they must therefore be dismissed.
47 Before us both parties self-represented. The
father did not point to any costs which he had incurred which might be the
of a costs order against the mother. Accordingly there will be no order
as to costs.
I certify that the preceding forty-seven (47)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Strickland, Aldridge &
Dated: 23 August 2021
RTF format (443 KB)
Signed PDF/A format