Pennytel Australia Pty Limited v Engelke [2025] FCA 1384 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Pennytel Australia Pty Limited v Engelke
[2025] FCA 1384
File number(s):
NSD 533 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
CORPORATIONS
– whether first and
second defendants contravened
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) by misusing their position as employees by taking confidential
information – whether third defendant was a person involved
accessory in any contraventions – finding on the facts that no
contraventions occurred
– whether original contract
of employment applied to first defendant after each of two promotions –
first defendant treated
contract as continuing after first promotion to no
objection from plaintiff – held that employment was not so profoundly
that original contract of employment no longer bound the first
– plaintiff alleged breach of
employment contract and implied duty of good faith by way of breach of
confidence – allegation
of taking and misusing confidential information
pursuant to a scheme to set up a competing business – finding on facts
no scheme involved and no taking of confidential
information
– post-employment restraint on second
defendant in role of sales account manager – restraint for six months
to “clients and prospective clients” including persons who
were in negotiation with the plaintiff during the restraint
restraint not limited to area of plaintiff’s business – held to be
broader than necessary to protect plaintiff’s
business and not able to be
read down – restraint invalid – however no breach of restraint
Legislation:
Evidence Act
Corporations Act 2001
Restraints of Trade Act 1976
Cases cited:
3D Access Pty Ltd v Buzasi
Birdanco Nominees Pty Ltd v Money
(2012) 36 VR 341
[2012] VSCA
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Brilliant Lighting v Baillieu
[2004] VSC 248
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd v Collins
(1995) 31 IPR
Corrs Pavey Whiting & Byrne v Collector of Customers (Vic)
[1987] FCA 266
(1987) 14 FCR 434
ET-China.com International Holdings Ltd v Cheung
(2021) 388 ALR 128
[2021] NSWCA 24
Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd v Voller
[2021] HCA 27
Federated Mutual Insurance Co of Australia v Sabine
[1920] SALawRp 21
[1920] SALR
Fortescue Ltd v Element Zero Pty Ltd (No
Gold Titan Pty Ltd v Lopez (No 2)
[2021] FCA 1523
Goulston v Bogasi Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWSC 989
Helmet Integrated Systems Ltd v Tunnard
[2007] IRLR 126
[2006] EWCA
Jones v Dunkel
(1959) 101 CLR 298
[1959] HCA 8
Just Group Ltd v Peck
[2016] VSCA 334
(2016) 344 ALR 162
Labelmakers Group Pty Ltd v LL Force Pty Ltd (No 2)
Lifeplan Australia Friendly Society Ltd v Woff
[2016] FCA 248
Manildra Laboratories Pty Ltd v Campbell
[2009] NSWSC 987
MCT Dairies Inc v Probiotec Limited
[2009] FCA 1385
Mount v Dover Castle Metals Pty Ltd
[2025] FCA 101
Nichol v Martyn
(1799) 2 Esp 732
Optus Networks Pty Ltd (ACN 008 570 330) v Telstra Corporation Ltd (ACN
051 775 556)
(2010) 265 ALR 281
[2010] FCAFC 21
Smith Kline & French Laboratories (Aust) Ltd v Secretary, Department
of Community Services and Health
(1990) 22 FCR 73
Pennytel Australia Pty Limited v Engelke, in the matter of
Pennytel Australia Pty Limited (Objection to Subpoena)
Productivity Partners Pty Ltd (t/as Captain Cook College) v Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission
(2024) 419 ALR 30
[2024] HCA 27
Quinn v Jack Chia (Australia) Ltd
[1992] VicRp 37
[1992] 1 VR 567
[1995] HCA 1
183 CLR 501
Robb v Green
[1895] UKLawRpKQB 58
[1895] 2 QB 1
Rosebanner Pty Ltd v Energy Australia
[2009] NSWSC 43
Saravinovska v Saravinovski (No 6)
[2016] NSWSC 964
Smart EV Solutions Pty Ltd v Guy
[2023] FCA 1580
Streetscape Projects (Australia) Pty Ltd v City of Sydney
[2013] NSWCA 2
Thales Australia Limited v Madritsch KG
[2022] QCA 205
Wallis Nominees (Computing) Pty Ltd v Pickett
(2013) 45 VR 657
Warner v Hung, in the matter of Bellpac Pty Ltd (Receivers and Manager
appointed) (In liquidation) (No 2)
(2011) 297 ALR 56
Watson v Foxman
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
Weldon & Co Services Pty Ltd v Harbinson
[2000] NSWSC 272
Westpac Banking Corporation v Forum Finance Pty Limited (in liq)
(Liability)
[2024] FCA 1176
Yorke v Lucas
(1985) 158 CLR 661
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
Commercial Contracts, Banking, Finance and Insurance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
2-6 December 2024, 10 December 2024, 26-27 March
2025, 13 May 2025
Counsel for the Plaintiff:
Mr C.D. Freeman
Solicitor for the Plaintiff:
Dettmann Phair Lawyers
Counsel for the First, Second, Third and Fifth Defendants:
Mr R. Millar
Solicitor for the First, Second, Third and Fifth Defendants:
Macpherson Kelley
Counsel for the Fourth and Sixth Defendants:
The Fourth and Sixth Defendant did not appear
NSD 533 of 2023
PENNYTEL AUSTRALIA PTY LIMITED ACN 166 566 632
NICHOLAS JOHN ENGELKE
SAMANTHA JANE CHITAS
Second Defendant
(and others named in the Schedule)
Third Defendant
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
is granted to the parties to apply for directions to relist the matter for a
hearing on costs.
THE COURT NOTES THAT:
determination of the costs of the proceedings, the proceedings will be
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
proceedings
The parties
The first, second, and third
The fourth, fifth, and sixth
The pleading of confidential
information
Relief sought by the
Issues raised by the
The plaintiff
Determination
Observations as to
Peter Horan
The pleaded scheme between the
first, second, and third defendants
Actions by the defendants
relied upon by the plaintiff
The first, second and third
defendants establish Citratel
Pennytel becomes aware of
Mr Horan incorporates
Pennytel customers who ported
Inferences relied on by the
What was the confidential
information?
Was there a scheme to set up a
competing business by using The Confidential Information of
Elements of the
plaintiff’s case as to a scheme
Agreement or understanding
that SPN would use Pennytel confidential information
Misuse of confidential
information – how did the Pennytel clients get to SPN?
Conclusion on the
Were there breaches of the
Corporations Act duties by any of the first to third defendants?
Accessorial liability under
the Corporations Act
Was it unlawful for SPN to start
trading in February 2023?
The plaintiff
What were the first and second
defendants’ terms of employment with Pennytel?
Implied term of good faith and
Did Mr Engelke breach his
employment contract?
Did Ms Chitas breach her
employment contract?
What are the damages claimed by
Delivery up and
Determination
The proceedings
proceedings were heard before me over nine days, seven in Sydney and two in
Melbourne, over which time some 10 witnesses gave
evidence. Somewhat
unsuccessfully, I attempted to contain the length of these reasons, by asking
the parties to formulate a list
of factual and legal issues to be determined.
Those issues have been distilled into the questions in the section
Determination
commencing at [
below and are Attachment A to these reasons. I have sought to deal only with the
facts as relevant to each question along with a
brief overview of the
parties’ cases. I have however had regard to the entirety of the evidence
before me, with the caveat
that the parties were asked to draw my attention to
the particular parts of the Court Book and additional exhibits (totalling over
6,000 pages including voluminous spreadsheets), upon which they sought to
principal relief sought by the plaintiff is equitable damages arising out of
what is said to be a scheme between the first to
third defendants to take and
misuse confidential information obtained by the first and second defendant
during their respective periods
of employment with the plaintiff, and to set up
a competing business, using the confidential information of the plaintiff,
the fourth and then the fifth defendant as corporate vehicles. It is
further alleged that the first and second defendants breached
their employment
contracts with the plaintiff, and that Mr Nicholas Engelke (the
) and Ms Samantha Chitas (the
second defendant
) improperly
used their positions as employees in breach of ss 182 and 183 of the
Corporations Act
(Cth). The first, second, third, and
fifth defendants were jointly represented and will be referred to as “the
defendants”
in these reasons. The fourth and sixth defendants did not take
part in the hearing, as explained below.
have determined that the plaintiff has failed to prove its case against the
defendants in that I am not satisfied that the first
and second defendants took
or misused confidential information, nor that there was a scheme as alleged with
the third defendant.
I have further found that there was no breach of the first
and second defendants’ employment contracts, and that there was
Corporations Act
. The proceedings should be
dismissed with costs once the parties have had the opportunity to address on the
appropriate extent of
the costs orders.
The parties
The plaintiff
Australia Ltd (the
) is the trading entity of a group of
companies (the
Pennytel Group
). The Pennytel Group operates a business
which sells telecommunication products such as data and internet plans,
post-paid or SIM
only mobile phone plans, and on-premises and cloud-based
products such as voice (phone) platforms and hardware to both residential
consumers and businesses.
plaintiff was incorporated in 2019. In the course of expanding its business,
Pty Ltd (the ultimate holding company of the Pennytel
Group) purchased the assets and customers of a number of telecommunications
businesses, including, relevantly,
Communications Pty Ltd. The
Focus purchase took place in July 2021. The plaintiff asserts that it spent over
$5,000,000 on these
purchases in total, and one of the assets purchased from
Focus was a “significant book of customers”.
the Business Sale Agreement with Focus, Holdings was required to offer
employment to listed employees, including Mr Engelke and
Ms Chitas. It did so,
and each of those employees became employed by Pennytel. The terms of their
employment is an issue in these
proceedings.
Ante Zizic, who gave evidence for the plaintiff in chief, is the Chief Executive
Officer of the plaintiff, and has been in that
role since 18 July
The first, second, and third defendants
Engelke and Ms Chitas were long-term employees of Focus at the time of its
acquisition, Ms Chitas having worked for Focus since
2001, and Mr Engelke since
2009. They each accepted an offer of employment to start on 29 July 2021, and
continued working for Pennytel
until they left that employment, sparking the
events the subject of this litigation.
Engelke left Pennytel on 6 May 2022 as Head of Corporate Services, and started
Technology Solutions Ltd. Spirit is a technology company
which specialises in fixed wireless networking, and supplied services to
Pennytel, which Pennytel then re-sold to its clients. Mr Engelke was dismissed
from his employment with Spirit on 13 January 2023
and briefly commenced work as
a casual Business Development Manager until he commenced work with the fifth
Co Pty Ltd, on 6 March 2023.
Chitas worked for Pennytel as an Account Manager until 22 January 2023. She
resigned from her employment with Pennytel after it
sent her a letter requiring
her to show cause as to why she should not be dismissed for serious misconduct.
She was on long service
leave at the time. She commenced work with SPN on 23
Peter Horan is the
third defendant
and sole director of SPN. He is the
managing director of a company called
Pty Ltd, and has been in
that role since 2011. Citracom was a corporate partner of Focus and referred
customers to Focus in exchange
for commission. It is a computer consultancy
business, which deals with small to medium sized businesses, providing “a
range of computing solutions” for them. Mr Horan was a friend of
each of Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas from around 2013 and has
never worked for
Pennytel. A company associated with Mr Horan, Web Steps, provided Mr Engelke
with his casual employment before he
commenced work with SPN.
The fourth, fifth, and sixth defendants
Pty Ltd, the
fourth defendant
registered as a corporation. Each of Mr Engleke, Ms Chitas, and Mr Horan was a
director of Citratel from 19 October 2022 to
3 May 2023, and their respective
companies (
Pty Ltd, a company controlled by Mr Engelke,
Overmasters
Holdings Pty Ltd, a company controlled by Ms Chitas, and
Pty Ltd, a company of which Mr Horan’s wife was the director
and shareholder) each held 40 of the 120 shares in Citratel.
was deregistered on 3 May 2023, which was prior to the commencement of these
proceedings on 7 June 2023, in circumstances
relevant to this action as
described below. The defendants plead that it did not at any time commence
trading. The company was reinstated
by order of this Court and is currently
under external administration. Citratel has taken no part in these
proceedings.
16 January 2023, Mr Horan registered SPN, the
fifth defendant
was its sole director and secretary, and its 120 issued shares were held by
Jeop. SPN commenced trading in February 2023
with Mr Horan and Mr Engelke as
employees. The circumstances of how SPN became registered and how it came to
operate the SPN business
is a subject of some dispute.
sixth defendant
, Telcoinabox Operations Pty Limited, is a supplier of
various telecommunications services. It filed a submitting notice on 19 October
2023. It has taken no part in these proceedings. It was referred to in the
evidence as
. No relief is now sought against TIAB.
supplied services to Pennytel, as a wholesaler. Another entity,
Wholesale Pty Ltd, is an entity related to TIAB and also provided services to
Pennytel as a wholesaler. The services supplied were
TaaS (Telecommunications as
a Service), CPaaS (Communications Platforms as a Service) and UCaaS (Unified
Communications as a Service).
Those services enabled Pennytel to provide the
services it did to its customers. In particular, the TaaS product enabled
Australian consumer brand, telco or ICT provider to sell their own,
fully branded, telecom services through Telcoinabox or Symbio
Wholesale”.
Symbio provided enablement, provisioning and billing of these products and
services to Pennytel via direct access
to the TIAB database, referred to as the
The pleading of confidential information
is no real dispute that Pennytel owned information which was confidential, nor
that Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas had access to most
or all of that information.
There is a dispute as to precisely what confidential information is alleged to
be the subject of these
proceedings.
elements of a claim for equitable breach of confidence were set out by the Full
Optus Networks
Pty Ltd (ACN 008 570 330) v Telstra
Corporation Ltd (ACN 051 775 556)
(2010) 265 ALR 281
[2010] FCAFC 21 (Finn
Sundberg, and Jacobson JJ) at [39] (adopting the reasoning in
Smith Kline
& French Laboratories (Aust) Ltd v Secretary, Department of Community
Services and Health
(1990) 22 FCR 73
(a) the information in question must be identified with specificity;
(b) it must have the necessary quality of confidence;
(c) it must have been received by [the defendants] in circumstances importing
an obligation of confidence, and
(d) there must be an actual or threatened misuse of the information without
[the plaintiff’s] consent.
10 of the ASOC identifies that the information of “a confidential and
valuable nature” was as follows:
the course of its business, Pennytel possessed certain information of a
confidential and valuable nature pertaining to:
(a) Pennytel Products and Pennytel Services;
(b) clients, customers or prospective clients or customers
(Customers)
(c) names and contact details of Customers;
(d) the terms on which Customers acquired Pennytel Services, including the
commencement date and end date of contracts for services
and the price paid;
(e) the terms on which the Symbio Services are provided;
(f) information regarding the affairs of Pennytel and its related entities,
including products and services, finances, customer details,
sales figures,
employee details, pricing methodologies, finances, and similar information
relating to Pennytel’s internal operations,
plans, policies, practices and
transactions;
(g) information regarding the affairs of Customers of Pennytel;
(h) proprietary information, including trade secrets, client lists, know-how,
original works or inventions, designs, trademarks and
trade names, whether
registered or not, technical processes, systems, methods, inventions,
discoveries, improvements, enhancements,
records, reports, documents, papers and
other materials whatsoever and any derivative works thereof, prepared by
Pennytel or another
employee, or by any client of Pennytel;
(Confidential Information).
response, the Amended Defence pleads:
10. To paragraph 10, they state:
(a) the pleading is vague and imprecise in failing to specify the allegedly
confidential information being referred to;
(b) without particulars of the precise forms of confidential information being
referred to, they do not know and cannot admit whether
such information was
confidential as it may have been within the public realm;
(c) without particulars of the precise forms of confidential information being
referred to, they do not know and cannot admit whether
information
regarding the affairs of Customers of Pennytel
’ was confidential
information as it may have been within the public realm;
(d) as to paragraph 10(h), they deny that information concerning
’ will be confidential information, as any such
information will be part of the skills and knowledge able to be freely used
employees of Pennytel; and
(e) they otherwise admit the paragraph.
particulars of the pleading were sought (at least that were in evidence).
Instead, the plaintiff relied on the relevant confidential
information as
identified in its opening submissions as being “customer names and contact
details, the terms on which the customers
acquired services (including start and
end dates of contracts), sales and pricing”.
Relief sought by the plaintiff
Amended Originating Process (
) seeks declarations that each of Mr
Engelke and Ms Chitas used their positions as employees of Pennytel and the
confidential information
obtained during that employment:
(a) in breach of their terms of employment; and
(b) in breach of
Corporations Act
plaintiff alleges that Mr Horan, Citratel, and SPN (and in the alternative Ms
Chitas) were involved in those contraventions. The
plaintiff submitted that it
did not need to establish that SPN or Mr Horan used confidential information
consciously or intentionally;
but it is submitted that Mr Horan knew what was
happening and “was part of it”. This is on the basis of a
Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd v Voller
[2021] HCA 27
). An alternative case is that Mr Engelke’s actions
constituted a breach of his obligations of confidentiality, and that the
defendants were parties to that breach. The plaintiff also seeks to establish
factual elements of its case by relying on inferences
which can, it says, be
drawn from the conduct of the defendants.
plaintiff in paragraph 8 of the AOP seeks to restrain the first to fifth
defendants from various uses of the
Plaintiff’s Records
, which are
defined in paragraph 9 as:
... all records of information whether in hard copy or digital form held by the
plaintiff in respect of its business and includes:
(a) a person, corporation or business who is a present or former customer or
client of the plaintiff
(Customers),
including their name and contact
(b) the terms on which Customers acquire products and services from the
plaintiff, including the commencement date and end date of
contracts for
services and the price paid;
(c) the price and terms on which wholesale services by Symbio Holdings Limited
ACN 118 699 853 are provided to the plaintiff and
its related entities for on
sale to the Customers;
(d) information regarding the affairs of the plaintiff, including products and
services, finances, customer details, sales figures,
employee details, pricing
methodologies, finances, and similar information relating to plaintiff internal
operations, plans, policies,
practices and transactions;
(e) information regarding the affairs of any client of the plaintiff;
(f) proprietary information, including trade secrets, client lists, know-how,
original works or inventions, designs, trademarks and
trade names, whether
registered or not, technical processes, systems, methods, inventions,
discoveries, improvements, enhancements,
records, reports, documents, papers and
other materials whatsoever and any derivative works thereof, prepared by the
plaintiff or
another employee, or by any client of the plaintiff.
13 and 14 of the AOP seek delivery up of the Plaintiff’s Records and
permanent deletion of the Plaintiff’s Records
in electronic form. The
plaintiff relied primarily on a remedy of equitable damages, as quantified by
its expert report from Mr Ngoc
Anh Nguyen, a chartered accountant with fifteen
years of experience in forensic accounting and quantification of damages, and
8, 9, 13 and 14 as set out or summarised above.
Issues raised by the defendants
Amended Defence raises three main themes; that the first and second defendants
did not misuse any confidential information, that
there was no scheme involving
the third and fourth defendants to do so, and that in any event the confidential
information was not
precisely defined. The admissions by the defendants as to
the pleadings as to confidentiality were hedged by paragraph 10 of the
Defence which, as set out above at [
], raised a “carveout” of
some issues and a general complaint about the way in which the ASOC was pleaded.
The plaintiff’s business
outlined above, Pennytel was in the business of selling various services, which
were supplied to it on a wholesale basis by TIAB
and Symbio, to both residential
and business customers.
employees used Octane, as well as Zoho applications (including Customer
Relationship Manager or
, and Desk) to manage the accounts of Pennytel
customers, and each of the first and second defendants had access to these
while employed by Pennytel by using a unique name and password to log
in. Pennytel alleges that the information so able to be accessed
was information
confidential to Pennytel. Subject to those matters in contest in paragraph 10 of
the Amended Defence relating to
the scope of the alleged confidential
information, those facts were admitted by the defendants.
relation to Pennytel’s customers who were previously customers of Focus,
their details were held on a CRM called
which had been used by Focus
while Mr Engelke worked there.
Those details included names, contact
details, some driver licence numbers, IP addresses, log-in details of customers,
and notes concerning
their credit history. It is common ground that most of the
Focus customers stayed with Pennytel after the acquisition of Focus, and
those customers’ details were recorded on ACT!. It is also common ground
that by logging in to ACT! (either initially
by way of unique employee logins,
or later, when only two logins were provided by Pennytel, one in the name of Mr
Engelke and the
other a generic company-wide login), employees, including the
first and second defendants, had access to information which was confidential
is common ground that that information held in ACT! and Zoho is, subject to the
carveouts in paragraph 10 of the Amended Defence,
information which should not
have been disclosed to third parties or competitors.
Issues for Determination
plaintiff alleges that the first, second, and third defendants agreed to take,
and misuse, the information to which the first
and second defendants had access
through their employment with Pennytel.
noted above, the parties were asked to provide a list of agreed issues for
determination, which formed the basis of the closing
submissions. The agreed
list of issues for determination is attached to these reasons, and has informed
this judgment, although these
reasons do not precisely reflect that structure.
burden of proof lies on Pennytel to demonstrate that:
(a) the confidential information was as pleaded and had the necessary quality of
confidence; and
(b) there was a scheme as pleaded; and/or
(c) there was a breach of the employment agreements, or of duties under the
Corporations Act
will deal first with questions of credit, the plaintiff’s claim of
breaches of confidence and a scheme, and any breaches of
Corporations
and then with the issues arising out of the first and second
defendants’ employment. As factual issues arise, I will deal with
more detail.
Observations as to credit
was a profound attack on the credit of each of the first, second, and third
defendants by the plaintiff. Mr Zizic, who gave
evidence for the plaintiff, was
also tested as to the veracity of his evidence. I will deal with these matters
generally in this
section and, where necessary, specifically in relation to any
relevant matters which arise.
will approach credit findings for each of these witnesses with the benefit of
the observations of Kunc J in
Goulston v Bogasi Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWSC 989
ff, where his Honour sets out the way in which proof is facilitated by
oral evidence, citing
Watson v Foxman
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
318-319, and the need for “actual persuasion” of the elements of a
case, taking into account the nature of the cause
of action or defence, the
nature of the subject matter of the proceeding, and the gravity of the matters
alleged (see also
Warner v Hung, in the matter of Bellpac Pty Ltd (Receivers
and Manager appointed) (In liquidation) (No 2)
(2011) 297 ALR 56
[2011] FCA 1123 (Emmett
J) at [48]), which elements are reflected in
Evidence Act
Saravinovska v Saravinovski (No 6)
[2016] NSWSC 964
, Kunc J said
that “evidence is to be preferred which is inherently probable in the
circumstances” and, at [469], “where
a witness has been found to be
lying about one thing, that does not automatically mean they are to be
disbelieved about everything
this matter, the allegations of breach of confidence and breach of contract are
serious, and the need for “actual persuasion”
requires more than
merely the say-so of one or other of the witnesses for each side. I have been
provided with a significant mass
of documentation. As will be seen, some
documents are not available because they were deleted by a defendant (notably Ms
but also Mr Engelke) and I am asked to make significant negative credit
findings on the basis of “deliberate destruction of
documents” (see
Pty Ltd v Energy Australia
[2009] NSWSC 43
). I am also asked to find that explanations given by the first,
second, and third defendants are lies, and that I should infer from
that finding
that they are seeking to cover up the alleged scheme.
have formed the view that none of the witnesses is a completely satisfactory
witness, and will deal with each of them in turn.
Zizic swore a number of affidavits and was cross-examined. Mr Zizic commenced as
Pennytel’s CEO on 18 July 2022, after Mr
Engelke had left. Mr Zizic had
not been involved with the Pennytel group prior to that, and so much of his
historical evidence is
documentary or based on his inquiries, and he was only
able to give direct evidence as to events after 18 July 2022. He gave evidence
both from his personal involvement, particularly in early 2023, and from
documents which, he said, supported the claims made in the
ASOC. As will be
seen, a number of those claims were later retreated from (in particular, and
importantly, that Mr Engelke had accessed
Octane after his employment with
Pennytel had ended, that Mr Engelke had incorporated his company in May 2022,
and that there were
“no legitimate reasons” for Mr Engelke to be
generating reports such as the ACT! report as part of his employment between
resignation and his leaving Pennytel’s employ).
defendants submitted that Mr Zizic’s evidence was undermined by a number
of misstatements and half-truths. For example,
Mr Zizic gave evidence, in
relation to the various customers who were witnesses for the defendants, that
there was no evidence in
Pennytel’s records of poor service or client
unhappiness. However, the Court Book reflects that almost all of the customers
who gave evidence had a number of issues over time and generally their problems
were documented in Zoho. For example, Mr Zizic says
that one customer,
Pty Ltd, were late in paying an invoice and were advised that the
account would be suspended if it were not paid. He said:
Other than that interaction the Zoho tickets do not confirm that there were any
problems experienced by Eco Recyclers with Pennytel
and Eco Recyclers Pty Ltd
made no complaint prior to ceasing the contract for telecommunication services
with Pennytel.
Ward, the contact at Eco Recyclers, had said that she had had an argument with a
Ms Young on 24 August 2022 who “told me
to take my business
elsewhere”. She then telephoned Ms Chitas “and she was able to
resolve my billing issue ... Sam was
instrumental in keeping my business at
Pennytel and was the only reason I stayed as a Pennytel customer”. Ms Ward
later contacted
Mr Engelke directly to do a small cabling job, and in October
2023 “reached out to SPN on the recommendation of Citracom, and
have used SPN for all of EcoGroup’s business telecommunication
services”. The company’s internet services
remain at Pennytel.
Zoho tickets confirm that Eco Recyclers did, indeed, have issues apart from the
payment dispute. In March 2023 it had no internet
and could not make calls,
which was resolved; it was overcharged in late March 2023 for their Spirit
services and given a credit;
and in May 2023 it still had not been allocated an
account manager after Ms Chitas’ departure. On 4 August 2023 it was
air since 1.30” and a number of internal tickets were generated
seeking to resolve the matter quickly. Service was restored
by 6.10pm, but it
was noted that “there is more than likely going to be a complaint from
this customer regarding the downtime”.
18 May 2023 Ms Ward had an email discussion with Ms Dahna Fly, then her account
manager at Pennytel, where Ms Fly said:
Hi Marina I have just spent time with my Manager expressing your concerns and
disappointment in the way you feel that Eco has been
treated by Pennytel. Again
please accept my apologies on behalf of the company that you were spoken to like
that. This is not how
we treat our customers and it will be addressed.
Recyclers ported their number after this incident.
of the other witnesses (to whose affidavits Mr Zizic was replying) had
demonstrable concerns reflected in Pennytel documents.
I do not accept Mr
Zizic’s evidence on his contention that the customers called by the
defendants did not have concerns with
Pennytel’s service to them.
Zizic and Pennytel clearly took a very dim view of Mr Engelke’s and Ms
Chitas’ directorship of Citratel. On 11 January
2023, Mr Marra, a director
and owner of Pennytel, wrote to Symbio noting that Citratel had set up a TIAB
account through Symbio,
and said that:
We believe that Customer databases of Pennytel & well as Spirit Technology
where Nicholas Engelke now works, has now been downloaded.
This will cause our
company significant loses ...
(as written)
the basis of that belief, Mr Marra apparently informed Spirit that Mr Engelke
had been involved in Citratel, which resulted in
Mr Engleke’s dismissal
from Spirit.
took the matter seriously. It instructed lawyers, sought details from Symbio
declined to provide given
confidentiality issues), sought undertakings from the first and second
defendants, and commenced these
proceedings promptly after becoming aware of
Citratel, then SPN and its business. It is not surprising that its case evolved
discovery and expert evidence, but it is clear from the emphatic
submissions that Pennytel’s view of the conduct of the defendants
never wavered. This is evident in the reliance by the plaintiff on the conduct
of Ms Chitas in December 2021, well before the
plaintiff contended that any
scheme was in place. That reliance shows a desire to “hit” the
defendants with any possible
negative inferences that could be found.
Zizic was however generally thoughtful and cautious in his cross-examination,
but his evidence was not entirely satisfactory. When
it was put to him that
certain matters were not tenable, he often did not agree, appearing to stay
“on script” (see,
for example, his responses to cross-examination
during her long service leave, at T.118-20). Given the impression I
have formed of his evidence – which often did not hold
up to the facts, as
noted above in relation to the customer complaints – I accept Mr
Zizic’s evidence when there are
corroborating documents, and where his
evidence is inherently probable in the circumstances. I do not accept his
characterisation
of the conduct of Ms Chitas and Mr Engelke unless it is
corroborated elsewhere.
Nicholas Engelke
Engelke affirmed an affidavit, and was cross-examined. He was not a particularly
impressive witness and tended to rely on statements
of things he “would
have” done instead of particular recollections. For example, there was a
question of whether he deleted
(“wiped”) his hard drive prior to
returning it to Pennytel. In the Amended Defence he said that he had
[his] laptop to [its] original state before returning [it] to
Pennytel” (at paragraph 77). In his affidavit he said that he
it, on a direction from one of two other employees. Expert evidence shows that
he did not take either step, instead, he
deleted files from the laptop but some
files remained in the recycle bin.
robust submission of the plaintiff was that the assertion that he wiped his
laptop was a lie told to cover his tracks, and demonstrative
of his lack of
credit, and that inferences should be drawn from his treatment of the documents
on his Pennytel laptop. For the reasons
set out below, I do not agree. However,
some of his actions (including in relation to the Spirit customer details) are
and do not assist his credit.
Freeman, counsel for the plaintiff, set out in his written closing submissions a
number of lines of cross-examination which he
submitted did not show Mr Engelke
in a good light, including whether he was aware of and could interpret the
“four pillars
report”, whether he knew what the Board considered at
its meetings, his evidence on churn rate, and a throwaway remark about
an executive of Pennytel had left or been fired. It was submitted
This is a witness who put himself forward as being able to interpret documents
and report to those above him and yet in the context
of these proceedings said
that “there must have been” a confidentiality clause. The Court
should have no confidence in
his evidence.
This is ... not the conduct of an honest person.
agree that to some extent Mr Engelke was seeking to present his actions in the
best light in the witness box, and I have to weigh
his evidence against the
inherent probability of events, and the onus on the plaintiff to prove serious
misdeeds, including the formulation
of a concerted scheme. I am assisted more by
the documentation in this case and in some cases the lack of documentation
in mind the submissions of the plaintiff as to how that lack of
documentation should be viewed) in determining the facts of this
case than I am
assisted by Mr Engelke’s somewhat patchy recollections. Where Mr
Engelke’s explanations are inherently
probable I can accept them, such as
his evidence of having a backup of his company laptop on his personal iCloud on
the basis that
“a long time ago [I] lost my entire computer’s
content. So I backed everything up”.
Samantha Chitas
Chitas was hampered in the witness box by some significant family losses around
the time her employment was terminated, and had
some emotional moments giving
evidence as a consequence. She often noted that she could not recall matters,
and her input into SPN
management was, from her account, minimal. She, like Mr
Engelke, appeared to ascribe motives or explanations to events which were
supported by the evidence. From paragraph [
] below, I deal with a conflict in
the evidence about her intentions of leaving Pennytel in September or October
2023, and determine
that matter against her.
too had a sustained attack on her credit in terms such as the
Ms Chitas twice emailed clearly confidential customer lists to her sister and
her personal email account. This speaks against her
credit. No reasonable
explanation as to why they were sent or what use was made of them has been
forthcoming. When Ms Chitas was
confronted with her behaviour she deliberately
erased her hard disk in the face of an express warning not to do so and the
presumption that arises that the contents of her drive would have been
against her. That was not the behaviour of an honest person.
(references omitted)
her evidence as to her actions from August 2022 when Citratel was set up, until
July 2023 when she joined SPN, is crucial
to the understanding of the relevant
events. However, she was corroborated to some extent on important points by her
evidence, and her explanations as to her sending or receiving the
documents relied on by the plaintiff as evidence of a scheme were
unreasonable.
as with other witnesses, her evidence is not of as much assistance to me as is
the surrounding documentation and inferences
to be drawn from her conduct and
the objective circumstances.
Peter Horan
Horan was somewhat testy in the witness box and sought on occasion to fend off
questions with his own questions. However, I found
him relatively impressive as
a witness and I am able to accept his evidence generally, in particular that he
had a conversation in
mid-August 2022 with Ms Chitas and Mr Engelke about
setting up a business, and then took steps with Mr Engelke to set that up.
there is an issue about a date, on which I take the view that Mr Horan
was mistaken; I do not take from that the significant credit
implications which
are urged upon me by the plaintiff, or make negative findings in relation to
what was alleged to be his questionable
The pleaded scheme between the first, second, and third
plaintiff alleges that there was an agreement between Mr Engelke, Ms Chitas, and
Mr Horan entered into “by no later than
13 September 2022, alternatively,
19 October 2022” to set up a new business through a company, to undertake
the same services
as Pennytel, and to do so using the
Confidential
Information
as defined in the ASOC.
pleaded misuse of the Confidential Information is set out in paragraph 75 of the
ASOC as follows:
In the premises of paragraphs 43-74 above, and by no later than 13 September
2022, alternatively, 19 October 2022, Engelke, Chitas
and Horan entered into an
agreement or understanding of or to the effect that:
(a) they would set up a new business through a company of which they, or a
company which they controlled, would be equal shareholders;
(b) the new business would sell data and internet plans of NBN and enterprise
internet fibre to residential and business customers
being the same or
substantially the same services marketed and sold by Pennytel and using the
Symbio Services;
(c) the new business would use the Confidential Information taken by Engelke and
Chitas referred to at paragraphs 43,
49, 51, 55, 58, 60 and/or
72 above by contacting Customers of Pennytel who were at or the near the end of
their contracts with Pennytel
and offer them contracts with the new business at
prices below that offered by Pennytel or on terms competitive with Pennytel;
Particulars
Further particulars will be provided after discovery.
further particulars to paragraph 75 were given.
43-74, referred to in paragraph 75 of the ASOC, are dealt with in the section
“Actions by the defendants relied upon
by the plaintiff” which are
set out in these reasons commencing at paragraph [
alleges that, in order to hide their activities, each of Mr Engelke and Ms
Chitas, on leaving Pennytel, deleted the contents
of their laptops and phones,
including data files and folders and, in Ms Chitas’ case, resetting the
operating system by way
of a system reset.
plaintiff’s case relied on the fact that a portion of SPN’s business
comprised “certain of Pennytel’s
customers that were predominantly
formerly Focus customers”. Those customers were 83 corporate or
“higher yield”
customers as analysed by Mr Nguyen, the
plaintiff’s expert. The plaintiff alleges that each of the first to third
knew that they could only sign up customers of Pennytel by reason of
the first and second defendants’ “taking and use
of the Confidential
Information”. The list of customers relied on by Pennytel are contained in
Attachments “A”
and “B” to the plaintiff’s closing
submissions.
at March 2022, Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas each had access to the ACT! CRM and the
Zoho CRM as part of their employment. Each of them
had, as part of their email
signature, “New name, same great team. Focus Communications is now a part
of the Pennytel family”.
Despite the chirpiness of that email signature,
Mr Engelke gave evidence that he regarded the culture at Pennytel as
and said it focused on profit rather than customers. Mr
Engelke gave notice in April 2022 and was instructed to hand over to Jenny
Yehson, who was taking over his role. Part of that handover was giving Ms Yehson
his Octane login credentials, as her credentials
were not then at a sufficient
level to get the reports required for the role. Mr Engelke said he gave Ms
Yehson his login credentials
in early May 2022, as part of showing her the end
of month reporting duties which included Octane reports.
plaintiff alleges that in around March 2022, Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas took steps
which were the commencement of the pleaded scheme,
and that by no later than
September or October 2022 there was an agreement or understanding as pleaded in
paragraph 75 of the ASOC
Engelke said that he started exploring the idea of a new business in July 2022
and spoke to Mr Horan about this in August 2022.
Mr Horan approached Ms Chitas
around then. They denied that the new business idea was part of a scheme which
relied on misusing Pennytel’s
confidential information. The Amended
Defence refers to this allegation as “scurrilous”.
defendants contended that the steps taken prior to Ms Chitas leaving Pennytel
(for example, making inquiries and later signing
a Master Wholesale Agreement
with TIAB, registering Citratel, registering corporate vehicles as shareholders
for Citratel and later
SPN, and registering SPN) were undertaken as
“legitimate preparatory steps for the prospective operation of a business
later date”. The plaintiff however characterises these steps as
breaches of the first and second defendants’ employment
agreements, of the
implied duty of good faith, and (as to Ms Chitas) of the restraints imposed on
Actions by the defendants relied upon by the
plaintiff relied on a number of acts which are alleged to make up the basis of
the scheme, (mainly but not entirely) as pleaded
in the ASOC. Most of the acts
pleaded are admitted by the defendants, but the Amended Defence pleads that they
were not unlawful
acts, did not make use of confidential information, or were
legitimate preparatory steps taken to set up a business. This section
the actions asserted by Pennytel, by pleadings or by way of evidence, as making
up the scheme.
The email forwarded to Ms Chitas’ sister
9 December 2021, Ms Chitas forwarded an email she had sent to “Lee”
at Connexus Group (one of the businesses purchased
by Pennytel) setting out a
list of Pennytel customers with Octane accounts, which email attached a document
titled MarginSummary_202111207-123908^M1100.xlsx
Margin Summary
spreadsheet
) to her sister, Ms Katie North, who worked at Telstra. While
this action attracted a deal of attention during the hearing, it is
not pleaded
as one of the breaches of confidence alleged by the plaintiff. It was referred
to in Mr Zizic’s affidavit of 12
March 2024 as being one of “some
additional emails by which confidential information of Pennytel was provided to
and Ms Chitas” and Mr Zizic noted that Telstra was “a
competitor of Pennytel”. Ms Chitas and Ms North (who gave
evidence under
her married name Cramp) each denied that this email had a sinister character. Ms
Chitas said that she had forwarded
the email to her sister for some professional
advice on how to handle the situation arising in the email, and included the
inadvertently. Ms North said that she did not recall seeing the
email, or opening the attachment.
defendants point to the fact that this email or its attachment is not pleaded as
part of the alleged scheme, and notes that the
plaintiff does not suggest it was
used. Pennytel relied on this email as a breach of the Confidential Information
provisions of Ms
Chitas’ employment agreement rather than as an element of
the pleaded scheme.
The customer report
31 March 2022, Mr Engelke emailed Ms Chitas at her Pennytel email address an
Excel spreadsheet containing details of all Pennytel’s
customers (
customer report
). The email said:
I managed to merge 2 reports to show all customers in the old Focus partition
with currently active services, there are some that
didn’t match up so
might still need to manually look them up but hopefully this will save some
customer report is the first element pleaded in the section of the ASOC entitled
Scheme between Engelke, Chitas and Horan to Set Up a Competing Business
Each of the first and second defendants says that this document well preceded
their contemplation of establishing a new business.
customer report contained all current Pennytel customer names, contact details,
service type, and plan name of the service. Pennytel
alleges that it was not
part of Mr Engelke’s duties to create or send the customer report to Ms
Chitas, other than for purposes
of his employment, and points to the timing of
the report creation, some six weeks prior to Mr Engelke leaving Pennytel.
likewise alleges that it was not a legitimate part of Ms Chitas’
role to access that report or use it other than for purposes
of her employment.
Mr Zizic noted that the customer report was collated by Mr Engelke using his
access to Octane and that it provided
“a complete view” of customer
details. It covered, he said, all customers, not just Ms Chitas’
customers, and he
could see no legitimate reason why Ms Chitas would need it, or
why Mr Engelke would need to create it.
Engelke said in his affidavit that he had sent the customer report to Ms Chitas
so that she could review those customers and if
necessary assign them to a new
Pennytel sales account manager. Ms Chitas gave a similar explanation, saying
that it was a legitimate
part of her duties to ensure that Focus customers were
assigned new sales account managers, and to request assistance from Mr Engelke
to do so. They submitted that they were “simply doing their job(s)”,
and the argument that the timing of the creation
of the customer report was
suspicious should not be accepted. The defendants contended that “Mr
Engelke can hardly be criticised
for doing his job up until his last
cross-examination, Mr Zizic was taken to some of the Zoho tickets where the
account manager allocation process was being undertaken
by Ms Fly, Mr Reid, and
Ms Stevens (albeit in relation to a list created, possibly by Ms Fly, in
September 2023). Mr Zizic was unwilling
to admit that Ms Chitas may have
undertaken the same exercise, but agreed that this was a task that was
undertaken by other employees
within Pennytel.
22 April 2022, Ms Chitas forwarded the customer report from her work email
account to her personal email account. Again, this was
not pleaded, but is dealt
with in Mr Zizic’s second affidavit.
defendants point to Ms Chitas’ explanation that she forwarded the report
to her personal hotmail account because:
I just thought that I would have somewhere where I knew that it would be if I
needed it, because there have been many occasions when
I’ve asked for
reports and then they’ve gone into the ether that is my inbox with
thousands of emails and I can’t
Chitas was cross-examined on this, and it was suggested to her that she and Mr
Engelke had already discussed setting up a new business
track”. She denied this. No such conversations are pleaded, and the ASOC
pleads that the scheme was in existence
“no later than 13 September 2022,
alternatively, 19 October 2022”, without specifying a date on which the
scheme commenced.
further relied on this email as a breach of the Confidential Information
provisions of each of Mr Engelke’s and Ms
Chitas’ employment
ACT! screenshot and report
26 April 2022, Mr Engelke provided Ms Chitas with a screenshot of some
information regarding a Pennytel customer. Mr Engelke forwarded
that screenshot
to his personal account. This was another action relied on which was not pleaded
as part of the scheme, but was raised
by Mr Zizic in his second affidavit. Mr
Engelke’s explanation for this was that he was about to leave Pennytel,
of the view that he could action the client’s needs from
Spirit, in order to best serve the interests of Pennytel and the customer.
was cross-examined about this, and in particular whether Ms Chitas could have
provided those details once he started at Spirit.
No particularly compelling
explanation was provided, but it is noted that the customer remains with
around April 2022, Mr Engelke generated a report from ACT! (
ACT! report
which contained information concerning customers, including their names, contact
details, IP addresses, login details for remote
access to their systems, some
driver licence numbers, and credit history. Pennytel alleges, and the defendants
do not agree, that
it was not a legitimate part of Mr Engelke’s role to
create such a report. The report was downloaded onto his laptop on 27
2022. Mr Zizic confirmed in his second affidavit that the ACT! report contained
“a lot of very sensitive information
... and key relationship
Zizic said that he could not think of a legitimate business reason for Mr
Engelke to download the report, given that he had already
resigned, and the
information was archival.
says that ACT! was used for only historic or archival information after around 3
November 2021, and that ongoing customer
information, including all new customer
information, was then held on the Zoho platforms. However, Mr Engelke said that
ACT! continued
to be used after the Zoho platform came into use, and when Mr
Engelke left Pennytel, only part of the information held in ACT! had
migrated to Zoho. Mr Brant, the former Operations Manager and then Head of
Technology and Operations for Pennytel, said that
he worked with Mr Engelke on
the migration from ACT! to Zoho until it was complete in around January 2022,
and that access to ACT!
was cut off in May 2022, while Mr Engelke claimed that
the ACT! to Zoho move was still being worked on in around April 2022. Mr Engelke
submitted that accessing ACT! was part of his job. In support of this
submission, he exhibited a photograph of his cat taken during
a work-from-home
day on 5 May 2022, the cat being the ostensible reason he was taking a photo
that day. In the background of the
photo was his computer which featured an
email from a customer from NSW, and the ACT! database open in order to obtain a
a technician based in NSW (information he says was not available in
Zoho). Mr Brant said that if reports needed to be manipulated
they would need to
be downloaded from ACT! rather than from Zoho as that function was not available
in Zoho. Mr Brant was not cross-examined.
relied on Mr Engelke downloading the ACT! Report as giving rise to an inference
that he was going to use its confidential
information in breach of the
Confidential Information provisions of his employment agreement. It further
relied on the fact that
the ACT! report would have been part of the upload to Mr
Engelke’s iCloud, as detailed in the next section.
The iCloud Drive
ASOC pleads that between 22 April 2022 and 6 May 2022 Mr Engelke created an
iCloud folder on his laptop entitled “Pennytel
and Focus (iCloud
Drive)”, and backed up documents to that drive. Mr Engelke said the
purpose of the folders “Pennytel”
and “Focus” was to
maintain personal records relating to his employment such as payslips, leave
applications, correspondence
relating to his role, and superannuation documents.
He tendered a list of the current contents of the folder which indeed does
that the folder now contains such documents. He said he did not create
an iCloud backup in April 2022, but had had one for some time,
and the pleading
relates only to the creation and backup of these particular folders. He denied
that he backed up customer details
of Pennytel and Focus customers for use in a
competing business.
Engelke denied that an automatic backup is “straight out theft” as
alleged by the plaintiff, and instead said that
it was a prudent cautionary
process. He said that he deleted the files which were not relevant to his
personal details as maintained
in the Pennytel and Focus folders, and that once
deleted, the backup process would have deleted them from the cloud. He was
cross-examined
on this point, which is dealt with further below.
defendants point out that Mr Engelke resigned on 22 April 2022, and submitted
that creating the folder on that day is not suspicious,
but an understandable
step given that he was leaving Pennytel and wished to keep his personal
information when he did. He was not,
it was pointed out, moving to a competitor,
but to Spirit, which was a business friendly to Pennytel.
relied on the creation of iCloud folders for Pennytel and Focus documents as a
breach of the Confidential Information provisions
of Mr Engelke’s
employment agreement, and of the implied duty of good faith and
Octane access on 2 and 3 May 2022
2 May 2022, Mr Engelke accessed Octane and downloaded a Customer Detail Report
which included contact, and contract, details for
all Pennytel customers on that
platform, and a Detailed ConnectYou Hosted
Voice Services Report
disclosed service numbers, provisioned dates, and plan names for all Pennytel
customers on that platform. Mr Zizic noted that
the Customer Detail Report
disclosed contact details for every customer on the Pennytel Corporate partition
12.23pm on 3 May 2022, Mr Engelke accessed Octane and downloaded a report
disclosing details of disconnected customers. Mr Engelke’s
explanation for
the 2 and 3 May 2022 downloads were that they were part of his handover to Ms
Yehson, his successor in his role.
Neither party called Ms Yehson, although Mr
Zizic was asked about this in his cross-examination and said that while he was
there was a handover to Ms Yehson, he understood she had “no
recollection of that time”. The defendants contended that
if there were
some dispute about the contents of the handover process, the plaintiff should
have called Ms Yehson.
defendants relied on Mr Engelke’s role at Pennytel requiring him to
download the kinds of report pleaded; for example, he
regularly accessed the
Voice Services Report, which was part of the 2 May 2022 download, accessing it
on five occasions in the last
three months of 2021.
activities are part of the pleaded case relating to the alleged scheme. Pennytel
relied on this activity as a breach of the
Confidential Information provisions
of Mr Engelke’s employment agreement.
The Focus on Furniture email
3 May 2022, Mr Engelke contacted a customer of Pennytel, Focus on Furniture, by
emailing “Pat and Chris” at a Focus
on Furniture email address and
copying the email to Ms Chitas, noting that he was leaving Pennytel, he was
remaining in the telco
industry “and will always have time for you
both”, and confirming that they had his mobile phone number, “you
welcome to contact me if you ever need me.” Mr Zizic noted that Focus
on Furniture ported their services away from Pennytel
to SPN on 30 March
email was pleaded in the ASOC but does not appear to have been relied upon by
the time of closing submissions.
Mr Engelke’s employment finishes with Pennytel
Engelke left Pennytel on 6 May 2022. He left to work with Spirit, which as noted
above was an installation company that supplied
services to Pennytel. He says he
spent part of his last day deleting Pennytel files from the iCloud storage
account. This is confirmed
by Mr Le, the IT expert called by the plaintiff, who
recorded a “bulk deletion” of files from Mr Engelke’s Pennytel
laptop on 5 May 2022 at around 1.40pm.
Spirit, Mr Engelke was the account manager for Pennytel.
Octane downloads on 7 and 25 May 2022
plaintiff pleads that on 7 May 2022, at 7.37 am, the Octane platform was
accessed under Mr Engelke’s login details, and
a Customer Product Report
was downloaded. The defendants deny that this was done by Mr Engelke, and the
Amended Defence pleads that
other employees had access to his login details. Mr
Zizic says that this report disclosed the prices charged to all customers within
the Pennytel Corporate partition of Octane for all the services they had with
Pennytel. Similarly, it is pleaded that a login on
25 May 2022 at 1.47pm,
downloading a Margin Summary Report which recorded the Pennytel billing and the
margin made by Pennytel on
each customer’s account, was an access by Mr
Engelke. Each of these was denied. The plaintiff originally relied on each of
these matters as evidence of the taking of confidential information by Mr
material subpoenaed from VPN Solutions (the subject of the decision
Australia Pty Limited v Engelke, in the matter of Pennytel Australia
Pty Limited (Objection to Subpoena)
[2024] FCA 1441)
established that Mr Engelke was not the person who accessed Octane on 7 May 2022
or 25 May 2022, and these allegations are no longer
relied upon in the
plaintiff’s closing submissions.
The Mesh customer email
23 May 2022, Ms Chitas emailed Mr Engelke, who was then working at Spirit, a
list of Mesh customers of Spirit (
the Mesh customer email
) which included
customer names, contact details, service provided, and contract information.
(The Mesh customer email is incorrectly
pleaded in paragraph 61 of the ASOC as
being sent by Mr Engelke to Ms Chitas). Mesh was a company that had recently
been acquired
by Pennytel. The Mesh customer email attaches the spreadsheet of
“Mesh Spirit” customers and reads “Here you go
”. The plaintiff noted that there was no explanation of why the list was
sent, and relied on Mr Engelke’s cross-examination
to the effect that he
could have looked up that information himself in the Spirit databases, and he
did not need all the information
on the list.
Chitas’ explanation was that she sent the Mesh customer email “to
see what Spirit could do for us”, and that
the point was for those
customers to be contracted with Pennytel rather than Mesh.
Engelke says that this was in the course of his duties as a manager at Spirit.
He said that he was sent the same list at around
the same time by two other
Pennytel employees, in order for those customers to be properly managed by
Pennytel and Spirit. Mr Engelke
said he did not keep that list, because it was
on his Spirit computer and would have been returned. Mr Engelke agreed that it
a confidential document of Pennytel, but had been properly sent to him by Ms
Chitas (and other Pennytel employees), and that he had
not placed it in his
iCloud drive.
relied on this as an “example of Mr Engelke’s disregard for
confidentiality” and characterised Ms Chitas’
reason for sending it
as “ridiculous”. The defendants counter this by claiming it is an
example of the two defendants
“doing their jobs for their respective
employers”.
Additionally,
the defendants submitted – on the basis of Ms Chitas’ evidence
– that none of the customers on the
list have moved to SPN. It does not
appear from the closing submissions that the Mesh customer email is relied upon
other than the
submission that “they were customers to whom SPN could have
marketed their services”.
The discussions with Ms McCann of Symbio and TIAB
applications
late July 2022, Mr Engelke and Ms McCann of Symbio had discussions, orally and
by email, about Mr Engelke setting up a new company
to enter into a Master
Wholesale Agreement with TIAB. The Amended Defence categorises this as being not
unlawful, and in the course
of legitimate preparation for a new business.
plaintiff relied on the documents at Tab 87 of the Court Book, which is an email
thread commencing with Mr Engelke sending a request
to Ms McCann on 27 July 2022
for “the info you have” from his personal email, rather than his
work email address (which
would have been a Spirit email at that time). Ms
McCann asked him to sign an NDA (non-disclosure agreement) which Mr Engelke
to sign in his personal name, as “I don’t have a company name
registered just yet!”. On 12 August 2022 he emailed
Things are starting to progress a bit here, I have a business partner lined up
and we are making progress in getting set up!
When you get a chance could you send over the price book, I’ve been
working off the Pennytel Corporate prices but want to make
sure I’m using
the most recent figures.
I’m hoping to have a company registered and signed up with you guys by the
end of October, I have a couple of weeks leave coming
up which will delay us a
McCann sent prices later that day, noting that it was “probably a lot
higher than Pennytel”, to which Mr Engelke said
the Pennytel prices were
“depending on volume?”.
Engelke said that he knew the prices really well, but did not have the TIAB
price book which is where the “Pennytel corporate
prices” would be
found. He said that he kept his response about Pennytel’s prices
“purposely vague, so she would
give [him] the best pricing”.
23 August 2022, Mr Engelke noted that he was “still working out the finer
details of the company”, and in November
he returned the forms noting that
“we haven’t started trading yet”. In January 2023 Mr Engelke
asking “what the next steps are and when I’ll be
able to start setting up rate plans etc?”. Ms McCann replied,
has been a bit of a delay with the holiday period/office closure but let me
chase this up for you and get an update”.
plaintiff relied on this exchange as part of the factual basis of the scheme,
along with Citratel’s TIAB sub-wholesaler
form dated 14 November 2022
(signed by Mr Engelke) and the novation of that form to SPN dated 20 January
2023 (signed by Mr Horan).
It contended that the email and the applications were
“only consistent” with the scheme, and that they establish Mr
“dishonest dealing with Pennytel’s confidential
information”. It notes that the TIAB wholesale prices were downloaded,
including the April 22 version 1.2 (being the wholesale prices charged by
Pennytel) on Mr Engelke’s Pennytel laptop. However,
it appears from Mr
Le’s report that this TIAB price book was deleted from the laptop on 5 May
2022. Deletion from the laptop
folder would have resulted in deletion from the
iCloud folder the next time the folder was synced.
defendants submitted that there is no use of any confidential information in the
emails or the TIAB applications, and refer to
Mr Engelke’s extensive
experience within the telecommunications field. They characterise this as
legitimate business planning,
and not a misuse of confidential
information.
The “little bit naughty” email exchange
28 July 2022, at 5.26pm, Mr Engelke sent an email to Ms Chitas which recorded
contract details of two Spirit customers. That email
said, in part:
So it turns out I am able to see the pricing on the PDF bill, which is a little
bit naughty, but I’ve attached it here anyway
Ms Chitas replied at 5.33pm:
It is a bit naughty but it is awsesome
(as written)
Zizic characterised this email exchange as “unethical”. The closing
submissions make the point that Mr Engelke and
Ms Chitas were prepared to show
disrespect for the client in unmasking the pricing.
plaintiff alleged that Ms Chitas was “not authorised” to receive
those customer details. It is alleged in the Amended
Defence that the email was
sent at Ms Chitas’ request for pricing in the course of Mr Engelke’s
employment at Spirit,
and of Ms Chitas’ at Pennytel. The
“naughty” comments were in relation to being able to see what the
customer had
redacted, and the defendants say that the information revealed was
not confidential.
email is pleaded as part of the scheme, and also as evidence of Mr Engelke
discussing pricing and customers with Ms Chitas, and
of Mr Engelke’s
“disregard for confidentiality”.
defendants take issue with whether this had been a breach of Pennytel’s
confidence, given that Mr Engelke was then employed
by Spirit, and point out
that Mr Zizic believed that the relevant client remained with Pennytel. The
defendants characterised Mr
Zizic’s concern about this email and the
ethical issues surrounding it as being “mock outrage”. Mr
email noted that “looks like they are paying a fortune for
their EE services, hopefully they are out of contract and you can
save them a
lot!” and the defendants submitted that this demonstrated that, far from
being part of the pleaded scheme, it was
part of their work for their
customer in the “little bit naughty” email is not one of the
customers which ported to SPN.
Spirit customer details
1 August 2022, a Spirit employee sent an email to all Spirit staff attaching a
list of clients who would no longer be serviced
by Spirit as of 31 August 2022,
as Spirit was “focusing on higher yield accounts and those with strong
potential growth prospects”.
On 8 August 2022:
(a) Mr Engelke forwarded this list to his private email address; and then
(b) forwarded that email to Mr Horan and cc’d Ms Chitas.
email from Mr Engelke read:
See below list, there’s no contact details with it but most of these were
managed IT customers that spirit are no longer supporting.
plaintiff relied heavily on the forwarding of the Spirit email to Mr
Engelke’s personal address and what it says is the
weakness of his
explanation (that he had Mr Horan’s email on his iCloud account). The
plaintiff points to Mr Engelke having
Mr Horan’s email address since his
time at Focus (as demonstrated by an email to Mr Horan cc’d to Ms Chitas
on an unrelated
topic), and contended that sending the list to his personal
email address was indicative of a consciousness of guilt. The plaintiff
relied on the fact that the email was sent about one week after he had first
Amended Defence alleged that this was for the benefit of Pennytel, and was sent
to Ms Chitas at Pennytel and Mr Horan at Citracom
to assist Pennytel in looking
after the interest of its customers.
evidence discloses that Mr Horan used the Spirit list to Google the names of the
customers on it, and could not have done so without
the list having been sent to
him. He was robustly cross-examined about the business ethics of this practice,
particularly in the
light of the persons on the list not having given consent to
their details being provided to him. Mr Horan said he obtained two clients
Citratel from that list, and neither of them became an SPN client. There is no
allegation that any of them did in fact become
clients of SPN.
Mr Horan approaches Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas
Horan says that he first approached each of Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas in August
2022, and had his first meeting with them on 13
August 2022. Mr Horan said he
had discussions with Mr Engelke before “Ms Chitas came in”. The
email from Mr Engelke to
Ms McCann on 12 August 2022 corroborates this (see [
13 September 2022, Ms Chitas’ sister, Ms North, sent an email to a law
firm seeking advice as to a family trust for Ms Chitas.
13 September 2022 is the
earlier date by which the plaintiff says that the scheme had been entered into.
The Amended Defence invoked
client legal privilege in relation to this email,
but no ongoing objection was apparently maintained, and in any event it was
that seeking to set up an entity such as a family trust was a legitimate
step in preparation for a new business.
Chitas said that she had no firm plans to leave Pennytel around the time this
email was sent, and had not decided to leave Pennytel
by the time Citratel had
started up. However, she noted that she was at a “crossroads” in her
life by 13 September 2022,
and had become less satisfied with her work at
The first, second and third defendants establish
21 September 2022, Ms Chitas had a conversation with Mr Kucenko of PBX Installs,
who provided her with their price list and capability
statement. Ms Chitas
replied the next day saying “Will pass on your details to our sales guys
however also have a few IT companies
that would be interested and a friend who
is starting a business that will be very interested.” Ms Chitas agreed in
cross-examination
that this was a reference to Mr Engelke.
plaintiff alleged that on 5 May 2022, Mr Engelke registered NMWC. The defendants
deny this and say it was registered on 5 October
2022, a position reflected by
the ASIC records.
Chitas’ company, Overmasters, was registered on 11 October 2022 and
Citratel was registered on 19 October 2022. The first
meeting of the Citratel
Board of Directors (comprised of Mr Horan) was held on 20 October 2022. Mr Zizic
says about Citratel’s
registration and the request by Ms Chitas’
sister regarding the proposed family trust:
Given what I now know about this trust and its corporate trustee, it is clear to
me that at this time Ms Chitas was setting up her
interest in the entity known
as Citratel Pty Ltd, which then went on to establish a telecommunications
service provider account with
Symbio Holdings.
plaintiff alleged that Citratel commenced trading after 19 October 2022, selling
data and internet plans of NBN and enterprise
internet fibre to residential and
business customers, using “the same or substantially the same services
marketed and sold
by Pennytel and by using Symbio Services”. It is pleaded
that Citratel was undertaking canvassing of customers whose contracts
Pennytel were expired or nearly expired, and that information had been sourced
from the Confidential Information, as defined
in the ASOC. The defence to this
allegation is that Citratel did not commence trading, in October 2022 or at any
other time, and
its incorporation was “no more than a legitimate
preparatory step for the prospective operation of a business at a later date
there was nothing unlawful about doing so”. There is no evidence that
Citratel ever traded, although various steps were
indeed taken to set it up as a
trading entity. Equally there is no evidence that Citratel was canvassing
Pennytel customers.
14 November 2022, Mr Engelke signed a TIAB sub-wholesaler application, on behalf
of Citratel. In that application it was noted
that Citratel was owned by Mr
Horan and Mr Engelke, and that it had an existing base of customers (which the
defendants say was a
reference to Mr Horan’s company Citracom, rather than
to Pennytel customers), and that the customers of Citracom were likely
customers of Citratel when that business was established. On or around 3
December 2022, the Master Wholesaler Agreement
was signed by Mr Engelke as a
director of Citratel for TIAB to provide wholesale services to Citratel.
30 December 2022, Ms Chitas took long service leave from Pennytel, and planned
to return to work on 20 February 2023. She accessed
Zoho and other applications
during her leave, which applications recorded customer data. It is alleged that
this was not part of
her duties and she was not authorised to do so “for
the purposes of obtaining Customer details to use in a competing
In response, Ms Chitas says that her accessing the applications
was in the course of undertaking her Pennytel work, when she was
Pennytel employees or customers directly.
Pennytel becomes aware of Citratel
11 January 2023, Mr Zizic became aware of the incorporation of Citratel, having
been informed by Mr Marra. Mr Zizic became
so aware from an email from Mr Marra
to Symbio executives, in which Mr Marra asked them to cancel Ms Chitas’
access to the
Pennytel partition in Octane. Symbio did so, and provided access
logs to Octane. Those access logs showed:
(a) access by Ms Chitas on 9 January 2023 while she was on long service leave.
Mr Zizic’s evidence records by way of those
logs that she accessed the
following applications:
(iii) Creator;
(iv) Analytics; and
Each of these applications is customers specific.
(b) access by Mr Engelke on 2, 3, and 7 May 2022 (as set out above).
12 January 2023, Ms Chitas was sent a letter by Pennytel’s lawyers asking
her to explain the purpose of her involvement with
Citratel and advising that
her remote access to Pennytel was suspended. She responded through lawyers,
saying that Citratel had not
traded, and that it had not entered to any
agreements. Her lawyers also asserted that Ms Chitas had “not approached
nor referred
any Pennytel customers to Citratel”.
16 January 2023, Ms Fly wrote to one of Ms Chitas’ clients to say that
“Sam is no longer at Pennytel”. The client
“I’m sorry to hear Sam is no longer with Pennytel, such a wonderful
account manager”. The client then
forwarded the email thread to Ms Chitas
who, it seems, told the client she had not been dismissed.
16 January 2023, Mr Marra wrote to Mr Krslovic and Mr Zizic to say
Just got a call from Spirit. Nick was escorted off premises by security on
Friday night.
17 January 2023, Pennytel’s solicitor wrote once more to Ms Chitas’
solicitors to reiterate the questions as to why
Ms Chitas had become a director
of Citratel, and to ask “why was your client in contact with customers, Mr
Engelke and Mr Horan
while on long service leave, when she is not
working”. It directed her to show cause why “her employment should
terminated summarily for serious and wilful misconduct.” On 19
January 2023, Pennytel’s solicitors sent a further letter
which indicated
that Pennytel regarded the incident with the client outlined above as breaching
a direction “not to contact
employees of our client as directed in our
letter of 12 January 2023”.
pause here to note that Ms Chitas’ out of office email read as
I am currently on extended leave however will have intermittent access to my
email as of the 9/01. If you have any urgent system
or network issues, please
call support on [
1300 number and email for Pennytel
For anything else, I will respond within 48 hours
19 January 2023, Ms Chitas’ lawyers replied reiterating that she had not
approached or referred any Pennytel customers to
Citratel. Some further
correspondence in the same vein ensued.
Chitas resigned from Pennytel on Sunday 22 January 2022 by letter from her
lawyer. The following day, Pennytel’s lawyers
accepted her
resignation,
and directed Ms Chitas:
to immediately return to Pennytel all of its property including the laptop,
mobile phone and Yealink desk phone and all company documents,
including but not
limited to documents containing confidential information as that term is defined
in her Employment Agreement (
Confidential Information
23 January 2022 letter from Pennytel’s lawyers reminded Ms Chitas of her
obligations under the Employment Agreement dated
23 July 2021 as to
post-employment restraints and confidentiality obligations. In relation to
confidentiality, the lawyers for Pennytel
sought an undertaking on 12 January
2023 (which was refused by Ms Chitas’ lawyers):
In relation to Confidential Information Ms Chitas must:
(a) not access, use, or disclose any of the Confidential Information in her
possession (including by making any further copies of
any Confidential
Information); and
(b) not delete, until advised by Pennytel, any Confidential Information from any
device, physical storage medium, or cloud-based
storage service in or on which
the Confidential Information is presently held. In the event that there is any
deletion of any Confidential
Information by her, Pennytel reserves the right to
rely upon that deletion in support an inference that she intends, unless
by an order of the Court, to further infringe Pennytel’s rights
in relation to the Confidential Information.
letter went on to threaten court proceedings were Ms Chitas to refuse to provide
an undertaking or the confidential material requested
in the letter. Annexure B
sought an undertaking that:
have returned all hard copies of all Confidential Information (as that term is
defined in the Employment Agreement) (
Confidential Information
possession and control to Pennytel.
have permanently destroyed (such that it cannot be retrieved or reconstructed)
all electronic copies of all Confidential Information
in my possession or
control after I advised Pennytel of what those documents are and been directed
to destroy them.
have not directly or indirectly sent, disclosed or given to any third party the
Confidential Information or copies or details of
any other Confidential
Information.
Ms Chitas’ lawyers’ reply to this letter, Pennytel’s property
was noted as being able to be collected or delivered.
It said that she had not
misled Pennytel (as alleged), and that she was aware of her post-employment
obligations whilst not making
admissions as to their enforceability, and would
not be providing the requested declarations.
24 January 2023, at the time that Pennytel was corresponding with Ms Chitas
wrote to Mr Engelke,
noting his role as a director of Citratel. That letter cited the 2, 3, and 7 May
downloads from Octane, and
the list of Mesh customers sent to him on 23 May
2022. It reminded him of his obligations of confidentiality and sought, as it
with Ms Chitas, an undertaking and a statutory declaration as to his use or
otherwise of Pennytel confidential information. Mr Engelke
did not reply.
letter was sent on 27 January 2023 to the directors of Citratel and their
lawyers, putting Citratel on notice of Ms Chitas’
post-employment
obligations being those under the employment contract, and each of Ms
Chitas’ and Mr Engelke’s confidentiality
obligations and statutory
obligations under the
Corporations Act
. Citratel resolved that it be
wound up voluntarily on 30 January 2023.
Mr Horan incorporates SPN
Horan arranged for the registration of SPN on 16 January 2023, the day after Mr
Engelke was dismissed. He set up a website spnco.com.au,
and executed a novation
agreement of the TIAB wholesaler agreements with Citratel to SPN. The novation
application described the
intent of the new business:
The brand will be working closely with our sister company that looks after IT
service for an existing customer base of small and
medium businesses.
and for the new company’s “value proposition”:
Our target market love us for our excellent customer support and often complain
of difficulties in getting any support from their
current providers, this will
be our differentiator in the market and the main reason for customers to come on
board with us.
Mr Horan said in cross-examination that “their current providers”
encompassed a reference to Telstra and Optus, not just
began trading in February 2023. Around then, Mr Zizic was informed by Mr Marra
of a conversation Mr Marra had with Mr Cleaver
of Symbio, during which Mr Horan
asked Symbio to transfer their account from Citratel to SPN, and that Symbio had
approved the transfer.
Ms Chitas nor Mr Engelke was working for Pennytel at this point. Mr Engelke
worked for SPN from the inception of its business,
and Ms Chitas from July 2023.
Neither of them was a director or shareholder of SPN (the shares being held by
Jeop). They had not,
as at the time of the hearing, become directors or
shareholders of Jeop.
Pennytel customers who ported to SPN
plaintiff relied on the list of former customers of Pennytel who ported their
services to SPN. The first iteration was a list
of 30 names attached to Mr
Zizic’s first affidavit. As at the close of submissions, the plaintiff
pointed to some 121 former
customers porting to SPN, but limited its case to the
83 customers the subject of Mr Nguyen’s expert report.
the Court Book was a list of customers that were ported from Pennytel to SPN,
produced by way of discovery and which formed the
basis of the eventual list in
Attachment B
to the plaintiff’s closing submissions. The majority
of the customers on that list have an “origin” marking of
customer” and the period of time that they were customers of
Focus and then Pennytel is around 10 years, or even up to 20 years.
plaintiff relied on this list to demonstrate that the customers who came across
to SPN from Pennytel (having taken over Focus),
was evidence of a
“miraculous” level of signing-up of former Pennytel customers.
Attachment B sets out those 83 customers
in date order, noting that five
customers ported from Pennytel to SPN in February 2023 (although the first of
those was Citracom,
Mr Horan’s company).
the end of April 2023, some 26 customers of Pennytel had gone to SPN. Six of
those customers gave evidence in the proceedings,
explaining their reasons for
moving to SPN. These were:
(a) David Gibbs and Associates (noted in Attachment B as “Focus customer
for over 15 years”). Mr Gibbs is a lawyer who
acted for Ms Chitas and Mr
Engelke in their employment issues with Pennytel, and then for the first to
fifth defendants in these
proceedings, from early 2023 until April 2023. In
around February 2023 Mr Gibbs decided to move his businesses’ phone
to SPN, due to his loyalty to Mr Engelke and his contentment with his
services, and his annoyance with Pennytel unilaterally raising
prices and not
responding to his concerns about those charges. Mr Gibbs was not
cross-examined.
Building Group Pty Ltd (noted in Attachment B as “Focus
customer for approx 5 years / Nick family”). Mr Wilson, a director
Turnkey, gave evidence that he had issues with Pennytel providing service in
around May 2023 and he sought to call Mr Engelke
on his mobile. He “knew
either through Nick or from a mutual friend of ours that Nick was ... working
... for SPN”. He
said that he suggested to Mr Engelke that he bring the
Turnkey business to SPN “as he had always been responsive”. In
email in which he sought to join with SPN, he said, “Looking forward to a
better experience following the horrors of recent
months with Pennytel”.
Mr Wilson was not cross-examined.
Downeys Group
Australia (noted in Attachment B as “Focus
customer for over 10 years / referred by Nick / Friend”). Ms Downey gave
that she was the manager of Downeys Group and was a family friend of Mr
Engelke, and joined as a customer of Focus because he worked
there, and then
remained as a customer of Pennytel. When she and her husband, the sole director
of Downeys Group, had troubles with
Pennytel’s service in early 2023, they
decided to move their business and personal telecommunications services to SPN
could look after it. She said the “sole” reason was her
unhappiness with the customer service at Pennytel,
concerned about pricing, because “Nick did a great job”. In her
email to Mr Engelke when she provided
her invoice, she said, “We have
moved some of the mobiles to Telstra as we were having issues with
coverage”. Ms Downey
was cross-examined.
(d) Eco Recyclers, also referred to as EcoGroup, (noted in Attachment B as
“Focus customer for over 15 years / referred by
Nick / Friend”). I
deal with some of the evidence of Eco Recycler’s relationship with
Pennytel in paragraphs [
] above. Ms Ward, General Manager,
gave evidence that she was referred to Focus by Telstra in 2008 and Ms Chitas
was her account manager.
The Eco Recyclers business moved with Ms Chitas to
Futuretel in 2013, and then back to Focus when Ms Chitas returned there. Ms Ward
gave evidence of a dispute with Pennytel about billing in August 2022, where Ms
Chitas was able to assist, and Eco Recyclers renewed
their internet services
with Pennytel in October 2022 (and those services remain at Pennytel). Ms Ward
2023, having used his services at both Focus and
Pennytel, and then in October 2023 she “reached out to SPN on the
recommendation
of Citracom” and has been a telecommunications customer of
SPN since. Her email to Mr Engelke of 16 March 2023 is attached
Horan’s second affidavit. Ms Ward was not cross-examined.
(e) Tarzula Pty Ltd (noted in Attachment B as “Focus customer for approx
10 years / Nick Friend”). The business had had
its telecommunications
services with Focus and then with Pennytel. Mr Finch, the managing director,
knew Mr Engelke through setting
up the original Focus systems and knew Mr
Engelke’s then boss (who was the reason for him going to Focus in the
first place).
In March 2023, he had an issue with his NBN service and he
telephoned Mr Engelke; Mr Engelke said he was no longer with Pennytel
SPN. Around this time Mr Finch was dissatisfied with Pennytel’s late fees
on his account, and in March 2023 he contacted
Mr Engelke to move both his
business and his family’s personal internet services to SPN because of the
late payment fees and
Pennytel’s attitude towards maintaining them. Mr
Finch was not cross-examined.
(f) CLP Law Pty Ltd (noted in Attachment B as “Focus customer for approx
10 years / Referred by Sam / Friend”). Ms Campbell,
the Legal Practice
Manager, gave an affidavit to the effect that her sister, the principal lawyer
of the practice, was at university
with Ms Chitas and that they were friends.
They stayed with Pennytel when it acquired Focus “as Sam was to remain as
our Account
Manager”. Mr Engelke was their primary technical contact at
Pennytel. In around March 2023 she contacted Pennytel’s customer
to seek assistance, did not receive it, and was frustrated by the “lack of
support”. She texted Mr Engelke to
see if he could fix the issue and he
told her he was now working for SPN. Ms Campbell then asked Mr Engelke to move
the firm from
Pennytel to SPN. Ms Campbell was not cross-examined.
Hulse of Floors by Greensborough (no 33 in Attachment B) was cross-examined. Ms
Hulse said that she contacted Mr Engelke in mid-2023,
possibly around June, and
asked him where he had gone; he told her he had gone to SPN and she asked him to
send her a proposal. It
appears from the email attached to Mr Horan’s
second affidavit that the initial contact was in late March 2023. Ms Hulse was
later telephoned by Pennytel seeking information as to why she had withdrawn her
company’s business. The transcript of the
phone call is in the Court Book
and Ms Hulse gave the Pennytel representative (Adam) some reasons for her move,
including dissatisfaction
with diversion charges to which the suggested solution
was purchasing a new system. Ms Hulse was asked where her business was going,
and who at SPN she was dealing with. She said “I couldn’t even tell
you”. She explained not mentioning Mr Engelke
by reason of her being at
work at the time and being confused as to why Pennytel was following up. Ms
Hulse said that at no time
did Mr Engelke tell her that he could “beat
Pennytel’s pricing”.
Yellow Brick Road
Finance Pty Ltd, a former Focus customer (no
78 in Attachment B), said that he approached SPN through Mr Horan, because
always ring Peter about my computer stuff”. He denied that Mr
Horan had said that he could beat Pennytel’s prices, and
Mr Elliot said he
understood that the price would be about the same, and he trusted Mr Horan. Mr
Elliot was cross-examined.
evidence as to the reasons for leaving Pennytel was given by Ms Sullivan of ASI
Electrics (no 44 in Attachment B), and Mr
Wright of Woottons Chartered
Accountants (no 30 in Attachment B).
twelve of the companies in the client list at Tab 268 which formed the basis for
Attachment B were referrals from Citracom.
Inferences relied on by the plaintiff
plaintiff noted that there were no explanations from any of the other customers
who ported to SPN, and submitted that it could
be inferred that “the
setting up of the business utilised Pennytel’s confidential customer
details”. In particular,
the confidential customer details (names, pricing, profit and margins) were
taken by Mr Engelke (who uploaded the contents of his
laptop to his personal
cloud in the days before he left Pennytel) and Ms Chitas who emailed customer
records to her sister and to
her private email with the same information.
(CB references removed).
plaintiff’s submission as to the inference that should be drawn from the
defendants only calling a limited number of customers
to explain their move
The reasons for the 9 customers coming over are irrelevant because (a) if it was
not for the Scheme, they would not have been customers
of SPN in the first place
and (b) the remaining 113 are unexplained.
addition to the actions set out above, and the failure of the defendants to call
any other customers, the plaintiff said that the
Court should draw inferences
adverse to the defendants from the following:
(a) Ms Chitas resetting her laptop and thus removing the contents after being
warned in writing not to do so;
(b) Mr Engelke uploading “the contents of his work laptop to his personal
(c) the setting up of a competing business after “taking the confidential
information”;
(d) SPN using the same suppliers as Pennytel;
(e) the “sequence and temporal proximity” of the acquisition of
customers from Pennytel, and the speed of attaining a
viable business within
months of commencement; and
(f) the fact that the customers who joined SPN were “higher yield
corporate customers”.
question of these inferences, and how they can be relied on by the plaintiff,
are dealt with further below.
What was the confidential information?
the Amended Defence, the defendants admitted that Pennytel possessed
confidential information but did not admit that employees’
“know-how” was confidential to Pennytel. They further took issue
with the claim that some of the information including
“information ...
regarding the affairs of Customers of Pennytel” was confidential, as it
may have been “within
the public realm”. Paragraph 10 of the Amended
Defence said that the pleading of the Confidential Information is “vague
and imprecise”.
plaintiff submitted that paragraph 10 of the ASOC “focuses in on customer
names and contact details, the terms on which
the customers acquired services
(including start and end dates of contracts), sales and pricing”, and
conducted its case on
that basis.
Zizic, in his first affidavit, set out some aspects of information which he
considered to be confidential to Pennytel. They included:
(a) details of customers’ identities and the length of their contracts;
(b) the terms and prices on which Symbio provides products and services to
Pennytel; and
(c) details held in the Octane database, which provides around 95% of
Pennytel’s products sold to customers. Most of those
who are not enabled
by Symbio (for example, customers with internet fibre connections through
Spirit) are still billed though Octane.
Octane holds therefore most of the
financial information for Pennytel relating to revenues, buy prices, and
Zizic said that he would have regarded an employee accessing Octane for any
reason other than in the course of their employment
would have been immediately
dismissed – a proposition Mr Engelke agreed was “fair”.
Engelke had the top level of access to Octane, and Ms Chitas had access to the
Group Financial level (the second highest) and Group
(the default role for all
users). At all user access levels of Octane, the operator can see the
customer’s name, contact details,
their type of contract or service, the
rates they would pay for those services, and the date of the contract
Zizic explained that Zoho Desk was a customer support ticket workflow management
application and that it uses data feeds from Octane.
Accordingly,
each of Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas had access to Zoho CRM and Desk. Between those
two applications, the whole of the relationship
a customer had with Pennytel was
available. The Zoho data captures details of logins, but only for 90 days (and
60 days of audit
logs). Accordingly, Mr Zizic said, he was only able to view the
access history of the first and second defendants back to January
2023, which
showed that Ms Chitas was accessing Zoho CRM and Desk while on long service
leave. Mr Engelke’s history with Zoho
had expired.
noted above, the pleading as to Pennytel’s confidential information was
said to be vague and imprecise. However, I regard
the plaintiff’s
summation of the information over which it sought protection, being
“customer names and contract details,
the terms on which the customers
acquired services (including start and end dates of contracts), sales and
pricing” as reflective
of the pleading and of Mr Zizic’s evidence.
The first element of the equitable claim for breach of confidence is that the
“must be able to identify with specificity, and not merely in
global terms, that which is said to be the information in question”
the necessary quality of confidence (see
Corrs Pavey Whiting & Byrne v
Collector of Customers (Vic)
[1987] FCA 266
(1987) 14 FCR 434
at 443 (Gummow J)).
a sense the complaint about the pleading is not determinative, as there was no
real dispute that the customer names and contract
details, including start and
end dates, was information which was confidential to Pennytel, nor that the
first and second defendants
had access to it.
was however a dispute over whether “pricing” was confidential.
Pennytel submitted that “customer details and
pricing” were not
known outside the business, and that customer and pricing details sit on Octane
and ACT!, and cannot be duplicated
without copying it. That submission may be
true for customer details, but is probably less true for pricing. The defendants
that Mr Engelke’s knowledge of pricing was
like a greengrocer knowing the wholesale price of apples, or a car dealer
knowing the list price of vehicles – the pricing
might not be known by the
person in the street, but knowing what the ‘going rate’ is does not
mean that confidential
information belonging to an employer has been misused.
Engelke was asked in cross-examination to agree about his understanding of
confidential matters. He was asked the following questions:
MR FREEMAN: ... just say when you were at Pennytel, did you consider that the
name and address of a Pennytel customer was confidential,
meaning that you were
not entitled to disclose it to somebody outside the company?--- It probably
depends on the circumstances.
Really? So your evidence is that you thought that you could disclose to somebody
outside the company the name and address of a customer?---Well,
for the purposes
of serving the customer or the company, yes.
No. No. Okay. Put that aside. To some third party, who had nothing to do with
the business of Pennytel or the customer, you’re
not saying, are you
– is it your evidence that you could disclose the name and address of a
customer?---Well, no, not to a
third party for no relevant reason.
Right. And irrespective of what’s written in a contract, you didn’t
think that you could disclose the name and address
of a customer to some
unrelated third party outside the company; correct?---Yes. That’s probably
fair to assume.
Right. I’m not asking you to assume it. I’m asking your knowledge.
To your knowledge, you are not free to disclose it;
correct?---Yes. If
it’s for no reason to serve the company, then yes.
And that included details as to services the customer received from Pennytel;
yes?---Yes.
And, again, I’m limiting my questions to unrelated third parties who have
no business with Pennytel; yes?---Yes.
Or the customer. And that relates – in addition to services and pricing,
but margins and profit that Pennytel was making?---Yes.
Right. So irrespective of what’s in a confidentiality clause, you
didn’t consider that you were free to disclose that
to third parties, did
MR FREEMAN: What I’m suggesting to you is that – and I think you did
say this before the lunch break. Putting aside what
the contract says, you
considered that information on customers and sales and pricing and client lists
and the like – you were
not free to provide those to third parties who had
no – nothing to do with the business?---Yes.
You accept that, don’t you?---Yes.
It wouldn’t be appropriate, would it, to hand them over pricing
methodologies?---Well, yes, if they definitely have nothing
to do, then,
probably, yes.
Yes. Or client lists?---Yes.
Now, you know – do you accept that customer lists with names, details,
pricing, addresses are matters that businesses such
as SPN and Pennytel were
particularly sensitive about?---Yes.
Engelke was specifically asked about “pricing” in the following
MR FREEMAN: All right. Now, in your inbox, your email inbox, you would variously
receive emails during the time you worked at Pennytel,
which contained customer
names; correct?---Yes.
Plans that they were on?---Possibly, yes.
Pricing?---Yes.
Right. Information as to customers that you would consider were confidential to
Pennytel; correct?---Yes.
and later as to documents which were synced to the iCloud drive which included
the TIAB price book, a document with price comparisons
between Pennytel and
Connexus, and the Focus price book. These documents were, while synced to the
iCloud drive, deleted on 5 May
2023 (see AL-4, tab 259 of the Court Book, an
excel spreadsheet created by Mr Le).
4.1.1 of each of the original employment contracts included, as Confidential and
Proprietary Information, “without limitation:
information regarding the
affairs of the company including ... pricing methodologies”.
plaintiff submitted that Mr Engelke’s acceptance that he was not able to
disclose “the names and address of customers,
the services they had with
Pennytel and pricing, margins and profits on those services” meant that
“pricing details”
were confidential to Pennytel, both contractually
and generally. The onus lies on Pennytel to specify the confidential information
with precision. “Pricing” cannot, in my view, mean that every aspect
of the prices that Pennytel charged its customers
was information which was
confidential to it.
equity will protect more than merely trade secrets (see
Streetscape
Projects (Australia) Pty Ltd v City of Sydney
(2013) 295 ALR 760
[2013] NSWCA 2
(Barrett JA)), it is also the case
... not all confidential information becoming known to an employee during or by
reason of his or her employment will be protected
on termination of that
employment. Where confidential information acquired by an employee during or in
the course of his or her employment
becomes part of the general know-how of the
employee, or cannot realistically be separated from that know-how, equity will
not protect
it unless it is of the nature of a secret formula or process, or,
more generally, something that is unlikely to be ascertained by
independent
inquiry or experience.
Manildra Laboratories Pty Ltd v Campbell
[2009] NSWSC 987
(McDougall J)).
Engelke and Ms Chitas would have been required by their roles to access prices,
both retail and wholesale, and to have an overview
of the kind of prices
charged. It seems to me that pricing generally available within the industry
would be within the experience
and know-how of Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas.
plaintiff relied on the fact that Mr Engelke could be found to have retained the
TIAB wholesale price book in his iCloud account,
because he referred to it in
his email to Ms McCann as “working off the Pennytel price book”.
However, the plaintiff’s
expert gave evidence that it had been deleted,
and Mr Engelke’s explanation was that he was keeping things
because he knew the prices, and was hoping for a good price
(as set out at [
] above). The fact
that Mr Engelke could contact Ms McCann and be offered a price which she
volunteered was “probably a lot
higher than Pennytel” does not
indicate a misuse of confidential information; it rather underscores that the
pricing itself
was available to players in the industry. Knowledge of prices
within an industry fall within the
Streetscape
principle of being
knowledge that is difficult to separate from know-how, and thus would not be,
without more, confidential information.
my view the plaintiff has not made out its case for the inclusion of pricing,
outside of pricing as it related to specific clients
or internal “pricing
methodologies”, in the material which is said to be information
confidential to Pennytel. The specification
only of “pricing
methodologies” in the employment agreement points to more than just a rate
charged to a customer; it
would be something more like a formula or a process by
which individual prices were calculated, and would include the “margins
and profit” about which Mr Engelke was asked and agreed was confidential.
Mr Engelke was asked about his ability to give a
competitive quote to a new
customer, and agreed that knowing a customer’s pricing was helpful to
providing a quote for services.
However, he said that prices (such as for Aussie
Broadband) were available online, and that his knowledge of the industry was
that it was possible to “jump on the web and have a look at the price
advertised by wholesale telcos such as Aldi, Woolworths, or Coles
you know it’s a few dollars cheaper at the wholesale rate”. This is
an example of the “independent inquiry
or experience” referred to by
Barrett JA in
Streetscape
Engelke further said that it was standard sales practice to ask for an existing
bill, to see what the prices were there. The “little
bit naughty”
email was central to the attack on Mr Engelke; he said that he thought removing
the redactions was not what the
customer wanted but it was good for Spirit and
Pennytel as it enabled him to provide better pricing. He was working for Spirit
the time, and Ms Chitas was working for Pennytel. This cross-examination
however went more to his credit than to any misuse of confidential
information;
there was no allegation that the information was used to seek to obtain that
customer’s business, as the customer
did not move to SPN and there was no
evidence there was an approach to achieve that end. Instead, the explanation
given by both Mr
Engelke and Ms Chitas was that they looked at the information
to provide a better Pennytel service to the customer.
Horan gave evidence, which was largely untested, that industry standards
required new clients to provide a past invoice so that
“understand the potential customer’s current services, to identify
what services SPN’s quote should include”.
Mr Horan annexed the
emails for those of the customer witnesses he could locate. In relation to Mr
Elliot of Yellow Brick Road, Mr
Engelke said, on being sent Mr Elliot’s
Pennytel invoice, “Unfortunately we cannot beat the current pricing
can match it”.
agree with the plaintiff that the prices paid by individual customers would be
information confidential to Pennytel, unless disclosed
by the client themselves.
I further agree that Pennytel’s “pricing methodologies”, being
the formulas or processes
by which they provided prices to particular customers,
including margins, would also be confidential. However, I agree with the
that wholesale prices charged to Pennytel were, in general, not
confidential information of the plaintiff, given that Mr Engelke
and Ms Chitas
would have the general expertise and know-how as to how companies such as Symbio
and TIAB provided pricing to various
customers, including the fact that a small
player such as SPN could not expect to be given the volume discounts that
Pennytel was
able to achieve. Given the practices of the industry described by
Mr Horan, it would seem that each customer who joined SPN would
be required to
disclose the pricing that they paid with Pennytel or any other telco prior to
accepting services in any event.
will adopt the wording suggested by the plaintiff in its submissions, with the
addition of the underlined words relating to pricing
as reflective of my above
reasoning, being:
customer names and contact details, the terms on which the customers acquired
services (including start and end dates of contracts),
and pricing
specific to Pennytel customers and Pennytel’s pricing
methodologies
as the confidential information at the heart of this dispute. I have removed the
word ‘sales’ as there were no submissions
made relating only to
sales and the word appears only peripherally in cross-examination (see [
] above). In my view, it is too
vague, and it adds nothing to the ‘terms on which the customers acquired
services’. I
will refer to that definition below as
The Confidential
Information
. The paragraph 10 “carveouts” in the Amended Defence
such as know-how and skills, particularly relating to pricing in
general, are
not included in that definition.
was not in dispute that The Confidential Information had the necessary quality
of confidence, nor that it was received by Mr Engelke
and Ms Chitas in
circumstances importing an obligation of confidence, thus satisfying the first
three categories in
Optus Networks
Was there a scheme to set up a competing business by using
The Confidential Information of Pennytel?
final element of the plaintiff’s claim for a breach of the equitable
obligation of confidence in equity is whether there
was an actual or threatened
misuse of The Confidential Information, without Pennytel’s consent. The
pleading is paragraph 75
of the ASOC and is set out in paragraph [
] above. As can be seen from that
paragraph, the pleading is that the purpose of the various actions relied upon
“was to obtain
names and contact details of Pennytel and Spirit customers
who could be contacted and offered data and internet plans of NBN and
internet fibre plans in a new business to be set up and operated by them and
with Horan.” The agreement or understanding
was pleaded to be that the new
business would specifically use The Confidential Information, contact customers
at or near the end
of their contracts, and offer them competitive contracts with
is uncontroversial that by mid-October 2022, Citratel was incorporated with the
purpose of establishing a new business operated
by the first three defendants.
Pennytel submitted that the start date should be “earlier than they have
disclosed”, although
the plaintiff’s written submissions do not give
a hard start date. The ASOC’s pleading of a scheme commences at paragraph
43 with the 31 March 2022 email. Given that, it seems the pleaded scheme
stretches back to no earlier than 31 March 2022.
defendants’ case is that the idea of the new business appears to have been
floated between the three of them in August 2022,
and was cemented in September
2022. Mr Horan, who was in my view doing his best to tell the truth, said that
he had heard from a
technician at Citracom that Mr Engelke wasn’t happy at
Spirit in around August 2022, and the technician “suggested that
have a chat with Nick and see if we could do something”. Mr Horan said
that he wanted to “have Sam involved
in that conversation” and they
got together in the August and had a chat about it, and decided that we could
potentially do something in the future, and we could,
in the meantime, register
a company do the preparatory work, but there was never intent to actually trade
or do anything at that
will be recalled that the steps taken were as follows:
(a) each of Mr Engelke, Ms Chitas, and Mr Horan incorporated bodies to hold
shares in the new company;
(b) Mr Horan registered Citratel around 19 October 2022, with himself, Mr
Engelke and Ms Chitas as directors and each holding 1/3
of the shares in their
corporate names;
(c) Citratel applied for, and was granted, an agreement with TIAB for the
provision of services, citing a start date of 1 January
(d) Pennytel became aware of the existence of Citratel, Mr Engelke was dismissed
from Spirit, and Ms Chitas from Pennytel, and SPN
was registered with Mr Horan
as sole director and his company Jeop as shareholder. The plaintiff put great
weight on the fact that
“SPN” stands for “Samantha, Peter,
Nicholas” being the first names of each of the first three defendants;
(e) SPN commenced business in February 2023 and employed Mr Horan and Mr
Engelke, and Ms Chitas followed in July 2023; and
(f) 121 former Pennytel customers were ported from Pennytel to SPN, with a
significant number coming across in the first six months.
is no contest that on 18 October 2022, Citratel, whose shares were owned by
corporate vehicles associated with each of the first
three defendants, had been
registered, and that it was intended to be a corporation which would conduct a
similar business to Pennytel
– not an identical business, because it did
not seek to include residential customers. It is likewise not in contest that
was incorporated to take over from Citratel, and that each of the first
three defendants would be involved with that business. The
defendants rely on
the fact that Citratel did not trade, that SPN was not set up until after six
months since Mr Engelke had left
Pennytel, and that Ms Chitas, while a director
of Citratel, “was not involved in the preparatory steps to set up the new
plaintiff said that those facts, along with the fact that the customers of SPN
who have given evidence had reasons to leave Pennytel
and provided SPN with
their invoices, are inconsequential and insufficient to ground the contention of
the defendants that there
was no use of confidential information. The plaintiff
said that the customers of Pennytel “would not have left
the Scheme pleaded and [the defendants’] conduct”. In other
words, had SPN not been incorporated, it said that those customers
remained with Pennytel.
Horan said that even though he said to TIAB that Citratel and SPN were each to
commence in early 2023, he said it was “preparatory
work” and there
was no intention to start so soon. He noted that he referred two “large
Citracom clients” to Ms
Chitas at Pennytel in December 2022 and January
2023, which he would not have done had he been intending to start trading. He
that the fact that both Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas were out of work in
February 2023 meant that the plan had to “pivot”
and SPN start
trading so that Mr Engelke could have an income.
plaintiff was not able to lead, or extract,
evidence that the
defendants discussed and agreed that they would use Pennytel’s
confidential information to target specific
customers of Pennytel – namely
higher yield small business customers such as those dealt with by Ms Chitas. The
plaintiff relied
on inferences to be drawn from the evidence to support that
part of its pleaded case. The facts relied on to support the inferences
agreement are:
(a) the use of documents, including the documents comprising confidential
customer details, and Mr Engelke’s uploads to iCloud;
(b) the fact that SPN “miraculously managed to sign up so many former
Pennytel customers” from February 2023; and
(c) the conduct of each of the first and second defendants,
Chitas “wiping her hard disk after being warned in writing not to do
so” and Mr Engelke saying he had wiped his hard
disk but instead having
uploaded files on it to iCloud.
plaintiff relied on
Australia Limited v Madritsch KG
[2022] QCA 205
to ground a submission that I should infer
misuse of The Confidential Information from their conduct. In particular, the
after receiving the information (
at [41](b)), use of the
same suppliers (
at [41](c)), an inability to get to the position
they did at the speed they had, had they started from legitimate sources
at [41](d)), and the lack of an explanation (
[41](e)). As to that last point, Freeburn J (with whom Morrison and Mullins JJA
agreed) said:
[42] Fifth, the inference may be avoided if the defendant can demonstrate that
the information was developed by its own efforts,
or acquired independently, or
acquired by reverse engineering of products placed on the market by the
plaintiff or by a third party.
However, those arguments may be difficult to
sustain if the offending conduct occurs soon after the information has been
in confidence ...
the lack of a logical explanation for the conduct
] should not be
taken too far. An inference of misuse of confidential information must still be
established by means of indirect or
circumstantial evidence ...
was recently referred to in
Fortescue Ltd v Element Zero Pty Ltd (No
[2024] FCA 1157
where Markovic J said in relation to
inferences: “The alleged misuse is for the most part alleged to arise
inferentially from
the surrounding facts and circumstances. There is no
difficulty with proceeding in that way”. The Court of Appeal in
stressed that “none of the principles [
as to inferences
being drawn
] alters the legal burden of proof.” As Freeburn J said (at
In a proceeding for breach of confidence the burden of proving, on the balance
of probabilities, each of the three elements of the
cause of action remains with
the plaintiff throughout.
plaintiff took me to the well-known passage in
Watson v Foxman
Furthermore, human memory of what was said in a conversation is fallible for a
variety of reasons, and ordinarily the degree of fallibility
increases with the
passage of time, particularly where disputes or litigation intervene, and the
processes of memory are overlaid,
often subconsciously, by perceptions or
self-interest as well as conscious consideration of what should have been said
or could have
been said. All too often what is actually remembered is little
more than an impression from which plausible details are then, again
subconsciously, constructed. All this is a matter of ordinary human experience.
Each element of the cause of action must be proved to the reasonable
satisfaction of the court, which means that the court “must
feel an actual
persuasion of its occurrence or existence”.
Considerations of the above kinds can pose serious difficulties of proof for a
party relying upon spoken words as the foundation
of a causes of action based on
Trade Practices Act
(or s 42 of the
Trading Act
in the absence of some reliable contemporaneous record or
other satisfactory corroboration
(plaintiff’s emphasis added)
also the statements of the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
ET-China.com
International Holdings Ltd v Cheung
[2021] NSWCA 24 (Bathurst
CJ, Bell P, Leeming JA) at [27]:
Whilst the quality and accuracy of oral recollection of actual conversations
should be treated with care and caution given the fallibility
of human memory
(of which there has been a growing appreciation within the judiciary in recent
decades), oral testimony may still
be of value and importance, as was recognised
in the nuanced observations of Leggatt J (as his Lordship then was) in
Gestmin SGPS SA v Credit Suisse (UK) Ltd
[2013] EWHC (Comm) 3560
“the best approach for a judge to adopt in the trial of a commercial case
is, in my view, to place little if any reliance at
all on witnesses’
recollections of what was said in meetings and conversations, and to base
factual findings on inferences
drawn from the documentary evidence and known or
probable facts.
This does not mean that oral testimony serves no useful
– though its utility is often disproportionate to its length.
But its value lies largely, as I see it, in the opportunity which
cross-examination affords to subject the documentary record to critical scrutiny
to gauge the personality, motivations and working practices of a
, rather than in testimony of what the witness recalls of particular
conversations and events. Above all, it is important to avoid
the fallacy of
supposing that, because a witness has confidence in his or her recollection and
is honest, evidence based on that
recollection provides any reliable guide to
the truth.” (emphasis added)
which has been adopted in this Court;
Mount v Dover Castle Metals Pty Ltd
[2025] FCA 101
Westpac Banking Corporation v Forum
Finance Pty Limited (in liq) (Liability)
[2024] FCA 1176
ET-China.com
is also worthy of note:
Documents and events have to be understood in their context, and evidence of
context will often be furnished by witnesses in their
oral evidence. Documents,
moreover, will not always present a complete picture of events. Indeed it would
be rare that they do. Nor
do contemporaneous documents necessarily or invariably
convey or record the background or context in which events took place. That
background or context will be familiar to the actors at the time of those events
but may not always emerge from documents.
these principles in mind, I turn now to findings as to the evidence relied on in
support of a scheme.
Elements of the plaintiff’s case as to a
accept the plaintiff’s submission that the business was intended to cover
similar ground as Pennytel,
taking into account the email exchange
between Mr Engelke and Ms McCann, Mr Horan’s and Mr Engelke’s
answers to the questions
in the TIAB Sub-Wholesaler application for Citratel
which identified “small to medium business customers predominantly in
who were “unhappy with their current service
providers”, and Mr Horan’s similar (but not identical) answers on
the TIAB Sub-Wholesaler application form for SPN. The difference between the
Pennytel business and that of SPN is that SPN did not
intend to cover
residential customers. I do not regard this difference as either supporting or
undermining the plaintiff’s
case; while business customers were more
lucrative, the confidential information which was alleged to have been taken
covered both
kinds of customers, and so this factor is accordingly
When did the agreement to set up a new business in competition
with Pennytel occur?
to the start date of the pleaded scheme, there are two inconsistencies in the
defendants’ evidence as to timing. The first
is, as noted above, that Mr
Horan was adamant that the first conversation with Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas was
on 13 August 2022. The
plaintiff contended that Mr Horan’s evidence as to
the date of 13 August 2022 is “inconsistent with contemporaneous documents
and is an attempt to deliberately hide that discussions had been going earlier
than they have disclosed”. Each of Mr Engelke
and Ms Chitas were
cross-examined on the basis that they had had ongoing discussions from much
earlier, the plaintiff putting to
them that “by May of 2022 [
] were having preliminary discussions about setting up a
accept Mr Horan’s evidence that his first conversation with Mr Engelke and
Ms Chitas was in mid-August 2022. Despite his insistence
that the 13 August 2022
date was his first discussion with both of them, he agreed that he spoke to Mr
Engelke first and then Ms
Chitas “came in” (see [
] above). This is consistent with Mr
Engelke’s email discussion with Ms McCann about his new business partner
on 12 August 2022.
While this is a discrepancy of a matter of days, there is
nothing in the evidence of discussions earlier in 2022 than mid-August.
Accordingly, I cannot, from that discrepancy of a few days, be persuaded that Mr
Horan’s evidence was a conscious lie to hide
the longer-running plans to
set up a competing business to Pennytel.
second inconsistency was Ms Chitas’ contention that she had no intention
of leaving Pennytel in October 2022, which is when
Citratel was incorporated.
The plaintiff submitted that that timing is not supported by the 13 September
email from her sister to
a legal contact asking for advice for Ms Chitas
relating to a “Family Trust as part of a business she is starting”.
present progressive (“is starting”) can be indicative of a
current state of affairs, or a planned future event. While
it is not clear that
Ms Chitas had definitively determined to leave Pennytel by that time, the email
is consistent with a finding
that she had resolved to join Mr Engelke and Mr
Horan in Citratel (and later SPN) from mid-August 2022. In her oral evidence she
said that they didn’t, in mid-2022, have a structural plan “because
we were looking at maybe 12 months down the track”
and that Mr Horan had,
through Citracom or Web Steps, a database of customers they could approach.
the invitation to draw an inference from the various actions relied on as being
evidence of a long-standing scheme (both as
pleaded, and as additionally
identified in the evidence of Mr Zizic), and from the inconsistencies with
timing, I accept the evidence
of Mr Horan, Mr Engelke, and Ms Chitas as to the
time at which discussions first commenced about “going out on their
as being in early August 2022 (
the business plan
response to Mr Horan hearing that Mr Engelke was unhappy at Spirit. That fits
with Mr Engelke’s contact with Ms McCann
at Symbio late in July 2022
reflected in his email of 27 July 2022, and his affidavit evidence that he was
then exploring the idea
of starting his own business. That email refers to Mr
Engelke starting the business. Mr Engelke’s later email to Ms McCann
August 2022 is corroborative of his evidence that he first started looking
around on his own, and then talked to Mr Horan (“a
partner”). The evidence of all three was that the business plan
discussions were held in around August 2022.
plaintiff contended strongly for a finding that the business plan was formulated
between the three of them much earlier than mid-August
– at least in May
2022 when Mr Engelke left Pennytel, and possibly as early as March 2022 when the
customer report was downloaded
– to commence a business in January 2023
or, later, for SPN, in February 2023. However, it seems to me that the only
documentary
evidence of any discussion between Mr Horan and Mr Engelke is
reflected in Mr Engelke’s email to Ms McCann in August 2022,
evidence points to Ms Chitas being involved at that time or shortly thereafter.
As for the start date of the business, there
is conflicting evidence; the
indicative start dates for Citratel of 1 January 2023, and for SPN of 1 February
2023, are not supported
by any evidence, direct or from which I can draw an
inference, that these are anything more than dates on a form. I note the fact
that Mr Engelke had been marched off the Spirit premises at the instigation of
Pennytel, and was out of a job in February 2023. Mr
Horan (who gave evidence,
which I accept, that the Symbio/TIAB contracts were only preparatory) said that
this was a factor that
brought the start date forwards.
was put to Mr Engelke that he was thinking about setting up his own business
from the time he decided to leave Pennytel, but he
rejected that contention, and
I accept Mr Engelke’s evidence on that aspect. There is no evidence which
would corroborate that
theory (unless I am able to infer such a plan from the
alleged misuse of confidential information which, as set out below, I do not).
On the other hand, Mr Engelke gave evidence that he was happy at Spirit until
his role changed, and there is nothing to indicate
that that is not the case. If
he were seeking to set up his own business, then joining Spirit (a supplier to
Pennytel) was not a
move which would progress that plan. Likewise, Ms Chitas
encouraged Ms Ward of Eco Recyclers to remain with Pennytel after Ms Ward
the argument with Ms Young on 24 August 2022.
support of the contention that the scheme commenced in May 2022 or earlier, the
plaintiff cross-examined Ms Chitas on various documents,
such as an email chain
on 5 May 2022, in which Mr Horan sent to Ms Chitas information about a Microsoft
Teams product, which she
forwarded to Mr Engelke with what appears to be a
technical question, “Would I register under MNF or Pingco?”. Mr
This would be Pingco and MNF (TIAB) trying to onboard new partners, so we can
already sell either of those and if we did want to
have a look ourselves at it I
would just go direct to either of them for it!
plaintiff submitted that the use of the plural “we” and the
reference to “ourselves” by Mr Engelke, who
was leaving Pennytel the
next day, indicated that this email reflected discussions between the first
three defendants as to setting
up a business. It was put to Ms Chitas that there
would be “no reason for him to want to have a look at it” because he
was leaving, and she replied that he was working for Pennytel at the time and so
the response “had to be around him referring
to Pennytel”. This
email is relied upon as “inferential evidence” of the scheme and it
is submitted that it was
“only consistent” with the scheme having
been formulated prior to May 2022. I do not agree that the use of the word
is “only consistent” with the existence of a
scheme. The “we” could, in context, refer to Pennytel and Spirit,
much as it could refer to a venture between Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas. In any
event, as I have noted above, the emails between
Mr Engelke and Ms McCann are
evidence of when the business plan was formulated, being August 2022.
of the first three defendants sought to downplay the fact that they had
discussions as to setting up a business together in August/
September 2022, but
they differ from the plaintiff as to the impact of those discussions, the
expectations of the parties as to a
start date, and the terms of those
discussions. The plaintiff has the onus to prove that the business plan included
the darker side
of the “scheme” – that they would take, and
use, confidential information belonging to Pennytel, and seek to sign
higher-yield customers who were primarily previously Focus customers.
the evidence as set out above, I am able to find that the business plan (as
defined above) dated from early-to-mid August 2022
between Mr Engelke and Mr
Horan, (most likely around 12 August) and around then, or slightly later, with
Ms Chitas (but before 13
September). This factual finding has some bearing on
the way in which the plaintiff has pleaded, and run, its case. In particular,
is relevant to the pleaded actions relied upon by the plaintiff and how those
actions fit into its pleading of the scheme. The
handling of the various
documents relied upon by the plaintiff take on a different complexion if, as I
have found, there was no business
plan between the three of them prior to 12
August 2022.
Did the plaintiff prove the element of the scheme that was the
agreement to misuse the information?
plaintiff was unable to prove directly, or by admission, that the participants
in the business plan actively agreed to take and
use Pennytel’s
confidential information. Instead, it submitted that I should infer from the
taking of the pleaded actions,
and from the speed with which SPN was able to
commence business, that The Confidential Information was used. Before I can
that issue, it is necessary to review the pleaded actions (and others
relied upon) to ascertain the motives behind the actions relied
Did Mr Engelke obtain The Confidential Information for the
purposes of the scheme?
the actions relied upon by the plaintiff, the following could be seen to be
actions by Mr Engelke:
(a) the forwarding of the customer report on 31 March 2022 (see [
] ff above);
(b) the ACT! report downloaded to his laptop on 27 April 2022 (see [
] ff, although this is not pleaded in
(c) uploading documents to his iCloud drive between 22 April and 6 May 2022 (see
(d) the Octane access on 2 and 3 May 2022 (see [
(e) the Mesh customer email and attached list on 23 May 2022 (see [
] ff, although this is not pleaded in
(f) the discussions with Ms McCann about pricing from 27 July 2022 onwards (see
(g) the “little bit naughty” email of 28 July 2022 (see [
(h) the Spirit customer details forwarded from Mr Engelke’s private email
on 8 August 2022 (see [
of these actions occurred before the date I have found the plan to set up the
business that became SPN was formulated, with the
possible exception of the
Spirit customer details which were forwarded on 8 August, very close to the 12
August email to Ms McCann.
regard to my finding as to the timing, the surrounding documentation, and the
lack of evidence supporting any earlier intention
of setting up a business, I
find that the customer report, the ACT! report, the Mesh customer email and
attached list, and the “little
bit naughty” email, were each actions
taken in the context of Mr Engelke’s and Ms Chitas’ work for
Pennytel or,
later, Mr Engelke’s work for Spirit. The ACT! report and the
customer report were clearly, in my view, matters which Mr Engelke
undertook for Pennytel. He and Ms Chitas had a good working relationship and the
evidence is that they were each customer-focused
and went the “extra
mile” where required. The Octane access on 2 and 3 May is consistent with
his duties to hand over
to Ms Yehson (noting that the occasions of access to
Octane under his login after his departure are no longer relied upon). The Mesh
customer email and attached list was sent to him, not by him, and the
“smiley face” emoji with which it was sent cannot
be seen, without
more, as evidence of guilt.
“little bit naughty” email, while there was a sniff of shady
practice in un-redacting a customer’s redaction,
appears from the
surrounding correspondence to have been done for the benefit of the customer and
in the course of Ms Chitas’
work as an Account Manager for Pennytel.
explanations for the sending or receiving of these documents are reasonable
ones, and given that I accept that Mr Horan did not
approach Mr Engelke or Ms
Chitas until early-to-mid August 2022, I am able to find that they were
undertaken in the course of Mr
Engelke’s work for Pennytel and then for
is nothing in any of these incidents which by themselves, taken together, or by
reason of any incriminating surrounding correspondence,
points to a plan, as far
back as the customer report download in March 2022 when Mr Engelke was still
working for Pennytel, to take
and misuse confidential information. It should be
recalled that Mr Engelke’s laptop had had files deleted from it, but that
the Outlook.pst files remained (as indicated in the spreadsheet AL-3 attached to
Mr Le’s expert report) and that had there
been a scheme on foot at that
point, it is likely that there would be some mention of it, somewhere. I do not
accept that Mr Engelke’s
deletions of documents on 5 May 2022 were done
with the intent to cover his tracks or to hide his taking of confidential
information
from Pennytel. That conclusion is inconsistent with his pleading and
affidavit evidence that he thought he had to reset his laptop
and thus wiped his
hard drive of content.
leaves the iCloud backup and the Spirit customer list. I have dealt above with
the Symbio setup communications with Ms McCann
as being consistent, not with the
plaintiff’s case, but with the defendants’.
major plank of the plaintiff’s case is that Mr Engelke backed up his
Pennytel computer, including Pennytel emails, including
customer names and other
details including The Confidential Information, since his resignation in April
2022 until his last day at
Pennytel on 6 May 2022. It was put to him that this
was done “because you and Ms Chitas and Mr Horan were intending at some
stage to set up a competing business?”. Mr Engelke’s response
At that time, we had never considered that. I was excited to go and work at
Spirit and continue working closely with Pennytel.
have accepted that at the time of the iCloud backups Mr Engelke had not yet
formulated the business plan with Mr Horan and Ms Chitas.
have considered the evidence about Mr Engelke’s laptop which, the
plaintiff said, tends to support the submission that he
lied about wiping his
hard drive. Mr Engelke said that when he resigned, either Ms Ryan or Mr Brant
instructed him to wipe his laptop
and return it to Pennytel. Mr Brant gave an
affidavit in these proceedings, and does not mention giving that instruction. He
not called for cross-examination. Ms Ryan was served with a subpoena to give
evidence, but it was not called upon and she did not
give evidence. The evidence
discloses that she was the Chief Operating Officer before leaving Pennytel in
evidence of the expert, Mr Le, was that the laptop had not been wiped, and it
was put to Mr Engelke by counsel for the plaintiff
that it was a “very
significant failure of recollection by yourself”? Mr Engelke did not
agree. He said he recalled that
he was concerned to remove confidential
information such as banking passwords, and also to delete information. While
information
was deleted from the laptop, there were a significant number of
documents which remained on the computer when it was handed back
Engelke initially had said that he “saved some personal files and data
from [his] laptop first, and then wiped it and returned
it to Pennytel as
instructed”. He created a “Pennytel” and a “Focus”
folder on his laptop and backed
them up to his iCloud drive. He said that that
was for the purpose of retaining personal information. In around February 2023
moved the contents of the folders to OneDrive. The documents in the OneDrive
index which was annexed to his affidavit were in the
nature of payslips, leave
applications, superannuation documents, and role change letters.
was cross-examined, somewhat fiercely, about the uploads. It is clear that he
did not wipe his computer, but he did undertake a
deletion of files. The
explanation for that is believable – that he wanted to ensure that he
handed his computer back without
confidential information on it. He had worked
at Focus, then Pennytel, for many years, and kept documents relating to his own
there (such as his Letter of Offer, tax information, and payslips).
His evidence that the hard drive was “wiped” is not,
in my view,
only consistent with a conscious lie. I note that he had an Outlook reminder on
his laptop for Friday 6 May 2022 to “Wipe
laptop profile” which
could explain the recollection that he had, in fact, “wiped” the
laptop at the time.
saying he wiped the laptop were a lie, it would be a lie without purpose given
that the computer was in the hands of Pennytel and
could have been, and was,
checked for data. That data revealed nothing to corroborate the pleaded scheme
unless I accept there were
sinister motives behind the iCloud backup. I do not.
It appears to me that he undertook the iCloud backup, data deletion, and removal
of personal information as part of his exit from Pennytel, and prior to his
going to work at Spirit. I do not find that the iCloud
backup process was part
of a scheme to take and misuse confidential information of Pennytel.
leaves the Spirit customer list. That post-dates Mr Engelke’s first
inquiry with Ms McCann. It is also different in context,
as it was forwarded to
his personal email and then on to Mr Horan and Ms Chitas. The explanation given
was that as Spirit was no
longer able to support those customers, Ms Chitas at
Pennytel or Mr Horan at Citracom may have wished to. The Amended Defence
this as one of the “legitimate preparatory steps for the
prospective operation of a business at a later date” but that
appear to be the way in which the first three defendants explained it.
noted by the plaintiff, the timing of this email was suspiciously close to the
formulation of the business plan. However, there
was no confidential information
of Pennytel included in the list attached to the email. Mr Zizic conceded as
much in cross-examination.
Paragraph 74 of the ASOC contended that the purpose
of (inter alia) the Spirit customers email was
to obtain names and contact details of Pennytel and Spirit customers who could
be contacted and offered data and internet plans ...
in a new business to be set
up and operated by [Mr Engelke, Ms Chitas] and with [Mr] Horan.
cannot be the case that the Spirit email sought to obtain names and contact
details of Pennytel customers. There were none on the
list. It could not have
been a breach of Pennytel’s confidential information, because it contained
am prepared to find that this email may have been sent by Mr Engelke in the
context of the discussions between the three defendants
for the eventual benefit
of the fifth defendant, but given Mr Horan’s evidence as to the use made
of that list, I find that
no action was taken by SPN which resulted in those
customers being managed by SPN.
Did Ms Chitas obtain The Confidential Information for the
purposes of the scheme?
Undertaking
the same exercise in relation to Ms Chitas, the relevant actions relied on by
the plaintiff are:
(a) the email and Margin Summary spreadsheet forwarded to Ms Chitas’
sister on 9 December 2021 (see [
(b) the customer report (as it is alleged that she was not authorised to receive
it) on 31 March 2022 (see [
(c) the Mesh customer email and attached list on 23 May 2022 (see [
(d) the “little bit naughty” email reply on 28 July 2022 (see [
(e) the Spirit customer details forwarded from Mr Engelke’s private email
on 8 August 2022 (see [
(f) the access to Zoho and other Pennytel applications while she was on long
service leave; and
(g) the factory reset of her laptop.
I have some reservations about some of Ms Chitas’ evidence – in
particular her reluctance to agree with propositions
in cross-examination which
did not assist her case but which had an objective basis – I found her
explanation of forwarding
the December 2021 email to her sister and
inadvertently including the spreadsheet believable, particularly since her
sister was called
and gave evidence that she did not recall receiving either
email or spreadsheet. There was no indication in the email to Ms North
was the attachment, and not the email, that was important (in fact the email was
a forward without any covering message).
Ms North’s evidence – that
she did not recall receiving the document - would be surprising had Ms Chitas
sent it for
some nefarious purpose. Additionally, it was sent some nine months
prior to the formulation of the business plan and well before
March-May 2022,
the period cross-examined on by the plaintiff as the commencement of the scheme.
The evidence, particularly as to
timing, does not support this as being part of
a scheme to take and misuse confidential information. There is no evidence,
or able to be inferred from the surrounding facts, that this document was
actually used, or its misuse was threatened.
make the same comments as to the customer report, the Mesh customer email and
attached list, and the “little bit naughty”
email as I made in
relation to Mr Engelke. Each of these are prior – in some cases well prior
– to the business plan
formulation and the commencement of the pleaded
scheme. Pennytel’s allegation that Ms Chitas was not
“authorised”
to receive a customer spreadsheet is not sustainable
(much as Mr Zizic’s contention that had he known about the “little
bit naughty” email at the time, he would have offered an apology to Aussie
Broadband for that conduct was unbelievable –
an assertion he later,
fairly, resiled from). Mr Zizic agreed in cross-examination that the Mesh
customer email was part of what
appeared to be a legitimate communication
between Ms Chitas for Pennytel and Mr Engelke for Spirit.
plaintiff submitted that Ms Chitas’ response as to the Mesh customer email
was not believable; it submitted that it was
“the third customer list she
had sent”. Mr Freeman submitted for Pennytel that:
(a) after Mr Engelke had left Pennytel, she had sent him “the entire Mesh
customer list ... of a business that had only been
purchased by Pennytel 6 weeks
before ... and in the context where she knew Mr Engelke did not need the entire
(b) her stated reason for sending the list was: “I sent him a list to see
what Spirit could do for us. That’s why I sent
the list”; and
(c) “The excuse she gives is that she sent it to see what he could do for
us. It is a ridiculous answer. It could not possibly
be accepted as reasonable
conduct to keep sending around confidential information of Pennytel for a third
cannot agree that her answer was “ridiculous”. Mr Engelke worked for
Spirit, which was a supplier of particular services
to Pennytel. He gave
evidence that two other Pennytel employees sent him the same list, and it was
“completely reasonable to
send this sort of information to a prospective
supplier”. It was put to Mr Engelke that having received a confidential
he should have destroyed it; it does not seem to me that that is a
particularly commercial reaction to being sent a list of customers
legitimate purpose. Despite there being no context to the covering email, Mr
Engelke says he quoted the services from Spirit
to the various people who had
sent it to him.
make the same comments as to the Spirit email as I made in relation to Mr
Engelke, however, it appears that it was sent to Ms Chitas
prior to her
involvement in the business plan. Ms Chitas said that she did not know why Mr
Engelke had sent it to her, and because
it contained IT customers rather than
telco customers, “it was more to do with Pete”, and she deleted it.
This has an
air of objective reality.
relation to her access to Zoho and other apps while being on leave, Ms Chitas
said that despite this, she continued to look after
her Pennytel clients and, as
noted above at [
], dealt with two
“large” clients referred to her from Mr Horan’s company. This
is corroborated by a text exchange
on 13 January 2023 with Ms Fly and Ken Zebra
which refers to a customer “referred by Citracom”. Ms Chitas’
out-of-office
email contemplated that she would respond after 9 January 2023 to
clients with non-urgent problems. The Court Book includes other
examples of her
liaising with Pennytel and with her customers during her long service leave. For
example, there are texts with a
Mr Scott about his VoIP invoices, and, on 10
January, a query from a Focus customer named Craig who asked:
Are u still with focus, our computer guys need password for modem supplied by
Are u able to assist.
Modem is netcom NLXXXXXXX.
regards Craig
To which Ms Chitas replied, annexing a picture:
Hi Craig! Focus is no more however I am working for the company that bought
Here are the details. Feel free to give your IT guy my detsils if he needs
anything else
(both texts as written, modem number anonymised).
Mr Workman called Ms Chitas on 23 December 2022; she responded in early January
assisting him to sign in. There is also an email
dated 11 January 2023 to
Corporate Support reporting on a call she received from a client about issues
with their handsets; this
was an email from her Pennytel address. This client
was one of the first two clients to join SPN in February 2023 although nobody
from that company was called by either party.
overwhelming evidence is that Ms Chitas was a diligent account manager seeking
to assist her customers even though she was on
extended leave, on one occasion
logging on late at night to do so. The plaintiff has not identified any specific
confidential information
that she is alleged to have accessed during that time,
merely that she was not authorised by Pennytel “to access and use [
and other applications
] for the purposes of obtaining customer details to
use in a competing business”. There is no evidence that she did so for
purposes. Given the other evidence, as to her managing clients while on
leave, I cannot infer from the timing of the access that
it was for the purpose
of setting up a competing business; there is clear evidence that she was
undertaking her work for Pennytel
for the customers who contacted her while on
leave. I find that her access to Zoho and other applications while on leave was
course of her work at Pennytel and a legitimate use of Zoho and other
applications. There is no evidence at all to suggest, and much
evidence going
the other way, that her purpose was to “obtain names and contact details
of Pennytel and Spirit customers who
could be contacted and offered ... plans in
a new business”. In any event, in early January 2023, the only steps that
taken by her towards the new business were the formulation of the
business plan, the registration of Citratel and her appointment
as director, and
Mr Engelke and Mr Horan – not Ms Chitas – signing up with TIAB. No
customers joined SPN until February
the chain of correspondence regarding Ms Chitas’ resignation, she was
directed to return any confidential information to
Pennytel and, by letter of 23
January 2023 she was told:
... Ms Chitas must not delete any documents until Ms Chitas has first advised us
what documents she possesses and is advised that
she may do so, because the
preservation of documents may be necessary to enable Pennytel to determine the
extent of any breaches
of her employment obligations arising out of the
downloading of the Confidential Information.
the end of January, Ms Chitas returned her laptop to Pennytel. It had had the
operating system reinstalled and so any data on it
had been deleted. Her mobile
phone was also returned, with a factory reset, so that no information could be
obtained from it either.
will be recalled (and is set out at [
]) that the 23 January 2023 letter
warned Ms Chitas not to delete any confidential information. The plaintiff
relied on Mr Le’s
expert evidence that Ms Chitas’ laptop was erased
and the operating system reinstalled on 26 January 2023. It is submitted
this was “deliberate and done with the purpose of covering her
tracks”, I was urged to apply the maxim
omnia praesumuntur contra
spoliatorem
at [454]) and infer that the contents of
the laptop would have been deleterious for her case (
MCT Dairies
Inc v Probiotec Limited
, Rares J held that the presumption can arise even if no intention to
destroy evidence has been shown (at [36]).
MCT Dairies
was a case in
which documents had been destroyed, apparently in accordance with a document
destruction policy, when those documents
were relevant for discovery and use in
Court proceedings in the US. There was no evidence as to when they were
cases relied upon by the plaintiff do not, as submitted, demonstrate that mere
destruction of documents results in a negative
inference that the documents
would have been actively harmful to the destroying party’s case. In
, for example, Rares J (at [37]), did not accept a submission that
the respondent deliberately destroyed the documents to suppress
discovery or evidence. That finding meant that, instead of grounding an
inference that the missing documents supported
an assertion of wrongdoing, the
Court found that “the absence of those documents does not assist [
respondent’s
] case, and means it lacks any corroboration they may have
given it”. And, at [38], the Court found in favour of the respondent,
despite the absence of any corroborating documents, on the basis that it was
“inherently unlikely” that the respondent
would have allowed the
alleged transgressions because of other evidence as to the long-term business
relationship, external factors,
and the severe consequences had it engaged in
such behaviour.
Ms Chitas’ evidence was that while she was aware that Pennytel’s
lawyers were writing to her, she was not specifically
aware of the demand that
she not delete her hard drive. She said that she never had an intention to
delete any confidential information,
but rather reset the laptop so that
information that was personal to her would not carry over. It was put to her
that Mr Horan had
reset it for her, as she did not know how to install Windows,
which she denied, saying that “it just resets, doesn’t
The cross-examination on this issue appeared to conflate the IT expert Mr
Le’s evidence that “the reset process
is an intentional
action” with a need to reinstall the operating system as a further
intentional action, when the evidence
was that the reset process did in fact
reset the laptop by reinstalling the operating system “to return it to its
the device was first purchased”. She denied that she intended
to delete all her work emails as she understood that Pennytel
had access to them
as they were “in the Cloud”. This was confirmed by Mr Zizic in
cross-examination, when he was asked:
MR MILLER: But in terms of anything that was on – anything was sent out or
sent to Ms Chitas using a work email, you had it.
You already had all of that
information?---Yes.
Yes. And in fact, your affidavit attaches many communications passing between Ms
Chitas and Mr Engelke and Mr Horan. That’s
correct, isn’t it?---Yes.
So the factory reset of the laptop hasn’t hampered you at all in using or
in obtaining the email communications; that’s
correct?---The Pennytel
account, that’s correct, yes.
to Ms Chitas going on long service leave, she had had some significant family
losses, and her evidence was that Mr Horan and
Mr Engelke were not keeping her
updated with the progress of Citracom and then SPN and that “Pete kept me
out of it largely
just because he knew what was going on with my
am not able, on the evidence, either directly or by way of inference, to find
that Ms Chitas took the actions she did in December
2022 and January 2023 with
the intention of obtaining customer lists from Zoho and other applications, or
resetting her laptop with
a view to protecting herself and deleting wrongfully
obtained confidential information. The explanations she gives, far from being
ridiculous, are consonant with human experience.
Agreement or understanding that SPN would use Pennytel
confidential information
plaintiff pleads this element in a very specific way: that SPN would use The
Confidential Information by contacting customers
of Pennytel who were at or near
the end of their contracts with Pennytel and offer them contracts with the new
business at prices
below that offered by Pennytel or on terms competitive with
Pennytel (see paragraph 75 of the ASOC).
plaintiff in section 7.2 of its closing submissions set out a number of aspects
which, it is submitted, gives rise to an inference
that the defendants intended
to use The Confidential Information. These include (in summary):
(a) the fact of the new business being agreed to, and then Citratel established
with each of the first three defendants as directors
and (indirect)
shareholders;
(b) the new business (SPN) providing the same services as Pennytel but focused
on corporate customers;
(c) “what ultimately happened” being the movement of 121 customers
from Pennytel to SPN, 83 of them by June 2024, which
were higher yield business
(d) the conduct of the first and second defendants in the pleaded and other
actions relied upon, a lack of explanation for doing
so, and the deletion by Mr
Engelke and Ms Chitas of files from their laptops and mobiles; and
(e) the naming of SPN reflecting their initials, and a possibility that each of
Ms Chitas and Mr Engelke may take a 1/3 shareholding
in the future.
defendants submitted that the plaintiff’s pleading effectively amounts to
a conspiracy, and that accordingly, the gravity
of the matters alleged should be
taken into account in determining whether the case has been proven (see
Evidence Act
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
per Dixon J at 362). It was submitted that the specificity of the
pleading bound the plaintiff to a contention that the scheme encompassed
only that the defendants sought to set up a competing business, but that they
did so “by using the confidential information
of Pennytel”.
I have found above, only the Spirit email was sent by Mr Engelke with the new
business in mind, and Ms Chitas did not take any
of the actions attributed to
her with the purpose alleged by the plaintiff. The mere fact that the business
proposed by the defendants
was similar to that of Pennytel’s does not give
rise to an inference that it was intended thereby to use Pennytel’s
confidential
information. This is particularly so where the plaintiff has been
unable to prove a substantial plank of its case – that the
agreement to
set up a new business did not occur as early as it contended for, with the
result that many of the actions relied upon
could not have been with the misuse
of The Confidential Information in mind.
do not consider that Pennytel has discharged its onus in relation to the purpose
of the various actions relied upon being the pleaded
scheme, nor the intent of
Mr Engelke or Ms Chitas in deleting documents being nefarious. Pennytel has not
been able to prove the
existence of the pleaded scheme.
Misuse of confidential information – how did the
Pennytel clients get to SPN?
question still remains, however, as to whether Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas did, in
fact, misuse confidential information available
to them. It will be recalled
that although I have found that the various documents relied upon by the
plaintiff were not downloaded,
sent, or retained by the first and second
defendants for the purpose of the pleaded scheme, it is part of the
plaintiff’s case
that the following documents remained available for them
to use once SPN was actively engaged in business:
(a) the email attaching the spreadsheet forwarded by Ms Chitas to her sister, if
Ms North were able to provide it to Ms Chitas; this
was not part of the
pleading, and I note that Ms North in her affidavit says she must have deleted
the email as she no longer has
(b) the customer report forwarded by Ms Chitas to her personal email on 31 March
2022. In her affidavit Ms Chitas says that she no
longer has a copy of this
email, and has no downloaded or saved copy of the attachment;
(c) the ACT! Report, if it remained in Mr Engelke’s iCloud after he
deleted the folders from his laptop prior to its return;
(d) the Spirit customer list, which was forwarded to Mr Horan, and Ms Chitas,
and to Mr Engelke’s personal email, but, as will
be recalled, was not
confidential information of the plaintiff.
76 of the ASOC includes the allegations:
(c) Engelke, Chitas and Horan were each directors of Citratel and were
responsible for Citratel and the manner in which Citratel’s
conducted as pleaded in subparagraph (a);
(d) Engelke, Chitas, Horan and Citratel by its directors knew that Citratel
(i) could only sign up Customers of Pennytel if Citratel
had knowledge of the Customers of Pennytel, including their names, contact
details and terms of their contracts with Pennytel;
(ii) knew or ought to reasonably have known that knowledge of the Customers of
Pennytel, including their names, contact details
and terms of their contracts
with Pennytel was Confidential Information and that Pennytel was unaware and did
not consent to the
taking and use of the Confidential Information by Citratel
Particulars
Full particulars after discovery and the issue of subpoenas.
further particulars were in evidence.
80 pleads that from February 2023 to date, SPN had signed up Pennytel customers
by porting them from TIAB to SPN, resulting
in Pennytel losing those customers,
and they did so by using some of the Confidential Information.
plaintiff relied on “direct evidence of taking and misuse; circumstantial
evidence of misuse; and the lack of a reasonable
explanation from the
defendants” as the elements that prove “actual or threatened
misuse”. The plaintiff’s
key question was “where was [SPN]
getting [its] customers from for [its] new business?” The plaintiff
submitted that
the list of customers available to Ms Chitas (the customer list
and the ACT! report) correlate with Mr Nguyen’s, the plaintiff’s
expert, evidence on high-margin customers who left Pennytel and went to SPN.
However, the plaintiff was not able to show –
apart from the Focus on
Furniture email where Mr Engelke said he would always be available to the
customer – any actual approaches
to customers to join SPN. The pleaded
allegations are quite specific in that particular customers were targeted and
approached at
the end of their contracts. Yet the plaintiff has not been able to
prove that aspect apart from relying on inferences of wrongdoing,
which would be
much more easily reached had I found that there was a purpose to the pleaded and
other actions of the defendants relied
on by the plaintiff.
defendants on the other hand brought evidence from ten customers who each denied
being approached, or encouraged, to leave Pennytel.
They each had reasons to
leave Pennytel. Only three of those customers were cross-examined. The
defendants submitted that against
an inference that confidential information
must have been used, “Pennytel’s own case includes over a thousand
customer interactions including many pages of logged customer
complaints” which back up the stated reasons for the witness
leaving Pennytel.
plaintiff contended that the
factor of an inability to get to
“the position they have, at the speed they have, had the defendant simply
started from legitimate
sources and worked everything out for himself” (at
[41](d)) results in an irresistible inference that confidential information
as the ACT! report and customer report had been used. However, there is no
evidence as to what would be a speedy setup. Five
invoices were issued to former
Pennytel customers by SPN in February 2023, one of which was Citracom, Mr
Horan’s company. A
further twelve companies were issued their first SPN
invoice in March 2023, a number of which were noted as “Nick /
or “Sam / family”. An important factor is the loyalty
which the customers who gave evidence seemed to owe to Mr Engelke
or Ms Chitas;
many had been with them through various companies over a number of years. The
evidence shows that customers often rang
Ms Chitas (including customers from the
Focus years) seeking her assistance; there is no reason why that should not have
after she commenced work for SPN.
evidence of Mr Nguyen is that the Pennytel customers who left for SPN tended to
be those who had been at Pennytel – or its
purchased businesses such as
Focus – for a long time. At paragraph 3.3.11 of his report, he observed
that “the average
tenure for Transferred customers is 9.83 years. This is
more than double the average tenure of Retained Corporate customers, being
years”. This is consistent with the defendants’ position that
customers followed them, rather than the plaintiff’s
position, that those
customers would only have moved providers had they been targeted, and that, in
effect Pennytel’s rates
had been undercut by SPN. There is no evidence
that SPN was cheaper than Pennytel; in fact, they were about the same, or (going
Ms McCann’s estimates) slightly more expensive.
Horan gave evidence that SPN was not solely servicing former Pennytel customers,
and that it undertook business development such
as social media marketing,
networking, LinkedIn, and referrals from current customers. The defendants
pointed to the numbers of customers
lost by Pennytel between February 2023 to
October 2024, a total of 398, of which Mr Zizic said only 78 went to SPN
(although Mr Nguyen’s
report specifies 83, and that is the figure relied
on by the plaintiff in its loss claim).
is a difference between the parties as to who should have established the
reasons for customers leaving Pennytel. The plaintiff’s
position is that,
having established by way of inference that the customers left because of misuse
of confidential information, the
defendants should have called the remaining
customers – over 100. In contrast, the defendants said that that would be
oppressive, and would impermissibly reverse the burden of proof;
particularly so, where the defendants submitted that the basis for
the inference
has not been made out.
this, I must agree with the defendants. While, as noted in
[40]) that instances of direct evidence of misuse are likely to be rare, I
consider that where the misuse is pleaded as specific
approaches to high-yield
customers at or nearing the end of their contracts, something more than
inferences of the type asserted
must be proved. There is no evidence that anyone
was approached; there are ten witnesses who say they were not. The plaintiff
to have founded its initial case,
directorships and shareholding of Citratel and concerns about Mr Engelke
accessing Octane after his departure from Pennytel
(which it was shown during
the trial that he had not), and about Ms Chitas working while on long service
leave and accessing Zoho
(which I have found did not have a sinister reason).
Those initial concerns of Pennytel did not appear, after the evidence, to be
well-founded.
Conclusion on the scheme
the findings I have come to as to the timing of the formulation of the business
plan, and my findings as to the lack of misuse
of any confidential information,
the fourth element in
Optus Networks
has not been made out. Accordingly,
the part of the plaintiff’s case relying on the pleaded scheme and the
misuse of confidential
information does not succeed.
Were there breaches of the
Corporations Act
duties by any of
the first to third defendants?
plaintiff alleged that the conduct of Ms Chitas and Mr Engelke was in breach of
Corporations Act
Section 182(1)
182 Use of position—civil obligations
Use of position—directors, other officers and employees
(1) A director, secretary, other officer or employee of a corporation must
not improperly use their position to:
(a) gain an advantage for themselves or someone else; or
(b) cause detriment to the corporation.
183 Use of information—civil obligations
Use of information—directors, other officers and employees
(1) A person who obtains information because they are, or have been, a
director or other officer or employee of a corporation must
not improperly use
the information to:
(a) gain an advantage for themselves or someone else; or
(b) cause detriment to the corporation.
Note 1: This duty continues after the person stops being an officer or
employee of the corporation.
Corporations Act
codifies aspects of the contractual
obligation to serve with loyalty and fidelity (see
Labelmakers
Group Pty Ltd v LL Force Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2012] FCA 512
per Tracey J at
[106]), and mirrors the equivalent equitable duty.
has been said to reflect the fiduciary obligation under the general law (see
Smart EV Solutions
Pty Ltd v Guy
[2023] FCA 1580
(Derrington J)). It continues, as set out in Note 1, beyond the employment of
the employee.
test of impropriety for the purposes of
Corporations Act
is an objective one. This test was established by the
joint majority in
[1995] HCA 1
183 CLR 501
which dealt with the predecessor of
, and established the test for
“improper use” in the following terms at 514-515:
Impropriety consists in a breach of the standards of conduct that would be
expected of a person in the position of the alleged offender
by reasonable
persons with knowledge of the duties, powers and authority of the position and
the circumstances of the case.
to the meaning of “information” in
Corporations
, the plaintiff accepted the “narrower view” as expressed by
Derrington J in
Smart EV Solutions
at [71]-[72]:
[71] While there has been some difference of opinion about the type of
“information” to which the section applies, the
view that arguably
accords best with the statutory language is that the term extends broadly to
“knowledge of facts”
or to “any information that a person may
have acquired because of their position in the company”:
Securities and Investments Commission v Somerville
[2009] NSWSC 934
(2009) 77 NSWLR 110
Digital Cinema Network Pty Ltd v Omnilab Media Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2011] FCA 509
Prestige Lifting Services Pty Ltd v Williams
[2015] FCA 1063
(2015) 333 ALR 674
, 702 [207];
DHL Supply Chain (Australia) Pty Limited v
United Workers’ Union
[2021] FCA 707
[33]. See, generally, the
discussion in
[534] – [544]. Although instances of breach
of confidence may fall within the reach of
, the question posed by the
section is not whether the information is confidential, but how the information
is acquired — specifically,
whether it has been obtained because the
person in question is a director, other officer or employee: see
(1988) 13 ACLR 619
United Petroleum
at 451 [649].
[72] That having been said, it might also be argued that a narrower view of the
term “information” must for now prevail
at first instance in this
Court after the Full Court in
Futuretronics.com.au Pty Ltd v Graphix Labels
[2009] FCAFC 2
(2008) 81 IPR 1
Futuretronics
) endorsed at 9 – 10 [44]
– [46] the statement of Young J in
Rosetex Company Pty Ltd v Licata
(1994) 12 ACSR 779
at 784 that “‘information’ ... means
the sort of information which equity would protect by injunction if a director
used it in breach of his fiduciary duties”. The position apparently
adopted by the Full Court has been adhered to on multiple
subsequent occasions:
Blackmagic Design Pty Ltd v Overliese
[2010] FCA 13
(2010) 84 IPR 505
Links Golf Tasmania Pty Ltd v Sattler
[2012] FCA 634
(2012) 213 FCR 1
, 230 [700];
GDP Group Pty Ltd v Saye
[2022] FCA 688
New Aim Pty Ltd v Leung
[2022] FCA 722
[248] – [251]. A Full Court constituted by five Judges
recently found it unnecessary to reconsider the correctness of that
New Aim Pty Ltd v Leung
[2023] FCAFC 67
(2023) 410 ALR 190
, 203 [58] – [59].
plaintiff relied on Mr Engelke downloading the ACT! Report and customer report
and sending it to Ms Chitas, the Octane access
on 2 and 3 May and the iCloud
back up. As established above, these actions were either within the scope of Mr
Engelke’s regular
duties, or did not support the inference sought to be
drawn as to an improper use of his position. It did not consist of a
of the standards of conduct that would be expected of a person in
the position” of Mr Engelke at Pennytel (
at 514-515).
am also unable to find that Ms Chitas improperly used her position to gain an
advantage or cause a detriment to Pennytel. As discussed
in my reasons above,
the email and Margin Summary spreadsheet forwarded to Ms Chitas’ sister
was sent some nine months prior
to the formulation of the business plan, the
Mesh customer email and “little bit naughty” email were made prior
business plan formulation and commencement of the pleaded scheme, and Ms
Chitas’ explanations for accessing Zoho and other
apps while on leave was
corroborated with documentary evidence that did not imply any sinister
motivation, but rather that Ms Chitas
was responding to clients in the scope of
her ordinary duties.
agree with the defendants’ submission that the conduct alleged does not
meet the test of improper use as set out in
R v Byrnes.
light of these findings, it is not necessary to consider whether damages should
be awarded under
Corporations Act
for any breach of
Corporations Act
seeking to prove a breach of
, the plaintiff submitted that Mr
Engelke’s participation in the scheme, his inferred use of The
Confidential Information, and
the speed at which SPN was set up and gained
former Pennytel customers, constituted a contravention of
Corporations Act
. I have not found any evidence, or inferences that can
lead to a conclusion to the proper level of satisfaction, of either Mr Engelke
or Ms Chitas seeking to use information obtained as an employee to divert
customers from Pennytel to SPN once that company got underway.
I accept the
defendants’ submission that the test of improper use has not been made out
in respect of
Accessorial liability under the
Corporations Act
can extend to a person involved in a contravention of
(1). The definition of a person involved in a contravention is
Corporations Act
, and relevantly
provides that a person is involved in a contravention if the person “has
been in any way... knowingly concerned in, or
party to, the
contravention”. In
Yorke v Lucas
(1985) 158 CLR 661
Court interpreted this to mean that the person must have knowledge of the
essential facts constituting the contravention,
although they do not have to
know that those facts amount to a contravention (see also
Productivity
Partners Pty Ltd (t/as Captain Cook College) v Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission
(2024) 419 ALR 30
[2024] HCA 27).
plaintiff’s position is that by reason of entry into and fulfilment of the
scheme, Mr Horan and SPN (through Mr Horan) had
actual knowledge of the
essential elements of Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas’ contraventions of
Corporations Act
. It alleged that Mr Horan was
knowingly concerned, under
Corporations Act
statutory contraventions, and was therefore liable under
Corporations Act
my findings on the existence of a scheme, and the lack of misuse of confidential
information, Mr Horan does not have any separate
liability for his involvement
in Citratel and, later, SPN.
will deal briefly with the elements that the plaintiff relied upon in seeking to
attach liability to Mr Horan. Mr Horan said in
his affidavit that he considered
the clients that Citracom had referred to Ms Chitas at her various places of
employment (including
Focus and Pennytel) would “very likely follow me to
a new venture”. He denied that he had seen confidential information
Pennytel’s, including “documents, reports or client lists or
anything that [he] would identify as being Pennytel’s
confidential
information”.
26 January 2023, Mr Engelke received an offer of employment letter from Web
Steps, a business owned by Mr Horan, to commence in
the role of Business
Development Manager. In cross-examination, Mr Horan accepted that he had hired
Mr Engelke, through Web Steps,
to work in the SPN business, and that by the end
of January 2023, he intended for Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas to be involved in the
business of SPN. Mr Horan denied that SPN intended to start trading on 1
February 2023, which was a denial the plaintiff alleged
went “fairly and
squarely to his credit”, however Mr Horan did accept that by February, the
SPN business was “up
and running”.
plaintiff relied on the fact that Mr Horan had inserted confidentiality
provisions into the Web Steps, Citracom and SPN employment
contracts as evidence
of his understanding of the importance of keeping client details confidential.
The plaintiff submitted that
Mr Horan was “happy to sit back and take the
new business through SPN from former Pennytel customers notwithstanding his
understanding from his own employee contracts that customer details were
confidential”.
plaintiff relied on the above facts to demonstrate that Mr Horan intended SPN to
be a continuation of the scheme which was pleaded
in relation to Citratel, that
is, for Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas to take and misuse Pennytel’s
confidential information. The
plaintiff drew on some of Mr Horan’s answers
order to make submissions about his “attitude to reasonable business
morality”, but Mr Horan’s view was that as
Citratel was not actually
competing, they were “not actually doing anything wrong”. The latter
view is reflected in my
reasons as set out above as to whether Ms Chitas was
involved in a competitive business or whether she was merely taking preparatory
steps towards one.
completeness, the plaintiff also submitted that each of Mr Engelke, Mr Horan and
SPN were involved in the contravention of
section 182
by Ms Chitas. As I have
not found any such contraventions, this ground cannot succeed.
Was it unlawful for SPN to start trading in February
plaintiff’s case is based on an assumption that SPN commenced by reason of
the pleaded scheme and by unlawfully using confidential
information. In the
absence of proof of those contentions, there was nothing unlawful about SPN
starting trading in February 2023.
The plaintiff’s case on the employment agreements
from the issue of confidential information, the plaintiff alleged (as clarified
by the time of the closing submissions)
(a) Mr Engelke breached the terms of his employment agreement relating to
disclosing The Confidential Information to other persons,
and using it for
purposes not in the proper performance of his duties; not returning The
Confidential Information on leaving the
company; and failing to advise his
employer of a conflict of interest;
(b) Mr Engelke breached the implied term of good faith and fidelity while
employed by Pennytel;
(c) Ms Chitas breached the terms of her employment agreement relating to
disclosing The Confidential Information to other persons,
and using it for
purposes not in the proper performance of her duties; not returning The
Confidential Information on leaving the
company; and
(d) Ms Chitas breached the implied term of good faith and fidelity (while
employed) or the contractual restraint period in her employment
agreement (for
the six months after 23 January 2023) not to compete with or divert business
from Pennytel.
was a preliminary issue as to which documents formed the basis of the first and
second defendants’ terms of employment.
I will deal with that issue first,
then go on to examine whether the alleged breaches are made out, including
determining, in relation
to Ms Chitas, whether the restraint was reasonable or,
as submitted by the defendants, void.
What were the first and second defendants’ terms of
employment with Pennytel?
preliminary issue was the terms upon which each of the first and second
defendants were employed. As noted, they each were initially
employed by Focus,
and they were offered employment within the Pennytel group once the Focus
business was sold.
of Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas signed an employment agreement in (relevantly) the
same terms with Pennytel, Mr Engelke on 23 July
2021, and Ms Chitas on 26 July
2021. They were each sent a Contract of Employment with a Schedule of
“Entitlements, Duties
and Obligations” under cover of a letter from
Rebecca Ryan, the General Manager of Pennytel at the time (together,
employment contract
). It is not in dispute that each of them owed a duty of
good faith and loyalty to Pennytel (at least, Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas said,
during the periods of their employment), or that they each had access to
confidential information during that time. Nor is it in
dispute that the
original employment contract bound each of them when first signed.
Engelke commenced work with Pennytel as a technician, after Focus was acquired
by Pennytel. On 5 October 2021, he was promoted
to Corporate Business Manager,
and on around 1 November 2021 he was promoted to Head of Corporate Services. He
was not provided with
a new employment contract for either of these roles. Mr
Engelke pleads that his change of position meant that he was no longer bound
the terms of his original employment contract, as they were specific to his
former position as Senior Technician, and his duties
and responsibilities had
“profoundly changed”.
Chitas also entered into an original employment contract with Pennytel. She was
employed as an Account Manager.
two original employment contracts signed by Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas
respectively contained the following term as to “consequences
termination”. In each of the quotes in the following paragraphs, the
relevant portion relied upon by the plaintiff is emphasised
underlining
8.3. Consequences of termination
8.3.1. If you terminate your employment, or if your employment has been
terminated,
8.3.1.1. promptly return all property of the Company that is in your possession
or control, including any document containing any
Confidential
Information
, as the term is defined in section 3.2 of Schedule 1; and
8.3.1.2. not represent yourself as having any ongoing connection with The
All obligations imposed on you under
of Schedule 1
Obligations
”) shall survive the termination of your
employment and you continue to be bound by the same subsequent to termination.
acknowledge and agree that:
8.3.1.3.1. the Obligations
are fair and reasonable for the purposes of protecting the Company’s
business and goodwill
8.3.1.3.2. your benefits and entitlements granted to you pursuant to your
employment with the Company are adequate consideration
for the Obligations, and
that no other consideration or compensation is necessary in respect of the such
Obligations;
8.3.1.3.3. any breach of the Obligations are likely to cause the Company
substantial and irrevocable damage which is difficult to
measure, and
accordingly, in the event of any such breach or threatened breach, the Company
shall have the right to obtain an injunction
from a court restraining such
breach or threatened breach and the right to specific performance of the
Obligations subsequent to
the termination of your employment;
8.3.1.3.4. the Company shall be entitled to other remedies to the maximum extent
permitted by law; and
8.3.1.3.5. if at any time hereafter, you are offered an arrangement or contract
which may cause you to breach the Obligations, you
must notify any person, firm,
company or entity of your
obligations.
Obligations appear in Clause 3.1 of the Schedule relevantly as
3. Obligations
3.1. Electronic Communications
3.1.1. You may be given a computer, a phone and other types of electronic
communications equipment for the duration of your employment
with the Company to
support you in the performance of your duties.
3.1.2. You will also have access to computer software, internet, phone, fax,
email and voicemail supplied by the Company.
3.1.3. You acknowledge and agree that:
3.1.3.1. all material transmitted or received by electronic communications
belongs to the Company and may be monitored by the Company.
Audit trails
detailing the dates and times of all internet site visits, together with the
duration of such activities may be recorded
and email activity may also be
monitored. Should circumstances warrant it, the content of internal/ external
email messages may also
be intercepted and viewed by persons authorised by the
Company, and if necessary, be blocked and quarantined.
3.1.3.2. you must use all electronic communication equipment and systems
supplied by the Company to communicate with other persons
business-related purposes.
3.1.3.3. you may be charged for the use of such equipment and system for any
personal purposes unless such use is reasonable in the
circumstances.
3.1.3.4. in using the equipment and systems, you must:
3.1.3.4.1. safeguard your
account and password.
3.1.3.4.2. comply with confidential information requirements.
3.1.3.4.3. respect the privacy of others.
3.1.3.4.4. use plain language format.
3.1.3.5. you must not use the equipment and system for any illegal or
unacceptable activities,
dissemination, mailing, display, posting, receipt or solicitation of illegal,
obscene, threatening, defamatory, intimidating
or harassing material or hate
propaganda.
3.1.3.5.2. defamation of other users, individuals or organisations.
3.1.3.5.3. posting or in any way compromising the personal information of others
as prohibited by the provisions of privacy laws.
3.1.3.5.4. theft, extortion, sabotage, fraud or blackmail, violation of
other proprietary
interests, including any activity that supports the illegal distribution of
any such activity as prohibited by copyright
3.1.3.5.5. gaining, or attempting to gain, unauthorised access to any kind of
network, service, information, communications, computing
facility or resource
using the Company's facilities.
3.1.3.5.6. attempts to monitor or tamper with another user's electronic
communications, except for monitoring by systems administrators
performance of their authorised duties attempts to store or transfer any
information, or to circumvent another user's authentication
or security of any
network or account, and any other activity, which can be construed as either
'cracking' or 'hacking';
3.1.3.5.7. damaging or destroying the integrity of a system, or the data or
programs stored on a system.
3.1.3.5.8. dealing in any way with sexually explicit or pornographic
3.1.3.5.9. harassing another person.
3.1.3.5.10. injuring or disparaging the reputation of the Company, its partners
3.1.3.5.11. injuring or disparaging the reputation of a person outside the
company, including any client of the
you must not use the
equipment and system for
unauthorised use or disclosure of the Company's Confidential Information, as
the term is defined in section 3.2 herein, including
forwarding any email
relating to the business or management of the Company to any person outside the
Company, or to any private email
account utilised by you which is shared with
family members or friends.
3.1.3.6.2. publishing or distributing any material which has not been approved
for distribution.
3.1.3.6.3. uploading, downloading, modifying or removing files from the
3.1.3.6.4. downloading any shareware, freeware or other executable files from
the Internet without the express prior approval of
your supervisor.
3.1.3.6.5. posting information to the Web, ftp or gopher servers, without the
express prior approval of your supervisor.
3.1.3.6.6. posting information to unapproved newsgroups, forums, blogs or
discussion groups.
3.1.3.6.7. distributing, displaying, soliciting or receiving material, which is
in any way contained herein, or generally accepted
the references to the defined term “Company’s Confidential
Information” being found in “clause 3.2
of Schedule 1” (see
clause 3.1.3.6.1 of the Schedule), neither that particular definition nor that
numbered clause exists.
It can be construed as a reference to the
“Confidential Information” found in clause 4.1 of the Schedule,
as follows:
Confidential and Proprietary Information
4.1. You may be entitled to, or may become aware of, information which is
confidential to the Company (
Confidential Information
) during your
employment, including, without limitation:
4.1.1. information regarding the affairs of the company, including products and
services, finances, customer details, sales figures,
employee details, pricing
methodologies, finances, and similar information relating to the Company’s
internal operations, plans,
policies, practices and transactions.
4.1.2. information regarding the affairs of any client of the Company.
4.1.3. proprietary information, including trade secrets, client lists, know-how,
original works or inventions, designs, trademarks
and trade names, whether
registered or not, technical processes, systems, methods, inventions,
discoveries, improvements, enhancements,
records, reports, documents, papers and
other materials whatsoever and any derivative works thereof, prepared by the
Company or another
employee, or by any client of the Company.
Except in the proper performance of your duties or as required by law,
you must not:
4.1.4.1. disclose any
Confidential Information to any other employee or to any third person outside
the Company.
4.1.4.2. use any Confidential Information for any other
Unless written prior authorisation is
given by your supervisor, you must not:
4.1.5.1. copy, modify or
reproduce any Confidential Information.
4.1.5.2. search or access any document prepared by another person within the
4.1.6. You agree to waive all proprietary rights, title and interests you may
have, including moral rights, in any Confidential Information,
proprietary information which you may have developed or created or enhanced, or
assisted in such development, creation or
enhancement, during the course of your
employment, and that all such Confidential Information belong solely to the
Company, or its
clients or licensors, whichever the case may be.
You must not retain and must return or destroy at the direction of the
Company, any Confidential Information which you are in possession
upon your leaving the employment of the Company.
4.2 provided that all reasonable steps must be taken to avoid a conflict of
interest arising, and should such a conflict arise,
the employee should promptly
notify their supervisor.
4.3 of the Schedule provided for a restraint. It read:
4.3 Restraint
4.3.1. For the purposes of this section:
“Client” means any person, firm, company or entity which
has at any time before or during the Restraint Period been a
client of the
4.3.1.2 “Prospective Client” means any person, firm, company or
entity which has at any time before or during the Restraint
Period been in
negotiations with the Company for the supply of services; and
“Restraint Period” means the period during which you must
comply with the restraint obligations below, being the duration
employment with the Company and for 6 months after termination of such
employment.
4.3.2. In order to protect the Company's goodwill and in consideration of the
benefits derived by you pursuant to your employment
with the Company, you
acknowledge and agree that, unless prior written consent has been given by the
you will not directly or indirectly, during the Restraint
engage, or assist others in engaging, in any business or enterprise
that is competitive with our business, whether or not as an owner,
officer, director, employee, consultant, investor, lender or otherwise.
either alone or with others, solicit, canvass, divert or take away,
or attempt to solicit, canvass, divert or take away, the business
or patronage
of any Clients or Prospective Clients.
either alone or with others, supply, or attempt to supply, to any
Client or Prospective Client products and services like the products
services offered by the Company;
4.3.2.4 either alone or with others, solicit, induce or attempt to induce, any
of the Company's employees or contractors to terminate
his or her employment or
engagement with the Company, or to hire or engage any such employee or
contractor.
4.3.3. Each of the restrictions contained in paragraph 4.3.2 is a separate and
independent restriction, notwithstanding that it may
be contained in the same
phrase, and if any part is found to be void and unenforceable, the remainder
will remain valid and enforceable.
Which documents form the terms of employment for Mr
relation to Mr Engelke, the Amended Defence pleads that once he became Corporate
Business Manager on 5 October 2021, his “employment
responsibilities had profoundly changed, such that his employment was no longer
bound” by the original employment
email sent by Ms Ryan to Mr Engelke on 5 October 2021 said, “I am pleased
to confirm your role change to Corporate Business
Manager with Pennytel
Australia”. That letter did not specify that he was no longer bound by the
original employment contract.
After noting that his role had changed, it set out
his management responsibilities, as well as his salary. The specification of his
then current salary was numbered in a similar but not identical format to the
original employment contract. The email went on to
say his salary would be
reviewed in six months’ time.
on 5 October 2021, Mr Engelke and Ms Ryan corresponded by email about the role
change. In that email chain, Mr Engelke raised
the long hours he had been
working as a technician and asked for a salary increase. He wrote:
My employment contract says that if I am required to work beyond my ordinary
hours I will be remunerated and that I need to seek
prior approval to work
overtime. Instead of seeking approval in advance which isn’t really
possible except for pre organised
tech jobs, so I am asking for a salary
increase of 20% to cover the additional hours and responsibilities.
Ryan replied on 6 October 2021, noting that management roles did not have
overtime, and that there were “minimal long days”.
Apart from Mr
Engelke referring to his “employment contract”, there was no other
discussion about the original employment
contract or any other form of
8 November 2021, Ms Ryan wrote to Mr Engelke “confirm[ing] your role
change to Head of Corporate Services with Pennytel Australia.”
position, he did receive a pay increase of 10% and had “an overall
responsibility of the Corporate Business Clients”.
Zizic said in his affidavit of 7 June 2023 at paragraph 36:
Mr Engelke was employed by Pennytel Australia as a Senior Technician from 29
July 2021 to 7 November 2021. On 8 November 2021 Mr
Engelke was promoted to the
role of Head of Corporate Services. The role change included direct management
of the Corporate Services
Team Members and an overall responsibility of
Corporate Business Clients. He was in this role until he resigned and exited the
on 6 May 2022.
Zizic did not provide any detail around any employment contract discussions for
the role of Head of Corporate Services, merely
annexing a copy of the letter
from Ms Ryan and the contract of employment signed on 23 July 2021 before his
evidence as to the role
because Mr Engelke was bound by a duty of fidelity during his employment with
Pennytel (see Irving M KC,
The Contract of Employment
LexisNexis Australia, 2012) p 370 at [7.30]), the defendants submitted that
“those written terms probably do not materially
add to the common law
obligations”.
support of the submission that the original employment contract did not apply
after 8 November 2021, the defendants pointed to
the absence of a “job
mobility clause” and relied on
Quinn v Jack Chia
(Australia) Ltd
[1992] VicRp 37
[1992] 1 VR 567 (Ashley
J) where an employee was initially
engaged on the basis of his employment being able to be terminated by one
month’s notice
by either party, as “an understudy to the General
Manager” of a construction project. During his two years of employment
with the defendant, Mr Quinn functioned in three other roles; a period of over a
year when he acted as General Manager, a period
of three months when he was
construction manager for a different project and construction manager for the
whole group, and finally,
six months of various duties in several construction
projects, but not the project where he had been general manager. In that case,
the plaintiff contended that each change of position supplanted the previous
contract of employment.
Millar, counsel for the defendants, relied on the statement of Ashley J at
... the passage highlights what seems to me to be a valid point - that where
employer and employee agree to an alteration in the
employee's duties and
responsibilities which is profound, a court should be more ready to hold (unless
the original contract of employment
provided for the contingency) that a new
contract has replaced the old; or at least that the old contract, as varied,
contained terms
objectively appropriate to the new relationship created.
passage referred to above is from a South Australian case of
Mutual Insurance Co
of Australia v Sabine
[1920] SALawRp 21
[1920] SALR 284
Murray CJ at 292:
... unless the original agreement gave the employer the right to the services of
the employee in any capacity he chose to direct
from time to time there would be
a new employment whenever a change was made in the duties to be performed, and
it would be a question
of fact in each case what the terms of the new employment
of the decisions in
Quinn v Jack Chia
Federated Mutual Insurance
stressed that the Court must consider the factual circumstances of each
contract of employment and each position. The terms in question
in each case
were the period of notice which was originally agreed to be one month, but after
significant (or profound) promotions,
the period of notice was assessed to be a
“reasonable” one (of 12 months in
Quinn v Jack Chia
Federated Mutual Insurance Co
5.1 of the original employment contract provides:
5.1. You will be part of the Victorian Business Sales Department of the Company,
reporting to the General Manager of Pennytel Australia.
However, you may still
be required to undertake work with other departments of the Company in response
to the needs of the business.
Schedule to the original employment contract provides:
2.1. Your principal duties are as follows:
2.1.1. Victorian Business Sales
2.1.1.1. In a team environment, retain and grow the Pennytel Corporate
2.1.1.2. Understand the company’s goal and purpose so that you can adapt
in situations to enhance the company’s performance.
2.1.1.3. Other reasonable tasks the company advises as per the ongoing needs of
the business.
provisions were relied on by the plaintiff to demonstrate that the terms of the
original employment contract would continue
to apply to Mr Engelke despite his
promotions.
question in relation to Mr Engelke’s employment is not whether a period of
notice of termination from a lower level of employment
subsisted into a higher
level of employment; here, the terms relied on by the plaintiff are terms
relating to the use of confidential
information and post-employment restraints,
which would doubtless have been imported into any contract of employment for Mr
subsequent roles in the same, (or, in the context of the
post-employment restraints, possibly more stringent) terms. Mr Zizic’s
evidence was that “all of its employment agreements with staff”
contained the confidential information clause.
J referred to having regard to the “industry norm” when determining
what Mr Quinn’s period of notice should
be (at 581). Pennytel submitted
that Mr Engelke continued to be bound by the confidentiality and restraint
provisions in the original
employment contract despite his change of role. It
submitted that:
The construction contended for by Mr Engelke produces a commercially absurd
result that a change in duties anticipated in the wording
of the employment
agreement discharge him from all liability under the confidentiality clause and
he is contractually free to do
as he pleases. Reasonable persons would not so
construe a contract.
seems to me that the change of duties from Senior Technician to a management
role within Pennytel was not the kind of change which
would have released Mr
Engelke from his previous obligations to safeguard his employer’s
confidentiality, nor the restraints
on his post-Pennytel employment. In my view,
the proper basis to have regard to Mr Engelke’s terms of employment is the
he signed on 23 July 2021, which, given his question as to his
contractual rights, appears to have been the parties’ view at
the time. In
any event, the defendants accepted that various kinds of confidential
information were the confidential information
of the plaintiff.
Which documents form the terms of employment for Ms
the time of the plaintiff’s closing submissions, the plaintiff relied only
on the original employment contract. This was
a step back for the plaintiff, as
the contention was, as Mr Zizic said in his first affidavit that employee
contracts were “altered
in respect of confidential information” in
February 2022 and that Ms Chitas was estopped from relying on the original
contract. The alleged estoppel was based on a further employment
contract being sent to Ms Chitas by letter dated 4 February 2022,
as pleaded and
alleged by Pennytel. This is not admitted by Ms Chitas, who says that she has no
recollection of receiving the further
employment contract from Ms Ryan. However,
at the end of the day, the plaintiff did not press this contention.
Accordingly,
as the plaintiff cannot prove that Ms Chitas agreed to the further employment
contract, Ms Chitas is bound by the original
employment contract.
Was the Employee Handbook part of the contract of employment
for either of the first or second defendants?
January 2022, Pennytel adopted two new systems, an HR unit called Zoho People
and an internal company communications unit called
Zoho Connect. The email
notifying the employees as to these changes was from Rebecca Ryan to the
“Pennytel All Hands”
email address. The email included a link to the
Pennytel Employee
. Clause 1.2 identified the “Purpose of
the Employee Handbook” as “the Employer’s rules and
regulations, the
policies and procedures relating to your employment and also
contains information on your benefits and protections ... all employees
required to comply with the... Handbook”.
1.4 of the Handbook provided:
1.4 GENERAL
Amendments to this Employee Handbook will be issued from time to time.
This Employee Handbook does not form part of your contract of employment, unless
expressly stated otherwise. However, in any event,
the Employee Handbook may be
considered when interpreting your rights and obligations under your terms of
employment.
the extent that the contents of the Employee Handbook are relevant, given that
by the plaintiff:
7.1 IT and Computer Policy
ii) Use of computer equipment
In order to control the use of the Employer’s computer equipment and
reduce the risk of contamination, the following rules
will apply:
the introduction of new software and
applications must first of all be checked and authorised by management before
general use will
be permitted
only authorised employees are permitted access to the Employer’s
computer equipment
only software that is used for business applications may be used on the
Employer’s computer equipment
computers are to be locked at the end of the day before leaving work
no software may be brought onto or taken from the Employer’s premises
without prior authorisation and
unauthorised copying and/or removal of computer equipment and/or software
will result in disciplinary action up to and including
termination.
8. STANDARDS
8.4 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
You may not be involved, employed or engaged in any activity which may be or is
likely to create a conflict of interest. The Employer
may take whatever action
it determines appropriate to avoid the actual or potential conflict of interest.
Such action may include
transfers, reassignments, changing shifts, or, where the
Employer deems such action appropriate, termination of employment.
17.4 CONFIDENTIALITY
All Employer business information is regarded as confidential; this includes
customer and staff information. Therefore, you must
take steps to protect
Employer records at all times against loss, unauthorised access, alteration, or
destruction.
You are required to take special care to secure all records and to prevent
unauthorised disclosure of any Employer or other business
information. Customer
or customer contact information is particularly sensitive as customers have a
legal right to expect personal
information held about them to be held in utmost
confidence. On behalf of the Company it is your legal obligation to ensure these
rights are protected.
Precautions must be taken to ensure third parties, including members of your
family, visitors or other persons visiting or residing
in your home do not
become aware of any information which is confidential.
Information must not be left unattended when you are working and when materials
are not in use they should be locked away in a secure
place. Similar precautions
must be taken when transporting documents in the course of your work.
You must take responsibility for destroying safely any paperwork containing
confidential Employer business that is no longer required.
Where necessary,
papers can be brought to the Employer’s offices for confidential
If you have any reason to believe that Employer information is lost, altered or
has been accessed by any unauthorised person, you
must report this to your
manager without delay.
Use of any computer equipment owned by the Employer, its software, etc. is
limited to yourself alone and to business applications
only. Personal equipment
such as a printer or modem may not be connected to any of the Employers’
equipment or property without
consent. Information personal to you should not be
stored on the computer.
ASOC does not plead that the Handbook formed part of the terms of employment of
either Mr Engelke or Ms Chitas. However, as will
be seen, the plaintiff alleged
failures by each of the first and second defendants arising out of the
“unauthorised copying”
of the information on their company-owned
laptops and mobile phones, relying on the Handbook.
Engelke accepted in cross-examination that he was aware of the Handbook and
understood that he was not free to undertake “unauthorised
and that he should protect confidentiality in emails. Ms Chitas was less
forthcoming about her knowledge of the Handbook
but did not dispute that she had
received it, and agreed that she had had a conversation with Ms Ryan about
Accordingly,
I will regard the Handbook as forming part of the policies and procedures of
Pennytel, which applied to the first and
second defendants while employed by
Pennytel, but not as part of the employment contracts of Mr Engelke or Ms
Chitas. In the plaintiff’s
submissions, the Handbook was relied upon to
give context to the confidential information clauses in the respective
employment contracts.
However, where the terms of the Handbook are not pleaded
as binding the first two defendants, it should not be used to bolster the
express provisions relating to their conduct in their respective employment
Implied term of good faith and fidelity
of the first and second defendants admitted that such a term should be implied
into their contract. However, they denied that
they breached the implied term by
reason of the ability of an employee to take preparatory steps towards setting
up a new business,
even if that business is in competition with the then
employer. The defendants relied on the statement of Lord Kenyon in
(1799) 2 Esp 732:
A servant, while engaged in the service of his master, has no right to do any
act which may injure his trade, or undermine his business;
but every one has a
right, if he can, to better his situation in the world; and if he does it by
means not contrary to law, though
his master may eventually be injured, it is
damnum absque injuria
. There is nothing morally bad, or very improper, in
a servant, who has it in his contemplation at a future period to set up for
to endeavour to conciliate the regard of his master’s customers,
and to recommend himself to them, so as to procure some business
from them as
well as others. In the present case, the defendant did not solicit the present
orders of the customers; on the contrary,
he took for the plaintiffs all those
he could obtain; his request of business for himself was prospective, and for a
time when the
relation of master and servant between him and the plaintiffs
would be at an end.
And, more recently, Besanko J in
Australia Friendly
Society Ltd v Woff
[2016] FCA 248
An employee may take certain preparatory steps towards new employment or a new
business without breaching his or her duties to his
or her existing employer.
What may be done without breaching the duties of fidelity and good faith will
depend very much on the particular
circumstances of the case:
[1895] UKLawRpKQB 58
[1895] 2 QB 1
per Hawkins J;
Ansell Rubber Co Pty Ltd v Allied
Rubber Industries Pty Ltd
[1967] VicRp 7
[1967] VR 37
Futuretronics.com.au Pty Limited v Graphix Labels Pty Ltd
Futuretronics.com.au Pty Ltd v Graphix Labels Pty Ltd
[2009] FCAFC
plaintiff relied,
, on Bryson J’s statements in
& Co Services Pty Ltd v Harbinson
[2000] NSWSC
(2) where his Honour said:
The contract of employment contains an implied promise to serve with good faith
and fidelity. Loyalty is required, and unless the
employer knows and approves of
the activity the implied promise is broken if the employee conducts competing
business activities
while in the employment, and also if the employee takes
preliminary steps to establish a competing business in some way which is
loyal to the employer, such as by making copies of the employer’s list of
clients or by canvassing the employer’s
customers to bring their business
over to the new enterprise being established. There are remedies, which can
include injunctions,
based on breach of contract.
Labelmakers
per Tracey J at [116]:
If an employee who is taking preparatory steps with a view to setting up a
competitive business fails to inform his or her employer
doing and actively seeks to ensure that the employer does not become aware that
the preparatory steps are
being taken, it may reasonably be inferred that the
employee is aware that what he or she is doing is antipathetic to the interests
of the employer: see
Able Tours v Mann
[2009] WASC 192
(2009) 187 IR 1
it is not contested that the duty of good faith and fidelity forms part of the
contracts of employment, I will deal with this part
of the plaintiff’s
case along with the allegations of breaches of express terms of the employment
contracts below.
Did Mr Engelke breach his employment contract?
can be seen from the facts set out above, the idea of the new business had been
floated between Mr Engelke and Mr Horan, and Ms
Chitas had been approached and
agreed to come on board, in August/September 2022. By 6 November 2022, the three
of them had set up
their corporate vehicles, and Citratel had been registered.
Between 6 November 2022 and 22 July 2023, Ms Chitas had considered price
for “a friend setting up a new business” and Citratel had applied
for TIAB services citing an “an existing
customer base with IT services
and existing account managers with customer relationships”.
is alleged in the plaintiff’s closing submissions that Mr Engelke breached
clauses 4.1.4, 4.1.5, 4.1.7 and 4.2, of the original
employment contract. The
plaintiff relied on the following matters (summarising the contractual terms
which are set out above at
(a) 4.1.1 – Disclosing Confidential Information to another employee or to
any third person, and using Confidential Information
for any other purposes: The
customer report, creating the iCloud drive and uploading documents to the Cloud,
and the 2 and 3 May
Octane access.
(b) 4.1.5 – Copying, modifying, or reproducing Confidential Information,
and searching or accessing documents prepared by another
person within the
company without written prior authorisation: As for (a) above.
(c) 4.17 – Not retaining and returning Confidential Information: Creating
the iCloud drive and uploading documents to the Cloud.
(d) 4.2 – Conflicts of interest: As for (a) above.
(e) Implied term of good faith and fidelity: As for (a) above.
In relation to each of the clauses above, the plaintiff said in its closing
submissions that “misuse is also inferred from
failing to disclose what
became of those documents”.
can be seen from the analysis of whether Mr Engelke misused the information to
which he had access after he left Pennytel and Spirit,
I do not accept that Mr
Engelke misused the information. The actions relied on by the plaintiff do not
on their face appear to be
breaches of cl 4.1.1 given that most of the
“disclosures” of confidential information were for the purposes of
his employment;
liaising with Ms Chitas in relation to accounts, or handing over
to Ms Yehson, for example. I have noted above that Ms Yehson was
not called, and
Mr Zizic gave second-hand evidence that she does not remember. This leads me to
the view that she was, for the purposes
Jones v Dunkel
101 CLR 298
[1959] HCA 8
inference, both available to the plaintiff, and unable
to assist the plaintiff’s case.
I have found that the iCloud backup by Mr Engelke was not a misuse of
confidential information, given that I accept Mr Engelke’s
evidence that
he did not maintain Pennytel’s documents on iCloud.
remaining question is whether any of these actions constitute a “conflict
of interest” that must be disclosed. In
its closing submissions, the
actions relied upon as conflicts of interest that should have been disclosed to
Pennytel were:
(a) the customer report;
(b) creating Pennytel and Focus folders on his laptop and uploading Pennytel
documents onto iCloud; and
(c) downloading documents on 2 and 3 May 2022.
The plaintiff further submitted that “misuse is also inferred from failing
to disclose what became of those documents”.
do not regard these actions as putting Mr Engelke into a position of conflict of
interest, as I have found that the purposes of
creating or downloading/backing
up these documents were not sinister. As submitted by the defendants, a conflict
of interest must
involve an “actual repugnance” between duty and
interest; maintaining some documents on his iCloud after leaving the
Pennytel, where I have found those documents were not used, is not sufficient.
Nor is creating or downloading documents
in the course of his employment (the
ACT! list and the documents on 2 and 3 May 2022) where those documents were not
used in breach
of confidence.
is not asserted that Mr Engelke has breached his post-employment restraints. I
have found that Mr Engelke had only determined to
investigate setting up his own
business when he contacted Ms McCann initially, which was after the actions
relied upon. I have also
found that there was no evidence of active canvassing
of customers using any documents that may have been retained.
to the issue of a breach of good faith and fidelity, the plaintiff relied on Mr
Engelke’s retention of documents on his personal
iCloud. Mr Engelke said
that he thought he deleted “all that stuff” after his departure. He
was cross-examined on the
logical inconsistency of “downloading”
files on 6 May 2022 and then deleting them soon afterwards, with the implication
that he must have kept them; but this characterisation does not take into
account the automatic “syncing” of files on
iCloud and the fact that
Mr Engelke handed his laptop back to Pennytel with documents such as a Pennytel
suppliers spreadsheet downloaded
on 6 May 2022, Connexus pricing information,
and Focus price books on it. Mr Engelke was cross-examined about the spreadsheet
attached to Mr Le’s expert report, and he remained adamant that he
had not specifically backed up his computer, but instead,
“was just saving
it within folders on the computer, which then synced to the cloud”.
plaintiff submitted, in strong terms, that his explanation was not believable;
it was submitted in closing written submissions
8.3.40 This was straight out theft. This only inference that the Court could
draw knowing that:
(a) Mr Engelke took the files and never disclosed it;
(b) he never disclosed why he took all the files;
(b) the new business was up and running 10 months later; and
(c) that many of the higher yield corporate customers came over to SPN;
was that it was taken to use to in the future to set up a competing business
and/or was ultimately was used in the setting up and
conduct of such
(as written)
of these submissions rests on the assumption that the files were
“taken” with a purpose in mind, which purpose was
actioned in
SPN’s eventual trading. I have found that that assumption is not
the time of Mr Engelke’s departure from Pennytel, when the documents were
synced, he was not, as I have found, planning to
set up a business in
competition with Pennytel. I have found that there was no specific intent in his
possession of the documents
relied upon by the plaintiff, and so I am of the
view that there was no breach of his duty of good faith and fidelity by having
computer backed up to iCloud. Given the factual findings I have made, the
submission that the “only inference” that can
be drawn from Mr
Engelke’s iCloud backup is that he stole the documents for use in a future
competing business cannot be made
Accordingly,
the plaintiff does not succeed on this part of the claim.
Did Ms Chitas breach her employment contract?
Confidential information provisions
plaintiff’s opening submissions do not hold back in characterising pleaded
breaches by Ms Chitas. For example, in relation
to the email to Ms North, Ms
Chitas’ sister, Mr Freeman says:
This was a flagrant breach of clause 4.1.4.1 of the Chitas Agreement and her
confidentiality obligations. There can be no legitimate
justification for this.
This ... underlies her total disdain for her obligations as an employee and in
respect of Pennytel’s
customer records.
to Mr Engelke, it is alleged in the table in the plaintiff’s closing
submissions that Ms Chitas was “a party
to, and participated in the
Scheme” by which she breached clauses 4.1.4 and 4.1.7 of the original
employment contract. The
plaintiff relied on the following matters (again,
summarising the contractual terms which are set out above at [
(a) 4.1.4 – Disclosing Confidential Information to another employee or to
any third person, and using Confidential Information
for any other purposes: The
email and Margin Summary spreadsheet forwarded to Ms Chitas’ sister on 9
December 2021, and the
customer report.
(b) 4.1.7 – Not retaining and returning Confidential Information: As for
relation to each of these breaches, the plaintiff said in its closing
submissions that by resetting her laptop hard drive, the
Court “would
infer that she had disclosed and used confidential information as part of the
was submitted that the spreadsheet emailed to her sister, and the receipt of the
customer report, were breaches of the confidential
information provisions of her
employment agreement. I have found above that the email to her sister was
inadvertent, and it was,
in any event, not pleaded. As for the customer report,
that was obtained in the proper course of her duties and there is no evidence
that it was misused. Accordingly, I do not find that these actions were
undertaken in breach of her terms of employment, including
the implied duty of
good faith and loyalty.
Did Ms Chitas breach the contract of employment?
plaintiff submitted that Ms Chitas was a party to the setting up of Citratel,
that she had knowledge of the establishment of SPN,
and that she “sat on
the sidelines for 6 months while a business in which she has an interest signs
up clients or prospective
clients”. It is contended that this was a breach
of the contract of employment, both while and after she was employed by
and a breach of the duty of good faith and fidelity.
plaintiff’s closing submissions alleged that Ms Chitas had a conflict of
interest by becoming a director and shareholder
of Citratel while working for
Pennytel, in breach of cl 4.2 of the original employment contract and the
implied term of good faith
and fidelity. It further relied on a breach of cl
4.1.5 (as per Mr Engelke, above) but did not expand further on the alleged
It should be noted that the ASOC does not plead Ms Chitas breached
clauses 4.2 or 4.1.5. In closing oral submissions, Mr Millar submitted
breach of cl 4.2 had not been invoked as it was not raised in the ASOC or the
agreed list of issues for determination provided
to the Court.
have found that Ms Chitas did not misuse the confidential information; however,
was she entitled to take “preparatory steps”
to set up a new
business in competition with Pennytel, even while employed at Pennytel, as the
defendants contended?
parties take opposing views. The plaintiff dealt with the evidence as to actions
while employed at Pennytel in its closing submissions
as follows:
When the existence of Citratel came to light, SPN Co (Samantha Peter Nicholas)
was registered with Mr Horan as the front but ultimately
with the same 1/3
interests. She was a party to the original setting up of a Citratel and it
continued under the guise of SPN and
she had full knowledge of its activities.
Sitting on the sidelines for 6 months while a business in which she has an
interest signs up Clients or Prospective Clients is a
Inferred from deleting her laptop hard drive.
(references omitted)
and as to breach of good faith and fidelity:
Ms Chitas was a party to, participated in and put into effect, the Scheme. While
an employee, she engaged in the conduct at 84(a)-(c)
of the ASOC and failed to
disclose to Pennytel the matters at paragraph 84(d) of the ASOC.
plaintiff relied on Bryson J’s statements in
(extracted at
] above) which found that
preliminary steps to set up a competing business without the knowledge of the
employer gave rise to remedies
in breach of contract. That case dealt with the
implied duty of good faith and fidelity as there was no contractual provision
preventing Ms Harbison from taking such steps, but the principle could
also apply to breach of an express term.
examples in
of breaches of the implied duty of good faith and
loyalty were analysed as “conducting competing business activities”
and the disloyalty examples were making copies of the employer’s client
list, or canvassing those clients to bring their business
over to the new
enterprise, when it was established.
noted above it was Ms Chitas’ involvement with Citratel, as a director,
which led to her resignation from Pennytel. SPN was
registered by Mr Horan on 16
January 2023 – before Ms Chitas had left Pennytel. Ms Chitas maintained
that she was not involved
in the preparatory steps to set up the new business,
including the contact between Citratel and TIAB. It is clear that she did take
some preparatory steps – for example, in seeking advice on a family trust,
taking the shareholding in Citratel through Overmasters,
and considering price
information from PBX Installs for Mr Engelke.
Chitas said that she was not involved in the creation of SPN, and that
“Nick and Peter handled it”. I can infer that
Ms Chitas was aware of
it, because she was aware of the S in the name standing for her first initial,
and “... saw this as
an opportunity to set up a company in which all three
of us could ultimately work, as we had originally hoped to do through
pause to note that the submission that Ms Chitas “had an interest”
in SPN was based on cross-examination of Mr Engelke
(at T.349) where he agreed
that it was intended that, when SPN was up and running and “the
money” that Mr Horan had put
in was resolved, they “might have
another discussion about where to from here” (ie, ownership of SPN shares
by Mr Engelke
and Ms Chitas). Ms Chitas said that she wasn’t aware of any
conversations which Mr Horan and Mr Engelke had had about this.
Ms Chitas said
that February to April – after she had resigned from Pennytel, and was
dealing with deaths in her close family–
were “a blur” and she
was not aware of what SPN was doing in relation to customers.
Chitas relied on the fact that she “did not start work with SPN until
after the six-month restraint period had ended”.
In her affidavit, she
I waited until 23 July 2023 to start working at SPN in my current role as a
Business Telecommunications Specialist, six months after
my resignation from
am unable to find on the evidence that Ms Chitas “had an interest”
in SPN during her employment, or for the six months
after she resigned from
defendants submitted that “the word
is a verb, and the
prohibition is not infringed by planning a future business, or even holding a
passive interest in a present business”.
But the contract does not merely
restrain Ms Chitas from “working at” a competing business; it
requires that she not
“engage, or assist others in engaging, in any
business or enterprise that is competitive with our business”.
of the cases relied upon by the defendants in support of Ms Chitas’
assertion that she was not working for Citratel or
SPN until after the six
months had expired, and that there was no harm in engaging in preparatory steps
towards a future business,
relate to the implied duty of good faith. Two which
are particularly relied upon are
at [338], and
[15]. These are cases in which the preparatory steps were undertaken where there
was no contractual stipulation such as the present,
and where the employer
relied on the breach of an implied term of good faith and fidelity. In
, there was no express agreement relating to activities to set up a
business or the use of confidential information during, or after
the cessation
of, Ms Harbinson’s employment, and no express restraint (at [5]). The
defendant set up practice as an accountant
the day after her employment ended,
having done preparatory work including gaining professional indemnity insurance
and obtaining
her own practising certificate whilst employed by the plaintiff,
and by using its equipment. On setting up her own practice, she
messages and letters and made telephone contact with many persons who had been
clients of the plaintiff and whose work
she had done while employed. She told
these persons that she had established her practice and offered to do accounting
work for them.”
plaintiff sought to draw a link between the situation in
where the office consisted of only two persons – with Ms Chitas’
role at Focus and then at Pennytel. Bryson J
said (at [27]) in
In the present circumstances where the plaintiff was conducting a small public
accountancy and tax agents' practice with only two
persons working as
accountants in it, and the defendant had responsibility for direct contact with
many clients without close supervision,
I am of the view that the
defendant’s duty required that she should not conduct a rival business,
however large or small, which
would or could divert paying clients who otherwise
might bring their business to the plaintiff and obtain the defendant's services
in that way. This would be the expectation of reasonable people who applied
their minds to the circumstances of a small accountancy
practice...
plaintiff submitted that “this is an apt description as to the intimacy of
the Pennytel office in Victoria and the complete
control over local business
customers by Ms Chitas”. With respect, the evidence does not establish
that proposition. While
Ms Chitas was an account manager, there were a number of
other account managers, and her position was very different to that of Ms
Harbinson, who worked only with one other accountant in the office of Weldon
have found above that Ms Chitas was not siphoning customers to Citratel (or SPN)
during her employment by Pennytel – she referred,
for example, two large
Citracom clients to Pennytel in December 2022 (see [
] above). However, she was a director
and, through Overmasters, a shareholder, of Citratel. Was this “engaging,
and assisting
others to engage”, in the business that became SPN? As
Besanko J said in
at [338], “What may be done without
breaching the duties of fidelity and good faith will depend very much on the
circumstances of the case” (citing
Robb v Green
[1895] UKLawRpKQB 58
per Hawkins J).
particular circumstances of this case are finely balanced. While it seems to me
that Ms Chitas was doing more than merely sitting
on the sidelines, she did not
take any steps to misuse confidential information or to divert clients from
Pennytel while she was
employed. She agreed to come on board with Mr Engelke and
Mr Horan in August/September 2022, becoming a director of Citratel and
shares in it through Overmasters, and to that extent, she was
to engage in such a competitive business. It was not said by Ms Chitas that she
did not intend to join Citratel; in fact, the TIAB
documents demonstrate that
she did, by referring to her expertise as an “existing account manager ...
with customer relationships”
(a document signed on 14 November 2022 by Mr
Citratel, it should be remembered, did not trade. SPN did not
trade until after Ms Chitas left Pennytel.
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd v Collins
(1995) 31 IPR 488
Hedigan J found that preparatory steps which included incorporating a company,
negotiating a draft distribution agreement for competitive
products, engaging
employees to be sales persons, trialling products and seeking their registration
under Federal legislation, were
not, “singly or in combination, more than
preparatory steps preceding the establishment of a business.” (at 497).
Helmet Integrated Systems Ltd v Tunnard
[2007] IRLR 126
EWCA Civ 1735
. As noted above, the defendant in
was found to have breached her obligations by doing private work
while employed, but the preparatory work she undertook for her own
business was not found to have been a breach as it was merely preparatory.
I have found that I do not accept Ms Chitas’ assertions about when she
intended to leave Pennytel, I do accept that she
was not further involved in
Citratel, and not involved in the business of SPN at all, until she joined that
business after the six
month period expired.
Chitas was aware (having been reminded in clear terms by the correspondence
between lawyers in January 2023) of her post-employment
restraints, and both Mr
Engelke and Mr Horan were aware of that period. Merely “sitting on the
sidelines” after leaving
Pennytel, and waiting out a period of restraint,
is not a breach of the contractual restraint. Ms Chitas was neither engaging in
SPN’s business nor diverting clients to them, and I cannot infer from her
her employment that she breached her restraints
. The submission that waiting out a restraint period with an
intention to join a competing business is a breach of that restraint
involves an
illogical leap which would result in a
indefinite extension of
the restraint period, as the restraint period would never end.
the circumstances, I do not find that Ms Chitas breached her obligations of good
faith and fidelity, or the terms of her employment
agreement, by taking the
limited steps that she did to set up a business in competition with Pennytel
while employed by Pennytel.
Were the restraints valid?
I am wrong, and Ms Chitas did breach either the contract terms or her duty of
good faith and loyalty, I would need to determine
whether the restraints were,
as contended by the defendants, invalid. There are two separate questions. The
first is whether the
restraint on engaging in competitive business was valid
whilst Ms Chitas was employed, and the second is whether it was valid for
post-employment period.
plaintiff submitted that by taking preparatory steps towards or commencing to
set up a business which would be in competition
with Pennytel, Ms Chitas
breached cl 4.3.2 of her employment agreement which read (relevantly):
4.3.2 ... you will not directly or indirectly, during the Restraint Period:
4.3.2.1 engage, or assist others in engaging, in any business or enterprise that
is competitive with our business ...
4.3.2.2 ... attempt to solicit, canvass, divert, or take away, the business or
patronage of any Clients or Prospective Clients;
4.3.2.3 ... attempt to supply to any Client or Prospective Client products and
services like the products and services offered by
the Company ...
will be recalled that the Restraint Period was the period of her employment with
Pennytel, and a subsequent six months post-employment.
Chitas’ employment contract is governed by Victorian Law (clause
it was not in dispute that the restraint clause formed part of Ms Chitas’
original employment contract, the defendants
argued that the restraint extended
beyond the protection of Pennytel’s legitimate interests and is void and
unenforceable as
an unreasonable restraint of trade. The onus lies on Pennytel
to show that the restraint was reasonable as at the time of the agreement.
relation to the terms of restraint while Ms Chitas was employed; I have no doubt
that it was a legitimate protection of Pennytel’s
interests to protect its
goodwill. Ms Chitas, who had worked for Focus and then Pennytel for an extensive
period of time, was peculiarly
well placed to take advantage of that by her
access to the kind of confidential documents which are at the heart of this
case. There
is no doubt that the restraint during Ms Chitas’ employment is
Pty Ltd v Buzasi
[2025] FCA 1105
Snaden J summarised the principles that regulate the enforcement of
post-restraint covenants. Although this case concerned the granting
injunctive relief, the general principles set out are relevant.
, his Honour cited
[2016] VSCA 334
(2016) 344 ALR 162
, 173 [30]-[31] (Beach and Ferguson JJA and Riordan
AJA) as authority for “the starting position” that a post-employment
restraint is prima facie invalid, unless in all the circumstances it is no more
than is reasonably necessary for the protection of
the employer’s business
and not contrary to the public interest. To demonstrate the former, “the
enforcing party must
show that the clause goes no further than necessary to
protect its legitimate interests”. His Honour went on to say, at [37],
that “in the employment context, restraints that limit competition per se
are not enforceable:
Just Group,
174 at [32]”.
restraints which relate to prevention of competition and solicitation of clients
have “a long pedigree” in
businesses undertaking professional
services; see
Birdanco Nominees
Pty Ltd v Money
[2012] VSCA 64 (Maxwell
P, Redlich JA and Robson AJA at [2] per Maxwell
P). I do not regard Pennytel as being in the “professional services”
category, it being involved in sales of telecommunication products and so not
having the trust and confidence aspect of the professional
services businesses
Birdanco Nominees
(both accountancy firms).
noted above, I accept that Pennytel had a legitimate interest in protecting
confidential information and customer connections which
it sought to protect by
restraining an employee from being involved in a competitive business. The
plaintiff bears the onus of proving
this legitimate interest, and relied on
Pennytel’s purchase of the assets and customers of a number of
telecommunications businesses,
including, relevantly, Focus.
defendants relied on the summary in
Brilliant Lighting v Baillieu
as enumerating the relevant factors for assessing reasonableness
of a restraint. These are:
(a) the activity restrained;
(b) the duration of the restraint;
(c) the geographical coverage of the restraint;
(d) consideration received; and
(e) bargaining position of the parties.
scope of the restraint in terms of its geographic area and duration was said to
be unreasonable. The defendants submitted that
the six-month restraint period
was “an excessively long period of protection from legitimate
competition”. The geographical
coverage of the restraint was also said to
be unreasonable as it was not limited to any particular area. This last
submission has
some force. On its face, a restraint which is not confined to a
particular geographic location may go beyond what is necessary to
protect the
employer’s legitimate interest. Although Pennytel is a telecommunications
company, and has offices elsewhere, the
Focus customers upon which this case is
mainly concentrated are Victorian businesses.
unreasonable. The defendants submitted that it was
“manifestly an attempt
to shield Pennytel from mere competition”. In particular, they relied on
the fact that the non-solicitation
clause applied to any Client or Prospective
Client of Pennytel, as defined in clause 4.3.1 and extracted below:
means any person, firm, company or
entity which has at any time before or during the Restraint Period been a client
of the Company.
“Prospective Client”
means any person, firm,
company or entity which has at any time before or during the Restraint Period
been in negotiations with the
Company for the supply of services.
defendants submitted that the effect of these definitions could result in an
unwitting breach of the restraint clause as it precluded
Ms Chitas from dealing
with entities that she was unaware had been clients of Pennytel from many years
ago, with entities currently
a client of Pennytel with which she had no
dealings, or clients who were in negotiations with both SPN and Pennytel at the
but unknown to her.
indicated above, restraints that limit competition per se are not enforceable
and a covenant of that nature must be tethered to,
for example, particular
clients with which the employee worked (
at [37] citing
Freedom Finance Accounting Pty Ltd v Goldstein
[2017] VSC 179
(McDonald J) citing
Birdanco Nominees
at [80]-[85]
(Robson AJA)).
defendants also relied on the fact that Ms Chitas’ salary was $79,579.50
per annum. Unlike the case of a highly paid business
executive, it was
unreasonable to exclude Ms Chitas from working in her chosen field for six
months. It was also argued that the
restraint was not a product of commercial
negotiation, presumably relying on the principle that the courts take a stricter
covenants in restraints of trade in employment contracts than those
contained in contracts for the sale of a business.
my view the post-employment restraint provisions are excessive, particularly as
to length and the geographical reach, but also
as to the wide definition of
clients. It would have been reasonable, in my view, to restrict Ms Chitas’
activities to a period
of say three months (which would have given customers a
reasonable time to settle in to a new account manager) and to restrict it
Victoria, and to current customers of Pennytel. Accordingly, as Victoria does
not have the equivalent of the
Restraints of Trade Act 1976
(NSW) which
allows an invalid restraint to be read down to a reasonable provision, the
defendants argued that the entire post-employment
restraint is invalid.
Wallis Nominees
(Computing) Pty Ltd v Pickett
(2013) 45 VR 657 at [94]-[95] and
at [39], the impugned part
of a restraint may be struck out if, by so doing, it can be simply removed
without changing the meaning
of the remaining part – ie, an independent
covenant. The plaintiff does rely on these cases at paragraph 13 of its closing
submissions, however it does not rely on them to base an argument that, if the
Court found the restraint was unreasonable, the impugned
part could be struck
out to make it enforceable. In relation to the timeframe for the post-employment
restraint, there is no ability
insert a new term, but only to strike out a part
of the clause, as if it were “simply crossed out with a blue pen”
Wallis Nominees
at [94]). In my view it would not change the balance of
clause 4.3.1.3 if it were to read:
"Restraint Period" means the period during which you must comply with the
restraint obligations below, being the duration of your
employment with the
and for 6 months after termination of such employment
the geographical reach of the provision and the definitions set out above as to
Clients and Prospective Clients are not able
to be amended in a way which
enables a reasonable restraint without changing the meaning, and so I would find
that the entirety of
the post-employment restraint in Ms Chitas’ contract
of employment is invalid and unenforceable.
What are the damages claimed by Pennytel?
should briefly note Pennytel’s claim to damages. It relied on cl 8.3.1 of
the original employment contracts (as set out at
] above). Pennytel also relied on the
expert report of Mr Nguyen. On the basis of a “transferred customer
list” he determined
that 83 customers were ported from Pennytel to SPN
between 19 October 2022 to March 2024. He noted that 98% of those customers were
“corporate” customers, and calculated the gross margin from
transferred as opposed to retained customers. He expressed
the view that the
transferred customers had a higher profit margin for Pennytel than the retained
customers. He calculated a loss
of profit before interest of $764,705. The
plaintiff submitted that interest should run from 28 February 2023, being the
bill run of SPN”, which Mr Nguyen calculated to 1 June 2024,
totalling $76,301.
plaintiff did not restrict itself to damages arising from those customers
however, submitting that “their loss does not
form the limit of the injury
to the plaintiff, for the wholesale canvas of [its] customers was likely to ...
diminish receipts and
profit”. It was submitted that “the amount
that Mr Nguyen opin[ed] was the loss of the income from 83 customers: the
thing that a Court can legitimately assess to “neutralise the unfair head
start the new business obtains by using the
confidential information”
Pty Ltd v Lopez (No 2)
[2021] FCA 1523
”. It was submitted that losses for breach of contract are not limited
to the trading loss, but can extend to diminution of
(Abraham J) at [8]). There was no specific submission on the extent of the
diminution of goodwill. I note the evidence that Pennytel
suffered a churn in
customers unrelated to the existence of SPN.
defendants submitted that “there has to be a causal link between the
breach and the loss” and pointed to one of the
actions put as a breach of
the contract of employment, the sending of an email to Ms North by Ms Chitas
some 12 months prior to her
termination, noting that it does not follow that the
loss of clients years later by Pennytel is a basis for assessing that loss as
flowing from that alleged breach. If no link could be drawn to a loss on the
part of the plaintiff, then it was submitted that even
were the plaintiff to be
successful, “we’re in nominal damages territory”.
Delivery up and Restraints
plaintiff also sought remedies in relation to the documents themselves; that
they be delivered up to the plaintiff and that the
defendants be restrained from
using them. The first and second defendants denied that they retained any
copies, or that they used
the information. I have accepted their evidence that
this is so, and on the basis of my findings above do not need to make any
Determination
the defendants have been entirely successful in resisting the relief sought, the
proceedings should be dismissed.
defendants wish to be heard on the question of costs. The parties have leave to
approach my chambers to have the matter relisted
for a short hearing on costs,
after which final orders both dismissing the proceedings, and determining the
costs, will be made.
I certify that the preceding three hundred and
eighty-one (381) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
the Honourable Justice
Dated: 13 November 2025
Attachment A – agreed issues for
determination
1.0 Confidential Information
1.1 What is the information and has it been identified with specificity?
1.2 Does the information have the necessary quality of confidence?
1.3 Was the information received by Mr Engelke and Ms Chitas in circumstances
importing an obligation of confidence?;
1.4 Was there a scheme between each of Mr Engelke, Ms Chitas and Mr Horan to
set up a competing business by using the confidential
information of
1.5 Has there been an actual or threatened misuse
of the information without Pennytel’s consent:
(a) in furtherance of the Scheme and as pleaded at paragraphs 43-46, 47A-47D,
48-55, 57, 61, 61A-61C, 66A-66F, 69-76, 77(b), 79-83
and 85 of the Amended
Statement of Claim
(b) as pleaded at paragraphs 43-46, 47A-47D, 48-55, 57, 61, 61A-61C, 66A-66F,
69-76, 77(b), 79-83 and 85 of the ASOC?
1.6 Was the information received and used by Ms Chitas, Mr Horan and/or SPN
in circumstances where they knew or ought to have known
that the information was
confidential to Pennytel?
1.7 If yes to
and/or 1.6, has
Pennytel suffered loss and damage and if so how is the loss and damage
2.0 The Chitas Employment Agreement
2.1 What were the terms of the Chitas Employment Agreement?
2.2 Did Ms Chitas breach the terms of clauses
4.1.4.1, 4.1.4.2, 4.1.7 and 4.3 of the Chitas Employment Agreement and the
implied term
if good faith, and if so, which terms?
2.3 Was clause 4.3 of the Chitas Employment Agreement an unreasonable
restraint of trade?
2.4 If any provisions of the Chitas Employment Agreement which are valid and
were breached, has Pennytel suffered loss and damage
and if so how is the loss
and damage assessed?
3.0 The Engelke Employment Agreement
3.1 What were the terms of the Engelke Employment Agreement?
3.2 Because of Mr Engelke’s change in
employment duties, was he bound by any one or more of the terms of the Engelke
3.3 If yes to
, did Engelke breach any of the terms
of clauses 4.1.4.1, 4.1.5, 4.1.7 and 4.2 of the Engelke Employment Agreement and
the implied
term of good faith, and if so, which terms?
3.4 If yes to
, has Pennytel
suffered loss and damage and if so how is the loss and damage assessed?
Section 182(1)
Corporations Act
4.1 Did Mr Engelke, as an employee of Pennytel,
improperly use his position to gain an advantage for himself or someone else or
cause detriment to Pennytel?
4.2 If yes to
, what is the
loss or damage?
4.3 Did Ms Chitas, as an employee of Pennytel,
improperly use her position to gain an advantage for herself or someone else or
cause detriment to Pennytel?
4.4 If yes to
, has Pennytel
suffered loss and damage and if so how is the loss and damage assessed?
5.0 Which parties, if any, have accessorial liability under
Corporations Act
for any breaches of
section 182(1)
Corporations Act
Section 183(1)
Corporations Act
6.1 Did Mr Engelke:
(a) as an employee of Pennytel acquire information by virtue of his position as
an employee of the Pennytel;
(b) make improper use of that information;
(c) made that improper use in order to gain directly or indirectly an advantage;
(d) gained that advantage either for himself or someone else;
(e) alternatively made that improper use to cause detriment to Pennytel.
6.2 If yes to
, has Pennytel
suffered loss and damage and if so how is the loss and damage assessed?
6.3 Did Ms Chitas:
(a) as an employee of Pennytel acquire information by virtue of her position as
an employee of the Pennytel;
(b) make improper use of that information;
(c) made that improper use in order to gain directly or indirectly an advantage;
(d) gained that advantage either for herself or someone else;
(e) alternatively made that improper use to cause detriment to Pennytel.
6.4 If yes to
, has Pennytel
suffered loss and damage and if so how is the loss and damage assessed?
7.0 Which parties, if any, have accessorial liability under
Corporations Act
for any breaches of
section 183(1)
Corporations Act
SCHEDULE OF PARTIES
Fourth Defendant:
CITRATEL PTY LIMITED ACN 663 224 048
Fifth Defendant:
SPN CO PTY LIMITED ACN 665 024 519
Sixth Defendant:
TELCOINABOX OPERATIONS PTY LIMITED ACN 162 159 935
RTF format (1.97 MB)
Signed PDF/A format