King & King [2013] FMCAfam 287 (28 March 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
KING & KING
[2013] FMCAfam 287
FAMILY LAW – Interim parenting –
children – question of equal shared parental responsibility – order
shared parental responsibility – parental responsibility as to
limited issue of education to vest in mother in best interests
Family Law Act 1975
Marvel v Marvel
[2010] FamCAFC 101
(2010) 43 Fam LR 348
Goode and Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
; FLC 93-286
[2010] HCA 4
[2010] FamCAFC 53
Mazorski v Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
McCall & Clark
[2009] FamCAFC
Lansa & Clovelly
[2010] FamCA 80
Respondent:
File Number:
WOC 803 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Mr Richardson SC
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Barkus Doolan Kelly
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Broun Abrahams Burreket
(1) That pending further order the mother and father
have equal shared parental responsibility in relation to the children [X] born
[in] 2006 and [Y] born [in] 2008 as to major long term issues in relation to the
said children being issues about the care, welfare
and development of the said
children of a long-term nature and includes (but is not limited to) issues of
that nature about the children's
religious and cultural upbringing, the
children's health, the children's names, and changes to the children's living
arrangements
that make it significantly more difficult for the children to spend
time with one or other of the parents,
provided always
that pending
further order the mother have long term parental responsibility in relation to
the question of the children's education
(both current and future).
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
King & King
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Proceedings
are parenting proceedings commenced by the applicant mother by application filed
on 3 September 2012. The present application
before the court is the applicant
mother’s further amended application filed on 13 March 2013.
applicant mother seeks parenting orders in relation to the children [X] born
[in] 2006 and [Y] born [in] 2008.
the further amended application the mother seeks interim orders that she have
sole parental responsibility for the said children,
that the children live with
her and that the children spend defined time with the respondent father.
father filed his response on 14 March 2013. He also seeks parenting orders in
relation to the subject children. He seeks orders
that provide for the parties
to have equal shared parental responsibility for the children that the children
spend defined time with
himself and the mother.
proceedings first came before the court on 7 September 2012. On that date the
court made interim orders by consent that facilitated
the mother travelling
overseas with the children for the purposes of a holiday during the period from
20 September 2012 to 5 October
2012. Otherwise the court ordered the parties to
attend a child dispute conference with a family consultant on 21 November 2012.
The parties were ordered to file further documents and proceedings were
adjourned to 29 January 2013 for directions.
29 January 2013 the matter was once again before the court. On that day the
parties agreed to consent orders that facilitated the
youngest child attending
preliminary interviews at [S] School and otherwise that each of the parties
ensure that the children attend
school and/or day care as applicable on the days
that they are required to attend. Once again the court ordered that the parties
file and serve appropriate documents and proceedings were adjourned to 15 March
2013 for interim hearing as to parenting.
15 March 2013 the parties agreed to consent orders as to parenting and orders
were made that in summary provided for the children
to reside primarily with the
mother and to spend time with the father during school term on alternate
weekends and Tuesday/Wednesday
in the off week and at such other times as they
may reasonably agree. The parties also agreed as to the children's time with the
father and mother for the purposes of special days and school holidays.
on 15 March 2013 the court made orders by consent appointing an Independent
Children's Lawyer for the children, for the
Independent Children’s Lawyer
to request urinanalysis testing of each of the parties and for the appointment
of Dr S as a single
expert on the instructions of the Independent
Children’s Lawyer.
parties were unable to agree as to the allocation of parental responsibility on
an interim basis and the interim hearing proceeded
as to that discrete
mother relied upon the following documents:
further amended application filed on 13 March 2013,
of child abuse filed on 13 March 2013,
affidavit filed on 1 March 2013,
of Ms T filed on 13 March 2013,
mother’s financial statement filed on 25 February 2013.
father relied upon the following documents:
response filed on 14 March 2013,
affidavit filed on 14 March 2013,
financial statement filed on 14 March 2013.
applicant mother is presently 41 years of age. She resides in rental
accommodation in [omitted] in Sydney with the two children.
parties commenced cohabitation in 1996 and married [in] 2002. The parties
separated on a final basis on 30 March 2011.
subject children are the children of the parties’ relationship.
mother asserts that for the period between 1995 and 2006 she was the primary
income earner in the household with the father in
and out of employment over
that period of time. Subsequent to the birth of the child the mother asserts
that it was agreed between
the parties that she would not engage in paid
employment and she would stay home to care for the children.
mother asserts that following the birth of the eldest child in April 2006 their
relationship deteriorated with the father remaining
out late at night and
returning home affected by alcohol and/or drugs.
2007 the parties separated under the one roof but reconciled prior to the birth
of the youngest child in April 2008.
mother asserts that she was the primary carer of the child and that the father
to a great extent was unavailable to the children.
She asserts that the father
rarely spent any regular time with the children and on most weekends spent
little or no time with the
to their financial circumstances the parties in 2008 and 2009 realised their
property investment portfolio. The father in early
2009 was unemployed through a
period thereafter of about 10 months and the parties were dependent upon
financial assistance from
the paternal grandfather to meet their living and
other expenses. This financial assistance was paid directly to the father by his
Subsequently
the father asserted that the paternal grandfather would no longer provide
financial assistance unless the parties moved
into a small apartment at
[omitted] owned by the paternal grandfather. The parties moved to this property
in October 2009.
mother asserts that after this time the father became even more difficult,
distant and erratic in his behaviour. She asserts that
the father resorted to
verbal threats of violence directed towards her. The mother asserts that the
father exhibits significant aggressive
tendencies, displaying on many occasions
incidents of road rage, routinely abusing pedestrians and other road users. In
January 2013
the youngest child informed the mother of how frightened he was
when the father became involved in an incident with a taxi driver
in whose car
they were travelling.
mother asserts that she spoke to the paternal grandfather on a number of
occasions about the father’s behaviour and wrote
to the paternal
grandfather expressing her concern in relation to the father's mental state, the
relationship and the stress within
their domestic circumstances.
mother asserts that the father continued his drinking and drug taking and the
abuse of her got worse. When home she asserts that
the father slept most of
Saturday and Sunday afternoons, returning home often between 3.00am and 6.00am
most weekends. She says that
she and the children rarely saw him except when he
was readying himself for work in the mornings. The mother asserts that the
provided no financial information to her as to his financial
circumstances and over the final two years of their relationship the
lived very privately and separately from her.
father refused to provide her with regular income for household and living
expenses and there were periods when she was without
a motor vehicle. Indeed in
one circumstance the parties’ motor vehicle was left in a parking station
for 12 months as the father
refused to pay for its re-registration.
mother asserts that the father has been abusive to and denigrating of her with
such behaviour occurring in the presence of the
children. On 30 March 2011 the
father had denigrated the mother in the presence of the children. The father
then proceeded to throw
all of the mother’s clothing, shoes and personal
items outside the front door of their apartment into the communal hall way,
saying to her
"when I have finished removing every trace of you, I will then
throw you down the stairs, you pathetic excuse for a woman. I'm going
every bone in your body. You’re a fucking joke, you're an
embarrassment.”
The mother replied
"you're destroying our children
with this behaviour”
the father replied
"I am going to ensure the
children will know what kind of mother you are, I will ensure they will have
nothing to do with you”.
mother subsequently managed to spirit the children away from the apartment and
they all ran to the car parked down the road. Notwithstanding
displaced living with friends and family.
The father refused to move out of the
family's apartment so as to allow the mother and children to return.
Subsequently the father
said to the mother
"I pity you. You have got nothing.
We are going to destroy you. I warned you my family will ensure you will not
have the children,
it's only a matter of time. You are a failure, a member of
the general public. We own the legal system and you are gone. I will destroy
you, financially and professionally.”
Subsequently
in June 2011 the mother was able to move into a friend's unit at [omitted] with
the children. Thereafter the father continued
to threaten the mother financially
and to defame her to her employer and her employer’s clients.
messages from the father to the mother subsequent to separation are abusive,
manipulative and financially attempting to coerce
the mother. In particular the
father from time to time has refused to pay the private school fees for the
eldest child unless the
mother reverts to her maiden name. The father has paid
one half of the child’s school fees and the mother has no financial
capacity to make any payment in relation to same. The father has sought to use
the child's continuing enrolment at private school
as a form of coercion against
the mother. He seeks to have the mother pay one half of the child’s school
fees for her continuing
attendance at private school. Somewhat surprisingly the
father's own financial circumstances reveal for his part absolutely no capacity
to continue to pay private school fees for the eldest child.
father does not pay child support to the mother although on
the father was assessed to pay child support in the sum of $1,314.33 per month.
That assessment was based upon a
provisional adjusted taxable income for the
father of $217,404. Subsequent to separation the paternal grandfather provided
to the mother to assist with her rent and living expenses of the children.
The father said to her
"the money will continue if I am happy with the access
arrangements”.
Subsequently payments from the paternal grandfather
ceased in December 2012 save for one payment to meet outstanding pre-school fees
for the youngest child.
mother remains concerned about the father's state of mind and his violent
father relies upon his affidavit filed on 14 March 2013. The father asserts a
relationship with the mother that is at complete
odds with the mother’s
assertions as to his abuse, domestic violence and coercion. Indeed it is
difficult to identify that
the parties are talking about the same
cohabitation.
father has now re-partnered and he and his partner are expecting their first
child in late March 2013.
father has recently resigned from what appears to have been a well paid
employment so as to spend he says more time with the children
and the new baby.
The father previously was employed as a [omitted] for the last three years. He
asserts that his contract with [omitted]
ended on 11 January 2013 subsequent to
him taking extended leave to spend time with the children over the recent
Christmas school
holiday period. The father formally resigned his employment on
20 February 2013 although he asserts that he is still "technically
employed" by
[omitted] until 20 May 2013.
father suggests that after 20 May 2013 that he will obtain employment similar to
that that he had at [omitted]. The father acknowledges
that the paternal
grandfather has provided some financial support for the mother and
appears to be the father's wish that the eldest child attend private
girls’ school and the youngest child a private boys’
school. Yet he
acknowledges that at present he has no capacity to pay such fees and expresses
some doubt as to whether the mother
would have a capacity to contribute to such
fees unless she returned to full-time employment.
father denies the mother's various allegations as to his conduct.
produced on subpoena by the New South Wales Police Service reveal that on 7
September 2006 an offence of common assault
relating to an incident on 24 April
2006 was proved as against the father but without proceeding to a conviction the
court placed
him on a 12 month good behaviour bond.
The Nature of Interim Proceedings
Marvel v Marvel
[2010] FamCAFC 101
(2010) 43 Fam LR 348
the Full Court (Faulks DCJ,
Boland and Stevenson JJ), discussed the difficulties associated with making
findings on contested evidence
as follows:
120. As has
frequently been emphasised interim parenting proceedings, and orders made as a
consequence, are a necessary but temporary
measure until all the evidence can be
tested, evaluated and weighed at a final hearing by the making of final
parenting orders. Decisions
judicial officers have to make in interim
proceedings are difficult and, often for very good reason, a conservative
approach, or
one which is likely to avoid harm to a child is adopted. This is
often to the understandable distress of a party who may not achieve
the outcome
he or she desires, or thinks to be in the best interests of their child or
children. Interim parenting orders are frequently
modified or changed after a
final hearing, and any allocation of parental responsibility made at an interim
hearing is disregarded
at the final hearing
121.............In
[2010] FamCAFC 13
the majority (Boland and Thackray JJ) discussed at
paragraph [88] of their reasons the care necessary to be exercised in making
in interim parenting proceedings. Their Honours
our view, findings made at an interim hearing should be couched with great
circumspection, no matter how firmly a judge’s
intuition may suggest that
the finding will be borne out after a full testing of the
122. Later,
at paragraph [100] their Honours amplified their comments and said:
intuition involved in decision-making concerning children is arguably of even
greater importance when a judge is obliged
to make interim decisions following a
hearing at which time constraints prevent the evidence being tested. Apart from
relying upon
the uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have
little alternative than to weigh the probabilities of competing
claims and the
likely impact on children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted
upon or rejected. It is not always
feasible when dealing with the immediate
welfare of children simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been
put in issue.”
relevant principles in relation to parenting and interim proceedings are well
Goode and Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346.
of the Act outlines the objects and principles underlying
“(1) The objects of this Part are to ensure that the
are met by:
(a) ensuring that
have the benefit of
both of their
having a meaningful
involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best
(b) protecting
from physical or
psychological harm from being subjected to, or
family violence
(c) ensuring that
receive adequate and
to help them achieve their full
potential; and
(d) ensuring that
fulfil their duties,
and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of
(2) The principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or
would be contrary to a
have the right to know and be cared
for by both their
, regardless of whether
are married, separated, have never
married or have never lived together; and
have a right to spend time on a
regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their
and other people significant to their care,
welfare and development (such as grandparents and other
jointly share duties and
responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their
should agree about the future
have a right to enjoy their culture
(including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that
provides that in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order, the
court is to regard the best interests of the child as
the paramount
consideration.
then outlines the primary (sub-s.(2)) and additional (sub-s.(3))
considerations that the court is to take into account in determining
the best interests of the child.
of the Act provides that when making a parenting order, the court must
apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the
child for the
child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility. The
presumption does not apply where:
a. there are reasonable grounds to
believe a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence
[s.61DA(2)],
in interim proceedings
the court considers
that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances
presumption to be applied when making that order [s.61DA(3)].
c. if the court is satisfied that an order for equal shared parental
responsibility would not be in the child’s best interests
[s.61DA(4)]
the presumption in
is to apply and the Court makes an order for equal
shared parental responsibility, this “triggers” the operation of
which requires the court to consider whether equal time or substantial
and significant time with each parent is in the child’s
best interests and
reasonably practicable.
Goode and Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
(2006) FLC 93-286
the Full Court (Bryant
CJ, Finn and Boland JJ) discussed the application of the presumption in
to interim proceedings at [56], the Full Court said:
our view the Act makes it clear that when a parenting order is sought, whether
it be an interim or final order, the starting
point is the application of a
presumption that it is in the best interests of the child that the child’s
parents have equal
shared parental responsibility as expressed in
subject to the qualifications in sub-sections (2), (3) and (4).
Full Court in
Goode and Goode
provided a “framework” as to
how applications for parenting orders are to be determined. The High Court in
[2010] HCA 4
affirmed the legislative pathway. This
identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts;
considering the matters in
that are relevant and, if possible, making
findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested
evidence to
enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take
the Full Court further observed at [106]-[107] in relation
to the need to consider whether the presumption in 61DA applies in interim
proceedings:
we are satisfied the legislation required his Honour to turn his mind to whether
or not the presumption applied, or
whether under
he should not
determine that issue. That he did not do.
already alluded to the fact that the legislation, after the amending Act,
imposes on a judicial officer determining a parenting
application, be it interim
or final, consideration of a number of provisions of
We are conscious, particularly for judicial officers determining
interim parenting matters in a busy court, such as the Federal Magistrates
Court, and where issues may be narrowly confined, or there is only a single
issue to be determined, that the requirements of
are onerous, particularly if an order for equal shared parental
responsibility has been or is to be made. However the legislation
mandates the
path which must be followed.
should not be applied in a broad exclusionary manner in interim
proceedings, it appears to us that it is likely to have greater relevance
matters where a narrow issue is in dispute in interim proceedings, particularly
if equal time or substantial and significant time
orders are not in issue. The
exclusion may also be relevant where there are numerous and complex factual
issues which are incapable
of determination at an interim hearing. The practical
effect of the application of
is that the task and complexity of
decision making on a narrow issue or issues is reduced.
However the
task still requires some reference to
and (2) and the giving of
reasons, which may be very brief, why it is considered appropriate for the
exception in
to be applied.”
The Presumption
court has reservations as to whether in all circumstances of this matter the
presumption should apply.
set out above in this the court’s reasons for judgment there are
reasonable grounds to believe that the father has engaged
in the abuse of the
children or domestic violence as contemplated in the terms of
section 4AB
Act if the court accepts the evidence of the mother.
the court is not in a position to determine facts in issue. Otherwise the court
needs to be satisfied that in all the circumstances
it is not in the best
interests of the children for there to be an order for equal shared parental
responsibility.
that circumstance the orders to be made by the court as to parental
responsibility fall to be determined by reason of a consideration
of the best
interest considerations set out in
section 60CC.
in view of the parties’ agreement as to interim parenting orders the
resolution of the outstanding discrete issue will
not enliven each and every one
of the considerations.
Best Interests
the Full Court preferred in
Collu & Rinaldo
[2010] FamCAFC 53
court turns to look at the best interests considerations set out in
should firstly consider the additional considerations.
The Additional Considerations
expressed by the
factors (such as the
's maturity or
level of understanding) that the
thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the
Understandably there is no evidence before the
court in relation to this consideration as it impacts upon the discrete issue
for determination.
Accordingly this consideration is of no relevance.
nature of the relationship of the
persons (including any grandparent or other
The court is
satisfied by reason of the physical circumstances of the children during
cohabitation and the parties’ respective
employment obligations during
that period that throughout cohabitation the mother was the primary caregiver
for the children and
as such to the children she represents their primary
attachment.
The nature of the relationship between the children and the father is
somewhat clouded by the mother's allegations in relation to
his behaviour
including his abusive, derogatory and coercive behaviour towards the mother in
the presence of the children. The circumstances
of final separation cause the
court some significant concern. Whilst the court is satisfied that the father
has a significant relationship
with the children the court is conscious that
that relationship is clouded by issues as to the father’s emotional
and anger management.
extent to which each of the
has taken, or failed to take, the
opportunity:
participate in making decisions about
major long-term issues
in relation
spend time with the
communicate with the
An overview of the
relationship in the context of this consideration is referred to above. In
circumstances of the parties having
a significantly conflictual relationship
both prior to and after separation with many of the issues alleged by one and
the other unresolved, an assessment of this consideration awaits final
determination. This consideration is of no relevance in the
context of the
present determination.
ca) the extent to which each of the
has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the
's obligations to maintain the
In the present circumstances the father has voluntarily resigned his
employment and at present provides little or no financial support
for the mother
and children. The mother as it were has relied upon handouts provided by the
paternal grandfather but even those were
subject to conditions and ceased when
the mother relocated her residence from Sydney's eastern suburbs to [omitted].
The mother otherwise
provides for all of the children's needs in terms of
accommodation and financial support.
(d) the likely effect of any changes in the
's circumstances, including the likely effect
of any separation from:
of his or her
, or other person (including any
grandparent or other
), with whom he or she has been
This is not a relevant consideration for the present
practical difficulty and expense of a
spending time with and communicating with a
and whether that difficulty or expense will
substantially affect the
's right to
maintain personal relations and direct contact with both
on a regular basis;
not a relevant consideration.
capacity of:
other person (including any grandparent or other
to provide for
the needs of the
, including emotional
and intellectual needs;
This consideration has some significance. The court is satisfied that the
mother has an adequate capacity in this regard by reason
of a consideration of
the circumstances of cohabitation and the period post separation.
The court has reservations in relation to the father's capacity in this
regard. His manipulation and coercive use of the issue of
private school fees
places the eldest child and to some extent the youngest child at risk of being
removed from their current enrolments
in circumstances where the court expects
that such removal would have an adverse impact on the children.
However to allow, as the husband asserts, private school fees to accumulate
in arrears by reason of the mother’s inability to
meet half of the school
fees demanded of her by the father is in the court’s view entirely
inappropriate. It places the children,
more particularly the eldest child at
risk of effectively being expelled from school for non-payment of fees. How that
circumstance
is explained to a child of her age must at best be problematic.
In the court’s view this consideration favours the mother at least in
the interim having parental responsibility for schooling
and educational issues
so as to remove from the father the ability to manipulate and coerce the mother
as he has done particularly
in relation to his alleged demands that the mother
changed her surname.
maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and
traditions) of the
and of either of the
, and any other characteristics of the
thinks are relevant;
children are at a young age. The question of education does not need to take
precedence as yet. Nor should it be the focus of
conflict between the parties as
described above.
or a Torres Strait Islander
's right to enjoy his or her
Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander culture
(including the right to enjoy that culture with
other people who share that culture); and
likely impact any proposed
under this Part will have on that right;
This is not a relevant consideration.
attitude to the
, and to the
responsibilities of
, demonstrated
by each of the
In the context of this
consideration the court is concerned that the father has demonstrated an
inappropriate attitude to particularly
the eldest child in so far as it touches
upon the prospect of disruption to her educational circumstances and the
imposition of an
unachievable financial burden on the mother. The mother’s
concerns in relation to this issue can only be reflected inappropriately
child especially in circumstances where she is excluded from attendance for
non-payment of fees by her present school.
family violence
involving the
There are many
unresolved issues touching upon this consideration that await final trial at
which time the court will be able to make
appropriate findings of fact.
family violence order
applies, or has applied, to the
's family--any relevant inferences that can be
drawn from the order, taking into account the following:
nature of the order;
circumstances in which the order was
evidence admitted in
proceedings
proceedings
for, the order;
other relevant matter;
This is not a relevant
consideration.
it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to
the institution of further
proceedings
in relation to the
These are interim proceedings limited to the discrete issue of
parental responsibility. The court has made orders as to the provision
single expert's report and in such a circumstance the court is unable to have
regard to this consideration.
other fact or circumstance that the
thinks is relevant.
This is not a relevant consideration.
The Primary Considerations:
primary considerations are:
(a) the benefit to the
of having a meaningful relationship with both of
(b) the need to protect the
from physical
or psychological harm from being subjected to, or
family violence
applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the
is to give greater weight to the consideration
set out in paragraph (b).
Section 60CC(2)(a)
– “meaningful” relationship
Mazorski v Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
, Brown J considered ordinary
definitions of the term “meaningful” and observed:
these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the
context of “meaningful relationship”,
is synonymous with
“significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for
“important” or “of
consequence”. I proceed on the basis
that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the
, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement
is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. It is a
qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one
. Quantitive concepts
may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the
application of the presumption
of equally shared parental responsibility and the
requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best
substantial and significant.
McCall & Clark
[2009] FamCAFC 92
the Full Court at 83,476 accepted as
appropriate this interpretation by Brown J of “meaningful
relationship”.
parties have agreed on interim orders as to the primary residence of the
children and the time they shall spend with the father.
The discrete issue for
determination as to parental responsibility is not assisted by a consideration
of this factor.
Section 60CC(2)(b)
– need to protect
court has touched upon this issue above in the context of parental capacity and
attitude. Whilst the expanded concept of family
violence provided for in
could include conduct such as is alleged by the mother against the father,
the court is comfortably satisfied that it is appropriate
to consider the issue
before it by reference to the additional considerations referred to
Parental Responsibility
Lansa & Clovelly
[2010] FamCA 80
J referred to the issue of conflict between parents in disputes over parenting
orders. His observations have relevance
in this matter. He said:
and its Central Role in this Case:
rights of children, and assertions as to their best interests are, in many
highly conflicted parenting cases ending in trials,
refracted through a prism of
each parent’s creation which contains their interpretation of the
children’s best interests
clouded by the (often unstated and sometimes
denied) assertion of parental rights, both of the type earlier described and of
self-centred type. In my judgment, such is the case here.
there is conflict of a chronic and debilitating kind, as there is here, the
issue is further considerably clouded by assertions
and counter-assertions of
past and present “wrongs” said to support ultimate assertions about
the best interests of the
children and said to “justify” the
exercise of rights by a parent or, at least, to explain why those rights are
exercised in a particular way. Again, in my judgment, such is the case
continued and said:
80. It will
be clear from what I have said about conflict and its central place in these
children’s best interests that, if
a proposal or proposals are found to be
significantly likely to reduce the conflict between these parents, any such
proposal or proposals
might be thought likely to be significantly beneficial for
the children and, thus, strongly indicative of a result consistent with
children’s best interests...”
J then discussed the issue of parental responsibility under the Act, the Court
The ambit of the legislative provisions referred to thus far is narrowed by
reference to
and the Note to
The latter section makes it clear
that sharing parental responsibility (whether equally or not) is not a passive
activity; it requires
those having shared parental responsibility, or aspects of
it, to make joint decisions and to consult and attempt to reach agreement
order to do so. However, the section goes on to provide that consultation is not
required unless the decision is about a “major
long-term issue”
– an expression that is defined.
Section 65DAE
and its Note underline the last point by providing that there is
no necessity to consult a person who has or shares parental responsibility
decisions that are made in relation to the child during the time that the child
is spending with that person that are not decisions
issues”. It is to be noted that the section is made subject to any
provision to the contrary in
a parenting order.
(s65DAE(2)).......
if the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not rebutted,
then, absent specific provision in the parenting
orders, the consultation and
genuine effort to reach a decision required by
applies, but (subject to
specific provision in the Orders) only in respect of “major long-term
Equally, the application of the presumption will mean that decisions during time
spent between parent and child that are not
issues”, can be made by the parent exercising the time without the
necessity for the consultation
and joint effort otherwise required in respect of
“major long-term issues”.
of these matters has relevance, as it seems to me, to a decision as to whether
the children’s best interests require
the rebuttal of the presumption. A
particular aspect of that is the role that entrenched and apparently intractable
conflict might
play in any such decision....”
J then said:
Those matters too, have relevance as it seems to me in assessing whether the
best interests of children require the rebuttal
of the statutory presumption
and, if so, the form of the orders that might be made in respect of parental
responsibility. In Chappell
and Chappell
(2008) FamCAFC 143
(2008) FLC 93-382
, the Full Court said:
order to rebut the presumption it is necessary for the Court to make a finding
that it would not be in the best interests
of the child for the presumption to
be applied. We accept that in determining what is in the child’s best
interests the Court
must take into account the prescribed matters in
and (3), one of which requires the Court to consider whether it would be
preferable to make the order least likely to lead to the
institution of further
proceedings. In our view, it would be an appropriate exercise of discretion in
some cases to find that application
of the presumption would not be in the
child’s best interests because the track record of the parents would
suggest a high
probability of deadlock, which would inevitably lead to further
proceedings. In such cases, however, the process of reasoning required
the presumption would involve findings related to the welfare of the child,
rather than findings concerning, for example,
the likelihood that schools and
hospitals would find it easier to deal with one parent rather than two.
We can also
envisage circumstances in which the Court, in the proper exercise of discretion,
might make very specific orders in relation
to issues which could be loosely
described as relating to the “management” of particular aspects of a
child’s welfare.
Thus, for example, in the present matter His Honour might
appropriately have made an order that the wife have responsibility for
appointments with the speech therapist, as this has been a point of contention.
However, where the Court proposes (as His
Honour did in this case), to give one
of the parents a form of responsibility for issues as broad as
“health” and “education”,
we consider this should
ordinarily be done by use of the concepts prescribed by the legislation
153. As the
Full Court points out, it is open to the Court to find that “the track
record of the parents [is such that it]
would suggest a high probability of
deadlock, which would inevitably lead to further proceedings.” Equally, it
seems to me,
that circumstances of pervasive, and apparently intractable,
conflict can point to the process of consultation and endeavour to reach
agreement required by the Act being productive of yet more conflict and
consequent strain and stress for the children; something
surely contrary to
their best interests.
subject to specific Court order to the contrary, it needs to be borne in mind
that the statutorily-required process is
in respect of “major long-term
issues”. There should, it seems to me, be good reason why, it is in the
best interests
of the children, for a finding that both parents ought not
equally and jointly be involved in the sort of major decision embraced
definition. It can readily be envisaged that high conflict can be a good reason.
All the more so, it seems to me when one,
or both, parents are affected by
issues such as drug or alcohol addiction, mental health issues and the like.
court is mindful that issues as to parental responsibility in the present matter
at least on an interim basis are limited to the
vexed question of the children's
education. The overshadowing circumstance of this issue is that the father has
sought to use the
issue to intimidate, manipulate and coerce the mother for his
own purposes.
all the circumstances the court is satisfied that the parties should have equal
shared parental responsibility for the children
for the question as to education
which on an interim basis should repose in the mother.
court will make orders accordingly.
I certify that the preceding
sixty-seven (67) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of
Date: 28 March 2013
RTF format (277 KB)
Signed PDF/A format