URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1980/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Port Jackson Stevedoring Pty Ltd v Salmond and Spraggon (Aust) Pty Ltd [1980] UKPCHCA 1; (1980) 144 CLR 300 (10 July 1980)
PRIVY COUNCIL
PORT JACKSON STEVEDORING PTY. LTD. v. SALMOND & SPRAGGON (AUST.) PTY. LTD.
[1980] UKPCHCA 1
(1980) 144 CLR 300
Privy Council
Lord Wilberforce(1), Lord Diplock(1), Lord Fraser of Tullybelton(1),
Lord Scarman(1) and Lord Roskill(1).
Contract - Bill of lading - Provisions limiting liability - Provision barring
action if not brought within year of delivery of goods
- Term that benefit of
those provisions be available to servants and agents (including independent
contractors) of carrier - Carrier
to be deemed to contract as agent or trustee
for their benefit - Whether third party stevedore can claim benefit of
provisions -
Scope of exemption - Whether bill of lading ceased to apply after
goods passed ship's rail - Himalaya clause - Theft of goods in
stevedore's
possession - Whether fundamental breach of obligations as bailee.
1980, May 12-15; July 10. 10:7:1980
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
LORD WILBERFORCE delivered the judgment of their Lordships as follows: -
This is an appeal, by special leave, from a judgment of the High Court of
dismissed an appeal from the Court of Appeal of the Supreme
Court of New South
(1977) 1 Lloyd's Rep 445
. That Court had allowed an appeal from a
decision of Sheppard J. sitting in Commercial
Causes by which he dismissed the
2. The action was brought by the respondent in respect of a consignment of
razor blades in thirty-seven cartons, shipped from Canada
to Australia on the
New York Star a ship of the Blue Star Line. The relevant bill of lading dated
27th March 1970 was issued in Montreal,
Quebec: the port of loading was St.
John, New Brunswick; and the port of discharge was Sydney. The shipper, named
in the bill of
lading was Schick Safety Razor Company Division of Eversharp of
Canada Ltd.; the respondent was named as consignee. The bill of lading
issued to the consignor and was transmitted to and accepted by the consignee.
3. The appellant carried on business as stevedore in the port of Sydney.
Forty-nine per cent of its capital was owned by Blue Star
Line Australia Ltd.
and it commonly acted as stevedore in Sydney for the Blue Star Line. (at p302)
4. The New York Star arrived at Sydney on 10th May 1970. On her arrival - and
there was evidence that this was in accordance with
the normal practice in the
port - the packages of razor blades were discharged from the ship and placed
by the stevedore in part
of a shed (called "the dead house") on the wharf
which was under its control. Later the goods were stolen from the wharf,
been delivered by servants of the stevedore to persons who had no right
to receive them, so that when the consignee presented the
bill of lading they
were unavailable. The consignee brought this action against the stevedore and
against the ship's agent - Joint
Cargo Services Pty. Ltd. - alleging
negligence in failing to take proper care of the goods, delivery of the goods
to an unauthorized
person and non-delivery to the consignee. The action
against the ship's agent failed at first instance and has not been the subject
of appeal. The trial judge however found that the stevedore had been negligent
in the care of the goods and that there had been a
misdelivery: these findings
have not been disputed. (at p302)
5. The bill of lading contained a "Himalaya clause" extending the benefit of
defences and immunities conferred by the bill of lading
upon the carrier to
independent contractors employed by the carrier, and also a time bar (similar
to that contained in the Hague
Rules) barring any action if not brought within
one year after the delivery of the goods or the date when the goods should
delivered: this action was not so brought. These provisions were in
substance identical with those considered by this Board in New
Shipping Co. Ltd. v. Satterthwaite & Co. Ltd.
[1974] UKPC 1
(1975) AC 154
, an appeal from
the Court of Appeal in New Zealand. The
relied upon these provisions
as affording a defence to this action.
6. It is now necessary to state in detail the issues which were contested,
and the decisions which were given in the three Courts
in Australia. (at p303)
7. Before Sheppard J. it was contended by the consignee:
(i) that there had been a fundamental breach by the appellant of its
obligations as bailee of the goods (the "fundamental breach"
(ii) that one of the necessary conditions for applying the "Himalaya
clause" had not been satisfied, in that it had not been
shown that the carrier
had authority to act on the stevedore's behalf in accepting the bill of lading
(the "agency" point);
(iii) that the bill of lading ceased to have any operation after the goods
passed over the ship's rail (the "capacity" point).
Sheppard J. rejected all these contentions, though he found that the necessary
agency was established only by ratification. He gave
judgment for the
appellant. (at p303)
8. In the Court of Appeal: the same three contentions were put forward, and
were rejected by the Court. The Court found that the
necessary agency was
directly established by the evidence, so that reliance on ratification was not
necessary. In addition, however,
the consignee was given leave to take a fresh
point, namely:
(iv) that there was no proof of consideration moving from the stevedore
so as to entitle it to the benefit of defences and
immunity clauses in the
bill of lading (the "consideration" point).
The Court of Appeal accepted that contention, allowed the appeal and gave
judgment for the consignee for $14,684.98 damages. (at
9. In the High Court of Australia: the "agency" point and the "consideration"
point were again argued, but rejected by the majority
of the Court (Barwick
C.J., Mason and Jacobs JJ.). There was also argument upon the "fundamental
breach" point, but this was not
dealt with in the judgments. (at p303)
10. As to the "capacity" point, senior counsel for the consignee expressly
disclaimed reliance upon it (not surprisingly since Glass
J.A. had described
it as "without substance") and argument upon it was not heard. However, the
majority of the Court, (Barwick C.J.
dissenting) decided the appeal in favour
of the respondent upon this point. (at p303)
11. Finally, it should be mentioned that the Board's decision in
Satterthwaite's Case was followed without question by the trial
judge and by
the Court of Appeal. Their Lordships understand that there was no argument in
the High Court upon the correctness of
this decision. However two members of
the majority (Stephen and Murphy JJ.) expressed disagreement with it. (at
12. It was upon this situation that their Lordships decided, exceptionally,
to grant special leave to appeal to Her Majesty in Council.
13. It will be seen from the foregoing that the point which calls for
decision by their Lordships is the "capacity" point. This
was fully argued by
both sides to the appeal. Before dealing with it, their Lordships must briefly
state their position upon the
other points, upon which argument was addressed
by the respondent. (at p304)
14. First, as to the Board's decision in Satterthwaite's Case. This was a
decision, in principle, that the "Himalaya clause" is
capable of conferring
upon a third person falling within the description "servant or agent of the
Carrier (including every independent
contractor from time to time employed by
the Carrier)" defences and immunities conferred by the bill of lading upon the
if such persons were parties to the contract contained in or
evidenced by the bill of lading. But the decision was not merely a decision
this principle for it is made clear that in fact stevedores, employed by the
carrier, may come within it; and moreover that they
normally and typically
will do so. It may indeed be said that the significance of Satterthwaite's
Case lay not so much in the establishment
of any new legal principle, as in
the finding that in the normal situation involving the employment of
stevedores by carriers, accepted
principles enable and require the stevedore
to enjoy the benefit of contractual provisions in the bill of lading. In the
Mason and Jacobs JJ. (1978) 139 CLR, at p 276 :
"When the circumstances described by Lord Reid" (sc. in Scruttons Ltd.
v. Midland Silicones Ltd.
[1961] UKHL 4
) "exist, the
stevedore will on the
generally accepted principles of the law of contract be entitled to his
personal contractual
immunity. The
importance of" (Satterthwaite's Case
[1974] UKPC 1
) "is the manner in which on the bare facts of the case their Lordships
to discern a contract between the shipper and the
stevedore, and, we
would add, to do so in a manner which limited the
approach to
those commercial
contexts in which immunity of the
stevedore was clearly intended in form and
almost certainly known
by both the
shipper and the stevedore to be intended."
Although, in each case, there will be room for evidence as to the precise
relationship of carrier and stevedore and as to the practice
at the relevant
port, the decision does not support, and their Lordships would not encourage,
a search for fine distinctions which
would diminish the general applicability,
in the light of established commercial practice, of the principle. As regards
its applicability
in Australia, their Lordships are content to leave the
matter as it was left by the Australian courts including the High Court. They
are the more satisfied to do so in view of the reasoned analysis of the legal
principles involved which appears in the judgment of
the Chief Justice. Their
Lordships find, as his Honour himself declares, this to be in substantial
agreement with and indeed to constitute
a powerful reinforcement of one of the
two possible bases put forward in the Board's judgment. (at p305)
15. The applicability of the decision was accepted in their joint judgment by
Mason and Jacobs JJ. although their Honours reached
a decision adverse to the
appellant on the "capacity" point. (at p305)
16. Secondly, as to the factual ingredients needed to confer on the stevedore
the benefit of the contract. From what has already
been said it follows that
this issue requires no prolonged discussion. Not only is the factual situation
in the present case in all
respects typical of that which the Board, in
Satterthwaite's Case, thought sufficient to confer that benefit, but each
relevant ingredient
has, in fact, been found to exist. Agency has been found,
as a fact, by all three courts, with only the qualification as regards
judgment of Sheppard J. already mentioned. The provision of consideration by
the stevedore was held to follow from this Board's
decision in Satterthwaite's
Case and in addition was independently justified through the Chief Justice's
analysis. (at p305)
17. Thirdly, as to "fundamental breach". The proposition that exemption
clauses may be held inapplicable to certain breaches of
contract as a matter
of construction of the contract, as held by the House of Lords in Suisse
Atlantique S.A. v. N. V. Rotterdamsche
Kolen Centrale
(1967) 1 AC 361
Photo Production Ltd. v. Securicor Transport Ltd.
[1980] UKHL 2
(1980) AC 827
and indorsed
Australia by Windeyer
J. in Thomas National Transport (Melbourne) Pty. Ltd.
v. May & Baker (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
[1966] HCA 46
(1966) 115 CLR 353
, at p 376 was not
But Mr. Hobhouse for the respondent put forward a special, and
ingenious, argument
that, because of the
fundamental nature of the
breach, the
appellants had deprived themselves of the benefit of cl. 17 of the bill
lading - the time
bar clause. A breach of
a repudiatory character, which he
contended that the breach in question was, entitled
the innocent party,
he waives the breach,
to claim to be released from further performance of his
obligations under the contract
- so far their
Lordships of course agree.
of these obligations, learned counsel proceeded to argue, was to bring any
action upon
within a period of one year,
and the innocent party was
released from this obligation. An alternative way of putting it
bringing of suit within one
year was a condition with which the innocent party
was obliged to comply: the repudiatory
discharged this condition. A
point made was that cl. 17 applied at most to actions for breach of
contract: the appellant's
negligence as bailee, however, gave
action in tort which was not governed by the time bar. (at p306)
18. Their Lordships' opinion upon these arguments is clear. However adroitly
presented, they are unsound, and indeed unreal. Clause
17 is drafted in
general and all-embracing terms:
"In any event the Carrier and the ship shall be discharged from all
liability in respect of loss or damage unless suit is brought
within one year
after the delivery of the goods or the date when the goods should have been
delivered. Suit shall not be deemed brought
until jurisdiction shall have been
obtained over the Carrier and/or the ship by service of process or by an
agreement to appear."
The reference to delivery of the goods shows clearly that the clause is
directed towards the carrier's obligations as bailee of the
goods. It cannot
be supposed that it admits of a distinction between obligations in contract
and liability in tort - "all liability"
means what it says. (at p306)
19. Moreover it is quite unreal to equate this clause with those provisions
in the contract which relate to performance. It is a
clause which comes into
operation when contractual performance has become impossible, or has been
given up: then, it regulates the
manner in which liability for breach of
contract is to be established. In this respect their Lordships find it
relevantly indistinguishable
from an arbitration clause, or a forum clause,
which, on clear authority, survive a repudiatory breach (Heyman v. Darwins
; Photo Production Ltd. v. Securicor Transport Ltd.
[1980] UKHL 2
). Mr. Hobhouse appealed for support to
some observations
Diplock in Photo Production Ltd. v. Securicor Transport Ltd. (1980)
849 where reference is made
to putting an end
"to all primary obligations
remaining unperformed". But these words were never
intended to cover such
"obligations"
to use Lord Diplock's
word, as arise when primary obligations
have been put an end to. There
then arise, on his Lordship's analysis,
secondary obligations
which include an obligation to pay monetary
compensation. Whether these
have been modified by agreement is
a matter of
construction
of the contract. The analysis, indeed, so far from supporting the
respondent's
argument, is directly opposed
to it. Their Lordships
opinion that, on construction and analysis, cl. 17 plainly operates to
the respondent's claim.
20. Their Lordships now deal with the "capacity" argument. This rather
inapposite word has been used, for convenience, in order
to indicate the
general nature of the submission. More fully, this was that at the time when
the loss occurred, the goods had been
discharged and were no longer in the
custody of the carrier. Consequently, the appellant was acting not as an
independent contractor
employed by the carrier to perform the carrier's
obligations under the bill of lading but as a bailee. His liability, in that
was independent of and not governed by any of the clauses of the
contract. This point enables a distinction to be made with Satterthwaite's
[1974] UKPC 1
(1975) AC 154
for there, since the goods were damaged in the course of
discharge, the capacity of the stevedore as a person
acting on behalf of
carrier was not contested. (at p307)
21. Their Lordships can at this point dispose of one question of fact. It
appears to have been the view of both Stephen J. and of
Mason and Jacobs JJ.
that the stevedore was remunerated for his services in stacking and storing
the goods on the wharf by the consignee:
this, if correct, might be an
argument for finding that it was not, in respect of these matters, acting in
the course of employment
by the carrier. In fact, however, the evidence,
including the actual account, showed that these charges were paid by the
ship's agent
on behalf of the carrier, thus, if anything, giving rise to an
inference the other way. Their Lordships put this matter aside and
deal with the point on the construction of the relevant provisions of the bill
of lading. (at p307)
22. On its face, the document stated that delivery would be effected "by the
carrier or his agents" in exchange for the bill of
lading, and the preamble
provided that the goods were "to be transported subject to all the terms of
this bill of lading . . . to
the port of discharge . . . and there to be
delivered or transhipped on payment of the charges thereon . . ." and further
agreed that the custody and carriage of the goods are subject to the
following terms on the face and back hereof which shall govern
the relations,
whatsoever they may be, between the shipper, consignee, and the Carrier,
Master and ship in every contingency wheresoever
and whatsoever occurring. . .
." (at p308)
23. Clause 5 was as follows:-
"The Carrier's responsibility in respect of the goods as a carrier shall
not attach until the goods are actually loaded for
transportation upon the
ship and shall terminate without notice as soon as the goods leave the ship's
tackle at the Port of Discharge
from Ship or other place where the Carrier is
authorised to make delivery or end its responsibility. Any responsibility of
the Carrier
in respect of the goods attaching prior to such loading or
continuing after leaving the ship's tackle as aforesaid, shall not exceed
of an ordinary bailee, and, in particular, the Carrier shall not be liable for
loss or damage to the goods due to - flood: fire,
as provided elsewhere in
this bill of lading: falling or collapse of wharf, pier or warehouse: robbery,
theft or pilferage: strikes,
lockouts or stoppage or restraint of labor from
whatever cause, whether partial or general: any of the risks or causes
in paragraphs (a), (e) to (l) inclusive and (k) to (p) inclusive, of
subdivision 2 of Section 4 of the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act
of the United
States; or any risks or causes whatsoever, not included in the foregoing, and
whether like or unlike those hereinabove
mentioned, where the loss or damage
is not due to the fault or neglect of the Carrier. The Carrier shall not be
liable in any capacity
whatsoever for any non-delivery or mis-delivery, or
loss of or damage to the goods occurring while the goods are not in the actual
custody of the Carrier." (at p308)
24. Clause 8 was as follows:-
"Delivery of the goods shall be taken by the consignee or holder of the
Bill of Lading from the vessel's rail immediately the
vessel is ready to
discharge, berthed or not berthed, and continuously as fast as vessel can
deliver notwithstanding any custom of
the port to the contrary. The Carrier
shall be at liberty to discharge continuously day and night, Sundays and
holidays included,
all extra expenses to be for account of the Consignee or
Receiver of the goods notwithstanding any custom of the port to the contrary.
If the Consignee or holder of the Bill of Lading does not for any reason take
delivery as provided herein, they shall be jointly
and severally liable to pay
the vessel on demand demurrage at the rate of one shilling and sixpence
sterling per gross register ton
per day or portion of a day during the delay
so caused: such demurrage shall be paid in cash day by day to the Carrier, the
or Agents. If the Consignee or holder of the Bill of Lading requires
delivery before or after usual hours he shall pay any extra
expenses incurred
in consequence. Delivery ex ship's rail shall constitute due delivery of the
goods described herein and the carrier's
liability shall cease at that point
notwithstanding consignee receiving delivery at some point removed from the
ship's side and custom
of the port being to the contrary. The Carrier and his
Agents shall have the right of nominating the Berth or Berths for loading
discharging at all ports and places whatsoever any custom to the contrary
notwithstanding. The Carrier shall not be required
to give any notification of
disposition or arrival of the goods." (at p309)
25. Clause 14 was as follows: -
"Neither the carrier nor any corporation owned by, subsidiary to or
associated or affiliated with the Carrier shall be liable
to answer for or
make good any loss or damage to the goods occurring at any time and even
though before loading on or after discharge
from the ship, by reason or by
means of any fire whatsoever, unless such fire shall be caused by its design
or neglect."
These provisions must be interpreted in the light of the practice that
consignees rarely take delivery of goods at the ship's rail
but will normally
collect them after some period of storage on or near the wharf. The parties
must therefore have contemplated that
the carrier, if it did not store the
goods itself, would employ some other person to do so. Furthermore a document
headed "Port Jackson
Stevedoring Pty. Ltd. Basic Terms and Conditions for
Stevedoring at Sydney, N.S.W." showed that it was contemplated that the
would be so employed. These practical considerations, which are
developed in the judgment of the Chief Justice, explain the somewhat
interrelation of cll. 5 and 8. (at p309)
26. It is convenient to start with cl. 8. This, in the first sentence,
creates an obligation on the consignee to take delivery from
the ship's rail
the moment that the ship is ready to discharge: if he does not he must pay
demurrage. This provision, which is in
line with the decision in Keane v.
Australian Steamships Pty. Ltd.
[1929] HCA 5
(1929) 41 CLR 484
, is a valuable protection
the carrier,
which he may, or may not, insist upon. The bill of lading
takes account of both possibilities.
The first sentence of
cl. 5, quite
consistently, provides that the carrier's responsibility as a carrier
terminates as soon as the
goods leave the ship's
tackle. But,
carrier may not have insisted that the consignee take delivery at this point,
of cl. 5 continues
by recognizing
that the carrier may continue to
have some responsibility for the goods after discharge. He cannot
them on the wharf
and leave them there. So to suppose would be
commercially unreal and is not contemplated by the
bill of lading.
Clause 5 in
attributes responsibility to the carrier as bailee and defines the
period in express terms as "continuing
leaving the ship's
tackle". There
is nothing in the latter part of cl. 8 that is inconsistent with this. It
merely provides
delivery ex ship's
rail shall constitute due delivery and
that the carrier's liability shall cease at that point. But this leaves
the option not
to insist on delivery ex ship's rail, and leaves, to be
governed by cl. 5, his responsibility if he does not.
27. The question may be asked, what is the carrier's position if he acts as
his own stevedore and himself stacks and stores the
goods. In the High Court,
Stephen J. did not provide an answer to this but, in view of the provisions
referred to above, their Lordships
think that the answer is clear - namely
that he would be liable for them, as bailee, under the contract. If that is
so, it seems
indisputable that if, instead, the carrier employs a third party
to discharge, stack and store, that person would be acting in the
his employment, performing duties which otherwise the carrier would perform
under the bill of lading, and so would be entitled
to the same immunity as the
carrier would have. Their Lordships would add that both cl. 5, in references
to theft or pilferage (which
may be expected to occur, if it does occur, on
the wharf) and cl. 14, referring to fire occuring after discharge, also
that the carrier may have responsibilities after this event. It is
made clear by cl. 5 that, irrespective of the period of carriage
the contract, the immunity of the carrier is not coextensive with this period
but extends both before and after it. The
stevedore's immunity extends, by
virtue of cl. 2, over the same period. (at p310)
28. On this point (and indeed on the appeal as a whole) their Lordships are
in agreement with the judgment of the Chief Justice.
They will humbly advise
Her Majesty that the appeal be allowed. The costs order of the High Court of
Australia will remain undisturbed
and the costs of this appeal will be borne
by the appellant in accordance with the undertaking which it gave. (at p310)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter