Zha & Wun (No 3) [2025] FedCFamC1A 195 (28 October 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Zha & Wun (No 3)
[2025] FedCFamC1A
Appeal from:
Zha & Wun (No 8)
[2024] FedCFamC1F 648
Appeal number
NAA 277 of 2024
File number
SYC 4269 of 2020
Judgment of:
ALDRIDGE, GILL & CHRISTIE JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – COSTS
– Where the appellant was wholly unsuccessful in her appeal – Where
all respondents rely
on settlement offers made to the appellant – Where
the settlement offers justify costs orders – Where indemnity costs
are not warranted – Appellant consents to fixed costs orders for a
specific period – Costs ordered against the
appellant on a party/party
basis and in a fixed sum – Appellant permitted to offset these orders
against costs orders in primary
proceedings.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) r 12.17
Cases cited:
Colgate-Palmolive Co v Cussons
(1993) 46 FCR 225;
[1993] FCA 801
Hogan and Hogan
(1986) FLC 91-704
[1986] FamCA 34
Kohan and Kohan
(1993) FLC 92-340
[1992] FamCA 116
Prantage & Prantage
(2013) FLC 93-544
[2013] FamCAFC 105
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Determined in chambers on the papers
Counsel for the
Mr Reynolds
Solicitor for the Appellant:
MLH Lawyers
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr Nehmy SC with Mr May
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Counsel for the Second, Third and Fourth Respondents:
Mr Turnbull
Solicitor for the Second, Third and Fourth Respondents:
David H Cohen & Co
SYC 4269 of 2020
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
First Respondent
Second Respondent
(and another named in the
Third Respondent
ALDRIDGE, GILL & CHRISTIE JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appellant pay the costs of the first respondent (excluding costs of recusal
applications determined 6 February 2025 and 4 March
2025) on a party/party basis
as agreed or assessed.
appellant pay the first respondent’s costs of the costs application as
agreed or assessed.
appellant pay the costs of the second to fourth respondents for the period
14 March 2025 to 13 June 2025 in the sum of $11,418.
appellant pay the costs of the second to fourth respondents for the period
22 October 2024 to 13 March 2025 (excluding costs of
application determined on 6 February 2025) on a party/party basis as agreed or
appellant pay the second to fourth respondents’ costs of the costs
application as agreed or assessed.
appellant be permitted to offset her obligations under Orders 1–5 against
the costs ordered to be paid by the respondents
SYC4269/2020.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
ALDRIDGE, GILL & CHRISTIE JJ:
13 June 2025 this Court made orders which included the dismissal of appeal
NAA 277 of 2024. Consequent upon that outcome, on 10
July 2025 the
first respondent husband made an application for his costs of the appeal; and on
11 July 2025 the second to fourth
respondents also made an application for
their costs of the appeal. In both cases the respondent on the applications is
the appellant in the substantive appeal. On 13 August 2025 the
wife filed Responses to both applications. All parties have filed
submissions. Contrary to the terms of the wife’s filed responses, her
written submissions state that she does not oppose
the making of a costs order,
rather she merely wishes to be heard about its nature, form and
Application by the first respondent husband
husband seeks:
(a) The wife pay costs of $184,194.39, referrable to costs incurred in the
period 22 October 2024 to 31 March 2025; and
(b) Indemnity costs of $74,996.57 referrable to the costs incurred in the period
1 April 2025 to the conclusion of the appeal.
the alternative to the relief set out above the husband seeks that the wife pay
costs in the sum of $234,149.14.
husband also seeks costs of the costs application.
wife’s concession does not absolve us of the obligation to find justifying
circumstances and we conclude that the fact that
the wife was wholly
unsuccessful and the fact of the husband having made an offer of compromise are
sufficient justifying circumstances
to depart from the usual rule.
applications are governed by the provisions of
(Cth) (“the Act”).
Section 114UB(1)
provides that
each party should ordinarily meet his or her own costs. We may depart from that
position by operation of
, which refers to making such order as
the Court considers just and departing from the position established by
s 114(UB)(1)
where “there are circumstances that justify” that
approach. In approaching the task, we are required to have regard to
the matters
s 114UB(3).
The establishment of one of the matters in
does not require departure from the usual rule since the discretion to order or
refuse to order costs remains. Costs may be ordered
if “just” in all
the circumstances:
Hogan and Hogan
[1986] FamCA 34
(1986) FLC 91-704.
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) (“the Rules”) provide various bases upon which an order for
costs may be calculated. Those are set out in r 12.17.
to indemnity costs, in
Colgate-Palmolive Co v Cussons
(1993) 46 FCR 225 (“
Colgate-Palmolive
Sheppard J stated:
tests have been variously put. The Court of Appeal in
Andrews v Barnes
at 141 said the court had a general and discretionary power to award costs as
between solicitor and client “as and when the
justice of the case might so
require”. Woodward J in
Fountain Selected Meats
appears to have
adopted what was said by Brandon LJ (as he was) in
Preston v Preston
637; namely, there should be some special or unusual feature in the case to
justify the Court in departing from the ordinary
practice. Most judges dealing
with the problem have resolved the particular case before them by dealing with
the circumstances of
that case and finding in it the presence or absence of
factors which would be capable, if they existed, of warranting a departure
the usual rule. But as French J said (at p 8) in
categories in which the discretion may be exercised are not closed”.
Davies J expressed (at p 6) similar views
Notwithstanding
the fact that that is so, it is useful to note some of the circumstances which
have been thought to warrant the exercise
of the discretion. I instance the
making of allegations of fraud knowing them to be false and the making of
irrelevant allegations
of fraud (both referred to by Woodward J in
and also by Gummow J in
Thors v Weekes
(1989) 92 ALR 131
at 152; evidence of particular misconduct that causes loss of time to the Court
and to other parties (French J in
); the fact that the proceedings
were commenced or continued for some ulterior motive (Davies J in
or in wilful disregard of known facts or clearly established law (Woodward J in
and French J in
); the making of allegations which
ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless
contentions (Davies
); an imprudent refusal of an offer to
compromise (eg
Messiter v Hutchinson
(1987) 10 NSWLR 525
Hospital v Fisher
(1992) 27 NSWLR 721
at 724 (Court of
Crisp v Keng
(unreported, Court of Appeal, NSW, Kirby P,
Priestly JA, Cripps JA, No 40744/1992, 27 September 1993) and an award of costs
indemnity basis against a contemnor (eg Megarry V-C in
). Other categories of cases are to be found in the reports. Yet
others to arise in the future will have different features about
them which may
justify an order for costs on the indemnity basis. The question must always be
whether the particular facts and circumstances
of the case in question warrant
the making of an order for payment of costs other than on a party and party
Prantage & Prantage
[2013] FamCAFC 105
(2013) FLC 93-544
the majority (Thackray and
Ryan JJ, with whom Murphy J agreed) held that the principles set out
by Sheppard J in
Colgate-Palmolive
were applicable to costs
applications in this Court.
for indemnity costs are a departure from the ordinary practice, generally
characterised as “exceptional”:
Kohan and Kohan
[1992] FamCA 116
wife opposes an order for indemnity costs.
husband submits that the particular case warrants an award of indemnity costs as
and from the expiry date of an offer of settlement.
The terms of the offer of
settlement were:
The respondents propose to resolve proceedings on the following terms:
1. Notice of appeal filed 22 October 2024 be dismissed;
2. Application in an Appeal filed 17 February 2025 be dismissed;
3. Application in an Appeal (second) filed 17 February 2025 be dismissed;
each party pay their own costs of an[d] incidental to these proceedings
including any costs arising from the Application in
an Appeal filed 28 February
This offer is submitted on behalf of all respondents and is open for acceptance
until 4:00pm on Friday, 28 March 2025 at which time
the offer is withdrawn and
no longer available for acceptance.
This letter is sent in accordance with the principles in
Calderbank v
[1976] Fam 93.
This letter will be relied upon by the respondents
for any application they may make in respect of costs.
(Annexure “1” to the affidavit of the husband filed 10 July 2025)
offer of settlement is a relevant consideration under s 114UB(3) of the
Act. The husband submits that the wife’s refusal
of the above offer of
settlement was imprudent in so far as, having regard to the legal fees to be
incurred in continuation of the
appeal, the wife would have been in a better
position had she accepted the husband’s offer.
wife submits at [8(c)] of her written submissions that as the offer of
settlement was on behalf of only one party to the appeal
its acceptance would
not necessarily have ended the matter. However, that submission appears to be
mistaken since the letter dated
13 March 2025 purports to be on behalf of
all respondents.
fact that an offer was made is relevant but not determinative. In the
circumstances of this case, we do not think that the wife’s
accept that offer is a sufficient basis for the award of indemnity costs. While
her appeal was dismissed, we are of the
view that it was properly brought and
do not consider that the wife’s conduct of the appeal itself warrants a
departure from the usual rule that costs are calculated
on a party/party basis.
To the extent that the husband submitted that failure to make discovery of her
litigation elsewhere and documents
obtained in those proceedings were relevant,
we consider that those actions are better considered in light of the submission
she did not seek to reopen the proceedings, then reserved, rather than
being matters which relate to the conduct of the appeal.
application for indemnity costs is refused. It falls then to consider the
husband’s application for costs in the sum of
$234,149.14, said to be the
amount calculated in accordance with the scale set out in the Rules.
wife says that some adjustment should be made to those scale costs to raise the
following issues:
(a) The claims for amounts at scale which are greater than those actually
(b) Questions about the reasonableness and proportionately of the amount of
preparation time claimed;
(c) Appropriateness of the engagement of two senior counsel (and interstate
(d) Whether some tasks should be charged at the solicitor’s rate (or
alternatively at a clerk’s rate);
(e) Whether the scale has been properly applied;
(f) Whether or not matters which are solicitor/client costs as opposed to
party/party costs have been included in the calculation;
(g) Whether individual items at scale would be considered reasonable and
proportionate;
(h) Whether the costs of the two recusal applications should be excluded (and in
that regard whether there should be a discount to
the amounts referrable to the
first day of hearing by reason of the time undertaken to prosecute the
unsuccessful recusal application
on that day); and
(i) Whether the time taken by counsel to undertake certain tasks was excessive.
matters which are set out in the wife’s written submissions persuade us
that this is not a matter where we could safely
adjudicate all disputes and as a
consequence, notwithstanding a fervent desire to avoid satellite litigation, we
are persuaded that
the appropriate course is for us to make an order that the
wife pay the husband’s costs on a party/party basis as agreed or
(excluding any fees referable to the recusal applications) and for this to also
apply to the application for costs of the
costs application. The matters set out
above (and reflected in the wife’s orders sought at 2(a)–(c) of her
Response to
the husband’s Application in an Appeal) are appropriate
matters for costs assessment. The costs of the recusal application
considered separately.
were two recusal applications in this case – the first resulted in an
order whereby Howard J recused himself; the second
application for
Aldridge J to recuse himself was dismissed. There are no factors identified
by the evidence or the submissions which
persuade us that the usual rule should
not apply to those applications and accordingly it is appropriate that each
party meet his
or her own costs of the recusal applications.
Application by the second to fourth respondents
second to fourth respondents seek:
(a) Costs of $1,255.53 for the period 22 October 2024 to 7 November
(b) Indemnity costs of $185,102.35 for the period 7 November 2024 to
13 June 2025.
the alternative to the relief set out above, they seek the following:
Alternative position
order that the Appellant pay the Second, Third and Fourth Respondents’
costs of the appeal as follows:
the period from 22 October 2024 to 13 March 2025 assessed on the ordinary basis
in the sum of $46,619.16;
the period from 14 March 2025 to the determination of the appeal on 13 June 2025
assessed on the indemnity basis in the sum of
$11,418.00.
Further alternative position
order that the Appellant pay the Second, Third and Fourth Respondents’
costs of the appeal assessed on the ordinary basis
in the sum of
$114.102.00.
Further further alternative position
order that the Appellant pay the Second, Third and Fourth Respondents’
costs of the appeal on a basis, and in a sum as the
Court thinks fit.
(As per the original)
also seek their costs of the costs application.
wife does not oppose the making of an order for costs in favour of the second to
fourth respondents.
wife seeks to be heard about the basis upon which the costs of the second to
fourth respondents are ordered.
7 November 2024 the second to fourth respondents served an offer to resolve
the appeal. The offer was made after the appeal was
filed but before the first
procedural hearing. The timing of the offer was such that had it been accepted,
very little work would
have been undertaken in respect of the appeal at that
point. The offer was in the following terms:
clients offer to compromise the whole of the Appeal against them on the
following terms:
(a) The parties consent to the Court making the following orders:
(i) The Notice of Appeal as against the Second Respondent, Third Respondent and
Fourth Respondent be dismissed.
(ii) There be no order as to costs of the Appeal as between the Applicant, the
Second Respondent, the Third Respondent and the Fourth
Respondent, with the
intent that each party pay his, her or its costs.
(b) Within 28 days of acceptance of this offer:
(i) The Second Respondent is to
pay the Applicant $2,000;
(ii) The Third Respondent is to pay the Applicant $2,000; and
(iii) The Fourth Respondent is to pay the Applicant $2,000.
(c) Upon payment of each of the sums set out in 3(b) above, the Applicant is to
release those of the Second Respondent, the Third
Respondent and the Fourth
Respondent who make such payment from any and all claims, actions, proceedings,
suits, causes of action,
demands, and complaints, whether at law in equity or
under statute, wheresoever and whensoever arising in relation to the subject
matter of the Appeal and the proceedings from which the Appeal has been brought.
be clear, acceptance of this offer would not amount to a resolution of the costs
applications argued before [the primary judge]
on 7 November 2024.
offer is open for acceptance in writing, addressed to this firm, until 4.00 pm
on 12 December 2024, at which time it is withdrawn.
offer is capable of immediate acceptance and does not require any further
document to be entered into or executed by the parties
for there to be a binding
agreement between the
(Exhibit “[ER]-1/1-3” to the affidavit of the solicitor for the
second to fourth respondents filed 11
offer constitutes justifying circumstances to support the making of a costs
order. The question then is on what basis? The second
to fourth respondents seek
indemnity costs.
principles which apply to claims for indemnity costs have been discussed above.
The facts of this case do not persuade us that
the second to fourth respondents
should be indemnified.
submissions made by the wife regarding the application of the second to fourth
respondents raise the following matters relating
to the reasonableness and
proportionality of the claim:
(a) Whether the fees are party/party or solicitor/client;
(b) The narrower scope of the work relating to the appeal as it related to the
interests of the second to fourth respondents; and
(c) Reasonableness of disbursement costs for printing.
desirability of fixing costs is outweighed in this case by the significant areas
of dispute which make assessment the most appropriate
course. However, given the
wife’s consent to the amount sought for the period 14 March to
13 June 2025, we will order those
costs in a fixed sum. It is appropriate
that the costs of the costs application be met by the wife, but in the
circumstances outlined
above that will be as agreed or assessed.
wife seeks that any costs orders in the appeal be set off against costs which
were ordered in the primary proceedings. This is
a reasonable request. The
respondents oppose this course on the basis that they assert an entitlement to
receive their costs of the
appeal (while the costs orders against them are being
assessed). Given that we have made orders which require agreement or assessment
of the appeal costs, we see no reason not to permit the set off sought by the
I certify that the preceding thirty-one (31)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Aldridge, Gill &
Dated: 28 October 2025
NAA 277 of 2024
SYC 4269 of 2020
Respondents
Fourth Respondent:
RTF format (406 KB)
Signed PDF/A format