O and Professional Association [2011] AICmrCN 9 (22 December 2011)
Case citation: O and Professional Association
[2011] AICmrCN 9
(22 December
Subject heading
to personal information
National Privacy Principles 6.1 and 6.2 in Schedule 3
The complainant sought access to their completed and
marked exam paper from a professional association. The complainant also sought
access to the associated documents which were used to mark and rate their
performance along with the application for special consideration
relevant documentation used in assessment of that application.
The professional association provided the complainant with a copy of the
front page of the exam paper and the multiple choice sheet
that contained their
personal information as well as a copy of their application for special
consideration. However, the professional
association refused to provide the
complainant with access to the rest of the documents they requested, including
working papers
for marking.
The professional association publishes an explanation of its marking process
on its website. It also offers exam participants online
access to a detailed
personal analysis letter, outlining the reasons for an adverse decision, as well
as the opportunity to contact
them with specific questions regarding their
personal analysis.
National Privacy Principle 6.1 provides that an
organisation that holds personal information about an individual must provide
individual with access to that information, unless one or more of certain
exceptions apply.
NPP 6.2 allows an organisation not to provide direct access to information
that will reveal commercially sensitive decision making
processes, if it gives
an explanation for the commercially sensitive decision.
The main issue was whether the professional
association could rely on the exception under NPP 6.2 to deny the complainant
some parts of their completed and marked exam paper, on the basis that
it would reveal evaluative information generated within the
organisation.
The Commissioner was of the view that the documents used to assess the exam
and the application for special consideration, contained
personal information
relating to the complainant and information on the method used by the
professional association; including the
formula and weighting information used
in their assessment and decision making about that individual.
The Commissioner formed the view that providing access to these documents
would reveal evaluative information generated in connection
commercially sensitive decision making process of the Professional Association.
The Commissioner was also of the view that
the professional association had
provided an explanation of the commercially sensitive decision through its
personal analysis letter.
The Commissioner declined to investigate the complaint under
section 41(1)(a)
on the grounds that the professional association had not
interfered with the complainant’s privacy.
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
December 2011
RTF format (813 KB)
Signed PDF/A format