Redman & Bartsch [2013] FMCAfam 309 (5 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2013] FMCAfam 309
FAMILY LAW – Parenting – children 11
and 9 years – father's capacity to interact with children/consult with
as a result of having Asperger’s syndrome – time with father
significantly limited – sole parental responsibility
Family Law Act 1975
Respondent:
File Number:
SYC 1818 of 2011
Judgment of:
Hearing dates:
21 and 22 March 2013
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Ms Christie
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Dimocks Family Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Peterson
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Ryall Lawyers
Counsel for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Solicitors for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Peter Baker Solicitors
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
(1) All previous parenting orders be discharged.
(2) The children of the parties, X born (omitted) 2002 and Y born (omitted)
2004, live with the Mother.
(3) The children spend time with the Father:
alternate Saturday from 1 p.m. until 5 p.m. unless the children are engaged in
an activity outside the home when time can
be extended by agreement between the
Father’s Day (in Australia) each year from 1 p.m. until 5 pm, when time on
the Saturday of that weekend will be suspended
if the Father’s Day weekend
is a contact weekend; and
Saturday closest to each child’s birthday from 1 p.m. until 5 p.m. (if not
a contact Saturday).
other time by agreement between the parties.
(4) Unless otherwise agreed between the parties, changeover occur in the lobby
of the Mother’s residence.
(5) The Father advise the Mother by text message if he will be more than 10
minutes late returning the children.
(6) The children have telephone communication with the Father each Wednesday
between 7.30p.m. and 8.30p.m. when the Father will call
the children’s
mobile phone, and the Mother will ensure the children’s mobile phone is
charged and switched on.
(7) The Mother have sole parental responsibility for decisions relating to major
long term issues for the children, including but
not limited to decisions about
their education, religion, medical treatment and health, applications for
passports and overseas travel.
(8) The Mother notify the Father by email, as soon as practicable, of any major
decision she has made in respect to the children’s
health, education or
(9) The Mother authorise the children’s schools to provide school reports
to the Father at his request, and any other information
sought by the Father in
relation to the progress of either child.
(10) Each party be responsible for the day to day care, welfare and development
of the children during periods the children are in
his/her care.
(11) Each party keep the other informed of his/her residential address, landline
and mobile telephone contact details and ensure
the other has at least 14 days
advance notice of any change in address, and 24 hours advance notice of any
change in either telephone
(12) Each party advise the other immediately, or as soon as practicable by
telephone if either child suffers a medical emergency
and provide details of
hospital, medical practitioner, and/or recommended treatment, as applicable.
(13) Each party be restrained from making any negative comment about the other
party in the presence or hearing of either child.
(14) Each party be at liberty to telephone the other party in an emergency.
(15) The Father be restrained from attending the children’s schools except
for one of the following purposes:
(a) To collect
either child if requested or agreed by the Mother;
(b) To deliver
either child if requested or agreed by the Mother;
(c) To attend a
school event to which parents are invited;
(d) To attend
an appointment with member of staff;
(e) To respond
to a direct invitation from the school.
(16) In the event the Mother proposes overseas travel for the children, the
Mother give the Father at least 30 days notice of her
intention to travel,
details of itinerary, including flight dates and times, evidence of the return
tickets and addresses of all
locations the children will stay.
(17) The children’s time with the Father be suspended during periods the
children are overseas with the Mother.
(18) In the event the Father consults Dr S or another psychologist/
psychiatrist/ health professional in relation to his interactions
children, the Father provide the health professional consulted, with a copy of
Mr L’s report dated 14 November 2012,
a sealed copy of these Orders and
Reasons for Judgment and it is noted that Mr L has offered to assist the Father
to locate an appropriate
health professional to address these issues.
(19) The appointment of the Independent Children’s Lawyer be
discharged.
(20) Pursuant to
section 65DA(2)
Family Law Act 1975
particulars of the obligations these orders create and the particulars of the
consequences that may follow if a person contravenes
these orders are set out in
Annexure A and these particulars are included in these orders.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
Redman & Bartsch
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYC 1818 of
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
parties have two children, X aged 11 years and Y aged 9 years. They agree the
children will live with the Mother but have been
unable to resolve how much time
the children will spend with the Father and as to whether or not parental
responsibility should be
parties commenced cohabitation in (omitted) 1996 in Australia. The Mother says
they separated under the one roof in
Father says they separated when he moved out of the home in February 2008. It is
common ground that the Mother spent 9
months in Peru with the children between
November 2006 and August 2007. The children have remained living with the
Mother. From February
2008 until approximately mid 2012, by arrangement between
the parties, the children spent regular time with the Father but mostly
the daytime. In accordance with Interim Orders made in December 2012, the
children presently spend each alternate weekend
with the Father from Saturday at
1 p.m. until Sunday at 7 p.m. The parties agree they have substantially
complied with those orders,
though the Mother says the Father has returned the
children late on occasions.
party and the Independent Children’s Lawyer were represented by counsel at
the hearing. While the Mother disputed the Father’s
need for an
interpreter, the Father was assisted by an interpreter in the Spanish language.
parties migrated from Peru to Australia in 1996. Both are now Australian
citizens. The Father’s mother has lived in Australia
since August 2011
but otherwise neither party has family in Australia. Neither party has
re-partnered since separation. Each party
lives in rented accommodation in
(omitted) in close proximity to the other party.
Mother, 46 years of age, works full time in the city as a (omitted) but her
employer has offered her the option of working some
of the week at home, which
she intends to accept.
Father is 51 years of age. He has a Master’s Degree in (omitted) from the
(omitted). He studies full time at TAFE in (omitted)
and expects to have
achieved a Diploma in (omitted) by the end of 2013. He then plans to seek
employment. He currently relies on
Government benefits for his income.
children attend (omitted) Public School, where X is in Year 6 and Y in Year 4.
They presently attend before and after school
care located at the school on most
weekdays. Both children are progressing well and each is actively involved in
extra-curricular
activities including learning a musical instrument, playing in
a school band, swimming, karate and in Y’s case, chess. Y’s
year report in 2012 supports the Mother’s view that Y is academically
gifted. X is progressing as an average
Brief litigation history
Mother commenced these proceedings by application for final parenting orders
filed in March 2011. The Mother sought orders for
the children to live with her,
for her to have sole parental responsibility for the children’s religion
and religious education
(but otherwise an order for equal shared parental
responsibility) and for the children to spend time with the Father each Saturday
for 6 hours.
his Response filed in July 2011, the Father sought final orders for the parties
to share parental responsibility, for the “
both a strong record on child protection issues and beliefs
that imply the equality between women and men.
” He sought orders for
the children to spend time with him after school until 6.30 pm each Monday
– Wednesday (when he
would ensure homework was done and would tutor X in
reading and comprehension) and from Friday until Monday on alternate
5 March 2012 interim parenting orders were made by consent providing for the
children to live with the Mother and to spend time
with the Father each Sunday
from midday until 7 pm until the Father moved into his own accommodation where
the children would have
their own beds. Then the children would spend from 3 pm
until 6 p.m. with the Father on Mondays and Tuesdays and alternate weekends
1 p.m. Saturday until 7 p.m. Sunday as well as half school holidays. On 20 June
2012, there were minor changes to the interim
orders and an Independent
Children’s Lawyer was appointed. On 10 December 2012, the orders were
varied to provide for the
children’s time with the Father to be reduced to
alternate weekends from 1 p.m. Saturday until 7 p.m. Sunday.
Orders sought by each party at hearing
Mother seeks orders providing for her to have sole parental responsibility for
major long term decisions for the children, and
for the children’s time
with the Father to be reduced to 3 hours on alternate Saturday
afternoons.
hearing, the Mother’s counsel advised the Court the Mother would agree to
the time being extended to 4 or 5 hours.
Father seeks an order for equal shared parental responsibility on condition that
the chosen religion must involve an organisation with a strong record
on child protection issues and beliefs that imply the equality
between women and
would prefer the children not to attend scripture classes at school. He seeks
orders providing for a gradual increase in the children’s
time with him,
over 2 years, until they are spending 5 nights a fortnight with him, in addition
to approximately half school
Expert recommendations
L, Regulation 7 Consultant, prepared a report for the Court and was
cross-examined in the proceedings. Mr L recommends that the
time with the Father be limited to 3-4 hours on a Saturday or a Sunday in
alternate weeks. In his view, the current
orders (which provide for the children
to spend 30 hours a fortnight with the Father), are harmful for the children. Mr
L says that
if the children spend more than a few hours a fortnight with the
Father, each child’s relationship with the Father will be
further damaged.
Mr L believes that the quality of the children’s relationship with the
Father will be enhanced if they spend
considerably less time with him. Mr L
recommends that the Mother have sole parental responsibility for major long term
for the children on condition that she notify the Father of those
decisions. Mr L recommends that the Father attend upon an appropriate
with respect to developing his capacity to relate to the children.
Independent Children’s Lawyer substantially supports Mr L’s
recommendations, but submits that the time should be 5
hours on alternate
Independent Children’s Lawyer does not seek an order for the Father to
attend therapy.
the Father told the Court he disagreed with Mr L’s recommendations,
considered his report “
unprofessional
” and believed that Mr L
lacked qualifications to make observations
Father’s counsel did not challenge Mr L’s expertise in
cross-examination, nor did he challenge the admissibility
of the report.
Legal principles
proceedings were commenced on 24 March 2011. Relevant amendments made to the
Family Law Act 1975
pursuant to the
Family Law Legislation Amendment
(Family Violence and Other Measures) Act 2011
therefore do not apply.
principles governing this case are set out in
Family Law Act
(‘the Act’).
Section 60CA
provides that I must regard the
best interests of the child as the paramount consideration. To determine the
child’s best interests
I must consider the primary considerations set out
section 60CC(2)
and the 13 additional considerations set out in
Section 60CC(4)
requires me to consider also the extent to which each
party has fulfilled his or her parental responsibilities, and has facilitated
the other parent in fulfilling his or her parental responsibilities. Although
the two primary considerations must assume greater
importance than the
additional considerations when determining what orders are in the best interests
of the child, I must consider
the factors before making a
determination. I must ensure that any order I make is consistent with any family
violence order and does
not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family
violence, to the extent that it is possible to do so consistently with the
child’s best interests being the paramount consideration.
primary considerations are firstly the benefit to the child of having a
meaningful relationship with both of the child’s
parents and secondly, the
need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse,
neglect or family violence. I give these
matters very careful consideration because the Act provides that they are
primary considerations
and because they are consistent with the first two
objects of the Act set out in
section 60B
to which I must have careful regard.
objects of the parenting provisions of the
Family Law Act 1975
ensure that the best interests of children are met by:
ensuring that
have the benefit of both of their
having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent
with the best
from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to,
ensuring that
receive adequate and proper
to help them achieve their full potential; and
ensuring that
fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care,
welfare and development of their
principles underlying these objects include that children have the right to know
and be cared for by both their parents; have
a right to spend time on a regular
basis and communicate on a regular basis with both their parents and other
people significant
to their care; parents jointly share duties and
responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children;
parents should agree about the future parenting of their children and children
have a right to enjoy their culture (including the
right to enjoy that culture
with other people who share that culture).
Evidence in relation to the Father’s behaviours and parental capacity
Father’s parenting capacity is the significant issue in this case. Mr L
identifies significant deficits in the Father’s
capacity to engage with
the children appropriately. He assesses the Father to lack insight, parental
judgment and empathy with the
children. I agree with this assessment and give it
considerable weight.
there was no medical evidence before the Court, it is common ground that the
Father was diagnosed with Asperger's Syndrome
a number of years ago. The Father
says it is “
The Father told Mr L “
sometimes I don’t pick subtle symptoms from
the body language of people and sometimes I have to
The Father says he took anti-depressant medication for anxiety in 2005 but has
not needed or used any medication since
examination, the Father says he had obsessive compulsive symptoms when X was
very young, but no longer has those traits.
However, in cross examination he
says he takes 20 seconds to wash his hands “
in accordance with hospital
recommendations
.” He avoids going outside in the winter because of
the risk of catching cold. He says he knows a lot about meningitis and
X to hospital on approximately 10 different occasions because he has feared she
has contracted meningitis. X has never
been diagnosed with meningitis.
Father expresses definite views about certain issues, including strong
opposition to the Catholic religion, and the need for the
children to focus on
opposed to the children attending
scripture classes at school. The Father
believes that “
the children may be exposed to homophobic, misogynist
and ‘soft-on-paedophiles’ views while attending the Catholic
.” He says “
I believe scripture teachers in Australia
become complicit in the cover up if they choose not to resign despite all the
scandals engulfing
the Catholic
There is no issue that the Father is entitled to hold these views. The concern
arises from the manner in which he behaves as a result
of these views.
relation to homework, the Father told Mr L he spends his time with the children
trying to get them interested in science, reading
to them about science and
doing maths with
He said he has
spent more time with X because Y does not have much trouble with maths. The
Father says he is keen to obtain educational
‘apps’ for the children
to use on the Ipad, and to have additional time to tutor X in reading and
comprehension as well
as in maths.
Mother says she commenced these proceedings because in February/March 2011, the
Father attended the children’s school on
two occasions to remove them from
their scripture
because the Father was in the habit of coming to the Mother’s home
unannounced to spend time with the children, which the
Mother found disruptive.
The Mother told Mr L that the Father’s Asperger’s Syndrome causes
him to lack empathy with others,
to misread people’s intentions (e.g. he
confuses excitement and anger), to hold odd ideas, such as believing that the
should only be allowed to express happy
Mother says the Father does not realise when Y wants attention, focuses almost
entirely on X when the children are with him,
and is not attuned to the
children’s developmental stages. For example, she says he is trying to
teach X high school algebra,
reads books to the children that are beyond their
years and believes extra curricular activities are a waste of time because they
take the children away from their homework. In relation to reading to the
children Mr D’s
“Magic of Reality”,
the Father said he
tried to read it aloud but noticed the children’s attention span was not
long enough and that he would leave
it for a year. The Mother says the Father
does not understand what is fun for the children, and misinterprets their
compliance with
his suggestions as “
.” She says Y
feels hurt and rejected by the Father, and X is distressed by Y being largely
ignored when the children are with
acknowledging that he is not an expert on Asperger’s Syndrome, Mr
L’s unchallenged evidence is that the Syndrome
compromised
capacity for empathy, which literally translates as being unable to see the
world from another’s point of view,
and therefore accurately read their
while I was interviewing him
[the Father]...
there were quite a few
jarring instances of him not really understanding what they
were trying to communicate to
told Mr L that the Father “
doesn’t actually play with us but
gives us the toys to play with
.” He feels “
the odd one
” because the Father always “
says the Father wants to stop them doing extra curricular activities so they can
do maths, while he really enjoys flute, guitar,
recorder. He feels bored,
rejected and unhappy much of the time he is with the
L that the Father rarely plays with her or with Y. She says he typically does
maths with her, while Y plays by himself
on the computer. She said Y gets
very annoyed and naughty
” like throwing the ball at the
Father and playing with the light
all the maths “
very boring
”. X describes her Father’s
lack of emotional expression when talking to her as “
playing one note that goes on and on for
Father told Mr L he treats the children with respect and does not “
”. The Father reported Y throwing a toy at him that nearly hit
him in the eye and explained “
I suspect he feels he is being suppressed
somewhere else.”
He also turned a table upside down. The Father
reported being pleased that Y “
feels free to express himself
in these ways when with
Father also believes that Y misbehaves because he perceives that the Father
likes X more than him, because of the amount of time
he does maths with
L says that the Father would not have a natural intuitive understanding of each
child’s particular characteristics in the
way a parent usually would, and
does not relate to the children at their developmental level. Mr L says that the
Father does not,
or cannot, recognise that Y is genuinely bored, frustrated and
angry when spending time with him and that Y therefore engages in
aggressive and
risk-taking
behaviours.
says that the Father does not recognise expressions of emotional needs
accurately. He misinterprets non-verbal cues of emotional
states like anger and
frustration and boredom. He has “
no inflexion in his voice
whatsoever”.
In Mr L’s view, the Father is pre-occupied with the
children’s educational needs to the exclusion of other developmental
and interests.
cannot apply himself to X’s education
in a balanced way.
agree with Mr L’s assessment of the Father. I find it noteworthy that in
cross examination the Father presented as over-literal
and inflexible. At times,
he questioned counsel rather then answering the question asked, and at times, he
presented as intensely
irritated by the questioning process making remarks such
you don’t ask proper questions”; “ask the
question properly.”
find that the evidence discloses numerous examples of the Father’s poor
insight, lack of parental judgment and at times irresponsibility.
I highlight
the following:
Y was still in a cot, the Father left him at home alone, with chocolates in the
cot in case he woke up, while driving X to day-care.
In response to questions on
this decision, the Father said statistics proved that it was “
dangerous to go in the car with a P driver than be left in a cot unattended...
he would be content for a while with chocolates
in his cot”.
X was 10 years, and Y 8, the Father decided to teach the children about sex. He
had read that educational experts believe that
children are not taught about sex
early enough and that nobody talked to him about this subject in his formative
years. He also told
X about sexual assault because “
she is old enough
to be raped so it should be discussed.”
He saw no need to discuss with
the Mother, his decision to talk about sexual matters with the children. The
Father told Mr L that
he now realises Y was too young to
understand.
February and 1 March 2011, the Father attended the school to try to remove the
children from scripture classes. He told Mr L
he did not want the children
exposed to scripture teachers because... “
they are implicitly colluding
with, and condoning, child sexual abuse within religious
organisations.”
He went to various rooms to try to find the children, including walking through
the open door of a classroom (neither X nor Y were
in the room) when other
children were engaged in a class, and shutting the door noisily after him. He
found X who followed him while
he looked for Y. The Father did not accept that
his actions caused X confusion and embarrassment and apprehension about his
at the school again. He said in cross examination “
will understand what I did.”
year, when the Father asked Y how the Mother was and he responded
”, the Father told her “Mummy” is not fine
believes in God and God does not
one occasion last year, when at a shopping centre with his mother and the
children, Y disappeared and ran home to the Mother. The
Father searched for him
but did not call the Mother. When the Mother called him to tell him Y had
arrived home alone, it was X who
acted as the conduit between the parties,
because the Father refused to speak directly to the Mother and did not text
message her.
The Father says he was prohibited from speaking to the Mother
because of a Court order providing for the parties to communicate by
email only and did not think to send her a text
Father did not accept the emergency at hand would override an order about
methods of communication. The Father’s concern
Y had been told to wait while he bought shoes for X, but ran away because he was
not prepared to wait
and is used to getting his own way. The lesson learned he
said, was that he, the Father, could not rely on his mother who was supposed
be supervising Y, while they waited outside the shoe store.
loves chess and is part of the school chess team. When the Father was asked
whether he plays chess with Y, the Father said “
No, because I always
” and Y does not like me always winning.
Father recently allowed his mother to put four layers of clothing on X when she
had a high temperature and the Father was taking
her to hospital, which,
according to the doctor consulted, caused X’s temperature to rise
orders requiring him to do so, the Father has told Y he would not take him to
karate unless the Mother paid. The Father said
that Y needed an explanation for
not going. In addition, the Mother’s unchallenged evidence is that the
Father did not comply
with the Court’s Orders prior to December 2012: he
collected the children late from school, returned them after the time they
to be collected, causing them to arrive late at their flute lesson. At times, he
would tell the children he intended to collect
them outside the times provided
in the Orders. In the April 2012 school holidays, the children complained of
being given no dinner,
Y repeatedly rang the Mother to say he could not sleep,
both children rang her each day asking to be picked up, (each day they therefore
spent some time at the Mother’s home) and on one occasion last year when
in the sole care of the paternal grandmother, the
children crossed the busy
(omitted) Highway alone because they wanted to get home to the Mother. The
Father would not always collect
the children at times provided in the Orders. In
November 2012, the Father chose not to have the children at all.
cross examination, the Father acknowledges discussing these proceedings with the
children, including allegations raised by the
Mother, and to showing the
children documents related to the proceedings “
because the children
demanded to see what was written
.” He discussed an incident with the
children reported by the Mother concerning an argument between himself and his
front of the children. He says he “
reconstructed
the incident with each child separately, “
using police procedure as
best I could
.” The Father also questioned the children about what they
said to Mr L at interview.
find the evidence also discloses behaviours by the Father which on the face of
it, seemed counter-productive to his interests, but
consistent with the rigidity
in his thinking:
4 of Orders made on 5 March 2012 provided for the Father to show the
Mother’s solicitor his lease agreement before the
children could spend
substantially increased time with the Father, including overnight time. However,
as a result of his own delays,
the commencement of the increased time was 3
weeks later than it could have been. Despite the Order, once the Father entered
a suitable lease agreement, he would not give the Mother’s solicitor
a copy of the lease, except on conditions set out in an
email to her of 26 March
2012 which were:
non-disclosure undertaking regarding any information contained in the Tenancy
Agreement”,
both spend the five minutes in the same room and the document does not leave the
photocopies or scanning of the document are to be taken”; and
of mobile phones or writing devices for any reason whatsoever.”
it was pointed out to the Father during the hearing that Dr S, psychologist,
whom he had consulted, can properly be referred
to as “Dr” given she
holds a PhD in clinical psychology, the Father was adamant she was not a doctor
and should not be
referred to as such. He persisted in this view despite being
corrected more than once.
Father formed the view that each of 4 different professionals (3 of whom he had
had direct dealings with) has been physically
violent towards his/her own
children: Mr L, the Court appointed expert, Ms B, a caseworker at the Department
of Family and Community
Services, Mr W, mediator at the Family Relationships
Centre in the city and the General Manager of the Family Relationships Centre
the city. In relation to Mr L, the Father says he came to this view because of
Mr L’s body language at interview. In relation
to Ms B, in April 2009,
the Father lodged a complaint about her in a 16 page densely typed
letter, the Father questioned Ms B’s professionalism and competence as
well as alleging she had falsified records, and
had used physical violence
against her children because she had no empathy with young children. On 8 March
2010, the Father wrote
that the departmental reply to his complaint was
unprofessional
His 7 page letter to the Chief Executive of the Department ends with this
proposed a change to DOCS recruitment practices whereby job applicants with
children would have to show they have real empathy
for young children by signing
a statement saying that they have not used physical violence to discipline
children of primary school
age and younger, either as a parent or teacher o
[sic] in any other capacity. Please provide an update on whether my suggestions
are being considered; if not,
In relation to Mr W, on 4 March 2010, the
Father alleged that Mr W has used physical violence to discipline young children
he declined to answer the Father’s direct question to him as to
whether he had done so. The Father also wrote to the General
Manager of the
Family Relationships Centre at which Mr W worked, to request “
mediator who has not used physical violence to discipline children... either as
a parent or as a teacher or in any other capacity.
” In the same
letter, the Father asked the General Manager to disclose whether he/she had ever
used physical violence to discipline children of primary school age or
younger, either as a parent or in any other
Father formed the view that Mr L is a misogynist because, inter alia, Mr L said
he agreed with equality between “
men and women
” rather than
women and men
” as the Father had put it to him.
Father’s counsel submits that the Court should find that the Father has
made positive changes since the December 2012 interim
orders were made and that
the children are now happy to be with him. The Father says he has reduced the
time he spends with X on
maths from 45 minute to 15 minute sessions. He believes
with 15 minute sessions. Since Christmas, he has
purchased 3 new Nintendo games the children wanted, and an Ipad which the
can now play.
I accept the Father has made some changes, I am not persuaded the changes are
likely to have improved the quality of the children’s
engagement with him,
in any meaningful way. When asked in cross examination about how he would use
additional time with the children,
the Father did not propose interactive fun
activities for himself with the children. The Father continued to emphasise the
of his involvement in X’s academic work, especially to improve
the speed at which she can solve maths questions. While her
teacher tells the
Father that X is an average student across all subjects, the Father does not
agree. He believes she needs help
with maths, reading and comprehension. He
says if the children spend additional time with him, he will do 3 sessions of 15
of maths with X each day, and 10 minutes with Y. If they complain, he
will reduce the time by 5 minutes. He will spend 15-20 minutes
a day with X on
reading and comprehension. He proposes the children playing solo games on
Nintendo and the Ipad, which would involve
no interaction between him and the
children or between the children themselves. He will purchase educational
applications for the
Ipad. The children can watch television and movies at his
is not enthusiastic about the children’s interests outside their school
work. He never watches them at swimming or
karate. He has almost never seen
either of them perform, and has never asked them to bring their instruments to
play to him at his
previously noted, Y does not like the Father always winning. The Father’s
focus remains on the children’s homework. He demonstrated no insight into
the major changes he needs to make in respect to
his manner of interacting with
each child, and rejected Mr L’s concerns altogether.
I do have regard to Mr L’s evidence that the Father did tell him, when
told the children seemed genuine when they said
they often felt bored with him,
I will do things I haven’t done
Mr L says the Father was surprised to learn he was not reading their cues
accurately and seemed prepared to investigate further.
Mr L says the Father
should consult a psychiatrist with expertise in the field of Asperger’s,
and the Father agreed that it
might be helpful to consult a psychiatrist or
psychologist to help him with his communication with the
encouraging to know that the Father has consulted Dr S, clinical psychologist on
2 occasions since December 2012 and says
he may consult her for further
give significant weight to these findings concerning the Father’s parental
capacity, and very much hope the Father will recognise
his need to address the
issues highlighted.
THE PRIMARY CONSIDERATIONS
The benefit to the
of having a meaningful relationship with both of the
L says that the Father has a genuine interest in the children’s education,
but X finds the Father’s tutoring excessive
and Y hates being left to his
own devices while the Father focuses on X. Mr L says that the Father makes Y
ignored and
as there is very little interaction between them, while the Father focuses on
tutoring X. Mr L says the Father’s efforts to
misguided because the Father largely ignores the children’s other
significant needs, including having
very little interaction with Y.
Mr L’s opinion, each child’s relationship with the Father is
impaired as a result of his lack of insight, his lack
of empathy, and his poor
capacity to recognise and to meet the children’s emotional needs.
share Mr L’s view that the children’s relationships with the Father
are not presently meaningful because of the Father’s
lack of parental
capacity. I accept his opinion that the children, for the most part, do not
enjoy their time with the Father as
a result of his behaviours and lack of
attunement to their needs. I therefore find that the children are presently
only able to
enjoy the benefit of a meaningful relationship with the Mother.
The need to protect the
from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to,
was, at the relevant time, narrowly defined in
as sexual abuse or an assault of a child which is an offence under the
law. This is not an issue in this case.
is not defined in the
Family Law Act
and must be given its ordinary
meaning. I am not satisfied there is a neglect issue in the usual sense, but I
am satisfied the children
are neglected by the Father in an emotional sense.
This issue has already been addressed in relation to the Father’s
” was defined at
of the Act, (at the relevant time)
as conduct, whether actual or threatened that causes the person to reasonably
fear for, or to
be apprehensive about, his or her personal wellbeing or safety.
Each party alleges the other has engaged in family violence.
Mother says she has seen the Father behaving aggressively both verbally and
physically. She says he pushed her against a wall
on one occasion and on
another, caused bruising to her arm. The Mother says the children have reported
seeing the Father trying to
punch his mother. The Father denies any physical
violence towards the Mother or against his mother.
Father alleges that when the parties were living together, the Mother exposed
the children to “
bursts of anger and hostility”
her depression.
While the Mother acknowledges raising her voice with the children when they
ignored her directions, she denies being “hostile”.
party’s counsel, nor counsel for the Independent Children’s Lawyer
submits this factor is significant in this
case. I agree with Counsel that even
if I were to accept each party’s evidence at its highest, such findings
would not influence
my decision.
THE ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
Any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s
maturity or level of understanding) the Court thinks
are relevant to the weight
it should give to the child’s views.
presented to Mr L as “
an intelligent, thoughtful, albeit rather
serious, little girl,
” very interested in reading and keen on
educational activities. He says she is a
serious, compliant, child
one would like to see her have a little more spark than she
presented.”
X told Mr L she wanted no more time, and “
may be a tiny bit
that X does want to know the Father.
presented with “
considerable spark. He was quite adamant about what he
wanted and didn’t want, and was able to communicate that in a lively
He described feeling bored, rejected and unhappy for much of the time he spends
with the Father. Mr L says Y wants significantly
less time, or no time with the
Father. Mr L says that Y cannot tolerate the amount of time he currently spends
with the Father.
He is acting out in angry and risk-taking ways. He is too
young to understand the ramifications of the Father’s condition
be unlikely to understand the importance of him knowing and having a
relationship with the Father.
L says the children’s expressed views “
are consistent with their
respective experiences of spending time with their
and should be taken into account.
accept Mr L’s assessment and do have regard to the children’s
expressed views in reaching my decision.
The nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s
parents and other persons (including any grandparent or
other relative of the
children have a close loving relationship with the Mother and totally depend on
her day to day.
already noted, the children are not close to the Father. I find that Y feels
rejected by the Father. I find that although X wants
to know the Father, she is
apprehensive of him, and what he might do, as a result of incidents earlier
described, such as his behaviour
at her school, Y running away from him, the
Father’s comments to her about the Mother’s religion, the
many trips with her to hospital when she has been unwell, and
being subjected to excessive tutoring. It is noteworthy that in August
the Father himself, in a letter to the Mother’s solicitor, says Y is
unhappy about going to his home on a Monday and
to the Father, the children do not relate well to the paternal grandmother,
partly because of her limited English. He says
that the paternal grandmother
has very different views from him about parenting, so he and the paternal
grandmother regularly argue
in front of the children, including over how Y
should be punished for misbehaving. The Mother says the paternal grandmother is
not a warm person
”. I am not satisfied the paternal
grandmother is a significant figure in the children’s lives.
The willingness and ability of each of the child's
to facilitate, and encourage, a close and continuing relationship between
and the other parent
agree with Mr L that the Mother supports the children having a good relationship
with the Father, but is worried that he confuses
them, that X is apprehensive of
him and that Y feels rejected by him. The Mother has always complied with Court
orders and believes
it is important for the children to know the Father and
therefore spend time with him. The Mother does not want to restrict the Father
from attending important events for the children, and is happy for them in their
extra curricular activities. I accept that the
Mother’s concern is the
children’s lack of enjoyment of their relationship with him.
Mother says that when they were together, the Father used to criticise her
constantly for being a bad mother and reported her
to the Department of
Community Services for lacking capacity to care for the children. The Mother
says the Father thinks that a good
mother should never raise her voice, never
show sadness or any other negative emotion around children. She says the Father
was fixated
on things being tidy, and criticised the Mother if the home was not
in order. The Mother has concerns about the Father continuing
to criticise her
in front of the children, with resulting distress to the children. I accept the
Mother’s substantially unchallenged
evidence on this issue.
give moderate weight to this issue.
The likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including
the likely effect on the child of any separation from
either of his or her
parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other
relative of the child), with
whom he or she has been living
accept Mr L’s assessment that the quality of the children’s
relationship with the Father is likely to improve if they
are not compelled to
spend as much time with him as they presently do. This would in turn, benefit
the children. I also accept Mr
L’s view, supported by the Independent
Children’s Lawyer, that an increase in time would cause further damage to
relationships. I find no basis in the evidence for the Father’s
counsel’s submission that increased time with the Father
would benefit the
children. I give substantial weight to this finding.
The practical difficulty and expense of a child
spending time with and communicating with a parent
and whether that difficulty or
expense will substantially affect the child's
right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents
on a regular
factor is not applicable.
The capacity of each of the child’s parents and any other person
(including any grandparent or other relative of the child)
to provide for the
needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
have earlier made findings as to the Father’s present incapacity to meet
the children’s emotional needs, and as a result,
the risky behaviours
demonstrated by the children when taking themselves back to the Mother’s
persuaded that the Father lacks the
capacity to care for the children physically. However, I find examples of his
poor parental judgment
in, firstly, his failure to give the children dinner
every evening and his failure to engage the children sufficiently to prevent
their at least daily requests to return to the Mother during the April 2012
school holidays, and secondly, in his usual choice of
activities for the
children when they are with him on alternate weekends which rarely involves
healthy interaction with him.
parties disagree as to how much involvement the Father had with the
children’s day to day care when they were living together.
claims to have been the children’s primary carer when they were in
Australia in their early years, though conceded
his version of the care
arrangements might not be entirely accurate. The Mother says she never relied on
the Father to care for either
child when she returned to work after periods of
maternity leave, though she acknowledges the Father had some limited involvement
in their care. I prefer the Mother’s evidence on this issue but I am not
satisfied anything of significance turns on this finding.
find the Father has a strong interest in the children’s education, and if
with professional assistance, he could learn to
assist the children “
a balanced way with their educational needs and read their emotional
” his capacity to contribute to their intellectual needs may
Mother was diagnosed with depression in early 2006, when still living under the
same roof with the Father, and says she was prescribed
anti-depressant
medication for a few months. As already noted, the Father alleges the
Mother’s depressive condition caused
her to behave in a hostile manner
towards the children. However, since then, the Father raises no issues about
the Mother’s
parenting capacity, and there is no other evidence which
calls into question the Mother’s competence as a parent. The Mother
caring for the children day to day. She has the children actively engaged in a
diverse range of extra curricular activities, and
according to their school
reports, both children are progressing
impressed me as a caring and capable parent.
The maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and
traditions) of the child
and of either of the child's
and any other characteristics of the child
that the court
thinks are relevant
children have a Peruvian heritage. Both parties were born in Peru and lived
there until adulthood. The Mother has taken the children
for a holiday to Peru
in the 2011 Christmas school holidays and they spent many months there with the
Mother when they were younger.
I am satisfied that the children will remain
connected to their South American culture.
Mother says that X has been diagnosed with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder because she is easily distracted and has difficulty
focusing on
has had tutoring outside school and a mentor at school to assist her once a week
with class work which has led to an
improvement. As already noted, Y is
academically gifted. I have regard to these matters.
attitude to the
and to the responsibilities of
demonstrated by each of the
Father acknowledges that the Mother has worked throughout their relationship,
with short periods of maternity leave after the
birth of each child. He says
the Mother was the primary breadwinner. As already noted, the Mother has carried
almost exclusive responsibility
for all aspects of the children’s care, at
least since separation, and for lengthy periods before separation. The Father
made only occasional minor contributions towards the children’s
financial support, and has met none of the fees for the children’s
extra curricular activities. I find that the Father has shown a poor attitude to
the responsibilities of parenthood.
involving the
have nothing to add under this factor.
Any family violence order that applies to the child or a member of the
child’s family, if the order is a final order or, the
making of the order
was contested by a person
factor is not applicable.
Whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to
lead to the institution of further proceedings in
relation to the child
parties have been unable to discuss issues concerning the children, probably as
a result of the Father’s difficulties, addressed
earlier in these Reasons.
The parties have vastly different approaches to parenting generally, but
particularly in relation to the
children’s education and the
children’s religious upbringing. I agree with the Mother’s
counsel’s submission
that there is likely to be further litigation unless
the Mother has sole parental responsibility for decisions concerning the
The extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed
to fulfil, his or her responsibilities as a parent
and, in particular, the
extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take,
the opportunity to participate
in making decisions about major long-term issues
in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate
the child; and has facilitated, or failed to facilitate, the other parent
participating in making decisions about major long-term
issues in relation to
the child and spending time with the child and communicating with the child; and
has fulfilled, or failed to
fulfil, the parent’s obligation to maintain
have nothing to add under this factor.
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
Mother, supported by the Court expert and the Independent Children’s
Lawyer, seeks an order for sole parental responsibility
for major long term
decisions relating to the children. The Father seeks an order for equal shared
parental responsibility.
of the Act applies whenever a parenting order provides for shared parental
responsibility, and requires the parties to consult the
other person and to make
a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about any major long term decisions
concerning the children.
Section 61DA
requires the court to apply a presumption
that it is in the best interests of the children for the children’s
parents to have
equal shared parental responsibility for the children. The
presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe
parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has
engaged in:
of the child or another child, who at the time, was a member of the
parent’s family (or that other person’s family);
there is some evidence of family violence in this case, I am not persuaded it
supports a conclusion that the presumption of
equal shared parental
responsibility does not apply.
presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would
not be in the best interests of the children for
the children’s parents to
have equal shared parental
responsibility.
agree with the submissions of the Mother’s counsel and counsel for the
Independent Children’s Lawyer that it would not
be in the children’s
best interests for the parties to have equal shared parental responsibility.
There are a number of reasons:
order requiring the parties to consult would not be workable. The parties do
not communicate and as a result of the Father’s
condition, I am not
satisfied their communication is likely to improve. I find no basis in the
evidence for the Father’s counsel’s
submission that the parties are
able to communicate. I find the Father’s failure to contact the Mother
when Y was missing at
the shopping centre, a vivid example of the Father’s
abdication of his responsibility to communicate with the Mother, even
emergency arises.
find that attempts at consultation are likely to cause conflict between the
parties and the conflict is likely to involve the children,
and impact on them
adversely, given the Father’s involvement of the children in these
proceedings.
find that if the parties are required to consult each other on major issues, the
children, X in particular, are likely to be used
as messengers between the
parties, which I find is a stressful and inappropriate role for children.
have made findings that the Father lacks insight, has poor parental judgment and
has limited capacity to consider issues from the
children’s perspective. I
agree with the Mother’s counsel’s submission that the Father is
unable to assess priorities
in the usual way. On religious issues, I find the
Father has, unreasonably, been unwilling to consider the children’s wish
to attend scripture lessons and to participate in church related activities with
the Mother. X told Mr L she enjoys going to church
and the activities associated
with church.
has the Father considered the real dilemma for the children, who live the vast
majority of their time with the Mother, a practising
Catholic, but are
effectively prohibited from attending church because of their concern about the
Father’s strongly negative
views about the Catholic Church. I am
persuaded there could never be consensus between the parties on religion.
agree with counsel for the Independent Children’s Lawyer’s
submission that the Father has been unwilling or unable to
agree to quite simple
propositions, for example, permitting the Mother’s solicitor to sight a
tenancy agreement in accordance
with Court orders.
am satisfied that the Mother has demonstrated a capacity to decide issues
sensibly and responsibly.
Mother will therefore have sole parental responsibility for major long term
decisions concerning the children. The provisions
therefore do not
apply. However, the Court must nevertheless consider significant and
substantial time between the children and
the Father, because that is the order
sought by the Father.
L believes the children will benefit from spending some time with the Father.
However, in his view, that time should be limited
to no more than 4 hours a
fortnight, to achieve any improvement in the quality of those relationships. He
says that, given her compliant
nature and her wish to know the Father, X would
feel guilty and responsible if she did not have any relationship with the
Importantly, Mr L says that the children need to know
be aware of their history, and to learn from the issues in their relationship
with the Father.
L agrees with the Mother’s observation that there is “
no fun, joy
” in the children’s relationship with the
children do not enjoy their time with him. Mr L recommends 3-4 hours on
alternate weekends as the appropriate length of time
for the children to spend
with the Father. He says that is the least amount of time needed to engage in
activities. In his view,
longer than 4-5 hours would leave the children feeling
angry, frustrated and
unstimulated.
says the current overnight time between the children and the father is harmful
children, he says, need to be given some relief from spending time with the
Father, whose quality of interaction with them is
so poor, and who does not meet
their needs. Mr L says that significantly reduced time may enhance the quality
of the children’s
time with the Father.
Father’s counsel submits that the Court should order increased time
immediately, gradually increasing to substantial and
significant time over a 2
year period. The Father’s counsel submits that the Father has shown a
willingness to learn and a
dedication and commitment to the children. For
example, he has reduced the amount of time he spends tutoring X. Counsel submits
Father’s commitment to the children’s education will become more
significant over time.
Independent Children’s Lawyer’s counsel submits that the children
should spend 5 hours on alternate Saturday afternoons,
rather than 3-4 hours as
recommended by Mr L. Counsel submits that the Father’s evidence suggests
that the children have enjoyed
their time with him more since he has purchased
an Ipad and 3 new Nintendo games for them. The Mother’s counsel submits
a period from 3 to 5 hours on alternate Saturday afternoons is acceptable
to the Mother.
am not persuaded the evidence supports the Father’s counsel’s
submission. I find that the Father’s proposal for
how he would spend the
additional time he wants revealed a lack of understanding of the serious
concerns raised about him in the
expert evidence. I find that the Father’s
emotional neglect of the children, the physical risks that result and the
lack of capacity to engage appropriately or empathise with the
children, remain live issues.
Determination
am not satisfied that an order for a period in excess of 4 hours is in the
children’s best interests. Time ordered is for
positive engagement between
the children and the Father, not merely for the sake of spending time. While I
accept that the children
were pleased to have the new games the Father
purchased, I am not satisfied these new games are likely to change the dynamic
the children and the Father. Each game must be played by one child at a
time, and invites no interaction from the Father. If the
children spend their
time inside the Father’s home, which I find likely in the winter months, I
have determined 4 hours is
long enough. If the Father chooses to take the
children on an outing of interest to them, I have provided for time to be
by an hour or two, as long as the Mother agrees. Given her wish to
support the children having a healthy relationship with the Father,
doubt that if the Mother believes the children will enjoy the outing proposed by
the Father, she will agree to extended
already noted, Mr L believes the Father is willing and able to take appropriate
advice and that he looks for advice. I find the
evidence, at least to a limited
extent, supports this view. The Father was prepared to consult Dr S about
communication issues with
the children and he says he will attend further
sessions. When counsel for the Independent Children’s Lawyer suggested the
children might like to take their instruments to his home, to play him a piece
of their music, the Father thanked her for her suggestion.
I therefore accept
that it is possible for the Father to learn to develop a more joyful, exuberant
relationship with the children,
to engage in fun activities with them, and I
urge the Father to seek and to heed professional advice on the interactive
of his relationships with the children. The Father is encouraged to
show his therapist a copy of Mr L’s report, and a copy
of these Reasons
for Judgment. It is hoped that if the Father chooses to be professionally
assisted over time, and therefore his
capacity for appropriate and empathic
engagement with the children develops, the children may wish to spend more time
have made orders providing for the children to travel overseas with the Mother.
The Father did not oppose these orders for travel,
proposed by the Independent
Children’s Lawyer.
am guided by the objects and principles already referred to. Having regard to
all these matters, I am satisfied the orders set out
at the beginning of these
Reasons are in the best interests of X and Y.
I certify that
the preceding eighty-four (84) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for
judgment of Sexton FM.
Date: 5 April 2013
Initiating Application dated 24 March 2011
(School Reports)
Mother’s Initiating Application dated 24 March
Father’s Response to Initiating Application dated 15 July
Mother’s Case Outline dated 19 March
Father’s Response to Initiating Application dated 15 July 2011
Affidavit affirmed 4 March 2013 at paragraph
Affidavit affirmed 4 March 2013 at paragraph 104
(Report by Mr L, dated 14 November 2012) at paragraph
Father’s Affidavit affirmed 4 March 2013 at paragraph
paragraph 83
Exhibit 1 at paragraph
Mother’s Affidavit sworn 24 March 2011 at paragraphs
1 at paragraph
Transcript,
Mr L, 21 March 2013 at page 12
Exhibit 1 at
paragraph 49
Ibid at paragraph
paragraph 44
Ibid at paragraph
paragraph 35
Ibid at paragraph
at paragraph
paragraph 32
Exhibit 1 at paragraph
Mother’s Affidavit sworn 21 February 2013 at paragraph
15 of Orders made 5 March
Mother’s Affidavit sworn 21 February 2013 at Annexure
Mother’s Affidavit sworn 21 February 2013 at Annexure
Mother’s Affidavit sworn 21 February 2013 at Annexure
Exhibit 1 at
paragraph 42
Ibid at paragraph
Transcript,
Mr L, 21 March 2013 at page 3
Father’s Affidavit affirmed 4 March 2013 at paragraph
Transcript,
Mr L, 21 March 2013 at page 13
Exhibit 1 at
Transcript,
Mr L, 21 March 2013 at page 13
Exhibit 1 at
paragraph 53
Mother’s Affidavit sworn 21 February 2013 at Annexure
Transcript,
Mr L, 21 March 2013 at page 11
Mother’s Affidavit sworn 21 February 2013 at paragraph
Family Law Act
Exhibit 1 at paragraph
Transcript,
Mr L, 21 March 2013 at page 14
RTF format (319 KB)
Signed PDF/A format