TV Innovations Pty Ltd v Global Shop Direct Pty Ltd [2022] ADO 2 (16 March 2022)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Request by TV Innovations
Pty Ltd to revoke registration of design number 201717503 in the name of Global
Shop Direct Pty Ltd
Louise Tuohy
REPRESENTATION:
David Larish
instructed by Benjamin Lawyers
One IP International Pty
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) – application for
revocation under
– insufficient evidence that a person other
than the registered owner was an entitled person in relation to Australian
number 201717503 – registration of design not revoked
decision concerns a request for revocation of Australian design number 201717503
’) on grounds relating to entitled persons under
Designs Act 2003
Design was filed on 7 December 2017 and registered on 3 January 2018. Reproduced
below are the relevant details:
Design Number:
Current Owner:
Global Shop Direct Pty Ltd
Current Owner
Previous Owner:
E. Mishan &
Sons, Inc. (‘
Previous Owner
Product Name:
Representations:
Convention details:
Number: 29/608781
Date: 16 June 2017
Priority Date
Country: United States of
18 May 2020, TV Innovations Pty Ltd (‘
’) requested
revocation of the registration of the Design based on grounds relating to
entitled persons (‘
’). The Request stated that:
application for Registered Design No. 201717503 (“the Australian
Design”) was lodged on 7 December 2017 and registered
on 3 January 2018.
The designer named in the Australian Design is Mr Fred Hollinger, and the
original registered owner of the Australian
Design is E. Mishan & Sons, Inc
(“E. Mishan”).
Australian Design is based on the US Design Patent D 804,898 S (“the US
Design”), which was filed on 26 June 2017.
Accordingly, the Australian
Design was accorded the priority date 26 June 2017.
submit, however, that Mr. Hollinger did not create the Australian Design, and
accordingly, is not the actual designer of the Australian
Design under
Designs Act
. It follows that E. Mishan is not an entitled person under
we submit that it was Mr. Hu Yue An, the designer of the Chinese design patent
No. 304424085 (“the Chinese Design”),
the created the Australian
Design. The Chinese Design is identical or almost identical to the US and the
Australian Designs, and
was filed on 7 June 2017, 19 days before the application
for the US Design. The Chinese Design was published and registered on 26
December 2017.
Hu has provided a declaration, stating that he is the actual designer of the
Australian Design.
applicant, TV Innovations Pty Ltd, is the exclusive distributor of the grill
that is the subject of the Chinese Design in Australia.
In the circumstances,
[TV Innovations Pty Ltd] is applying to the Registrar to revoke the registration
of the Australian Design under
24 June 2020 a delegate of the Registrar of Designs wrote to the Current Owner
of the Design, at its address for service, Benjamin
Lawyers. The letter asked
whether the Current Owner wished to contest the claims made in the Request. In
response on 23 July 2020
the Current Owner advised the Designs Office that it
would be contesting the Request.
24 August 2020 directions were issued to the parties which set out the practice
and procedure to be followed in deciding the Request.
In accordance with those
directions the Requestor filed Evidence in Support (‘
followed by Evidence in Answer (‘
’) being filed by the
Current Owner. In turn, the Requestor filed Evidence in Reply
oral hearing was requested by the Current Owner. In advance of the hearing both
parties provided written submissions. The hearing
took place on 1 November 2021
via video conference. At the hearing the Current Owner was represented by David
Larish of Counsel instructed
by Benjamin Lawyers. The Requestor did not attend
the hearing. The matter has been handed to me to decide in my capacity as a
of the Registrar of Designs. What follows is my decision, with reasons,
based upon the Request, evidence, written submissions and
an audio recording of
the hearing.
is an outline of the evidence filed by the parties:
Declaration of
Olaf Kretzschmar, Managing Director and IP Consultant of One IP International
Pty Ltd for the Requestor made on 31
August 2020, with Exhibits TV-01 to TV-11
First Kretzschmar declaration
’). Exhibit TV-09 contains a
copy of a declaration by Hu Yue An, owner of Ningbo Jiangbei Chuangxin Electric
Appliances Co Ltd
made on 5 July 2019 with Annexures A to D (‘
declaration
Declaration of
Fred Hollinger, Product Designer of the Design made on 9 March 2021, with
Exhibits FH-1 to FH-2 (‘
Hollinger declaration
’). Exhibit FH-1
contains a copy of a declaration by Timothy John Benjamin, Solicitor for the
Current Owner made on 19 January
2021, with Exhibits TJB-1 to TJB-17
Benjamin declaration
Declaration of
Olaf Kretzschmar for the Requestor made on 23 April 2021 with Exhibits OK-01 to
Second Kretzschmar declaration
Blanket confidentiality claim
EIS, EIR and written submissions by the Requestor all contain a blanket
statement that the Requestor regards the information disclosed
as relating to
the company’s business affairs with the meaning of
of Information Act 1982
(Cth) and deems such information to be strictly
confidential. While the Requestor’s interests in preserving its
confidential
information is acknowledged, I must provide reasons for my
findings. In discharging this duty, information claimed to be confidential
inevitably require discussion.
this decision I adopt the approach of the delegate in
Source Homeloans v
Coles Group Ltd
The confidentiality claim obviously extends to
the whole of the evidence led in support of the opposition. It is not clear to
I could decide this matter without discussing the evidence the opponent
has served and filed in support of its opposition. The onus
in these proceedings
is on the opponent to establish its grounds of opposition, at least to my
satisfaction. Seemingly barred from
any discussion of the opponent’s
statements and exhibits and the weight that I attach to them if I were to lend
credence to
the claim, my hands would appear to have been effectively tied.
Prima facie, the easiest way out of the dilemma would be to accede
opponent’s wishes and find that it has not established its opposition.
Thus, if I were to take Mr Peter’s request
... at face value, that
would be the end of these matters.
This position, obviously, is extreme, since the opponent has filed this
evidence in support of its opposition and must expect the
evidence to be
discussed and weighed. It will be sufficient for me to say, in setting out my
reasons for my decision, that there
are arguably commercially sensitive matters
in the evidence that I do not need to discuss in detail (and, if I do, my
consolation
lies in the fact that the opponent in not being specific in its
request has brought the problem upon itself). None the less, the
evidence of the
parties as a whole satisfies me of various things, which I will set out under
the appropriate headings
The Requestor
Kretzschmar explains that the Requestor is an Australian wholesaler of consumer
products. Since March 2018 the Requestor has imported,
distributed and marketed
in Australia a product called the ‘Copper Pro Grill’
March 2018, Ningbo Jiangbei Chuangxin Electric Appliances Co Ltd
’) signed a declaration giving the Requestor
exclusive rights to sell and distribute the CPG in Australia. According to the
declaration, Chuangxin is the original manufacturer of the grill and it holds a
Designs Patent in China for its
Below are details of the
Chinese Design Patent (‘
Registration
Ningbo Jiangbei Chuangxin
Electric Appliances Co Ltd
Electric BBQ
Representations:
Filing Date:
Date of Publication:
December 2017
Date of Registration:
creator of the design the subject of the CDP is listed as Mr Hu Yue An. Mr Hu
declares that he is the owner of Chuangxin, and
explains that his company
designs and manufactures electronic appliances as well as cookware, including
barbeques, egg boilers, electric
grills, coffee machines, tortilla presses,
pans, pots and casseroles.
advises that Chuangxin regularly receives orders from overseas companies to
manufacturer and deliver
Hu further declares that he has been working as a designer and engineer since
and that he has been designing
electric grill products since 2004.
DEVELOMENT OF DESIGN – THE REQUESTORS ACCOUNT
evidence does not provide any direct dealings between the Requestor and the
Previous Owner, however the Previous Owner, Chuangxin
and Mr Hu have all
conducted business with a Taiwanese company, Cheering Couple Enterprise Co Ltd
Cheering Couple
’). Mr Kretzschmar on behalf of the
Requestor declares that Cheering Couple contacted Chuangxin during the Autumn
Canton Fair
in 2016 and enquired for the price of a specific item in its
inventory being item JA802D1 for the United States of America
I have reproduced an
image of item JA802D1
20 October 2016 Cheering Couple emailed Chuangxin and requested quotations for
the item in different quantities. The email included
a request that the grill
plates be sprayed with gold and copper non-stick coating or ceramic non-stick
24 October 2016 Cheering Couple emailed Chuangxin and requested a sample of item
JA802D1. The sample was to be sprayed with ordinary
black non-stick coating and
gold colour coating respectively. In response Chuangxin sent a sample of item
JA802D1 in black colour
to Cheering Couple.
10 January 2017, Chuangxin sent a second sample of item JA802D1 in copper colour
to Cheering Couple.
February 2017, Cheering Couple sent an image of the following design render to
before 16 March 2017 Chuangxin sent the following mock-up sample of the grill
design to Cheering Couple for
Kretzschmar declares that after the confimation from Cheering Couple was
obtained, Chuangxin started making pre-production samples
for Cheering
16 March 2017, Chuangxin sent samples of item JA802D10 to Cheering
DEVELOPMENT
OF DESIGNS – THE OWNERS ACCOUNT
Benjamin declares that the Previous Owner, is a developer, owner and distributor
of a broad range of consumer goods. The Designer
named in the Design is Mr Fred
Hollinger. Since the early 1990’s Mr Hollinger has designed a range of
consumer goods for the
Previous Owner, many of which have been the subject of
design registrations in respect of cookware goods and their
componentry.
23 September 2016, Mr Hollinger was working on the design for a product named
the Smokeless Grill (‘
’). Below is an image of the design
render created by Mr Hollinger on or before 1 November 2016 (‘
2016 the Previous Owner instructed Cheering Couple to act as its agent to assist
it in procuring the manufacture of the product
embodying the design created by
Mr Hollinger known as the SG. The Previous Owner sent to Cheering Couple the
first design render
of the SG created by Mr Hollinger for that
in the second half of 2016, Cheering Couple, on behalf of the Previous Owner,
approached Chuangxin for the purpose of preparing
for manufacture and
manufacturing the SG.
11 November 2016, prior to sending Chuangxin the first design render, Cheering
Couple sent to Chuangxin a confidentiality agreement
for execution. I have
reproduced the English translation of the confidentiality agreement below:
11 November 2016 following receipt of the executed confidentiality agreement
with both Chuangxin’s company seal and Mr Hu’s
personal seal
affixed, Cheering Couple sent to Chuangxin via instant messaging the following
design render of the SG.
to Mr Benjamin the Previous Owner instructed Cheering Couple to ascertain from
Chuangxin whether it already had any products
similar to the first design
render. Mr Benjamin explains that the existence of a similar product would have
resulted in reduced lead
times and production cost for the SG as there would
already be in existence production drawings and mould templates which could be
adapted to the new design. However, Chuangxin advised that item JA802D1 was the
only product design which was similar. As such new
production drawings were
15 February 2017 Cheering Couple sought an update from Chuangxin on the progress
of the production drawings. Later that day Chuangxin
provided Cheering Couple
with the following production
20 February 2017 Cheering Couple instructed Chuangxin to proceed with preparing
moulds based on the production drawings and sought
from Chuangxin an executed
moulding agreement.
21 February 2017 Chuangxin provided to Cheering Couple an executed copy of the
6 April 2017 Cheering Couple emailed Chuangxin advising that the Previous Owner
wanted an additional ‘baking pan’ hotplate
for the SG which was
completely flat and did not have hole
28 April 2017, Cheering Couple sent an email to Chuangxin attaching a new
moulding agreement in respect of the flat hotplate. Chuangxin
replied to the
email on the same day and returned the executed moulding
9 May 2017 Cheering Couple sent an email to Chuangxin requesting that it be
conveyed to Mr Hu that the Previous Owner wished to
apply for patents for the
products developed and requested production design drawings and exploded views
of the products for that
10 May 2019 Chuangxin replied to Cheering Couple and attached exploded views of
items JA802D10 (small version) and JA802D11 (large
version). I have reproduced
the exploded views below:
26 June 2017, Mr Hollinger assigned all his rights in and to the invention the
subject of the application for a United States Design
Patent (USDP), that
resulted in registered USDP D804,898, to the Previous
July 2017 Chuangxin began manufacturing the SG and 110,000 units were
subsequently produced. However, due to repeated demands by
Chuangxin for a price
increase to the manufacture of the SG which were rejected by the Previous Owner,
Cheering Couple sourced another
manufacturer, Cuori Electrical Appliances
(Group) Co Ltd to assist it with the manufacture of the
Hollinger also provides some background regarding the development of the Design.
Mr Hollinger declares that in early January 2017,
the Vice President of the
Previous Owner, Steven Mishan contacted him and requested a design render of the
SG showing the oval shaped
heating element. On 10 January 2017 Mr Hollinger
emailed Mr Mishan the following design render showing the oval shaped heating
second design
Legal framework
of the Act provides:
entitled to be registered as the registered owner of a design
(1) A person mentioned in any of the following paragraphs is entitled to
be entered on the Register as the registered
owner of a design that has not yet
been registered:
(a) the person who created the design
(b) if the designer created the design in the course of employment, or
under a contract, with another person--the other person, unless
the designer and
the other person have agreed to the contrary;
(c) a person who derives title to the design from a person mentioned in
paragraph (a) or (b), or by devolution by will or by operation
(d) a person who would, on registration of the design, be entitled to
have the exclusive rights in the design assigned to the person;
(e) the legal personal representative of a deceased person mentioned in
paragraph (a), (b), (c) or (d).
(2) Despite subsection (1), a person is not entitled to be entered on
the Register as the registered owner of a design
that has not yet been
registered if:
the person has assigned all of the person’s rights in the design to
another person; or
(b) the person’s rights in the design have devolved on another
person by operation of law.
(3) To avoid doubt:
(a) more than one person may be entitled to be entered on the Register as
the registered owner of a design;
(b) unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to the registered
owner of a registered design in this
Act is a reference to each of the
registered owners of the design.
(4) No person other than a person mentioned in paragraph (1)(a), (b),
(c), (d) or (e) is entitled to be entered on the
Register as the registered
owner of a design that has not yet been registered.
sets out a list of who is entitled to be registered as the owner of a design
that has not yet been registered.
Section 13(1)(a)
‘designer’ as ‘the person who created the design’. The
case law has identified the designer as the
‘person whose mind conceives
the relevant shape, configuration, pattern or ornamentation applicable to the
product and reduces
it to visual
the concept of entitlement relates to a design ‘that has not yet been
registered’
evidence of
entitlement should at least be contemporaneous with the registration date of the
Design. Equally evidence of entitlement
must pertain to the design under
consideration and not one which merely happens to be
the present matter, the Requestor argues that Mr Hu is the designer of CDP and
that it is identical or almost identical to the
Design. Moreover, the Requestor
has made various claims that the oval design of the heating element is a
proprietary design of Chuangxin,
which Chuangxin has been using since 2007.
is no doubt that Chuangxin’s designer Mr Hu has experience in grill
design. However, ownership of prior art does not mean
that a person was an
entitled person. In my assessment of the evidence, a copy of Mr
Hollinger’s first design render was provided
to Chuangxin on 11 November
2017 by Cheering Couple, which showed a grill style cooking plate, with 15
vertical bars, and two handles
on the two shorter sides of the plate, embedded
in a rectangular shape with sloping sides and curved edges on the top of the
The purpose of Cheering Couple providing the design render to Chuangxin
was to create production drawings to manufacturer the SG
15 February 2017 Chuangxin provided Cheering Couple with the production drawings
in two sizes which showed a grill style cooking
plate, with 15 vertical bars
(small version) and 19 vertical bars (large version), a flat oval shaped heating
element, two handles
on the two shorter sides of the plate, embedded in a
rectangular shape with sloping sides and curved edges on the top of the base.
9 May 2017 Cheering Couple sent an email to Chuangxin requesting that it be
conveyed to Mr Hu that the Previous Owner wished to
apply for patents for the
products developed and requested production design drawings and exploded views
of the products for that
purpose. The next day Chuangxin provided Cheering
Couple exploded views of its production drawings and labeled the drawings item
JA802D10 (small size) and item JA802D11 (large size).
on 7 June 2017 Mr Hu applied to register what appears to be item JA802D11 (large
size) in China and on 26 June 2017 the Previous
Owner applied to register what
appears to be item JA802D10 (small size) in the United States.
John Michael
Jarvie v Comtec Industries Pty Ltd,
received drawings which had been prepared by the requestor in that case. The
drawings included improvements the requestor
had conceived. The Delegate
From this point, Mr Whelan declares that he applied his
skills as an engineer to certain technical problems with the above designs.
result of Mr Whelan’s labours was the drawings that depict the Designs.
... I note that there are differences, particularly
to the sheet pile component.
Taking Mr Whelan’s declaration at face value, these may represent a
significant application of
engineering nous, but this is not the point. Designs
are concerned with visual appearance. Visually then, the two iterations of the
sheet pile are very close and the pin pile is almost identical.
Requestor has shown how, through many years and iterations, and in particular
the spark of inspiration that hit him in early 2014,
he arrived at the
‘Before’ shapes. ... Mr Whelan’s case is, at its highest, that
he took the ‘Before’
shapes and applied his skill as an engineer to
them, resulting in the ‘After’ shapes. Mr Whelan is therefore
not the person whose mind conceived of these shapes—his
contribution was a refinement of shapes already conceived in the mind
Requestor. Mr Whelan’s work was that of a drafter and engineering
consultant tasked with ironing out the kinks in someone
else’s original
LED Technologies Pty Ltd v Elecspress Pty Ltd,
Mr Ottobre provided sample
products and drawings to an overseas manufacturer which then created engineering
drawings for the products.
Gordon J stated:
On the facts just
described, it is clear that Mr Ottobre is the person who conceived the relevant
shape, configuration and pattern
of the designs and reduced it to a visible
form; “M” simply converted that design to an electronic form in
order to facilitate
the production process. Put another way, it was Mr Ottobre,
not “M”, who had the idea for dual and triple combination
in one base. It was Mr Ottobre who reduced that idea to visible form in the
sketches. As the engineering drawings marked
and “3” on Annex C record, it was Mr Ottobre’s sketches which
contained the features
different from those in any other previous design.
Accordingly, Mr Ottobre was “the person who created the design
the present matter, the evidence filed supports the Previous Owner’s
assertion that Mr Hollinger was the sole designer of
the Design. The design
render supplied to the Chuangxin on 11 November 2016 by Cheering Couple,
demonstrates that Mr Hollinger conceived
the visual appearance of the Design.
While Mr Hu was tasked with providing production drawings to facilitate the
manufacture of the
SG product and he more likely than not applied his
engineering skills to Mr Hollinger’s design render (by refining them to
include a flat oval heating element in the final production drawings), Mr
Hu’s contribution was no more than a refinement to
Mr Hollinger’s
design render already provided by Cheering Couple.
find that the sole designer of the Design was Mr Hollinger. Having so found, I
am now able to turn to the main question. On the
day the Design was registered,
who was entitled to be recorded as the registered owner.
default position in
of the Act is that the designer, being the person who
created the design, is entitled to be entered on the Register of Designs as
registered owner.
However, this
position will change if certain conditions, as laid out within the provision,
are satisfied. In this case, the designer
Mr Hollinger, assigned all his rights
in and to the invention the subject of the Design to the Previous
find that the Requestor has failed to satisfy me that Mr Hu was a designer of
the Design, or that it was otherwise entitled to proprietorship
of the Design.
of the Act provides:
Procedures in relation to
application
(1) This section applies if a person makes an application under
for revocation of the registration of a design.
(2) If the Registrar is satisfied that:
a person or persons were entitled persons at the time the design was first
registered, and one or more of
the original registered owners of the design was
not an entitled person at that time; or
(b) each original registered owner of the design was an entitled person
at the time when the design was first
registered, but another person or persons
were also entitled persons at that time;
the Registrar may make a written declaration specifying that a person whom
the Registrar is satisfied was an entitled person at the
time the design was
first registered is an entitled person under this subsection.
(3) If the Registrar makes a declaration under subsection (2), the
Registrar must:
(a) notify the relevant parties that the registration of the design is
revoked; and
(b) make an entry in the Register under section 115.
(4) The Registrar must also publish a notice, in the form prescribed by the
regulations, stating that the registration
of the design has been revoked and
that the design is taken never to have been registered.
(5) The Registrar must not revoke the registration of a design under this
section unless the Registrar has given each
original registered owner a
reasonable opportunity to be heard.
on the evidence before me, I am not satisfied that Requestor or any persons
other than the Previous Owner were an entitled person
at the time of
registration of the Design. Accordingly, the Request is unsuccessful and I
decline to revoke registration of Australian
design number 201717503.
Current Owner has sought an award of costs. The ordinary course is for costs to
follow the event. I award costs against the Requestor.
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Designs
Design 201717503
Chinese Design Registration 304424805
The full set of representations
of the Design are reproduced in Annexure A to this
[2008] ATMO
Officer Thompson).
Kretzschmar
declaration
First Kretzschmar
declaration [8] [Exhibit
The full set of
representations of the Design are reproduced in Annexure B to this
Hu declaration
Hu declaration
Hu declaration
First Kretzschmar
declaration [14] [Exhibit TV-05], [15] [Exhibit TV-06]. see CDPs 3327260,
3533653, 300726636,
301143194 and
Kretzschmar declaration [6].
Second Kretzschmar declaration [6] [Exhibit OK-01].
Kretzschmar
declaration [6] [Exhibit
Kretzschmar
declaration [8] [Exhibit
Second Kretzschmar
declaration [9] [Exhibit
Kretzschmar
declaration [11] [Exhibit
Kretzschmar
declaration [10] [Exhibit OK-05].
Second Kretzschmar
declaration [10] [Exhibit OK-05] (JA802D10 being Chuangxin’s inventory
number for the item).
Benjamin declaration [5] [Exhibit
Benjamin declaration
[6] [Exhibit TJB-2].
Benjamin declaration
Benjamin declaration
Benjamin declaration
[10] [Exhibit TJB-5].
Benjamin declaration [11]
[Exhibit TJB-6].
declaration [11] [Exhibit
Benjamin declaration
[12] [Exhibit TJB-8].
Benjamin declaration [13] [Exhibit
Benjamin declaration
[14] [Exhibit TJB-10].
Benjamin declaration [15] [Exhibit
declaration [16] [Exhibit
declaration [17] [Exhibit
declaration [17] [Exhibit
declaration [7] [Exhibit
Benjamin declaration
[19], [20].
declaration [4] [Exhibit
LED Technologies
Pty Ltd v Elecspess Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 1941
, [26] (Gordon J) citing with
Chris Ford Enterprises Pty Ltd v BH & JR Badenhop Pty Ltd
(1985) 7 FCR 75
, 80 (Smithers
Australian Fitness
Supplies Pty Ltd v Rasheed Rane
[2013] ADO 6
[36] (Hearing Officer
[2018] ADO 5
and [26] (Hearings Officer
[2008] FCA 1941
(2008) 80 IPR 85
s 13(1)(a).
s 13(2)(a).
RTF format (35.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format