Brougham v Aboriginal Health Council of South Australia [2021] FCCA 2031 (27 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF
Brougham v Aboriginal Health Council of
South Australia [2021] FCCA 2031
File number:
ADG 235 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE BROWN
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW
– proceedings pursuant
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) – general protection proceedings
– practice and procedure – where the forum of the matter is disputed
whether matter should be conducted by electronic means or face to face
– discussion of whether the court should depart from
a traditional mode of
hearing – discussion of an open and just court – discussion of what
constitutes a fair hearing
– balance of convenience – interests of
justice and equity
Legislation:
Fair Work Act 2009
Federal Circuit Court of Australia Act
(Cth) ss 3, 13, 66, 69.
Cases cited:
Board of Bendigo Regional Institute of
Technology and Further Education v Barclay [No1]
[2012] HCA 32
(2012) 248 CLR
Campaign Master (UK) Ltd v Forty Two International Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2009] FCA 1306
(2009) 181 FCR 152.
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Limited
(Adjournment)
[2020] FCA 486.
Jones v Queensland Tertiary Admissions
Centre Limited (No 2)
[2010] FCA 399.
v Ambulance
[2015] FCAFC 55.
Singh v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services & Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCCA
State of Victoria (Office of Public Prosecutions) v Grant
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Starke Lawyers
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Counsel for the Respondents:
Mr Collinson
ADG 235 of 2020
ANGELA JANE BROUGHAM
ABORIGINAL HEALTH COUNCIL OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
LIMITED ACN 616 917 090
First Respondent
POLLY SUMNER
Second Respondent
ANNIE-ROSE THURNWALD
(and another
named in the Schedule)
Third Respondent
JUDGE BROWN
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The matter be fixed for final hearing before Judge Brown commencing on
in the South Australian District Registry
NOTING 3 days hearing time has been allocated and will not be exceeded without
2. The Applicant is to file and serve any further affidavits and other
materials on which she wishes to rely at trial on or before
Monday 25 October
3. The Respondents are to file and serve any further affidavits and any other
materials on which they wish to rely at trial on or
November 2021
4. The Applicant is to file and serve any affidavits in reply on or before
Monday 6 December
5. The Applicant is to file and serve an Outline of Argument at least 20
clear business days prior to the commencement of trial.
6. The Respondents are to file and serve an Outline of Argument at least 10
clear business days prior to the commencement of trial.
7. Counsel for the Respondent is granted leave to appear electronically
throughout the duration of the trial. HOWEVER it is directed
that all witnesses
resident in South Australia appear in person subject to any COVID-19 health
protocols in place at the time of
the final hearing.
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE BROWN:
INTRODUCTION:
1 These are general protection proceedings arising
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (‘the Act’). The parties
concerned remain in dispute and require a final hearing. The issue currently
determination is whether that hearing should proceed in an electronic
form or should take place, in the conventional manner, face
to face, in the
courtroom in Adelaide.
2 The Applicant, Angela Brougham, was employed by the First Respondent, the
Aboriginal Health Council of South Australia Ltd (‘the
Council’) as
its Strategic Business Executive. She commenced employment in November 2018,
pursuant to a contract of employment,
which was scheduled to conclude on 30 June
2019 and which was later extended to 30 June 2020.
3 Ms Brougham’s contract was not extended after this latter date,
notwithstanding the possibility that it could be so extended.
Brougham’s case that her employment was not extended because she exercised
a workplace right to complain about being
subject to harassment in the workplace
and because of her religious beliefs and race, in contravention of
sections 341
of the Act.
4 The Council is a not-for-profit organisation, which is the peak body for
Aboriginal health organisations in South Australia. It
is an independent and
community-controlled organisation, which is primarily funded through the
Commonwealth and State governments
and is directed, in its charter, to improve
health outcomes for all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people living in
Australia. I accept, in general terms, the Council is not well resourced
financially and its preference would be to direct its government
funding towards
its constituent bodies.
5 The Second Respondent, Polly Sumner-Dodd is the Chairperson of the Council.
At relevant times, Annie-Rose Thurnwald was a Manager
and Debra Stead the Senior
Finance Officer at the Council. They had personal involvement with Ms
Broughton and were her superiors.
She complains that they subjected her to
bullying and harassment.
6 Ms Brougham commenced proceedings, in the Adelaide Registry of the Court,
on 8 July 2020. She is a resident of South Australia,
as are each of the named
Respondents. Her solicitor and counsel are also based in Adelaide.
7 A Response was filed, on behalf of the First Respondent, on 7 August 2020.
Efforts to reach common ground between the parties, through
a process of
Alternative Dispute Resolution, were unsuccessful. The Council has elected to
retain solicitors in Hobart.
8 In its Response, the Council has asserted that Ms Sumner-Dodd, Ms Thurnwald
and Ms Stead were not the decision makers in respect
of the Council’s
decision not to extend Ms Brougham’s contract of employment. It is the
Council’s position that
this decision was made by its Chief Executive
Officer, Shane Mohor.
9 Mr Mohor has filed an affidavit in anticipation of the trial. It is his
evidence that the decision not to extend Ms Brougham’s
contract of
employment was his and it was made for financial reasons relating to the
Council’s recurrent funding and its need
to direct resources towards
combating the pandemic crisis. Mr Mohor’s evidence is supported by an
Affidavit of Laura Azar,
who was and is employed by the Council as its Human
Resources Business Partner.
10 In these circumstances, the First Respondent does not propose to call the
Second, Third and Fourth Respondents, none of whom have
filed an Affidavit in
the proceedings. They will rely on evidence from Mr Mohor and Ms Azar, both of
whom is resident of South Australia.
At this stage, as the Court is currently
advised, Ms Brougham proposes to call only herself. Accordingly the trial is
take around 2 to 3 days to complete.
11 The trial was previously listed, on 23 August 2021, for 3 days before
Judge Heffernan, who was formally a Judge of this Court.
He is now a Judge of
the District Court of South Australia, having been appointed to that Court on 1
April 2021. In these circumstances,
regrettably, the trial listed for 23 August
2021 could not proceed.
12 For these reasons, the case was listed before me for mention in order for
the hearing to be re-assigned. At this stage, an issue
arose as to whether the
trial could be heard electronically by a Judge of the Court from interstate or
whether it needed to be heard,
in the presence of each of the parties, in the
Court in Adelaide.
13 Ms Brougham would prefer that the case take place in Adelaide in the
conventional manner. It is her positon that the interests
of justice dictate
that she should be able to cross-examine Mr Mohor and any other relevant
decision-maker at the Council directly
to garner the full forensic potential of
such an examination, which may lose its potency and efficacy, if conducted at a
metaphorical
arm’s length
via an electronic format.
14 On the other hand, the Council points to its not-for-profit status and the
fact that it has retained solicitors, as it is entitled
to do so, in Tasmania.
In the circumstances, it is submitted that the reasons why Mr Mohor decided as
he did is not an unduly complicated
issue and is therefore one which is readily
amenable to the electronic format and it is therefore expedient that the hearing
in this manner, as it will be the quickest and most cost effective way
for it to be concluded.
LEGAL PRINCIPLES APPLICABLE TO GENERAL PROTECTION
PROCEEDINGS:
Protections.
Pursuant to
section 340(1)
a person must not take
adverse action
” against another person because that other
person has a workplace right.
Section 341
provides the definition of
workplace right
has such a right if, amongst other matters, they are:
able to make a complaint or inquiry:
(i) to a person or body having the capacity under a workplace law to seek
compliance with that law or a workplace instrument; or
(ii) if the person is an employee—in relation to his or her
employment.
Section 342(1)
of the Act contains a table setting out the circumstances
in which a person is to be regarded as having taken
adverse action
against another person. The first item of the table provides as follows:
Adverse action is taken by an employer against an
employee if the employer:
(a) dismisses the employee; or
(b) injures the employee in his or her employment; or
(c) alters the position of the employee to the employee’s prejudice;
(d) discriminates between the employee and other employees of the
18 The expression workplace right is defined by
section 341(1)
(1) A person has a workplace right if the person:
(a) is entitled to the benefit of, or has a role or responsibility under, a
workplace law, workplace instrument or order made by
an industrial body; or
(b) is able to initiate, or participate in, a process or proceedings under a
workplace law or workplace instrument; or
(c) is able to make a complaint or inquiry:
(i) to a person or body having the capacity under a workplace law to seek
compliance with that law or a workplace instrument; or
(ii) if the person is an employee—in relation to his or her
employment.
of the Act defines
workplace law
. Relevantly,
workplace law
means the Act itself or any
other law of the Commonwealth or a State, which regulates the relationships
between employers and employees
(including by dealing with occupational health
& safety matters). A
workplace instrument
is any document made
pursuant to a
workplace law, which concerns the relationship between
employers and employees.
Section 351
provides other protections for employees. Its provisions
prohibit an employee from taking
adverse action
against an employee
because of the employee’s race, religion or other specified attitudes.
21 It is currently Ms Brougham’s case that she was subject to such
adverse action, for protected reasons, which relate to her
race and religion and
because she made a complaint about bullying in the workplace.
22 Clearly, she was subject to some form of adverse action as her contract
was not extended. However, the central issue in the case
is the reason
her contract was not extended. Ms Brougham has asserted her view, whilst Mr
Mohor has asserted that it was for operational reasons,
which were not
influenced by any of the factors articulated by Ms Brougham in her application.
23 Clearly, this will be the central issue in the case. The only persons who
definitively know why Ms Brougham’s employment
was not extended are the
relevant decision makers concerned. In these circumstances, it is likely to be a
matter of controversy,
as to what factors influenced them in their decision
making role and what was the extent of this influence.
24 Collier J in
Jones v Queensland Tertiary Admissions Centre Limited (No
explained the operation of
section 361
of the Act in the following
That the employee is required to first prove the
existence of objective facts which are said to provide a basis for the alleged
action, before the onus shifts to the employer in respect of the
prohibited reason ... it is not sufficient for [an applicant] to
simply allege
that she had a workplace right and that she was the subject of adverse action
– rather on the assumption that
[an applicant] is able to prove these
allegations, the burden is then cast on to [the employer] to prove that adverse
not taken against [an applicant] because of [her] workplace rights
for the purposes of
section 340
of the Act.
Bendigo Regional Institute of Technology and Further Education v
Barclay & Anor
Court, in the context of
section 346
of the Act, which provides protection for
employees against adverse action motivated by an employer in respect of
industrial activities,
discussed the application of the onus arising under
section 361.
In the case, Gummow and Hayne JJ said as follows:
In determining an application under
necessary to] to assess whether the engagement of an employee in an industrial
activity was a “substantial and operative
factor” as to constitute a
“reason”, potentially amongst many reasons, for adverse action to be
taken against that
employee. In assessing the evidence led to discharge the onus
upon the employer under
, the reliability and weight of such evidence
was to be balanced against evidence adduced by the employee and the overall
circumstances of each case; but it was the reasons of the
decision-maker at the time the adverse action was taken which was the focus
the inquiry.
v Ambulance Australia
Court of the Federal Court (comprised of Dowsett, Bromberg and Murphy JJ)
provided an erudite and very useful summary, in
respect of the application of
section 361
and the authorities which relate to it, as follows:
When an employee alleges that an employer has taken
action against him or her because the employee exercised a workplace right
casts the onus on the employer to “prove otherwise”. Under
while there may be multiple reasons for an employer to have taken the adverse
action, the employer takes action for a prohibited
reason if the reasons for the
action include that reason. The rationale for the presumption was ... as being
to throw on to the
employer the onus of proving that which lies peculiarly
within its own knowledge
Where adverse action is taken by one person against another, the task of a court
in a proceeding alleging contravention of
is to determine why the
person took the adverse action and to ask whether it was for a prohibited reason
or reasons which included
a prohibited reason ... The relevant inquiry is
therefore into the “particular reason” of the decision-maker for
action ... which is a determination of fact to be made by the court
taking account of all the facts and circumstances of the case
and available
inferences...
To displace the presumption created by
in light of the effect of
the respondent must prove that its conduct was not motivated in whole or in part
by the prohibited reason alleged. A failure to
displace the presumption enables
the allegation by an applicant of adverse action for a prohibited reason to
stand as sufficient
proof of that
27 In this context, it is the submission of Mr Collinson, counsel for the
Council, that the issue as to the
particular reason
Brougham’s contract was not extended is a not unduly complicated one,
given that it will only turn on the Court’s
assessment of the credibility
of Mr Mohor, in particular. He has already provided the reasons why the
decision was made, which related
to funding consideration relevant to the
Council rather than anything specific to Ms Brougham’s conduct.
28 Mr Collinson submits that these reasons are not inherently complex in any
way and does not turn on the assessment of Mr Mohor’s
credit to any
significant degree. As such, the task set for the Court of determining
the Council took the action which it did can be easily undertaken through an
electronic format. In this context, he points to the
fact that his client is an
non-government organisation and it will be expensive for it to retain counsel in
Adelaide, given that
his instructor is based in Hobart, Tasmania.
29 On the other hand, it is the submission of Mr Manuel, counsel for Ms
Brougham, that the case will turn to a very large degree on
the assessment of
the relevant decision maker’s credit and this will put Ms Brougham, at a
significant disadvantage, if the
hearing proceeds electronically. It is his
submission that the use of video
fundamentally impedes the cross-examination
by either party.
Essentially, he submits that it is not unknown for
employers to confabulate reasons to dismiss a person in order to achieve an
30 In addition, although Mr Manuel accepts, as he must, that the First
Respondent is entitled to appoint solicitors from wherever
in Australia it deems
appropriate, the fact of the matter is that all the parties and witnesses
concerned in the case are resident
in the State of South Australia and the cause
of action arose in this state.
31 It is the submission of Mr Manuel that these factors tip the balance of
convenience in favour of the case proceeding in the conventional
manner as was
originally envisaged, when it was set for hearing before Judge Heffernan.
CONSIDERATIONS RELEVANT TO ELECTRONIC HEARINGS:
32 Pursuant to section 13(2) of the
Circuit Court of Australia Act
(Cth) (‘the FCCA
Act’) the jurisdiction of the Court
must be exercised in open court.
33 The Federal Circuit Court of Australia is a lower level federal court,
whose objects include that it
operate as informally as possible
use streamlined procedures
34 In this context, pursuant to section 66(1) of the FCCA Act, the Court may
allow any relevant testimony to be given by video or
audio link. This discretion
is subject to the conditions stipulated in section 69.
35 The stipulation that proceedings be conducted in open court, in respect of
video hearings, can be augmented by a general invitation
being provided to any
interested member of the community to attend such a hearing through his/her
personal computer. This has frequently
occurred during the last 18 months or so
of the pandemic crisis.
36 In determining whether or not to depart from the traditional manner in
which justice has previously been dispensed in Australia,
including in the
Federal Circuit Court, the Court must consider two issues above all others,
which can be summarised under the following
Open justice;
37 A court hearing, which is open to the scrutiny of all, is a public
demonstration of the rule of law. The rule of law is exemplified
impartiality; demonstrable fairness in procedures; and the ability for the
public to observe legal argument and the delivery of
reasons. As is often
stated, justice must be seen to be done to ensure public confidence in the
administration of justice.
38 In theoretical terms, as indicated above, any interested person could
attend a hearing to be conducted via an electronic platform,
if provided with
smart phone, they would be able
to see and observe the proceedings, as if they
were in court.
39 In addition, counsel for a party can take part in such a hearing and would
be able to conduct a cross-examination of a witness,
via such a platform. In my
experience, there are some difficulties in this process. It is common for an
interlocutor to cut across
a witness, due to an inability to be attuned to the
body language
inherent in such situations
and the almost
imperceptible time delays arising from such electronic transmission.
Singh v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services
& Multicultural Affairs
Judge Kendall described these problems as being
, which could not
be considered
insurmountable
41 I agree that the technology is indeed remarkable and it is commendable
that both the courts and the legal profession have adapted
quickly to the
administration of justice through such means.
42 Given the lockdowns which have been necessitated on public health grounds
throughout Australia, particularly in its larger states,
it has been the case of
the courts responding to necessity. To adopt an ancient adage
needs must,
when the devil drives.
43 Although an electronic trial is far from perfect, I am satisfied that it
can satisfy the requirements of open justice and the stipulation
contained in
section 13 of the FCCA Act that proceedings be heard in open court, if
interested parties are able to respond to an
invitation to access the relevant
electronic platform.
44 A more difficult issue is whether such a forum will provide a fair
hearing. Procedural fairness dictates that a party to proceedings
is entitled to
be given the opportunity to present any arguments, which he or she considers
vital to the case concerned and, significantly
in a case such as the present, is
able to test evidence comprehensively through a process of cross-examination.
45 If a person is deprived of either of these opportunities, the relevant
trial cannot be characterised as a fair one and, as such,
would represent an
affront to the principles of justice. A more nuanced issue arises if a party
considers, on subjective grounds,
that a case conducted electronically is, in
some way, a
Clayton’s trial,
in the sense that it represents an
unsatisfactory compromise or inferior substitute to a face to face trial.
46 As I understand it, it is Ms Brougham’s case that she will not be
able to adequately cross-examine the applicable decision
makers at the Council
and so expose what she asserts is their overall lack of credibility and the fact
that they are, in some way,
concealing the operative reason why her contract of
employment was not extended. As such, she asserts that the process if
potentially
fundamentally unfair to her.
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Limited
(Adjournment)
Perram J alluded
to these problems, when he said as follows:
My impression of those platforms [which include
Microsoft Teams which is the platform proposed for the electronic hearing in the
matter] has been that I am staring at the witness from about one metre
away and my perception of the witness’ facial expressions
is much greater
than it is in Court. What is different—and significant—is that the
video-link technology tends to reduce
the chemistry which may develop between
counsel and the witness. This is allied with the general sense that there has
been a reduction
in formality in the proceedings. This is certainly so and is
undesirable. To those problems may be added the difficulties that can
dealing with
objections.
48 Added difficulties are likely to arise, when the system fails
unexpectedly. Such hearings are likely to take longer, in a virtual
environment
with which parties and the court itself is unfamiliar, which will increase
rather than lessen expense. In addition,
if a party is called upon to refer to
a document, there may be logistical issues arising.
49 The rationale for requiring cross-examination, in ordinary circumstances,
to take place in open court, was expressed by Buchanan
Campaign Master
(UK) Ltd v Forty Two International Pty Ltd (No
I am particularly troubled by the prospect (or
possibility) that the cross-examination of an important witness might be
rendered less
effective by the limitations of video link technology or the
absence of the witness from the courtroom. Although the days are gone
witnesses are expected to feel any sense of intimidation as an aid to telling
the truth, there is no doubt in my mind that the
requirement to give evidence on
oath or affirmation in the (generally) solemn atmosphere of a courtroom in the
presence of a judge,
and to answer questions in cross-examination in the
presence also of cross-examining counsel, has at least three potential benefits.
It enhances the prospect that the witness will remain conscious of the nature
and solemnity of the occasion and of his or her obligations.
It affords the
cross-examiner some reassurance that the gravity and immediacy of the moment,
and of the supervising presence of the
judge, are not lost on the witness and
the cross-examination is not thereby rendered any less effective, to the
possible prejudice
of the cross-examining party. It provides the Court with a
more satisfactory environment in which to assess the nature, quality and
reliability of responses by a witness, both to questions and to the overall
situation presented by the necessity to give evidence
in court. To my mind there
remains, even in the modern context, a certain ‘chemistry’ in oral
interchanges in a courtroom,
whether between a judge and counsel (or other
representative) or between cross-examiner and witness. I would not wish too
to deprive a cross-examiner of that traditional forensic element in the
exchange although, as the cases universally make clear, the
Court must now, if
asked to do so, balance the interests of a cross-examining party against claimed
inconvenience both in individual
cases and with respect to individual witnesses.
Notwithstanding the increased availability and use of video link technology, in
view, a case must be made out for the use of video link evidence if it is
opposed by an affected
50 However, I am well aware that the existence of the pandemic and the
uncertainty about when it will be controlled are factors which
impact upon the
balance of convenience between adopting the electronic mode of trial, with the
imperfections relating to cross-examination
which it may entail, and the
prejudice arising from the proceedings being adjourned, perhaps for a reasonably
lengthy period of time.
51 At this juncture, an interstate judge (that is a judge from a sate other
than South Australia) may be able to hear the case prior
to the end of the year
via Microsoft Teams. Such an option would entail all of the parties and any
other interested parties attending
court remotely via their respective computer
screens. Many such links would be involved and, in my view, it would not be an
without its potential complexities and pitfalls.
52 The other option is that the hearing takes place, in a conventional way,
in the Adelaide courtroom before me. Due to other Court
commitments, the
earliest I could allocate a 3 day hearing would be 2 to 4 March 2022.
53 The obvious advantage of such an outcome is that all the witnesses
concerned and at least one counsel, would be physically present
in Adelaide.
This would be particularly important insofar as any cross-examination of any
relevant decision makers is concerned.
54 In order to minimise expense, in my view, it would be possible for counsel
for the First Respondent to attend court via an electronic
platform, if this was
the preference of his client, particularly in terms of the reduction of expense.
The major drawback of such
an outcome is that it would delay the resolution of
55 In my view, an electronic trial is different to one taking place in the
courtroom which necessarily provides its own
chemistry and theatre,
particularly in the form of the direct interactions between counsel and
witnesses and the proceeding judicial officer. An electronic
trial does not
permit evidence to be gathered and assessed in the natural and organic way
provided by an open hearing. Necessarily
there is a reduction of
and expression which can be best summarised of the
conscious and unconscious movements and postures, by which attitudes and
are communicated
56 In the current case, the operative reason as to why Ms Brougham was
dismissed is central. It is essentially her position that the
relevant decision
makers have conveniently manufactured other reasons, relating to funding, to
justify her dismissal, when the real
reason is attributable to their perception
of her as a trouble maker in the workplace and other protective attributes
relevant to
57 Given the reverse onus created by section 361 of the Act,
complex and nuanced issue, both in legal and evidentiary terms. Axiomatically,
at this stage, I am not in a position to
resolve this controversy in the context
of the current proceedings. However, in my view, this forms the framework in
which the resolution
of the discovery aspects of the case must be
considered.
58 When the case is ultimately determined, the Court will be required to seek
substantial and operative factor
as to why Ms Brougham’s
contract was not extended. This is a question of fact rather than conjecture.
When boiled down, this
means that the Court will be required to ascertain the
real reason
why the contract was not extended. This is a question to be
“in the light of all the facts established in the
proceedings”
59 In all the circumstances of this case, in my view, this is an issue which
would be better determined in the context of a conventional
hearing, rather than
an electronic one, given the potential moment of the decision for all concerned,
which may well turn on the
Court’s assessment of the credibility of each
of the parties concerned.
60 In my view, it is also important that Ms Brougham have confidence in the
process concerned and not perceive that she has been provided
with an inferior
medium through which this issue, of such fundamental importance to her, is to be
determined.
61 In my view, a balance to the pragmatic considerations raised by Mr
Collinson is that he be given leave to appear, in the trial
scheduled, by electronic means, but the relevant witnesses, all of whom are
resident in South Australia can appear personally
in Adelaide for the trial.
62 The earliest trial dates available are in early March of next year. I will
fix the trial for this time and make the necessary directions.
63 For all these reasons, the orders of the Court will be as set out at the
commencement of these reasons for judgment.
I certify that the preceding sixty-three (63)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 27 August 2021
Respondents
Fourth Respondent:
DEBRA STEAD
Jones v Queensland Tertiary
Admissions Centre Limited (No 2)
[2010] FCA 399
(Collier J).
Board of Bendigo Regional
Institute of Technology and Further Education v Barclay [No1]
[2012] HCA 32
(2012) 248 CLR
Ibid at 542 [127] (Gummow
& Hayne JJ).
v Ambulance Australia
[2015] FCAFC
Ibid at [54]-[56] (Dowsett,
Bromberg and Murphy JJ).
Federal Circuit Court of Australia Act 1999
Singh v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services & Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCCA 726.
[49] (Kendall J).
v Ford Motor Company of Australia Limited (Adjournment)
Ibid at [19] (Perram
Campaign Master
(UK) Ltd v Forty Two International Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2009] FCA 1306
(2009) 181 FCR 152.
Ibid 171 [78] (Buchanan J).
State of Victoria
(Office of Public Prosecutions) v Grant
[2014] FCAFC 184
RTF format (389 KB)
Signed PDF/A format