Curoglu and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs (Migration) [2024] AATA 3600 (11 October 2024)
Curoglu and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
Affairs (Migration) [2024] AATA 3600 (11 October 2024)
Division: GENERAL DIVISION
File Number(s):
Tuncay Curoglu
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
Deputy President
Britten-Jones
The Tribunal sets aside the decision dated 25
August 2023 and substitutes a decision that the decision cancelling the
Applicant’s
visa is revoked.
........................[SGD]................................................
Deputy President Britten-Jones
MIGRATION – Non-revocation of mandatory cancellation of Class XB
Subclass 202 Global Special Humanitarian visa – where
the Applicant does
not pass the character test- whether there is another reason to revoke the
mandatory cancellation - applicant
has strong ties to Australia because he
arrived when eighteen months old and has lived the majority of his life in
Australia –
decision under review is set aside
Legislation
Migration Act 1958
Tanielu v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] FCA 673
Secondary Materials
Direction No. 110 – Visa refusal and cancellation under
section 501
and revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a visa under
section 501CA
REASONS FOR DECISION
Deputy President
Britten-Jones
the Applicant
) seeks a review of a decision by a delegate of the
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs (
27 March 2020, the Applicant’s Class BF Transitional (Permanent) visa
) was mandatorily cancelled under s s 501(3A) of the
the cancellation
) because he had a ‘substantial criminal record’ and was
serving a sentence of imprisonment.
25 August 2023, a delegate of the Minister decided under
revoke the cancellation decision. The Applicant sought review in the Tribunal
and the cancellation decision was affirmed,
but the Tribunal’s decision
was then set aside on judicial review in the Federal Court. The matter was
remitted to the Tribunal
and there was a further hearing on 10 and 11 October
Background Facts
Applicant is 51 years old and a citizen of Turkey. He came to Australia with his
parents in 1974 as an 18-month-old infant. The
Applicant has a long history of
drug addiction and associated criminal behaviour since 1992. He is still dealing
with his addiction
and is undertaking a methadone program at Villawood. He has
three children with his ex-partner and two stepdaughters.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
, the Minister must cancel a visa that has been granted to a person if:
(a) the Minister is satisfied that the person does not pass the character test
because of the operation of paragraph (6)(a) (substantial
criminal record), on
the basis of paragraph (7)(a), (b) or (c); and
(b) the person is serving a sentence of imprisonment, on a full-time basis in a
custodial institution, for an offence against a law
of the Commonwealth, a State
or a Territory.
character test referred to in
is outlined in
Relevantly,
provides that a person does not pass the character test if the
person has a substantial criminal record (as defined by sub-s (7)).
purposes of
s 501(6)(a)
, and relevant to this matter, a person has a
substantial criminal record if the person has been sentenced to a term of
imprisonment
of 12 months or more.
a visa has been cancelled as set out above, the Minister has a power under
s 501CA(4)(b)
to revoke the cancellation decision if satisfied that the
visa holder passes the character test, or that there is another reason
original decision should be revoked:
501CA Cancellation of visa—revocation of
decision under
subsection 501(3A)
(person serving sentence of
imprisonment)
(1) This section applies if the Minister makes a decision (the original
decision) under
subsection 501(3A)
(person serving sentence of
imprisonment) to cancel a visa that has been granted to a person.
(2) For the purposes of this section, relevant information is
information (other than non‑disclosable information) that the
(a) would be the reason, or a part of the reason, for making the original
decision; and
(b) is specifically about the person or another person and is not just about
a class of persons of which the person or other person
is a member.
(3) As soon as practicable after making the original decision, the Minister
(a) give the person, in the way that the Minister considers appropriate in
the circumstances:
(i) a written notice that sets out the original decision; and
(ii) particulars of the relevant information; and
(b) invite the person to make representations to the Minister, within the
period and in the manner ascertained in accordance with
the regulations, about
revocation of the original decision.
(4) The Minister may revoke the original decision if:
(a) the person makes representations in accordance with the invitation;
(b) the Minister is satisfied:
(i) that the person passes the character test (as defined by
section 501)
(ii) that there is another reason why the original decision should be
the cancellation decision is not revoked the right to have that decision
reviewed by the Tribunal is enlivened.
Tribunal is bound by
to comply with any directions made under the
Migration Act
. In this case,
Direction No 110 – Visa refusal and
cancellation under
section 501
and revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a
section 501CA
the Direction
) has application.
the purposes of deciding whether or not to revoke the mandatory cancellation of
a non-citizen’s visa, paragraph 5.2 of the
Direction contains several
principles that must inform a decision-maker’s application of the Primary
and Other Considerations
identified in
where relevant to the decision.
principles that are found in paragraph 5.2 of the Direction are as
(1) Australia has a sovereign right to determine whether
non-citizens who are of character concern are allowed to enter and/or remain
Australia. Being able to come to or remain in Australia is a privilege Australia
confers on non-citizens in the expectation that
they are, and have been,
law-abiding, will respect important institutions, such as Australia's law
enforcement framework, and will
not cause or threaten harm to individuals or the
Australian community.
(2) The safety of the Australian Community is the highest priority of the
Australian Government.
(3) Non-citizens who engage or have engaged in criminal or other serious
conduct should expect to be denied the privilege of coming
to, or to forfeit the
privilege of staying in, Australia.
(4) The Australian community expects that the Australian Government can
and should refuse entry to non-citizens, or cancel their visas,
if they engaged
in conduct, in Australia or elsewhere, that raises serious character concerns.
This expectation of the Australian
community applies regardless of whether the
noncitizen poses a measureable risk of causing physical harm to the Australian
(5) Australia has a low tolerance of any criminal or other serious conduct
by visa applicants or those holding a limited stay visa,
or by other
non-citizens who have been participating in, and contributing to, the Australian
community only for a short period of
(6) With respect to decisions to refuse, cancel, and revoke cancellation
of a visa, Australia may afford a higher level of tolerance
of criminal or other
serious conduct by non-citizens who have lived in the Australian community for
most of their life, or from a
very young age.
(7) Decision-makers must take into account the primary and other
considerations relevant to the individual case. In some circumstances,
nature of the non-citizen's conduct, or the harm that would be caused if the
conduct were to be repeated, may be so serious that
even strong countervailing
considerations may be insufficient to justify not cancelling or refusing the
visa, or revoking a mandatory
cancellation.
(8) The inherent nature of certain conduct such as family violence is so
serious that even strong countervailing considerations may
be insufficient to
justify not cancelling or refusing the visa, or revoking a mandatory
cancellation, even if the information available
at the time of consideration
suggests that the noncitizen does not pose a measureable risk of causing
physical harm to the Australian
by the principles in paragraph 5.2 above, I must take into account the primary
and other considerations in the Direction.
primary considerations are:
(1) protection of the Australian
community from criminal or other serious conduct;
(2) whether the conduct engaged in constituted family violence;
(3) the strength, nature and duration of ties to Australia;
(4) the best interests of minor children in Australia;
(5) expectations of the Australian community.
other considerations are:
a) legal consequences of the decision;
b) extent of impediments if removed;
c) impact on Australian business interest.
primary consideration of the protection of the Australian community is generally
to be given greater weight than other primary
considerations.
CONSIDERATION
Protection of the Australian community – 8.1 of the
considering the protection of the Australian community, I have regard to the
principle that the Government is committed to protecting
the Australian
community from harm as a result of criminal activity. Entering or remaining in
Australia is a privilege that Australia
confers on non-citizens in the
expectation that they are, and have been, law abiding, will respect important
institutions, and will
not cause or threaten harm to individuals or the
Australian community. As required by paragraph 8.1(2) of the Direction, I give
consideration
(a) the nature and seriousness of the non-citizen’s conduct to date;
(b) the risk to the Australian community, should the non-citizen commit further
offences or engage in other serious conduct.
The nature and seriousness of the non-citizen’s
conduct – 8.1.1 of the Direction
Applicant’s criminal record is set out in the report from the Australian
Criminal Intelligence Commission.
The offending spans 1992 to 2020. Most of the offending is property related
involving theft, dishonesty, and damage but there are
also drug offences and
some violence including domestic violence. Over this lengthy period, the
offending was frequent with a most
significant cumulative effect. He has been
in and out of prison for over 20 years.
2002 the Applicant was convicted of armed robbery with an offensive weapon and
sentenced to 4 years imprisonment. He approached
a woman who had a one-year-old
child in a pram with her after going to an automatic teller machine. He pointed
a knife at her before
grabbing her bag. Soon after he was found with the cash
that he had stolen together with some other items. The sentencing judge
it as a serious offence and referred to the considerable length of his
court record and the fact that he was serving a sentence of
20 months periodic
detention. The presentence report noted that the Applicant was remorseful and
cooperative and had significant
support from his partner and his parents.
Further, it noted the need to resolve his drug abuse and that any prognosis as
to reoffending
depended upon the Applicant’s cooperation following through
with drug rehabilitation programs.
2004 the Applicant was convicted of assault occasioning actual bodily harm and
sentenced to 2 years imprisonment. The sentencing
judge referred to it
a serious assault upon a female which was unprovoked whereby
the offender grabbed the victim’s hair, pushed her through the
front door,
pushed her head into a railing post on a veranda and pushed her down steps,
smashed her head on the concrete and came
down the steps and punched the victim
to the face.
2012, the Applicant was convicted of ‘
break and enter house
and sentenced to 12 months imprisonment. The Applicant had little recollection
of the offence because he had taken drugs.
By committing the offence, the
Applicant was in breach of five good behaviour bonds. The sentencing judge said
that it was a matter
which the community expects will be taken very seriously
but it was noted that the Applicant’s drug use led to the commission
this offence and other offences of a very similar nature that appeared on his
lengthy criminal history.
5 December 2013, the Applicant received a term of imprisonment for a number of
offences which was suspended so as to allow him
the opportunity to undertake a
drug court program. The completion of this program was described as a great
success and his term of
imprisonment was set aside and replaced by a good
behaviour bond on 20 April 2015.
22 May 2014, the Applicant was convicted of two counts of contravening an
apprehended violence order for which he received a sentence
of two years
imprisonment. The facts of this matter are that the Applicant’s behaviour
was causing his parents some concern
and they became frightened and called the
police. The police were called but the Applicant returned later that night and
made a number
of threats through the front window of the home including that he
was going to burn down the house while they were sleeping. There
was a separate
offence for breaching an
apprehended violence order
relating to his former partner. The Applicant was affected by drugs during this
was convicted for numerous offences on 26 May 2017 including assaulting and
resisting a police officer in the execution of duty.
A suspended sentence of 12
months imprisonment was imposed.
contravention of another apprehended violence order
for which he was sentenced to 8 months imprisonment.
Applicant was given formal warnings of an intention to consider cancelling his
visa in March 2010 and July 2012. He also received
numerous warnings when being
sentenced for his offending. The Applicant has continued to take drugs and has
continued offending
despite many opportunities for him to cease doing so. He has
participated in numerous drug rehabilitation programs including methadone
programs but despite some limited successes along the way he is still treating
his drug addiction with a methadone program today.
The seriousness of his
offending is reflected in the numerous custodial sentences he has received. The
acts of violence against
women and police officers on duty are very
conclude as to the nature and seriousness of the Applicant’s conduct that
it was lengthy, persistent and serious but almost
all of the offending was
directly related to his drug addiction which he is addressing. Further, he was
given numerous warnings
which he failed to heed. The nature and seriousness of
the Applicant’s conduct is a significant factor in terms of whether
satisfied that there is ‘another reason’ to set aside the
non-revocation decision.
The risk to the Australian community
should the non-citizen commit further offences or engage in other serious
conduct – 8.1.2
of the Direction
considering the need to protect the Australian community from harm, I have had
regard to the Government’s view that the Australian
community’s
tolerance for any risk of future harm becomes lower as the seriousness of the
potential harm increases. Some conduct
and the harm that would be caused, if it
were repeated, is so serious that any risk that it may be repeated may be
unacceptable.
As required by
paragraph 8.1.2(2) of the Direction, I also have regard to, cumulatively:
(a) the nature of the harm to individuals or the Australian community should the
non-citizen engage in further criminal or other
serious conduct; and
(b) the likelihood of the non-citizen engaging in further criminal or other
serious conduct, taking into account:
(i) information and evidence on the risk of the non­ citizen re-offending;
(ii) evidence of rehabilitation achieved by the time of the decision, giving
weight to time spent in the community since their most
recent offence (noting
that decisions should not be delayed in order for rehabilitative courses to be
undertaken).
terms of measuring the risk to the Australian community, guidance can be found
in the decision of Mortimer J (as she then was)
Tanielu v Minister for
Immigration and Border
Protection.
Her Honour said
that, to determine an unacceptable risk, one has to evaluate what the
consequences of reoffending are as well as
the likelihood of the person engaging
in that conduct in the future.
Nature of harm if further criminal
or other serious conduct – 8.1.2(2)(a) of the Direction
the Applicant were to engage in further similar criminal offending, the nature
of the harm would be serious particularly because
of the volume of offending
over such a long period of time. Much of the offending seen on its own was not
the most serious - for
example, larceny – but there was some violence
including domestic violence.
Likelihood of further criminal or
other serious conduct – 8.1.2(2)(b) of the Direction
Applicant has expressed remorse for his offending and says he is motivated to
not reoffend because of his children. Many times
before today, the Applicant
has expressed similar remorse and made promises to avoid drugs and to not
reoffend. It is hard to see
what is different this time. He has always had the
support of his parents. He has had the benefit of support from his ex-partner
for many years and he has had children for many years and yet he has continued
to take drugs and offend.
Nevertheless,
I was impressed by the Applicant’s candour in the witness box and he
seemed to express a genuine desire to stop
the pattern of drugs and offending.
He was forthright about his addiction, and he expressed an understanding that he
his addiction so as to avoid further offending. He is complying with
a methadone program which he says he will continue if released.
His ex-partner
gave evidence that they are still best friends and that she will support him if
released. His sister explained that
there is a job waiting for him at her
partner’s joinery business where she works too. He has indicated a desire
to work and
most significant difference about the Applicant’s circumstances is that he
has spent the last four years in detention and
I believe that he finally
understands the significance of being removed from the country if he does not
change his behaviour. Whilst
in detention he has engaged in the Smart Recovery
program. His behaviour in detention has been free of any significant incidents.
He admitted to smoking marijuana in detention and he disclosed this to the
medical officers. He has a drug relapse plan which includes
engaging with
Odyssey House and his general practitioner if released.
is clear from how emotional he became in the witness box when giving evidence
that understands how he has failed his children and
family in the past and how
important it is for him to avoid drugs and offending in the future. He knows
that he will be deported
to Turkey if he reoffends and that is a very
significant motivation for him. In 2020 the Applicant was assessed as a medium
risk of reoffending
more recent behaviour and his evidence to the Tribunal indicates an improved
risk. For that reason, I conclude that the
likelihood of further criminal
conduct is moderate which I do not consider to be an unacceptable risk to the
Australian community
given that much of his past offending has not been the most
Family Violence – 8.2 of the Direction
Applicant has engaged in family violence which caused fear to his sister and
ex-partner. In considering the seriousness of the
family violence engaged in by
the Applicant, the following factors in paragraph 8.2(3) are relevant:
(a) the frequency of the non-citizen’s conduct and/or whether there is
any trend of increasing seriousness;
(b) the cumulative effect of repeated acts of family violence;
(c) rehabilitation achieved at time of decision since the person’s last
known act of family violence, including:
(i) the extent to which the person accepts responsibility for their family
violence related conduct;
(ii) the extent to which the non-citizen understands the impact of their
behaviour on the abused and witness of that abuse (particularly
(iii) efforts to address factors which contributed to their conduct; and
(d) whether the non-citizen has re-offended since being formally warned, or
since otherwise being made aware by a Court, law enforcement
or other authority,
absence of a warning should not be
considered to be in the non-citizen’s
favour. This includes warnings about the non-citizen’s migration status,
the non-citizen engage in further acts of family violence.
August 2013, the Applicant was the subject of an apprehended violence order
which named his ex-partner and four children as persons
in need of protection.
Further, on 10 August 2013, the police applied for, and were granted, an urgent
order on behalf of the Applicant’s
sister. On 22 May 2014, the Applicant
was convicted of breaching these apprehended violence orders and sentenced to
imprisonment
for two years. With respect to the sister, in August 2013, the
Applicant was at his home with her and started yelling at her accusing
putting something in the water and poisoning him. The sister initially contacted
police because she was concerned for his
welfare, but he began to scream at her.
His behaviour was drug induced. With respect to the ex-partner and his children,
on 18 August
2013, the Applicant attended at the prohibited premises asking to
be let in because he was hungry. He shouted obscenities and was
intoxicated.
26 February 2020, the Applicant was sentenced to an aggregate term of
imprisonment of 12 months which, on appeal, was varied to
9 months. The
sentencing judge noted that the Applicant had deliberately ignored his
ex-partner’s’s statements made several
times that he was not welcome
at her home and that she had reasonable grounds to fear a domestic violence
offence and intimidation
and stalking.
15 December 2020, the Applicant was convicted for contravening an apprehended
violence order and sentenced to 8 months imprisonment.
The offending occurred on
3 June 2020 when the Applicant attended the home of his ex-partner and demanded
entry so as to retrieve
his personal properties. When he was denied entry, the
Applicant removed the back door from its hinges and entered the home and engaged
in a vocal argument and made threats to the family.
Applicant concedes that there have been acts of family violence and that he has
been formally warned about the consequences of
further offending. He has
expressed appropriate remorse, and explained that his behaviour was influenced
by drugs at the time. I
note that the family violence is limited to episodes in
August 2013 and in 2020 and it was not frequent. He accepts responsibility
his conduct and understands its impact on his family. The ex-partner and the
sister of the applicant have both provided supporting
written statements and
both gave oral evidence at the hearing in support of the Applicant. The effect
of their evidence is that his
past conduct was drug induced but they maintain a
strong relationship with him and support his release because he is addressing
drug addiction.
Applicant contends, which I accept, that the conduct was not at the higher end
of seriousness and did not involve any physicality.
Nevertheless, the Applicant
caused fear to the very people that he says he loves whilst they were in their
views this conduct very seriously. This factor
weighs heavily against the Applicant but if he remains drug free it is very
that he would commit further domestic violence. With the support of
his ex-partner, his sister and parents plus the benefit of completing
methadone program, it is likely that he will not
Strength, Nature and Duration of Ties to Australia
– 8.3 of the Direction
primary consideration provides at paragraph 8.3 of the
(1) Decision-makers must consider any impact of the
decision on the non-citizen's immediate family members in Australia, where those
family members are Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents, or
people who have a right to remain in Australia indefinitely.
(2) Where consideration is being given to whether to cancel a
non-citizen's visa or whether to revoke the mandatory cancellation of
visa, the decision-maker must also consider the strength, nature and duration of
any other ties that the non-citizen has to
the Australian community. In doing
so, decision-makers must have regard to:
a) how long the non-citizen has resided in Australia, including whether
the non-citizen arrived as a young child, noting that:
i. less weight should be given where the non-citizen began offending soon
after arriving in Australia; and
ii. more weight should be given to time the non-citizen has spent
contributing positively to the Australian community
b) the strength, duration and nature of any family or social links with
Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents and/or
people who have an
indefinite right to remain in Australia.
Applicant has lived in Australia since he was 18 months old. He has lived here
for over 50 years. He has three children and
two stepchildren for whom he
assumes a parental role. The Applicant’s ex-partner, sister and father
gave oral evidence that
they maintain a close relationship with the Applicant
and that they would support him upon his release. His mother also supports
and has suffered due to his drug addiction and consequent behaviour. They will
be devastated if he is removed to Turkey. The
ex-partner said that he is her
best friend and that she wants him released so that he can be with her to help
with the children.
of his adult children has written a letter of support describing their father as
loving and caring and referring to the problems
he has had with drug addiction.
They want him to be part of their lives and will be devastated if he is removed
Applicant has held various jobs over the years but his drug taking has severely
affected his employment.
conclusion with respect to ties to Australia, I place significant weight on the
fact that the Applicant’s family is in Australia
and that he has
effectively spent his whole life in Australia having arrived as an infant aged
18 months. I conclude that the applicant’s
ties to Australia is a factor
that weighs heavily in favour of the Applicant.
Best interests of minor children – 8.4 of the
must determine whether non-revocation of the cancellation of the
Applicant’s visa is, or is not, in the best interests of
a child who is
affected by the decision. The following factors that I must consider where
relevant to this application
(a) the nature and duration of the relationship between the child and the
non-citizen. Less weight should generally be given where
the relationship is
non-parental, and/or there is no existing relationship and/or there have been
long periods of absence, or limited
meaningful contact (including whether an
existing Court order restricts contact);
(b) the extent to which the non-citizen is likely to play a positive parental
role in the future, taking into account the length of
time until the child turns
18, and including any Court orders relating to parental access and care
arrangements;
(c) the impact of the non-citizen's prior conduct, and any likely future
conduct, and whether that conduct has, or will have a negative
impact on the
(d) the likely effect that any separation from the non-citizen would have on
the child, taking into account the child's or non-citizen's
ability to maintain
(e) whether there are other persons who already fulfil a parental role in
relation to the child;
(f) any known views of the child (with those views being given due weight in
accordance with the age and maturity of the child);
(g) evidence that the child has been, or is at risk of being, subject to, or
exposed to, family violence perpetrated by the non-citizen,
or has otherwise
been abused or neglected by the non-citizen in any way, whether physically,
sexually or mentally;
(h) evidence that the child has suffered or experienced any physical or
emotional trauma arising from the non-citizen's conduct.
Applicant has two children below the age of 18. They are eight years old and 16
years old. The younger one is his stepdaughter,
but she has never had a
relationship with her biological father. She treats the Applicant as her father,
calls him ‘dad’.
The ex-partner of the Applicant gave evidence that
the daughter idolises the Applicant and that he is a good father to these two
children. She is on a sole parent pension looking after five children and is
struggling without him. This impacts on the children.
The 16 year old son wrote
a letter of support saying how much he misses his father and is scared that if
he goes to Turkey then
he will never see him again.
note that as a show of support, the four younger children attended the hearing
with their mother.
find that it would be in the best interests of the Applicant’s son and
stepdaughter if he were released so that he could provide
financial and
emotional support to them. I have no doubt that he loves his children and that
if he remains drug free, he will be
a very good father to them. It would be very
difficult for his children to maintain a meaningful relationship with their
he were removed to Turkey. This is a very significant factor in favour
of the Applicant, but its weight must be reduced because of
his past conduct
which has affected his children and resulted in significant periods of absence
from them and because there remains
a risk, albeit very low, of further domestic
violence if the Applicant does not resolve his drug problem.
Expectations of the Australian community – 8.5 of the
Australian community expects non-citizens to obey Australian laws while in
Australia. Where a non-citizen has engaged in serious
conduct in breach of this
expectation, or where there is an unacceptable risk that they may do so, the
Australian community, as a
norm, expects the Government to not allow such a
non-citizen to remain in Australia.
The Applicant has failed to obey the laws of Australia and would therefore be
expected to be removed from the community. His criminal
conduct was serious but
much of it was at the lower end of the spectrum and I do not consider that there
is an unacceptable risk
of further re-offending. I take into account that the
Australian community may afford a higher level of tolerance of the
Applicant’s
criminal past because he has lived in Australia for most of
his life and from a very young
conclude that the Australian community expects that the Australian government
should not revoke the cancellation decision. This
is a factor that weighs in
favour of non-revocation of the cancellation decision but only moderately
Other Considerations
deciding whether there is ‘another reason’ to revoke the
cancellation of the Applicant’s visa, I must also take
into account the
‘other considerations’ listed in the Direction, but these are not
exhaustive.
Legal Consequences of Decision – 9.1 of the
Applicant makes no claim in relation to Australia’s non-refoulement
obligations, so this consideration is
of impediments if removed – 9.2 of the Direction
Direction requires that I consider the extent of any impediments that the
Applicant may face if removed from Australia to New
Zealand in establishing
himself and maintaining basic living standards (in the context of what is
generally available to other citizens
of that country), taking into
(a) the Applicant’s age and health;
(b) whether there are substantial language or cultural barriers; and
(c) any social, medical and/or economic support available to him in that
Applicant is 51 years old and in relatively good physical and mental health.
would be some language and cultural barriers in Turkey because he has never
lived there except for two relatively short periods
in 1985 and 1989. He has
difficulty reading and writing Turkish and his language is not fluent. He has
limited family in Turkey.
He has had some contact with one cousin but he is not
even sure of his whereabouts and knows that he travel abroad regularly.
country information suggests that Turkey offers opioid substitution programs,
mental health services are inadequately funded
and therefore the Applicant may
not be able to access the necessary counselling to assist his drug
rehabilitation.
employment may also be problematic because of his age, his drug addiction and
his limited language skills.
to life in Turkey would be very difficult but in terms of establishing himself
and maintaining basic living standards, these
problems would not be
insurmountable. Nevertheless, this is a factor that weighs in favour of the
Impact on Australian business interests – 9.3 of the
was no evidence of impact on Australian business interests within the meaning of
the Direction. This factor is neutral.
have considered the specific circumstances relating to the Applicant as part of
my consideration. I am now required to carry out
the evaluative exercise of
weighing up the factors to determine whether I am satisfied that there is
‘another reason’
to revoke the cancellation decision.
primary considerations of the protection and expectations of the Australian
community and family violence weigh against the applicant
but I consider they
are outweighed by the Applicant’s ties to Australia and the best interests
of children.
Applicant has committed crimes for the best part of three decades and the
Australian community would expect that his visa remains
cancelled. However, I
place significant weight on the fact that he has lived in Australia for over 50
years from the age of 18 months
and has established a family of five children
who love and support him. I consider that this is a case where the
Applicant’s
significant ties to Australia and the interests of his
children outweigh the countervailing factors. He has taken steps to
rehabilitate
himself and he has a drug relapse plan and strong family support.
This will help him to remain drug and crime free in the future.
recognise that the safety of the Australian community is the highest priority of
the Australian government, it is unlikely
that the community’s safety will
be endangered because of the Applicant’s drug rehabilitation.
decision of the Tribunal is to set aside the non-revocation decision and to
instead revoke the decision to cancel the visa.
I certify that the preceding 63 (sixty-three) paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for the decision herein of Deputy President
Britten-Jones
.............................[SGD]...........................................
Dated: 11 October 2024
Date(s) of hearing:
10 & 11 October 2024
for the Applicant:
Ms M Mamarot, South West Migration and Legal Services
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Ms A Wilford, Sparke Helmore Lawyers
All references to legislation
Migration Act
unless otherwise specified
Direction 110 at 7(2)
Remittal Bundle pages 34 to
Direction 110 at 8.1.2(1).
(2014) 225 FCR 424
Presentence report 14 February
2020 at p 342 of exhibit 3
Direction 110 at 8.4(4).
Direction 110 at 8.5(1).
Direction 110 at 5.2(6).
SZRTN v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] FCA 303
(2014) 141 ALD 395
, 409 at [86];
Applicant’s statement
of facts, issues and contentions at [31]
RTF format (1.69 MB)
Signed PDF/A format