URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/SSATACSA/2011/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Newman v CSA [2011] SSATACSA 22 (15 September 2011)
REVIEW NUMBER XXXXXXXX
APPLICANT Carly
OTHER PARTY Child Support
DECISION REVIEWED
A decision made by an
objections officer of the Child Support Agency on 18 July 2011 refusing an
application for an extension of time
to object to a decision dated 15 December
2010 to refuse to accept an application for administrative assessment of child
The members of the Tribunal
were: XXXXXXXX Presiding
The hearing was conducted
on 15 September 2011. Ms Newman spoke to the Tribunal by conference telephone
and gave sworn evidence.
The Child Support Registrar was not
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
On 15 September 2011
the Tribunal decided to set aside the decision under review and substitute a new
decision that an extension of
time is to be granted.
This means the
application is successful.
DATE OF DESPATCH
16 September
REASONS FOR DECISION
Newman is the mother of Megan, born 2008. Ms Newman obtained a paternity order
from an overseas court on 19 April 2010 declaring
Mr Michael Turner to be
Megan’s father.
2 June 2010 Ms Newman applied to the Child Support Agency (CSA) for an
administrative assessment of child support to be made. After
investigations had
failed to establish the identity or whereabouts of Megan’s father, on 15
December 2010 the CSA decided to
refuse that application. Notice of that
decision was sent to Ms Newman by post the same day.
27 May 2011 Ms Newman lodged an objection to the CSA decision. In that objection
she noted that she had obtained new information
regarding Mr Turner’s
whereabouts. With the objection, an application for an extension of time in
which to lodge the objection
was received.
is of some relevance to the matter to note at the outset that, on 30 May 2011,
Ms Newman made another application for the administrative
assessment of child
support. On 7 July 2011 that application was accepted. Mr Turner has now been
assessed to pay child support to
Ms Newman for Megan from 30 May
Ms Newman’s objection was made more than 28 days after notice of the
decision to refuse her initial application was received,
the CSA was required to
consider whether an extension of time should be granted. On 18 July 2011 the CSA
refused the application
for an extension of time for the following reasons:
there was no valid reason for the delay in the objection and there would be
to Mr Turner and the public were the extension
Newman applied to the Tribunal for review of the objection decision on 25 July
CONSIDERATION
Tribunal has carefully considered the sworn evidence given by Ms Newman at the
hearing of the application. The Tribunal has also
taken into account the
documentation provided by the CSA (Exhibit 1), as well as the further material
provided by Ms Newman (Exhibit
A). The salient parts of the evidence will be
outlined below.
The legislative
legislation relevant to this application is contained in the
Child Support
(Registration and Collection) Act 1988
(‘the Act’). A parent
may object to a decision made by the CSA pursuant to
of the Act.
of the Act provides that an objection must be lodged within 28 days
after notice of the decision is served on the parent. Pursuant
parent may apply for an extension of time in which to lodge an objection in the
event that the 28 day time period has expired.
Act provides no guidelines in relation to the exercise of the discretion to
extend time found in section 83. The starting position
in matters concerning
applications for extensions of time is that proceedings commenced outside a
statutory period will not be entertained.
Nevertheless, the primary concern is
‘to do that which will enable justice to be done between the
parties’: see
Martinsen v Secretary, Department of Family &
Community Services
[2004] FCA 297
per Spender J. In
Spender J quoted with approval McHugh J in
Gallo v Dawson
(1990) 64 ALJR
as follows:
In order to determine whether the rules [imposing time limits] will work
an injustice, it is necessary to have regard to the history
of the proceedings,
the conduct of the parties, the nature of the litigation, and the consequences
for the parties of the grant or
refusal of the application for extension of
When the application is for an extension of time ...it is always necessary
to consider the prospects of the applicant succeeding in
line with the cases above, and also the comments of Wilcox J in
Hunter Valley
Developments Pty Ltd v Cohen
(1984) 3 FCR 344 at 348-349, the Tribunal
proposes to consider the following in the exercise of its
discretion:
the delay, and
any explanation for that delay;
whether the
applicant has rested on her rights;
the merits of
the substantive application;
any prejudice to
the other party including any prejudice in defending the proceedings occasioned
by the delay; and
interest considerations.
Reason for delay/resting on
is plain that there has been a considerable delay between notice of the decision
being served on Ms Newman and her objection lodged
on 27 May 2011. Ms Newman did
not dispute that she was given notice of the decision dated 15 December 2010.
Even allowing time for
the postage of the notice to Ms Newman she is some four
months out of time.
Newman explained that she had been searching for more information regarding Mr
Turner’s whereabouts for some time. She had
been in contact with his
family and did not receive what she needed until shortly before contacting the
CSA. Ms Newman provided an
extract from
showing that on Friday
20 May 2011 the family provided her with Mr Turner’s date of birth and
address. On Monday 23 May 2011
she contacted the CSA and her written objection
was received by the CSA on 27 May 2011. Ms Newman did not make an objection
as it had been made clear to her by the CSA that, without further
information concerning Mr Turner’s whereabouts, her application
be accepted.
Newman is recorded as having contacted the CSA on at least three occasions after
the decision of 15 December 2010: on 24 February
2011, 1 March 2011 and on 23
May 2011. There was more than a six month delay between the initial application
having been made on
2 June 2010 and the eventual refusal decision on 15 December
2010. During that time there were numerous contacts and discussions
Newman regarding the matter. The CSA also made unsuccessful investigations of
its own concerning Mr Turner.
was made very clear to Ms Newman that without further information the CSA could
do nothing. Advice to that effect was given by
the CSA on a number of occasions.
After the decision was made, Ms Newman made further attempts to obtain that
information. When it
was received she contacted the CSA on the next working day.
The Tribunal is quite satisfied that Ms Newman has a reasonable explanation
the delay and has not rested on her rights.
Merits of the
with the information it now has, the CSA would be required to allow Ms
Newman’s objection and accept the application for
an administrative
assessment from 2 June 2010. Indeed, a CSA filenote dated 15 December 2010,
written shortly before the decision
was made, suggests that there were further
actions that the CSA should have taken to establish Mr Turner’s identity
making its decision. Those further actions do not appear to have been
taken. The merits of this objection are strongly in support
of the exercise of
the discretion to extend time.
Potential prejudice to Mr
Turner will not be placed at a disadvantage in terms of his ability to respond
to the objection were the extension allowed. No
evidentiary difficulties have
been caused by the expiry of time.
is true that, in the event that the extension of time was granted and then the
objection successful, Mr Turner would be put at
a disadvantage in that he would
have to pay arrears of child support. However, that is not prejudice directly
arising as a result
of the grant of an extension of time. It is rather related
to the merits of Ms Newman’s case. Strong merit should actually
grant of an extension of time.
it is Mr Turner’s own actions that have delayed the matter. Ms Newman
advised that she had been seeking Mr Turner’s
address and details from his
family for some time prior to June 2010. She said that the family had spoken to
Mr Turner and were waiting
for him to make contact with her. Eventually the
family decided that enough time had passed and gave that information themselves.
This is consistent with the comment on
following the supply of
the details in question: ‘[name removed] says sorry it took so long we
were hoping he would contact
you himself...’
is apparent that there were protracted court proceedings to establish Mr
Turner’s paternity of Megan (documents in relation
to which are to be
found in Exhibit 1). Mr Turner did not file a defence in those proceedings and
did not make an appearance. Ms
Newman advised that Mr Turner is required to sign
Megan’s birth certificate and has failed to do so. He has made no contact
with Megan and has not spoken to Ms Newman since she advised him she was
Tribunal finds that Mr Turner has been actively avoiding attending to issues
relating to his child, including the payment of child
support. In the event that
Mr Turner is required to pay arrears it will do no more than ensure that he does
what he should have done
some time ago, and, as Ms Newman has noted, it will not
achieve that end entirely as he will only be required to pay child support
2 June 2010.
Prejudice to the public
has seen fit to set a 28 day time limit for the lodgement of objections so that
parents (and the CSA) can act with certainty
as to the outcome when the
objection period has elapsed. That said, aside from the general principle, there
is no other apparent
prejudice to the public present in this case. It is not a
factor that will play a particularly significant part in the Tribunal’s
consideration.
allow Mr Turner to benefit from his decision to ignore his child support
responsibilities would be to work an injustice. The Tribunal
has no hesitation
in finding that an extension of time should be granted in the case. The decision
under review will be set aside.
September 2011 the Tribunal decided to set aside the decision under review and
substitute a new decision that an extension of
time is to be
This means the application is
successful.
Presiding Member
September 2011
The publication of Social Security Appeals Tribunal child support
decisions is authorised under
subsections 16(2AB)
(2AC) of the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act
Personal particulars of parties to an appeal and their children are
removed to protect their privacy. Names used in all published
decisions are
pseudonyms. Reasons for decisions are published in full (with any information
which may identify involved individuals
to a member of the public removed) to
ensure that the full context and basis for the decision can be understood. The
Social Security
Appeal's Tribunal's decisions in relation to child support
matters demonstrate the application of the Child Support legislation to
individual circumstances of the case being decided. Different fact situations
or subsequent changes to legislation may result
in different outcomes.
The CSA reviews all SSAT decisions to identify opportunities to improve
its services and ensure its processes and policies are robust
and accurate. The
CSA publishes further information about SSAT decisions on their website
www.csa.gov.au/publications/1313.aspx#ssat
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (870 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter