CSR Building Products Ltd v United States Gypsum Company [2025] APO 26 (11 August 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
PATENT OFFICE
CSR Building Products Ltd v United States Gypsum
[2025] APO 26
Patent Application: 2021229169
Title: Composite Gypsum Board and Methods Related Thereto
Patent Applicant: United States Gypsum Company
Opponent: CSR Building
Products Ltd.
Delegate: K. Wagg
Decision Date: 11 August
Hearing Date: 6 January 2025 (written submissions)
Catchwords:
– section 59 opposition to the grant of a
patent – divisional case where parent was also opposed – lack of
sufficiency
– lack of support – construction of strength enhancing
starch – novelty and inventive step not made out –
costs awarded.
Representation: Patent attorneys for the Applicant: Argon IP Advisory Pty Ltd
Patent attorneys for the Opponent: Griffith Hack
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Application: 2021229169
Title: Composite Gypsum Board and Methods Related Thereto
Patent Applicant: United States Gypsum Company
Date of Decision: 11 August 2025
The Opposition has been
successful. The claims lack a clear enough and complete enough disclosure under
s 40(2)(a) and lack support
under s 40(3). The Opponent has not discharged its
burden to prove the grounds of novelty and inventive step on the balance of
probabilities.
Costs are awarded against the Applicant according to
Schedule 8.
Subject to appeal, I provide the Applicant two months to
file suitable amendments.
REASONS FOR DECISION
application number 2021229169 (the
Opposed Application
Specification
) was filed on 8 September 2021 by United States Gypsum
the Applicant
The application is a divisional
application. The parent is 2016284331, which was filed through the PCT as
PCT/US2016/038737 which
claims priority from a series of US priority documents.
The earliest priority date claimed is 24 June 2015. The Opposed Application
has two sibling applications, 2021229170 and 2021229171, which have both lapsed
after failing to gain acceptance. The nibling
application, 2024201220—a
divisional of 2021229171, has not been examined. I note that the parent
application was the subject
to an opposition whose decision is CSR Building
Products Limited v United States Gypsum Company
[2024] APO 1
application was examined and advertised as accepted by the Commissioner on 5
October 2023. CSR Building Products Ltd (the
) filed a notice of
opposition to grant on 22 December 2023 under section 59 of the
This decision concerns
the opposition to grant under section 59 (this
The Grounds of Opposition
Statement of Grounds and Particulars (the
) was filed on 22 March 2024
and identified all of the available grounds of opposition. Amendments to the SGP
were allowed on 14 August
2024. The Applicant did not file evidence in answer
nor request to be heard in relation to the opposition. The Opponent was heard
written submissions. In the Opponent’s submissions, only the grounds of
lack of a clear enough and complete enough disclosure,
lack of support and lack
of novelty and inventive step were pressed.
Onus and Standard of Proof
onus lies with the Opponent to satisfy me that a ground of opposition exists on
the balance of probabilities.
am satisfied, then I may refuse the Opposed
Application.
evidence in support comprises the following declarations:
Mr Steven Sucech
SS-1 to SS-19
Dr Dylan Riessen
noted above no evidence in answer was filed, and accordingly there is no
evidence in reply.
The Specification
commencing to construe the specification, I note what Middleton J said about
approaching patent specifications in
Eli Lilly v Apotex Pty
"It is well settled that the Court should, from the outset, approach the task
of patent construction with a generous measure of common
sense. The Court must
place itself in the position of a person skilled in the relevant art, being the
subject matter of the patent.
From this perspective, the patent is to be read as
a whole, in the context of the specification and in light of the prevailing
general knowledge and state of the relevant art at the priority
properly construe the specification, it is essential to obtain an idea of the
technology the invention relates to and obtain a
picture of the person skilled
in the art. I will therefore review the background.
specification relates to gypsum boards or panels. These panels are said to be
well-known in a general sense and are made of gypsum
(calcium sulfate dihydrate)
set in a core which is sandwiched between two cover sheets such as paper. These
boards are used in dry
wall and may include a denser layer of gypsum (skim coat)
on either side of the core usually at the paper-core
manufacturing of the boards stucco is made by mixing the calcine gypsum (calcium
sulfate hemihydrate or anhydrate) with water
and other ingredients. The stucco
is painted onto the paper, with an optional skim coat, and then dried. It is the
specific hydration
of the calcined gypsum that enables the formation of the
interlocking matrix of set gypsum. The drying step is often said to use
such as in a kiln, to remove un-interlocked
Driving off the excess water
with heat is said to be inefficient in the
specification.
Another challenge is
said to be reducing the weight of the gypsum board while maintaining strength.
Strength of the board is said
to be measured using nail pull resistance,
sometimes just called nail pull.
this background in mind I will now characterize the person skilled in the art.
The Person Skilled in the Art (PSA)
concept of the PSA has long been considered by the courts when construing patent
specifications. Finkelstein J described the PSA
with the following words in
“He is the person to whom the patent is addressed and who must construe
it. He is the person whose knowledge will determine
whether a patent is novel.
He is the person who will judge whether a patent is obvious.”
Finkelstein
J also cited Lord Diplock in
where he said the
PSA is likely to have a practical interest in the subject
“My Lords, a patent specification is a unilateral statement by the
patentee, in words of his own choosing, addressed to those
likely to have a
practical interest in the subject matter of his invention (i.e. ‘skilled
approach to the PSA having a practical interest in the subject matter was
approved by the Full Federal Court with Heerey, Emmett
and Dowsett JJ
“The uninventive but skilled worker is likely to have a practical
interest in the subject matter of the claimed
invention.”
J (when she was still on the Federal Court) added to this statement that the
person would be acquainted with the surrounding
circumstances of the art and
manufacture and may often work in the art with which the invention is
any art it is hard to find a skilled person whom I would comfortably call
uninventive, instead the PSA is an artificial construct
used as a tool of
analysis. This concept of using an artificial construct was articulated in
AstraZeneca
“The notional person is not an avatar for expert witnesses whose
testimony is accepted by the court. It is a pale shadow of
a real person –
a tool of analysis which guides the court in determining, by reference to expert
and other evidence, whether
an invention as claimed does not involve an
inventive step.”
Opponent’s declarant in this opposition is the same as that used in the
Parent Opposition, Mr Sucech. In the Parent Opposition
the delegate noted:
“Mr Sucech is a technical consultant providing technical assistance and
guidance in operations of gypsum board manufacturing
as well as developing new
gypsum formulations and additives. A significant portion of his experience
includes his employment with
the Applicant, during which time he developed and
implemented new products, formulation additives and processes. This is detailed
in Sucech #1 at
like the parent application, the field of the relates to gypsum boards. In the
Parent Opposition the delegate noted that:
“On the face of the specification, there is little doubt that the
notional person skilled in the art includes a person with
experience in making
gypsum boards, and in particular composite gypsum boards. Such persons would
have knowledge of the various ingredients
and processes used in manufacturing
these boards. It is clear that the person skilled in the art would also need to
possess an understanding
of the effect of altering the ingredients or making
modifications to the manufacturing processes on the final product and properties
required for the product
considering the declarants the delegate in the Parent Opposition
“I consider the person skilled in the art to include laboratory
technicians and plant engineers who, respectively, formulate
slurry compositions
and set up the production equipment to make gypsum boards. While these are the
critical members of the team of
persons skilled in the art, in the present case,
nothing turns on the inclusion or exclusion of the other additional members who
are involved in the production
divisional application is almost identical to the parent, although there are
some differences in the claims, I see no reason
to depart from the
Delegate’s findings in the Parent opposition on the person skilled in the
art. I therefore consider that
Mr Sucech has a practical interest in the field
and is in a position to provide evidence as to what the PSA would have known or
The Invention Described in the Specification
outlining the background the specification provides a section entitled
“brief summary”. In this summary the specification
provide a composite gypsum board comprising a board core made from at least
stucco, water and optionally an enhancing
additive. There is also said to be a
concentrated layer on one side. With the concentrated layer said to contain the
enhancing additive,
water and a cementitious material such as
description of the gypsum board is easily visualised with reference to FIG. 1
which is introduced at [0015]. I have reproduced
FIG. 1 below, the gypsum core
is the central part 24 and the concentrated layer is 18 which sits on top of it.
The top and bottom
faces are covered with paper sheets, 12 and 30. Between these
layers are the interfaces, such was the paper-core interface 28 and
paper-concentrated layer interface 16 and 20.
concentrated layer 18 is said to contain a higher weight percentage of the
enhancing additive.
The presence
of this additive is said to provide one or more efficiencies in the process and
concentrating the additive in a smaller
section (the concentrated layer) reduces
the overall use of enhancing additives in the board. This is said to maintain
the strength
of the board and may give a lighter board
Having the enhancing
additive in the concentrated layer is also said to be beneficial when the
enhancing additive is something that
requires water in the slurry, such as when
pregelatinized starches are used. By reducing the amount of enhancing additive
core, the water demand in the core slurry can be reduced therefore not
requiring as much heating to drive off the excess
Opponent has highlighted the following discussion on the enhancing agent:
“The enhancing additive provides desired strength properties....
Examples of suitable enhancing additives help provide strength,
such as starch,
polyvinyl alcohol, boric acid, gypsum-cement, nano-cellulose, micro-cellulose,
or any combination thereof. The use
of the singular term enhancing additive
herein is used for convenience but will be understood to encompass the
further adding that when the enhancing agent is starch specifically the
specification states:
“With respect to starch, any suitable strength enhancing starch can be
used, including hydroxyalkylated starches such as hydroxyethylated
hydroxypropylated starch, or a combination thereof, uncooked starches, or
pregelatinized starches, which are generally preferred
over acid-modifying
migrating starches which generally provide paper-core bond enhancement but not
core strength enhancement. However,
if desired, the acid-modifying migrating
starch can be included with the enhancing additive in some
embodiments.”
starches are also discussed in further detail:
“Cooked starches are sometimes referred to as pregelatinized
starches... Preferred starches, whether cooked or uncooked, are
different than
acid-modified migratory starches which do not confer the same strength
properties and are used in the art for paper-core
bond enhancement as they
migrate to the paper-core interface due to their smaller chain
Opponent submitted that the above paragraphs teach that pregelatinized starches
are preferred over acid-modifying starches and
that acid-modifying starches
provide paper-core bond enhancement—which the Opponent submits is a form
of strength enhancement.
Furthermore, the Opponent argues that these passages
teach that acid-modifying starches can be included “as part of”
enhancing additive”. They are said to be “part of” because
they do not provide core strength enhancement but
instead provide paper-core
bond enhancement.
specification contains 10 examples. In example 1 three boards are made, two of
which have a concentrated layer, with the thickness
of the concentrated layer in
board 2 being 0.035 in and the thickness in board 3 being 0.050 in. The boards
are then tested for nail
pull resistance with board 3 having the greatest pull
resistance at 76.3 lbf followed by board 2 at 70.9 lbf and board 1—with
concentrated layer having the lowest pull resistance at 60.2 lbf. The enhancing
additive used in the concentrated layer is pregelatinized
corn starch.
2 tests the effects of starches on strength in gypsum disks as a representation
of the concentrated layer. The discs were
prepared by making a stucco slurry
containing the starch and heated at 300 F (149 C) for 60 mins followed by drying
at 43 C for 48
hours. The final discs had dimensions of 4 in and a thickness of
0.5 in. Strength was tested by measuring both compressive strength
and nail pull
resistance. The nail pull resistance was said to have been tested in accordance
with ASTM 473-10 method B. The results
of this experiment are given in a table
which has been reproduced below. I note that many of the starches used have a
nail pull resistance
comparable to or higher than the pregelatinized corn flour
(2B), see last column.
Opponent noted that these disks are not a full composite gypsum board as they do
not have the core or outer paper layers. The
Opponent also noted that these
disks are thicker than the concentrated layers actually used in the composite
gypsum boards by a factor
of ~5-25. Finally the Opponent also noted that the
drying step of 43 C over 48 hours differs from commercial production in that in
a commercial dryer such as a kiln with high temperatures where up to 315 °C
can be used.
Opponent asserted that the specification does not state that the starches tested
in table 3 would themselves enable the pull test
to be met, or explain how that
could be done for composite boards. They highlighted the following
“In embodiments where starches are used in the concentrated layer, this
example illustrates that both cooked and uncooked starches
have benefit as
enhancing additive for improving strength as shown
the improvement in
performance on strength...
The improvement in strength seen in the disks shown from both
cooked and uncooked starches, in accordance with various embodiments
invention, indicates the utility of these starches in the concentrated layer of
a gypsum wallboard in accordance with some
embodiments because the desired
starches provide extra bonding between gypsum crystals for strength improvement.
The starches were
effective to improve strength, thereby suggesting lack of
migration, contrary to the case with a migratory acid-modified starch.
Therefore, the example shows that the starches would be effective in a
concentrated
note that the above passage points to the lack of migration of the acid-modified
starch in this example. This supports the opponent’s
argument that drying
at 43 C over 48 hours rather than in a kiln is different to commercial boards. I
also note the following passage
which does appear to suggest that the improved
strength is the result of starch:
“As seen from Table 3, the uncooked and cooked starches showed
considerable improvement in strength over the comparative composition
the starch, with many of the values being more than about 50% higher than the
strength of the control without starch, more
than about 75% higher than the
strength of the control without starch, or more than about 100% more than the
strength of the control
remaining examples 3-10 all test composite boards. Of note in all of these
examples is that the only starch used is pregelatinized
starch. In example 3,
fibre glass is added to the composition and in examples 4-10 the benefits of the
concentrated layer being present
in the board is tested with various stucco
formulations, as previously noted all with various amounts of pregelatinized
the enhancing agent.
Opposed Application ends in 23 claims. Of these claims claim 1, 12 and 17 are
independent.
approach to the construction of claims was discussed by Bennett J in
Lundbeck A/S v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
“the words in a claim should be read through the eyes of the skilled
addressee in the context in which they appear ... while
the claims define the
monopoly claimed in the words of the patentee's choosing, the specification
should be read as a whole ... it
is not permissible to read into a claim an
additional integer or limitation to vary or qualify the claim by reference to
of the specification ... terms in the claim which are unclear may be
defined or clarified by reference to the body of the specification”
approach of reading the specification as whole through the PSA's eyes with the
Common general knowledge (CGK) in mind provides
context and the intention behind
what is meant.
This is commonly
referred to as a purposive
construction.
1, 12 and 17 are independent with claims 2-11 being dependent on claim 1, claims
13-16 being dependent on claim 12 and claims
18-21 being dependent on claim 17.
Claims 22 and 23 are dependent on claims 1-21. Claim 1 reads as follows:
A composite gypsum board, comprising
a) a board core comprising set gypsum formed from a first slurry comprising at
least water, stucco, and optionally, a strength enhancing
starch, the first
slurry having a first water-stucco ratio, the core having a first density, the
core defining first and second core
faces in opposing relation;
b) a concentrated layer formed from a second slurry comprising at least water,
stucco, and the strength enhancing starch, the second
slurry having a second
water-stucco ratio, the concentrated layer disposed in bonding relation to the
first core face, the concentrated
layer having a dry density of at least about
1.1 times higher than the dry density of the board core, wherein:
(i) the amount of strength enhancing starch in the first slurry by weight of the
stucco is less than the amount of strength enhancing
starch in the second slurry
by weight of the stucco;
(ii) the board core has a thickness greater than the thickness of the
concentrated layer, the latter thickness being from 0.05 cm
to 0.23 cm;
(iii) the second water-stucco ratio is at least about 1.2 times higher than the
first water-stucco ratio; and
(iv) the board has a nail pull resistance according to ASTM C473-10, Method B
of at least 30.8 kg or 302.48 N.
claim is directed to a composite gypsum board, which has both a core and a
concentrated layer where the concentrated layer contains
a strength enhancing
starch. These features are shared with the claims of the parent and were
construed by the delegate in the Parent
Opposition.
key difference between the claims in this opposition and that of the parent is
that the current claims require the concentrated
layer contains a strength
enhancing starch, whereas the parent only required an “enhancing
Strength enhancing starch
Opponent submitted that the term “strength enhancing starch” is
“a starch ‘that is effective to increase
the dry strength of the
composite gypsum board relative to the strength of the composite board without
the ingredient such as starch’,
thus providing ‘desired strength
properties’.” I note that the specification discusses starches under
the enhancing
additive definition. The parent’s sole independent claim
referred to enhancing agents more broadly, which include a large number
alternatives. In this case the claims refer to a strength enhancing starch. The
specification does not provide a definition of
a strength enhancing starch but
does state:
“With respect to starch, any suitable strength enhancing starch can be
used, including hydroxyalkylated starches such as hydroxyethylated
hydroxypropylated starch, or a combination thereof, uncooked starches, or
pregelatinized starches, which are generally preferred
over acid-modifying
migrating starches which generally provide paper-core bond enhancement but not
core strength enhancement. However,
if desired, the acid-modifying migrating
starch can be included with the enhancing additive in some embodiments.
The starch can be cooked or uncooked. Uncooked starches are characterized as
being cold water insoluble and having a semi-crystalline
structure. Typically,
uncooked starches are obtained by wet milling and are not modified by heating
wet starch as in the case of
cooked starches. Cooked starches are characterized
by being cold water soluble and having a non-crystalline structure. Cooked
are prepared by heating wet starch, and can be prepared, e.g., by
extrusion techniques. See, e.g., co-pending US patent applications
14/494,547;
14/044,582; and 13/835,002, which extrusion techniques are incorporated by
Cooked starches are sometimes referred to as pregelatinized starches, because
the crystalline structure of the starch granules melts,
and results in starch
gelatinization, which is characterized by the disappearance of the birefringence
under a microscope with a
polarized light. Preferred starches, whether cooked or
uncooked, are different than acid-modified migratory starches which do not
confer the same strength properties and are used in the art for paper-core bond
enhancement as they migrate to the paper-core interface
due to their smaller
chain lengths. The acid-modified migratory starches have minimal molecular
weight, typically below about 6,000
Daltons. In some embodiments, preferred
starches in accordance with embodiments of the disclosure have higher molecular
e.g., at least about 30,000 Daltons.”
outlined above these are not preferred since they do migrate when heated and
instead enhance the bond at the interface with the
paper. Mr Sucech appeared to
consider that such starches were not strength enhancing:
“I also note that each of the claims of the Patent requires a
‘strength enhancing starch’. I understand from the
paragraphs of the
Patent I have set out at my [96] above, that while pregelatinized starches are
generally preferred”
as strength enhancing starches,
any suitable strength enhancing starch can be used
the starch needs to be “
effective to increase the dry strength of the
composite gypsum board
”. I understand for a starch to be a
‘suitable strength enhancing starch’ the starch should not be a
starch that
migrates during production of the plasterboard (i.e. during drying),
though how the Patent defines a migrating starch is not clear
one turns to the examples, and specifically example 2, it appears that the disks
are heated in a manner which does not cause
this migration. Indeed it would
appear that the starches used in example 2, including the acid-modified
starches, would all be considered
strength enhancing starches in the sense that
all of them appeared to show better nail pull resistance compared to the disk
without starch. Sucech notes that:
“It is surprising to me that no board line examples have been given in
which a starch other than pregelatinized starch is used
as the strength
enhancing starch. This is strange, especially given that pregelatinized starch
was apparently not the best performing
starch according to the results given in
lab example 2, which I discuss in more detail below. If the other starches of
such as the acid-modified starches, also performed well in board line
trials, I would have expected such results to also be provided.
This suggests to
me that pregelatinized starch is the only strength enhancing starch that
performed well in composite boards, produced
on a real board
my view, Mr Sucech is speculating here that the starches of example 2, other
than the pregelatinized starch, were tried in a composite
gypsum board and were
unsuccessful. Mr Sucech does, however, provide some later explanations as to why
he thinks this might be the
case and it is because of the atypical conditions
used in example 2:
“It is surprising to me that, despite many of the different starches
apparently producing higher nail pulls than pregelatinized
starch, none of these
other starches appear to have been used in any of the other Examples of the
Patent. The only starch that appears
to have been tested on a board line is
pregelatinized starch. Again,
this suggests to me that the higher nail pull
results given for the disks containing starches other than pregelatinized
starch, are
likely attributable to the particular conditions employed in example
2, which are not representative of a board line. If these results
generalised to a board line, acid-modified starches would be greatly preferred
over pregelatinized starches, as they are
cheaper and impact the process less
(e.g. require less water and have less impact on foaming).
However, all of
the remaining examples in the Patent (and importantly all the board line
examples) use pregelatinized starch instead.
I can only assume that the
acid-modified starches were not used as ‘strength enhancing
starches’ in the board line trials,
because acid-modified starches readily
migrate under commercial drying conditions and do not contribute to core
strength improvement
in composite boards.
I note that no indicative board
line compositions are given for boards containing any of the starches of example
2, other than pregelatinized
my emphasis).
technical reasons are also provided by Mr Sucech as to why the conditions in
example 2 are different to those used in examples
“The foam used in example 2 (PFM-33) is also different to that of the
board line examples (examples 4-10 use a mixture of CS230
and Polystep 25).
Given the wide variety of starches used and the large amount of starch in
example 2, this would have a significant
impact on the foaming properties,
particularly for the pregelatinized starches which are known to be mild
defoamers (as I have stated
above at my [50] to [70]). This would be another
variable that would need to be assessed for the different starches, if they were
to be used as ‘strength enhancing starches’ in real composite
Sucech then concludes:
“Given the atypical drying conditions used in example 2, which are very
different to what would be used to produce composite
gypsum boards on a board
line as I have noted at least at [275], I do not agree with the statement at
[0151] of the Patent. Starch
migration under the conditions used for example 2,
particularly for acid-modified starches, cannot be generalised to composite
boards under commercial conditions. I would expect completely different
results on a board line. Further, the composition for the
core and the
concentrated layer would likely need to be altered to accommodate each different
starch, as each starch is likely to
have different effects on water demand,
foaming, setting time,
the specification’s own discussion on acid-modified starches and the
evidence from Mr Sucech, acid-modified starches are
not within the scope of a
strength enhancing starch. They would not act in the same way in a composite
board as they do in the discs
of example 2. Given the fact that acid-modified
starches are known to migrate through the stucco at high temperatures when
boards are being made, they act differently to strength enhancing
starches and cannot be considered to fall within the scope of the
are more starches used in example 2 and in the field than just acid-modified
starches and PG starches that could be within the
scope of the term
“strength enhancing starches”. Mr Sucech was asked about what he
would consider this term to mean
more generally:
“Griffith Hack asked me if I would consider any of the starches to be
‘strength enhancing starches’, based on CSR’s
understand from the Patent that a ‘strength enhancing starch’ is a
starch which, when included in the disk,
increases the strength of the disk
compared to the disk without the starch. As such, I consider a ‘strength
enhancing starch’
would significantly increase the nail pull of the disk.
Based on this understanding of a ‘strength enhancing starch’,
would consider both Manildra and Bunge pregelatinized starches to be strength
enhancing starches. This is because the inclusion
of each of these starches in
the disks increased the nail pull, compared to the disk with no
Sucech went on to say:
consider any of Gemgel S90, LC211, SCAC 0302
Tapioca or Clinton 277 starches to be strength enhancing starches. This is
because the
presence of these starches in the disks did not appear to affect the
nail pull of the disk. Notably, each of these starches are examples
acid-modified starches, which I would expect to substantially migrate under
typical commercial board making conditions and not
contribute to core
also note that Mr Sucech also said that:
“Based on these results, I maintain my view that ‘strength
enhancing starch’ as referred to in the Patent should
pregelatinized starch.”
I consider that strength enhancing starches is broader than the one
pregelatinized starch used in examples 4-10, furthermore
it has been chosen as a
term to be pursued in this divisional and I note that claims limited to
pregelatinized starches have been
granted on the parent. The term strength
enhancing starch does not include migratory starches, such as acid-modified
starches. I
consider that hydroxyalkylated starches such as hydroxyethylated or
hydroxypropylated starch, or a combination thereof, uncooked
starches, cooked
starches, including pregelatinized starches would be within the scope of this
12 reads as follows:
A composite gypsum board comprising:
a) board core comprising set gypsum formed from at least water, stucco, and
optionally, a strength enhancing starch, the core having a dry density, the
coredefining a first core face; and
b) a concentrated layer formed from at least water, stucco, and the strength
enhancing starch, the concentrated layer disposed in
bonding relation to the
first core face;
(i) the concentrated layer is formed from at least about 1.2 times the
strength enhancing starch than in forming the board core;
(ii) the dry
density of the core is about 30 pcf (about 481 kg/m
(iii) the concentrated layer has a dry density at least 1.1 times higher than
the board core dry density; and
(iv) the board has a nail pull resistance
according to ASTM C473-10, Method B of at least 30.8 kg or 302.48 N.
12 is an independent claim with similar features to claim 1. It is also to a
composite gypsum board with a core and a concentrated
layer. This claim also
refers to a strength enhancing starch which is present in the concentrated layer
but only optional in the
board core. I note that the concentrated layer and core
do not refer to a slurry but instead are formed from at least water, stucco
if present, the strength enhancing starch.
claim also defines the dry density of the core which is said to be about 30 pcf
(about 481 kg/m
. Board core density is discussed at paragraph
[0064], Mr Sucech said that back calculating the board core density from other
is provided.
that the exemplified densities are from about 25 pcf (example 10) to about 30
pcf (example 4).
17 reads as follows:
A composite gypsum board, comprising
a) board core comprising set gypsum formed from at least water, stucco, and
optionally, a strength enhancing starch, the core having
a density, the core
defining a first core face;
b) a concentrated layer formed from at least water, stucco, and the strength
enhancing starch, the concentrated layer disposed in
bonding relation to the
first core face, the starch concentrated layer having a density of at least
density of the board core; wherein:
(i) the concentrated layer is formed from a greater amount of the strength
enhancing starch than the amount used in forming the board
(ii) the concentrated layer has a Young's modulus that is at least about 1.5
times higher than a Young's modulus of the board core;
(iii) the board has a nail pull resistance according to ASTM C473-10, Method
B, of at least about 68 lbs of force (about 302 N).
claim 1 and claim 12, claim 17 is to a composite gypsum board with a core and
concentrated layer. Like claim 12 these layers
do not need to be formed from a
slurry. The difference between claim 17 and claim 12 is that instead of
requiring a dry density of
the core, claim 17 requires the concentrated layer to
have a Young’s modulus that is at least about 1.5 times higher than that
of the board core. This feature is discussed at paragraph [0084], Mr Sucech
noted that he could not see this feature measured in
any of the examples but
“I understand that the Young’s modulus of a material tends to
increase proportionally with the hardness of a material.
I would therefore
expect the concentrated layer to inherently have a higher Young’s modulus
than the core, given its purpose
in providing additional strength to the
composite board and the fact that it has a higher density than the core.
However, it is not
clear to me from the Patent how to make a board in which the
Young’s modulus of the concentrated layer is at least 1.5 times
the board core.”
Section 40(2)(a)
amendments brought about by Raising the Bar introduced the following piece of
legislation under s 40 (2):
“A complete specification
(a) disclose the invention in a manner which is clear enough and complete
enough for the invention to be performed by a person skilled
in the relevant
Merck Sharp & Dohme Corporation v Wyeth LLC (No
Burley J considered the law of
and also considered s
40(2)(a). His Honour consulted the Explanatory Memorandum, which discussed how
the change brought about by
Raising the Bar was intended to align the Australian
disclosure requirements with those
His Honour then
considered s 40(2)(a) in comparison to the EPC and UK Act. He noted that s
40(2)(a) is expressed in terms that are
virtually the same as in s 14(3) of the
but noted that the
highest courts of the UK have emphasised the influential effect of the EPO
Technical Board. I note that his approach
is consistent with the approach taken
by this office in
CSR Building Products Limited v United States Gypsum
involves the following three steps:
(1) Construe the claims to
determine the scope of the invention as claimed,
(2) construe the description to determine what it discloses to the person
skilled in the art, and
(3) decide whether the specification provides an enabling disclosure of all
the things that fall within the scope of the
deciding the third question the delegate in
included the
following two questions:
(4) Is it plausible that the invention can be worked across the full scope of
the invention?
(5) Can the invention be performed across the full scope of the claims
without undue experimentation?
Cytec Industries Inc. v Nalco
Burley J cited the
above office decisions and confirmed that this was the correct approach with the
Full Federal Court in
confirming this
Opponent has argued that the claims should be limited to a pregelatinized
starch, which would mirror the outcome in the parent.
They argue it in two
contradicting ways, one being that the acid-modified starches are within the
scope of the claims, and these
are not enabled, and the other is that the claims
should be limited to pregelatinized starches because this is used in examples
Breadth of “strength enhancing
Opponent has made similar arguments to those made in the Parent Opposition. In
the Parent Opposition the delegate was considering
the term “enhancing
additive”. This term does not include the word “strength” and
furthermore, “additive”
is clearly broader than a
“starch” as currently claimed. Nonetheless it is useful to consider
the delegate’s decision
in that case. Relevantly the delegate found:
“I consider that the specification, at best, provides a starting point
for further research to be conducted by a person skilled
in the art. However,
changing the enhancing agent from pregelatinized starch is not a simple matter
of substituting like for like.
Mr Sucech stressed the impact of changing the
enhancing additive in the slurries in Sucech #1 at [116]:
“Changing the compositions provided in the examples, to replace
pregelatinized starch with one of the other claimed enhancing
(different starches, polyvinyl alcohol, boric acid, gypsum-cement,
nanocellulose, and/or microcellulose), may necessitate
a complete reformulation
of the slurry composition and changes to the processing parameters for the
boards. This is because different
additives can have different effects on slurry
fluidity, water demand, drying conditions, setting time etc.”
many other enhancing additives are discussed along with the different starches
and it could be argued that changing from a pregelatinized
starch to another
strength enhancing starch is a far less cumbersome exercise. However, the
Applicant choose not to file evidence
in this opposition and therefore there is
no evidence for me to weigh that possibility. Instead I only have the evidence
of Mr Sucech
who explains:
“[C]hanging a parameter such as the type of strength enhancing starch
or even the amount of strength enhancing starch, is not
necessarily
straightforward. This is because so many aspects of the board core/concentrated
layer composition interact e.g. the type
of additive, the amount of water
required, the effect on foaming, whether a dispersant is needed, etc. As the
composition changes,
the conditions required to produce the slurry, set and dry
the board etc. also change. It would take substantial trial and error
skilled person to successfully substitute the pregelatinized starch used in
examples 1 and 3 to 10 with each of the different
potential strength enhancing
starches noted in the Patent (such as hydroxyalkylated starches, other uncooked
starches, acid-modified
starches, etc.) and/or change the amount of strength
enhancing starch in a board so as to achieve a lightweight board with the
strength properties, according to the
Mr Sucech has said it would take substantial trial and error to substitute the
pregelatinized starches with another strength
enhancing starch as many other
factors are affected, such as foam and the amount of water.
2 does test a range of starches in a disk which are purportedly representative
of the concentration layer. However, as I have
noted above the conditions used
include drying at low temperatures. This clearly affected the migratory
with them appearing to
be strength enhancing when they are not. Mr Sucech also noted the presence of
STMP and the long drying time
would have allowed for greater crosslinking. Mr
Sucech also noted that:
“The strength results reported for the disks, certainly for those
containing migrating starches with STMP, would have benefited
unrealistic drying conditions of 110°F for 48 hours. I do not believe that
these results would be generalisable to
composite gypsum boards, particularly
for the wide range of starches suggested, without significant alterations to the
formulations
for the composite boards.”
these appeared to provide greater nail pull resistance, they are unlikely to be
transferable to the composite boards as claimed.
Furthermore, there is no
evidence to the contrary that other starches would be easily enabled.
Opponent has provided compelling evidence as to why the conditions of example 2
would not be directly transferable to a composite
board of the current claims
and their expert has said that “substantial trial and error” would
be needed to substitute
the pregelatinized starches in examples 1 and 3 to 10.
In my view, the question of whether or not this “substantial trial and
error” would amount to an undue burden could have been argued by the
Applicant with either evidence or through submissions.
Given that the Applicant
has chosen not to file either I am left to decide solely based on the evidence
in front of me, that of the
Opponent. On the balance of probabilities I consider
that the “substantial trial and error” amounts to an undue burden
and the specification lacks a clear enough and complete enough disclosure for
composite boards made with strength enhancing starches
other than the
pregelatinized starches.
Optional strength enhancing starch
in the board core
Opponent argued that the claims do not require a strength enhancing starch in
the board core. They asserted that the patent application
does not provide clear
enough and complete enough disclosure of a gypsum board where a no strength
enhancing starch is used in the
board core that meets the nail pull
requirements. This argument was made in the Parent Opposition where the delegate
found that it
would not be an undue burden for a person skilled in the art to
prepare a composite board as claimed without an enhancing additive
The Opponent has not
provided any evidence in this opposition that would make me consider that making
a core without a strength enhancing
starch would be an undue burden. It follows
that I do not consider this argument to succeed.
acid-modified starches
Opponent has argued that if the strength enhancing starch encompasses the
acid-modified starch, then the claims would be invalid.
The example experiments
run by the Opponent in SS-18, indeed show there would appear to be an issue if
acid modified starches were
used. However, based on the evidence of Mr Sucech,
I have construed the term “strength enhancing starch” not to extend
to the acid-modified starches. Therefore, this alternative argument does not
require further treatment as it is not within the scope
of the claims.
Separate slurries
Opponent argued that the construction of claims 12 to 23 is that these claims do
not require the composite gypsum board to be
made from separate slurries. Their
argument focuses on the use of the words “forming” used when the
specification is
describing how the core is made. This argument was also made in
the Parent Opposition, in that decision the delegate found that since
two distinct layers in the composite board, that being the concentrated layer
and the core, nothing turns on how the slurries
I agree with the delegate
in that decision. Both the independent claims 12 and 17 require that the
concentrated layer has more strength
enhancing starch than the board core. Even
if a single slurry were made at first adjustments would need to be made to the
concentrated
layer. There is no evidence that any particularly way of making
the boards with these would be an undue burden. Based on the evidence
submissions I do not see how this argument can succeed for lack of a clear
enough and complete enough disclosure.
Thickness of the
concentrated layer
again, the Opponent pressed this argument in the parent, and once again, there
are no new evidence or submissions that would
warrant a different outcome. The
claims are to a large range of thickness of the concentrated layer, 0.05 cm to
0.23 cm, however,
in the examples the thickness of the concentrated layer range
from 0.0635 cm to 0.1016 cm. I do not consider that it would be an
undue burden
for a person skilled in the art to adjust the thickness of the concentrated
layer. The upper limit of 0.23 cm is said
to be unusually
but not that such a
thickness would be an undue burden to make. This does not cause a lack of clear
enough and complete enough disclosure.
Young’s modulus
of the board core compared to the concentration layer
Young’s modulus is a mechanical property of a material. The thrust of the
Opponent’s argument is that this property
has not been measured in the
examples. Mr Sucech stated that since it is not measured, it is not clear how it
is done for the individual
“Integer e defines that the concentrated layer has a
“Young’s modulus that is at least about 1.5 times higher than
Young’s modulus of the board core”. I do not consider this to be
exemplified in the Patent. The Young’s modulus
is not measured in any of
the examples. Thus, it is not clear to me how to make a board that satisfies
this requirement. Furthermore,
no explanation of how to measure the
Young’s modulus of the concentrated layer in isolation of the composite
board is provided
anywhere in the Patent. To my knowledge, the Young’s
modulus (or modulus of elasticity) is not commonly measured for gypsum
and certainly not for isolated concentrated or hardfacing
it may be uncommon to measure this feature in gypsum boards, this does not
appear to be an undue burden for the PSA to put
into practice. The
Opponent’s submissions did not focus on the issue of measuring the
Young’s modulus of the layers separately.
Given that I consider the board
to be made of distinct layers I am not convinced making a piece of concentrated
layer and a piece
of board core and measuring the Young’s modulus would be
an undue burden.
Conclusion on subsection 40(2) paragraph
is no evidence that a PSA could use the teachings from the specification, such
as those of example 2, to make composite gypsum
boards having the required pull
strength using starches other than pregelatinized starches. It would be an
undue burden to work
the invention using starches beyond these. The term
“strength enhancing starch” is used in independent claims 1, 12
17, none of the dependent claims narrow to the use of only pregelatinized
starches, consequently, all of the claims lack a clear
enough and complete
enough disclosure.
Section 40(3)
amendments brought about by Raising the Bar introduced the following piece of
legislation under s 40 (3):
“The claim or claims must
be...supported by matter disclosed in the specification.”
J discussed the law of support in MSD. His Honour accepted the rationale
outlined in the CSR decision.
the Full Federal Court took the same
the delegate provided a three-step approach:
construe the claims to determine the scope of the invention as claimed,
construe the description to determine the technical contribution to the art,
(3) decide whether the claims are supported by the technical
contribution to the art.
technical contribution may be a general principle:
“if [the patentee] has disclosed a beneficial property which is common
to the class, [the patentee] will be entitled to a patent
for all products of
that class (assuming them to be new) even though [the patentee] has not himself
made more than one or two of
Opponent relied on their submissions on s 40(2)(a) for support but added that
the same reasoning applies where there is a lack
of a clear enough and complete
enough disclosure then it follows that the technical contribution to art is also
left wanting and
thus results in a lack of support. In many cases, the inquiries
into sufficiency and support are two sides of the same
the opposition to the parent the delegate found that the technical contribution
was limited to a gypsum board with pregelatinized
starch [132]:
“The Applicant’s contribution to the art resides in producing a
composite gypsum
board with a concentrated layer enhanced by pregelatinized starch. Although the
specification names other candidates for the enhancing
agent, given the varied
mechanisms for imparting strength and suggested quantities for each of the
alternatives, the specification
does not enable the full breadth of the
enhancing agents in the composite gypsum board.”
delegate then concluded that claims were not supported by stating at [138] and
“I agree with the Opponent that, despite the specification providing some
additional information on the alternative enhancing
agents at [0115]-[0118], the
claimed invention exceeds the technical contribution the specification makes to
the art. As noted in
CSR 2015 at [110], an important consideration when
considering support is whether the technical contribution is a general principle
or the specific examples in the specification. The contribution to the art made
by the present application resides in the use of
pregelatinized starch in the
concentrated layer, which forms part of the body of a composite gypsum board.
While the pregelatinized
starch may have been added for the purposes of
enhancing the concentrated layer, a broad term such as an enhancing agent does
constitute a principle of general application. In the absence of a principle
of general application, the specific use of pregelatinized
starch in the
composite gypsum boards is the Applicant’s contribution to the
that there is no new evidence that would support the technical contribution
including strength enhancing starches more broadly,
I have no reason to depart
from the decision above. Therefore the claims lack support.
Opponent also argued further points from s 40(2)(a), I have found that these did
not give rise to a lack of clear enough and complete
enough disclosure, it
follows that these points do not result in a lack of support.
Conclusion on support
claims lack support because the technical contribution relates to pregelatinized
starches and the scope of the claims extends
to other strength enhancing
starches. This issue is present in each of the independent claims 1, 12 and 17
and none of the dependent
claims narrow the board to use PG starch.
Consequently, all of the claims 1-23 lack support.
is a requirement of subsection 18(1) of the
that the invention, so
far as claimed in any claim, is novel. Subsection 7(1) states that an invention
is considered novel unless
it is not novel compared to prior art information.
then states that prior art information can be information made
publicly available in a single
well-established test for lack of novelty is the reverse infringement test. The
classic formulation of this test is that given
by Aickin J in
Meyers Taylor
Pty Ltd v Vicarr Industries Ltd
"The basic test for anticipation or want of novelty is the same as that for
infringement and generally one can properly ask oneself
whether the alleged
anticipation would, if the patent were valid, constitute an
infringement".
test is satisfied if the alleged anticipation discloses all the essential
features of the invention as
In reviewing a citation
one must look at the citation to determine what it tells the skilled reader to
do. Determining what is taught
or disclosed can require some treatment.
courts have often cited with approval the words of the UK Court of Appeal in the
General Tire
which provides guidance on assessing a disclosure for novelty. It is useful to
look at that discussion in full from pages 485-486:
“If the prior inventor's publication contains a clear description of, or
clear instructions to do or make, something that would
infringe the
patentee’s claim if carried out after the grant of the patentee's patent,
the patentee's claim will have been
shown to lack the necessary novelty, that is
to say, it will have been anticipated. The prior inventor, however, and the
may have approached the same device from different starting points and
may for this reason, or it may be for other reasons, have
so described their
devices that it cannot be immediately discerned from a reading of the language
which they have respectively used
that they have discovered in truth the same
device; but if carrying out the directions contained in the prior inventor's
publication
will inevitably result in something being made or done which, if the
patentee's patent were valid, would constitute an infringement
of the patentee's
claim, this circumstance demonstrates that the patentee's claim has in fact been
anticipated.
If, on the other hand, the prior publication contains a direction which is
capable of being carried out in a manner which would infringe
the patentee's
claim, but would be at least as likely to be carried out in a way which would
not do so, the patentee's claim will
not have been anticipated, although it may
fail on the ground of obviousness. To anticipate the patentee's claim the prior
publication
must contain clear and unmistakable directions to do what the
patentee claims to have invented. A signpost, however clear, upon the
the patentee's invention will not suffice. The prior inventor must be clearly
shown to have planted his flag at the precise
destination before the
(citations omitted).
General Tire,
the requirement for clear and unmistakable directions in
the prior publication is well known. However, it also states that if carrying
out the directions in the prior art leads inevitably to doing something within
the scope of the claim
then there will be a lack of novelty.
This inevitable consequence of carrying out the directions in the prior art
occurred in
Novozymes v
with Jessop J
providing the following guidance with Yates J and Greenwood J concurring:
“In my view, the
General Tire
approach, if taken at all, may be
taken only with respect to the whole of any claim asserted to have been
anticipated. The “precise
destination” at which the flag must have
been planted is one which includes every integer of the claim. The approach
in my view, be taken for some integers only, leaving others to be dealt
with by reference to the understanding of the skilled addressee.
In the present
context, what this means is that, to the extent that the appellants’ case
is based on
General Tire
, it is not sufficient that they be able to point
to passages in the Novo patent from which it would appear to the skilled
that inactivation was contemplated or intended by the earlier
inventors. It is necessary that they show that, if example 20 were
directed, it would inevitably, as a matter of hard fact, have involved
inactivation of the enzyme (to the standard set
up under Claims 1 and 7 of the
patent in suit as identified by the primary Judge) at the baking
Opponent raised the same document which was raised in the Parent Opposition,
US 2012/0207989 A1 (XU ET AL.) 16 August 2012
the Parent Opposition the delegate found the following:
“I agree with the Opponent insofar as the facing core layer of D1 being
comparable to the concentrated layer as defined in the
present application if
and when it is formulated to have a higher concentration of strength additives
and a higher density than the
non-facing core layer. However, as noted by the
Applicant, D1 does not provide clear and unmistakable directions for making a
gypsum board with a facing core layer having the required dry density
with the required thickness range and including a strength
additive, where such
a board would also have a minimum nail pull resistance according to ASTM
C473-10, Method B, of at least 30.8
“a board comprising, consisting essentially of, or consisting of a
multilayer core comprising, consisting essentially of, or
consisting of a first
cementitious layer having a first density and a first thickness, and a second
cementitious layer having a second
density and a second thickness. The first
density is higher than the second density, and the ratio of the first thickness
second thickness is from about 1:1 to about
multilayer board in D1 is said to have a nail pull resistance of a minimum nail
pull resistance according to ASTM C4 73, Method
B of about 77 lbs of
This nail-pull resistance
converts to 34.9 kg.
are three figures from D1 which illustrate the boards made, one of them being
figure 2 which is reproduced below:
schematically illustrates a two-layer core board
accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. The board has facer
and skim coats
The core has
two cementitious composition layers 32 and 41. The core layer 41 has a higher
density than the density of core layer
32. Increased nail pull resistance is
realized when a nail punctures the facer material 11 and skim coat 21 and enters
the core layer
41 of 200, as compared to when the nail punctures the facer
material 11 and skim coat 21 and enters core layer 31 of 100, as in accordance
with the present
has three examples. Each of these make ½ inch boards with some being a
single layer or two-layered. In all three examples
pre-gelatinized corn starch
is used. Foams are also used in some of the examples. In the examples 2 and 3
many of the boards are
thicker than the 0.05 to 0.23 cm of the 1
layer (concentrated layer). Example 2 reads as follows:
boards made using this protocol appear to be outlined in tables 9 and 10. The
thickness of the boards is given in fractions of
inches, which are a system of
measurement which has not been used in the Australian building and construction
industry since 1976.
I will convert them to metric where appropriate.
nail pull resistance of these boards is also given in the table below.
boards with multiple cores with increased nail-pull resistance are made using
the protocol in example 3 shown below:
boards made using this protocol are said to have starch in the second layer
noting that only board C has two layers.
density and nail-pull resistance of these boards is given below.
Claim 1 when compared to D1
current claims require the thickness of the concentration layer to be between
0.05 cm to 0.23 cm. For reference 1/8
of an inch is 0.3175cm,
of an inch is 0.15875cm and 3/16
of an inch is
0.47625cm. As can be seen from the table above only board 7 (in table 10) has
the first layer thickness of 1/16
of an inch (0.15875cm), however,
this board does not use the pregelatinized starch (PG starch) and is therefore
not within the scope
of this feature of the opposed claim 1. Claim 1 also
requires that the second water-stucco ratio be at least about 1.2 times higher
than the first water-stucco ratio. The experimental data given in D1 does not
teach a difference in the water-stucco ratios between
D1 does discuss
different densities between the
and does teach that
density can be achieved by lowering the water-stucco layer of a particular
however, varying the
layers as defined in the claim is not specifically disclosed.
Claim 12 when compared to D1
12 requires that the concentrated layer is formed from at least about 1.2 times
the strength enhancing starch than in forming
the board core. Mr Sucech said
that in his opinion this feature is “not explicitly
disclosed”.
however, examples where the strength enhancing starch is used in the
layer and not in the second layer. In my view, this is greater
than at least about 1.2 times the strength enhancing starch of the
core. Boards
13 and 14 in example 2 have PG starch in the 1
layer and not the
second layer. I note that board C in example 3 (table 11) has equal quantities
of PG starch in both boards.
12 also requires that the dry density of the core is about 30 pcf (about 481
) or less. Only boards 13 and 14 have PG starch in the
layer and not the second layer which satisfies 1.2 times the
strength enhancing starch. The density of the core is not given on its
however, the dry density of boards 13 and 14 is given in table 10. Board 13 has
a density of 27.68 pcf and board 14 has a density
of 30.71 pcf. Given that the
figure in the claim is said to be “about” and no decimal places are
given I consider both
boards 13 and 14 would have a core density of about 30 pcf
next feature of claim 12 is that the dry density of the concentrated layer is at
least 1.1 times higher than the board core dry
density. This feature is not
specifically disclosed in the examples of
however, D1 does discuss
embodiments where the layers have different densities:
“The core layers of the present invention can have various densities.
In some embodiments, for a two-layered or three-layered
core board as described
herein, the density of the first core layer can be from about 35 lbs/ft3 to
the second core layer is said to be
“In some embodiments, the density of the second core layer can be from
is clear that there is some overlap between 35-70 lbs/ft3 and 25-40 lbs/ft3
which would include embodiments were the first layer
is 1.1 times higher than
the second layer. Certainly D1 envisages that the first layer is denser than
that of second layer, this
is further supported by the following disclosure:
“An embodiment of the present invention includes where the second core
layer, having the lowest density, is in-between the first
core layer and the
third core layer, the first core layer and the third core layer each having
higher densities than the second core
is also relevant to consider boards 13 and 14 which have a concentration layer
which contains PG starch and a layer which does
not contain PG starch. In this
scenario the concentration layer is likely to have a dry density that is higher
than the board core.
However, the specific ratio as claimed cannot be readily
determined on the disclosure of D1 alone and the evidence presented only
to the disclosure above.
there is overlap between the ranges of 35-70 pcf and 25-40 pcf disclosed in D1
which would result the ratio of 1.1, but there
are also ratios which are not.
Based on the limited evidence on this I do not consider that the Opponent has
discharged its burden
of proof on the balance of probabilities that this ratio
would be arrived at if the clear and unmistakable directions of D1 are
17, like claims 1 and 12, requires that the concentration layer contains at
least about 1.1 higher density in the concentration
layer compared to the core
layer but also that the concentration layer be formed from a greater amount of
strength enhancing starch
than the core and also contains a feature about the
Young’s modulus. Claim 17 requires the concentration layer have a
modulus that is at least about 1.5 times higher than a Youngs
modulus of the board core. I note that claim 17 does not list the nail
resistance in kg but instead states 68 lb of force and about 302 N in brackets.
This is fewer decimal places of Newtons of force
than that given in claims 1 and
12 and I understand the claim to require a that degree of precision. Sucech
admits that the Young’s
modulus is not disclosed in D1 but states that he
would expect this to be higher in the first and third layers than that of the
layer. Given my conclusion about the density ratio in claim 12, it
follows that it has not been established that this feature is
disclosed in D1
and consequently claim 17 is not anticipated.
Opponent submitted that this case involves a particular scenario of ranges, such
as the thickness of the concentrated layer in
claim 1, that do not require
absolute certainty or that they are “parameteritis” citing:
Solutions Corporation v REC Solar Pte Ltd
[2023] FCA 1017
Williams Advanced Materials Inc v Target Technology Co
[2004] FCA 1405
(2004) 63 IPR 645
, [99]. The relevant principles were set out
recently by Burley J in
(a) this is a question
of fact based on the circumstances of the case
(b) a distinction should be “drawn between a case where a range is
specified together with a set of variables that is so broad
as to be a far cry
from a clear and unmistakable
Applying those principles, his Honour held at [506] that a prior art
disclosure of a range of 5 nm to 200 nm involved a disclosure
of the claimed
thickness of less than 50 nm, even though the majority of the prior art range
was outside the claimed range. His
Honour held:
“...Isaka simply teaches and recommends that a solar cell may be
made using as its passivating film an aluminium oxide that
is anywhere within
the specified range, a substantial portion of which is within the range
identified in claim 9. In this regard,
it is perhaps not irrelevant to note that
the disclosure of the patent in suit in the present case provides no indication
range selected of less than 50 nm has any material bearing on the
performance of the solar cell. Nor does the expert evidence indicate
is any basis upon which the person skilled in the art reading Isaka would
consider anywhere within the specified range
(including less than 50 nm) was
unsuitable to use when producing a passivating film of aluminium oxide and
silicon nitride.”
parameteritis can be described as an attempt to re-patent the prior art by
limiting the claims by reference to a series
of parameters not mentioned in the
the current case there is indeed a range for the thickness of the concentrated
layer in claim 1 as well as the range for the water
stucco ratio in D1 for claim
12 and the Young’s Modulus in claim 17.
citation, however, does not provide a disclosure of a possible range for this
feature for the concentrated layer. Instead there
are several layered boards
made and if one considers one layer to be the concentrated layer and then other
layer to be the board
core then there is one example in which the first layer
(if considered the concentrated layer) that would be within the scope, however,
in this example other features of the claim are missing (such as the presence of
PG starch). There are not clear and unmistakable
directions to change the
thickness of the layers along with the amounts of PG starch used in that
particular layer compared to the
other layer.
does disclose a range for the water to stucco ratio of 35-70 pcf and 25-40 pcf
which would result the ratio of 1.1 which is a feature
of claim 12. I do not
consider that this has no material bearing on the performance of the board. One
of the main functions is
to have a concentrated layer which provides nail pull
strength and a core which is thicker. This feature does result in the
concentrated
layer being more concentrated, particularly in the absence of the
thickness feature of claim 1. Consequently, the Opponent has not
discharged its
onus in regard to claim 12.
Young’s modulus feature is not disclosed in D1, however, similar to my
findings above, I do not consider this has no material
bearing on the
performance of the board. Consequently, the Opponent has not discharged its
onus in regard to claim 17.
view of the above the ground of lack of novelty fails.
Inventive Step
is a requirement of subsection 18(1) of the
that the invention, so
far as claimed in any claim, involves an inventive step. Subsection 7(2) states
that an invention is taken
to involve an inventive step unless it would have
been obvious to a person skilled in the art in the light of the common general
knowledge, considered alone or together with the prior art (subsection
test for whether an invention is obvious is to ask whether it would have been a
matter of routine to proceed to the claimed invention.
Wellcome Foundation
Ltd v V.R. Laboratories (Aust.) Pty
"The test is whether the hypothetical addressee faced with the same problem
would have taken as a matter of routine whatever steps
might have led from the
prior art to the invention, whether they be the steps of the inventor or
Alphapharm,
Court endorsed the use of the reformulated "Cripps question":
“Would the notional research group at the relevant date, in all the
circumstances, which include a knowledge of all the relevant
prior art and of
the facts of the nature and success of [the prior art], directly be led as a
matter of course to try [the invention],
in the expectation that it might well
produce a useful alternative to or better drug than [the prior art] or a body
useful for any
other purpose?"
has been elaborated on in the Full Federal Court’s decision
Health Pty Ltd v Bayer Pharma Aktiengesellschaft
“We do not think that the plurality in Alphapharm were saying that the
reformulated Cripps question was the test to be applied
in every case. Rather,
it is a formulation of the test which will be of assistance in cases,
particularly those of a similar nature
to Alphapharm. The plurality did not
reject as an alternative expression of the test the question whether experiments
were of a routine
character to be tried as a matter of course (The Wellcome
Foundation Limited v VR Laboratories (Aust) Proprietary Limited
(1981) 148 CLR
, at 280‑281, 286, per Aickin J). We do not think there is a divide
here in terms of whether an expectation of success is relevant
between a test
which refers to routine steps to be tried as a matter of course and the
reformulated Cripps question. It is difficult
to think of a case where an
expectation that an experiment might well succeed is not implicit in the
characterization of steps as
routine and to be tried as a matter of
is clear that this test requires only routine steps to be undertaken and that
there is an expectation is that a useful result might
come from them. In
Nichia Corporation v Arrow Electronics Australia Pty
the Full Federal Court said the expectation does not mean that it is necessary
to know or be able to predict that useful result
and a useful alternative is one
which is useful when compared to the prior art in the field of the
This was further
elaborated on by the Full Federal Court in
“The reformulated Cripps question does not require certainty of
outcome. It requires that the skilled addressee be directly
led as a matter of
course to try the claimed invention in the expectation that a particular
research path “might well produce”
a useful result (Hässle v
Alphapharm at [53]). It does not require the skilled addressee to know that the
steps will produce
note that more than one thing may be obvious, and other steps or solutions might
be tried first.
Common general knowledge (CGK)
Aickin J stated in
common general
knowledge is the background knowledge and experience available to all those
working in the relevant art:
“The notion of common general knowledge itself involves the use of that
which is known or used by those in the relevant trade.
It forms the background
knowledge and experience which is available to all in the trade in considering
the making of new products,
or the making of improvements in old, and it must be
treated as being used by an individual as a general body of
knowledge.”
it is not enough that information is recorded in a document, even if that
document is widely circulated – it is only
part of the common general
knowledge when it is generally known and accepted:
“...information does not constitute common general knowledge merely
because it might be found, for example, in a journal, even
if widely read by
persons in the art ... Reference in this regard is made to the words of Luxmoore
British Acoustic Films
(1936) 53 RPC 221
at 250, cited by Lehane J
Aktiebolaget Hässle v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
(1999) 44 IPR 593
[1999] FCA 628
In my judgment it is not sufficient to prove common general knowledge that
a particular disclosure is made in an article, or series
of articles, in a
scientific journal, no matter how wide the circulation of that journal may be,
in the absence of any evidence that
the disclosure is accepted generally by
those who are engaged in the art to which the disclosure relates. A piece of
particular knowledge
as disclosed in a scientific paper does not become common
general knowledge merely because it is widely read, and still less because
widely circulated. Such a piece of knowledge only becomes general knowledge when
it is generally known and accepted without
question by the bulk of those who are
engaged in the particular art; in other words, when it becomes part of their
common stock of
knowledge relating to the
the Parent Opposition the parties agreed the following was common general
(a) General knowledge of how to formulate and produce gypsum boards, including
the fundamentals and what generic ingredients would
(b) Relevant standards to which commercial gypsum boards must comply (including
the nail pull test);
(c) Manufacturing systems and analysis techniques for gypsum boards;
(d) The use of skim coats (including methods and equipment for thickness
control) in gypsum boards; and
(e) General use of additives, such as foaming agents, dispersants, fluidisers,
fillers and the like.
delegate went on to discuss the use of a basic slurry of stucco and the various
additives commonly used in
are not inconsistent with the Opponent’s submissions in this opposition.
However, in the Parent Opposition the use of
skim coats was discussed, and the
delegate was not satisfied that it was CGK to introduce additives into the skim
coat that were
the current opposition the Opponent submitted that layers were used between the
core and the covering sheet and that these were
often densified or known as
“hard facing” layer.
stated that the thickness and density of the hard facing layer was not typically
measured, however, did make the statement
that hard facing layers have a density
of 25-35% higher than that of the core for
discussed the hard facing layer and from his evidence suggested that
improvements to improve nail pull resistance such as increasing
thickness had
been tried but had not worked
However, the original
purpose of this layer was to improve paper-to-core
evidence does not suggest that it was common practice or routine to add starches
to this layer and not the core. Instead he stated:
“There have been discussions in the past about adding starches to the
hard facing layer, to reduce overall starch usage, but
this adds complications
to the production
that the hard facing layer’s purpose was to increase paper-core-bonding,
and the density was not measured, I do not consider
that modifications to this
layer with starches for increasing nail pull resistance were CGK.
use of starches in gypsum boards was known at the priority date and there is
discussion of acid-modified starches being migrating
starches. This migration
can increase the paper bonding. PG starches do not migrate in the same way. I
accept that both these starches
and their properties, such as migration, was CGK
at the priority date. However, the formulation of the slurry with these starches
is complex, for example PG starch can require more water to maintain fluidity of
and affects the
foaming characteristics in a complex
This is not a matter of
Inventive step when CGK is combined with s 7 (3)
Opponent submitted that claims 1, 12 and 17 are obvious when compared to D1 and
the CGK. The Opponent relied on their submissions
for novelty as outlined above
and in their Schedule 1.
Opponent submitted that the use of starches to increase strength of gypsum
boards was CGK, which I accept, however, they go on
to say that the CGK included
the use of starches in the “densified layer”—which is
discussed by Sucech as the hard
facing layer. As I have outlined above the
purpose of this layer was to increase the paper-to-core bonding and if starches
be used in this layer the PSA would more likely use a migrating starch
as it would migrate to the edges during kilning and increase
bonding that way.
Furthermore the Opponent appeared to submit that the use of migrating starches
in this layer is what is obvious.
The current claims refer to a strength
enhancing starch. I have construed this term based on the evidence above and I
do not consider
it to include the use of migrating starches.
Opponents further submitted that the use of greater concentration of starch in
the concentration layer of D1 to arrive at the
current claims it would be no
more than routine experimentation. However, this does not seem to match with the
difficulties faced
when using PG starches, for example, Sucech states that:
“The pregelatinized starches used before the Priority Date and to the
present day, pick up water immediately, which is a detriment.
Acid-modified
starches do not pick up water. Thus, when acid-modified starches are used, water
to stucco ratio is not impacted, but
when pregelatinized starches are used, the
W/S ratio must be increased to maintain slurry
further states that
“When a pregelatinized starch is added in a slurry having a typically
low water to stucco ratio, for example a W/S of 0.55,
the required W/S to
produce gypsum boards increases from about 0.55 to greater than 0.7, with
addition of pregelatinized starch and
depending on amount added. At 0.55 W/S,
there may be insufficient water available to the pregelatinized starch, so
typically much
of the excess water is consumed by the starch and viscosity of
the slurry becomes unacceptably high for forming gypsum boards. If
relatively low level addition (3-5 lb/msf) pregelatinized starch is added to a
slurry having a high W/S, for example 0.8
or more, addition of the
pregelatinized starch to the slurry has little impact for a small amount of
addition, but will increase
as pregelatinized starch is added. This is because,
at a W/S of 0.8, there may be sufficient water to account for consumption by
starch and to maintain a suitable fluidity or viscosity of slurry for board
pregelatinized starches also affect foaming in the board as outlined by Sucech:
“Pregelatinized starch also has an impact on the foaming
characteristics of gypsum slurries, which affects gypsum board strength.
Pregelatinized starch can in some cases be used to destabilize foaming in a
beneficial manner (pregelatinized starches are mild defoamers),
in addition to
crystal-to-crystal bonding effects. Pregelatinized starches can cause special
foams to coalesce and make larger bubbles,
this effectively increases gypsum
core strength. However, pregelatinized starch can also be used to destabilize
foaming in a non-beneficial
manner, requiring additional processing or
formulation steps to
the above I do not consider it a matter of routine to modify the amount of PG
starch in a concentrated layer compared to the
board core to arrive at the
current claims. Furthermore, given that modifying the densities of each core
layer is not commonly done
do not consider it obvious to arrive at the current claims from D1.
opposition has been successful, subject to appeal, I provide the Applicant with
2 months to file suitable amendments.
is usual in matters before the Commissioner that costs follow the event. The
Opponent has been successful; costs are awarded against
the Applicant according
to Schedule 8.
Delegate of the Commissioner
Patents Act
Eli Lilly and Company
Limited v Apotex Pty Ltd
[2013] FCA 214
100 IPR 451
Specification paragraph
Specification
paragraph [0003].
Specification paragraph [0004].
Specification paragraph
Root Quality Pty
Ltd v Root Control Technologies Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 980
Catnic Industries
Inc. v Hill & Smith Limited
[1982] RPC 183
Minnesota Mining
& Manufacturing Co v Tyco Electronics Pty Ltd
[2002] FCAFC 315
KD Kanopy Australasia Pty Ltd v Insta Image
[2007] FCA 481
(2007) 71 IPR 615
approved on appeal at
[2008] FCAFC 139
(2008) 78 IPR 20
AstraZeneca AB
v Apotex Pty Ltd
AstraZeneca AB v
Apotex Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 30
Parent opposition at
Parent opposition at
Parent opposition at
Specification
paragraph [0007].
Specification paragraph [0009].
Specification paragraph
Specification
paragraph [0010].
Specification paragraph [0100]—appearing on page
Specification paragraph
[0101]—appearing on page 32.
Specification paragraph
[0100]—appearing on page 33.
Specification paragraph
Specification
paragraph [0151].
Specification paragraph [0150].
[2009] FCAFC 70
Catnic Components Ltd v Hill & Smith Ltd
[1982] RPC 183 (HC).
Technip France
S.A.’s Patent
[2004] RPC 46.
CSR Building Products
Limited v United States Gypsum Company
[2024] APO 1
Specification
paragraph [0100] et seq.
Sucech at [97].
Sucech at [283].
Sucech at [171].
[2017] APO 57.
Jusand Nominees Pty Ltd v Rattlejack Innovations Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC
Sucech at [276].
Sucech at [284].
The parent oppositions at
opposition at [105].
[2020] FCA 1477
Jusand Nominees
Pty Ltd v Rattlejack Innovations Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 178
[2015] APO 72
[1996] UKHL 18
at 49 per Lord Hoffman.
Jusand Nominees Pty Ltd
v Rattlejack Innovations Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 178
[1977] HCA 19
Holdings Pty Ltd v Martin Engineering Co
[1990] FCA 40
(1990) 91 ALR 513at
The General Tire
& Rubber Company v. The Firestone Tyre and Rubber Company Limited and others
[1972] RPC 457.
A/S v Danisco A/S
Novozymes A/S v
Danisco A/S
[2013] FCAFC at
D1 paragraph
D1 at paragraph
D1 paragraph
See D1 [0026]-[0027],
SS-15 page 13.
SS-15 page 3.
D1 at [0026].
D1 at [0033].
Corporation v REC Solar Pte Ltd
[2023] FCA 1017
Pharmaceuticals Co Ltd v Generic Health Pty Ltd (No 2)
(2016) 120 IPR 431
[1981] HCA 12
Aktiebolaget Hassle v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 59
[2014] FCAFC 73
[2019] FCAFC
Ibid at [80]; [89];
Mylan Health Pty
Ltd (formerly BGP Products Pty Ltd) v Sun Pharma ANZ Pty Ltd (formerly Ranbaxy
Australia Pty Ltd)
[2020] FCAFC 116.
Ibid at [502].
Minnesota Mining
& Manufacturing Co v Beiersdorf (Australia) Ltd
[1980] HCA 9
Minnesota Mining
& Manufacturing Co v Beiersdorf (Australia) Ltd
[1980] HCA 9
at 255-256.
Laboratories Limited v AstraZeneca AB
[2013] FCA 368
Parent opposition
Sucech at [70].
Sucech at [40].
RTF format (7.27 MB)
Signed PDF/A format