Review Applicant: Trevor Alan Crowley Visa Applicant: Marion Audrey Penn IRT Reference: N98/00414 #number 13388 [1999] IRTA 13388 (27 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND
REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT REFERENCE: N98/00414 13388.doc
REVIEW APPLICANT: Trevor Alan CROWLEY
VISA APPLICANT: Marion Audrey PENN
TRIBUNAL: Michael RADIN
Senior Member
DATE: xx January 1999
PLACE: Adelaide, South Australia
DECISION: The Tribunal, pursuant to
Section 349
Migration Act
remits this application to the Department with the direction that Ms
Marion Penn meets all of the relevant criteria for the grant
of the Subclass
104 (Preferential Family) visa on
'special need relative'
except for the public interest criteria.
REASONS FOR DECISION
This application for review was made on 11 March 1998. The application was
made by Mr Trevor Alan Crowley
('review applicant')
in respect of a
decision by the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
Department'/'DIMA')
not to grant to his sister Ms Marion Audrey Penn
('visa applicant')
a Subclass 104 (Preferential Family) visa.
The review applicant Trevor Crowley was born on 2 March 1947 in Brighton,
England, United Kingdom, and he is currently aged 51 years.
He has lived in
Australia since 1980, and is now a citizen. He has three siblings, one of whom
resides permanently in Australia.
His remaining two siblings are ordinarily
resident in the United Kingdom, including his sister, Marion Penn, the visa
Mr Crowley is a married person, who also has an 18 year old
daughter from a previous relationship. He is self employed.
Marion Penn, the visa applicant, was also born in the United Kingdom on 15
December 1935. She is presently aged 63 years. She is
now retired, having
previously worked for many years in the nursing field. She has a daughter from
her first marriage in the United
Kingdom, and is presently divorced.
Marion Penn made application for a Preferential Family visa (Subclass 104) on
'special need relative'
grounds on 31 December 1996. She was sponsored
by her brother Trevor Crowley, the review applicant. On 14 April 1997, the
application was refused by a DIMA officer at the Departmental post in
London. It was held that the visa applicant had failed to
satisfy the relevant
prescribed criteria for this class of visa. Specifically, it was found that
the visa applicant was unable to
satisfy the definition of
'special need
as it appeared in the relevant part of the
Migration Regulations
Subsequently, on 2 June 1997, Trevor Crowley made application to the Migration
Internal Review Office
seeking review of the primary decision.
That decision was affirmed however on 18 February 1998 by a MIRO officer in
Sydney, who,
inter alia, made the following findings:-
'...The review applicant has outlined his claims ... the applicant's mother who
is 90 years old, would benefit by being cared for
by the applicant in the home
of the review applicant ... this would be a mutually good arrangement in that
the family could be together
and their mother would be well cared for in her
...Initially ... Marion Penn applied under the preferential family category 104
to join her family in Australia. She has her elderly
mother living in
Wollongong with her brother and his family ... For 20 years prior to January
1996 the mother lived with another
son and his family in Melbourne ...
...In the process of considering the application I have spoken to the sponsor
and asked what use has been made of welfare, hospital,
nursing or community
services in the local area ... He said that the family have not pursued the
availability of assistance for
his mother in the community because it is not
what the family or his mother wants ... He explained that his mother needs
the clock care which he and his wife are unable to provide because they
have to work ...
...While sympathetic to the family situation I find that the applicant is
unable to meet the definition ... At present Mrs Crowley
is being cared for by
her son and family while making some use of medical and community care ...
Though not considered desirable
by the family ... it may be necessary to pursue
the option of seeking additional help from other aged care providers in the
... In short it has not been established that the sponsor's mother
cannot get assistance from other relatives or from welfare, hospital,
or community services ...'
Subsequently, the review applicant Trevor Crowley sought review of the previous
decisions by making application to the Immigration
Review Tribunal at its New
South Wales registry on 11 March 1998.
RELEVANT LAW
In order to secure the grant of a Subclass 104 visa, the visa applicant is
required to satisfy the relevant prescribed criteria which
are set out in the
Migration Regulations 1994
. So far as is relevant to these proceedings, those
criteria are set out hereunder, pursuant to the heading, 'Subclass 104 -
Preferential
SUBCLASS 104 - PREFERENTIAL FAMILY
104.1 INTERPRETATION
[NOTE: "eligible New Zealand citizen", "aged dependent relative", "settled",
"special need relative",
and "spouse" are defined in
regulation 1.03
"orphan relative" is defined in
regulation 1.14
; and "remaining relative" is
regulation 1.15.
There are no interpretation provisions specific to
this Part.]
104.2 PRIMARY CRITERIA
[NOTE: The primary criteria must be satisfied by at least one member of a
family unit. The other members of the family unit who are
applicants for a visa
of this subclass need satisfy only the secondary criteria.]
104.21 Criteria to be satisfied at time of application
104.211 (1) The applicant meets the requirements of subclause (2) or (3).
(2) An applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the applicant is an aged dependent relative, or a remaining relative, of a
person (in this subclause called
"the Australian relative")
(i) an Australian citizen; or
(ii) an Australian permanent resident; or
(iii) an eligible New Zealand citizen; and
(b) the applicant is sponsored:
(i) if the Australian relative has turned 18 and is a settled Australian
citizen, a settled Australian permanent resident or a settled
eligible New
Zealand citizen - by the Australian relative; or
(ii) by the spouse of the Australian relative, if the spouse:
(A) cohabits with the Australian relative; and
(B) is a settled Australian citizen or a settled Australian permanent resident
or a settled eligible New Zealand citizen; and
(C) has turned 18.
(3) An applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the applicant is an orphan relative, or a
special need relative
a person (in this subclause called "the Australian relative") who is:
(i) an Australian citizen; or
(ii) an Australian permanent resident; or
(iii) an eligible New Zealand citizen; and
(b) the applicant is sponsored:
(i) if the Australian relative has turned 18 - by the Australian relative;
(ii) by the spouse of the Australian relative, if the spouse:
(A) cohabits with the Australian relative; and
(B) is an Australian citizen or an Australian permanent resident or an eligible
(C) has turned 18.
104.22 Criteria to be satisfied at time of decision
104.221 The applicant continues to satisfy the criterion specified in clause
104.222 The sponsorship referred to in clause 104.211 has been approved by the
Minister and is still in force.
104.223 The applicant satisfies public interest criteria 4001, 4002, 4003,
4004, 4005, 4009 and 4010.
104.224 If the applicant:
(a) has previously been in Australia; and
(b) is an aged dependent relative or a remaining relative;
the applicant satisfies special return criteria 5001 and 5002.
104.224A If the applicant:
(a) has previously been in Australia; and
(b) is a special need relative;
the applicant satisfies special return criteria 5001.
104.225 An assurance of support in relation to the applicant has been given,
and has been accepted by the Minister.
104.226 (1) Each member of the family unit of the applicant who is an applicant
for a subclass 104 visa is a person who:
(a) satisfies public interest criteria 4001, 4002, 4003, 4004, 4005, 4009 and
(b) in the case of an applicant who is an aged dependent relative or a
remaining relative - satisfies special return criteria 5001
and 5002; or
(c) in the case of an applicant who is a special need relative - satisfies
special return criterion 5001.
(2) Each member of the family unit of the applicant who is not an applicant for
a subclass 104 visa is a person who:
(a) satisfies public interest criteria 4001 to 4004; and
(b) satisfies public interest criterion 4005, unless the Minister is satisfied
that it would be unreasonable to require the person
to undergo assessment in
relation to that criterion.
104.227 If either:
(a) the family unit of the applicant includes a dependent child who made a
combined application with the applicant; or
(b) a child who:
(i) is usually resident with the applicant; and
(ii) has not turned 18;
made a combined application with the applicant;
the Minister is satisfied that the grant of a subclass 104 visa to the child as
a member of the family unit of the applicant would
not prejudice the rights and
interests of any other person who has custody or guardianship of, or access to,
104.228 If the applicant is an orphan relative, the Minister is satisfied that
the grant of the visa would not prejudice the rights
and interests of any
person who has custody or guardianship of, or access to, the applicant.'
The substantive provisions above make reference to various subclasses,
'special need relative'
. That term is defined at
subregulation 1.03 of the Regulations as follows:-
"special need relative"
in relation to an Australian citizen usually resident in Australia, an
Australian permanent resident usually resident in Australia
or an eligible New
Zealand citizen, means a relative who is willing and able to provide
substantial and continuing assistance to
the citizen or resident if:
(a) the citizen or resident has a permanent or long-term need for assistance
because of death, disability, prolonged illness or other
serious circumstances
affecting the citizen or resident personally, or a member of his or her family
(b) the assistance cannot reasonably be obtained from:
(i) any other relative of the citizen or resident, being a relative who is an
Australian citizen, an Australian permanent resident
or an eligible New Zealand
citizen; or
(ii) welfare, hospital, nursing or community services in Australia;
The Tribunal gave consideration to documentation submitted as a part of the
application in this matter, including written submissions
prepared by the
review applicant. Various medical certificates in respect of the review
applicant's aged mother and daughter were
also submitted. Also considered was
the Departmental file, which was provided to the Tribunal. The Tribunal
convened a preliminary
meeting by telephone with the review applicant on 12
August 1998, and subsequently, at the review applicant's request, a hearing
arranged in the Tribunal's Sydney registry on 20 August 1998. Mr Trevor
Crowley attended and gave sworn evidence. He was accompanied
by his spouse Ms
Sue Crowley.
Mr Crowley confirmed that he was born in Brighton, England United Kingdom, on 2
March 1947. However he has lived in Australia since
September 1980 when he
migrated here with members of his immediate family. He is now an Australian
He told the Tribunal that he has a brother Brian Crowley, and a sister, the
visa applicant Marion Penn, who still reside in the United
Kingdom. Marion
Penn is presently in Australia pursuant to a visitor visa. Another brother,
Ralph Crowley, also resides in Australia,
in Melbourne with his family.
Sue Crowley was born in London, United Kingdom, on 16 January 1954, and she has
lived in Australia since 1981. She is also a citizen.
Mr Crowley told the Tribunal that he has a daughter, Lauren, from a previous
relationship, who is presently 18 years of age, and
now resides in Queanbeyan,
New South Wales. He has no children from his present relationship with Sue
Mr Crowley is the principal of Jastrow Pty Ltd, a company which he has operated
for 16 years, and which presently employs 12 persons.
The company's most
recent annual turn over was $1.6 million, providing a net profit of some
$30,000 for Mr Crowley and his spouse,
who are both committed on a full time
basis in the management and operation of the said business, which is located in
the Wollongong
This represents the family's only source of income at present, and apart from
the company and their own residence, they have no other
major assets or
investments in Australia.
Mr Crowley confirmed that his sister Marion Penn is presently in Australia,
tending to their aged mother. Ms Penn ordinarily resides
in the United
Kingdom, where she has a sibling, and a daughter from her first marriage. She
is presently aged 63 years, now retired,
but formally having worked as a nurse
in a general hospital and subsequently in a war veterans clinic. She is
presently divorced,
and receives a UK government pension. She owns property,
which she will liquidate should she be granted permanent residence in
She has been residing with the review applicant in his household since her
arrival in Australia earlier in 1998. She tends to their
mother, who is
presently 91 years of age and in frail health. Mr Crowley confirmed that his
mother sustained wrist injuries as a
result of a fall in May 1998, and referred
the Tribunal to a medical report in this regard.
He stated that
'...her previously stated independence is all gone now. She
is clearly unable to look after herself. She has little mobility. Previously,
despite the frailties associated with anyone of her age, she was in reasonable
condition. But since the fall she has deteriorated.
She takes drugs for
various complaints on a daily basis, and needs someone to supervise her. She
started living with me and my
wife at the beginning of 1996. Prior to this
time she had lived with my brother and his family in Melbourne for some 20
Mr Crowley discussed with the Tribunal the contents of various medical and
welfare reports which had already been submitted, and
indicated that further
reports were to follow the hearing in this matter. The Tribunal has also given
careful consideration to such
reports, which are reproduced hereafter.
Mr Crowley commented on the findings of the previous decision-makers with
respect to the ability of his daughter, Lauren Crowley,
to assist with care for
his mother. In this regard, Mr Crowley pointed out the existence of reports
confirming that his daughter,
who lives in Queanbeyan with her mother, is a
paraplegic, having suffered injuries as a result of an accident in 1983. He
therefore that she is unable to assist in any way with the care of
his mother.
His only other close relatives, his brother and sister-in-law, live in
Melbourne, and are both engaged in employment.
'...In this regard, they are
not in a position to assist any further. In any event, it is unreasonable to
expect them to do so, because
mum lived with them for 20 years before 1996.
After this time, they could not deal with it any more, and as a result of their
"compassion
fatigue", I was asked to assume the responsibility of providing for
mum in her remaining years. I have no other relatives in the
Illawarra or
Sydney regions. Mum is now in my sister's full time care, and doing better.
My sister is very happy to continue providing
this assistance. We have used
both nursing and community services, but they are very part time. Mum now
needs full time care around
the clock, and care that is more sensitive and more
appropriate to her ongoing needs.'
He discussed with the Tribunal his own work commitments. He stated in this
regard that
'...before mum had her accident, we would go home to have lunch
with her. We would alternate, sometimes I would go, and sometimes
stress that she had a little bit of independence then, and she could make her
own drinks, and have the family pet to
keep her company. Notwithstanding this,
we were always worried about her, and we felt a little guilty because it told
us that she
should not be left alone. As I have said, these circumstances have
now changed as a result of the accident. She eventually fell
at home while we
were at work, and we only discovered her when Sue got back home from
He told the Tribunal that as a result of the accident, his mother's moral has
fallen. She has little appetite, and remains depressed
and at times irritable.
She is required to take drugs for a number of complaints. He told the Tribunal
that a nursing home was an
inappropriate and very expensive alternative, and
that should she be institutionalised, her moral would continue to fall, perhaps
hastening her ultimate demise.
The Tribunal gave careful consideration to a number of medical reports. In
respect of the review applicant's daughter, Lauren Crowley,
the Tribunal had
access to a report prepared by Sir George Bedbrook detailing the injuries
suffered by Lauren Crowley as a result
of a motor vehicle accident in Darwin in
September 1983.
In 1990, Professor Thomas K.F. Taylor, of the Royal North Shore Hospital, also
prepared a report in respect of Lauren Crowley, and
identified in particular
her developing scoliosis.
She had been referred to Professor Taylor by Mr S. Baddeley, Orthopaedic
Surgeon, who summarised her situation in a medical report
on 22 November 1989,
which contained the following information:-
'Re: Lauren CROWLEY DOB 01/09/79
Lauren was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 1983 and suffered a complete
T5 paraplegia. She has undertaken rehabilitation
at a number of Centres over
the years specifically with Sir George in Perth and more lately with Dr. Ruth
Marshall in Adelaide.
She has been seen by John Yeo previously at your
Lauren came to see me again recently after having not been seen for a period of
four and a half years. It appears that she is developing
a long paralytic left
sided curve which on erect films I have reviewed today appears from T6 to L3 to
Lauren and her mother are visiting Sydney over the Christmas holidays and I
would be most grateful if you could see her and advise
concerning further
management.
As we have discussed previously bracing in the tropics is not without its
problems and I feel that at 45° a surgical option
may be the only
I would be most grateful if you could let me know your feelings.
Kind regards.
MR. S. BADDELEY
ORTHOPAEDIC SURGEON'
A medical report prepared by Dr. S.C. Loomba on 26 August 1998 was provided to
the Tribunal. It contained the following information:-
'TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN
In relation to Mrs Ellen Crowley of 97 New Mt. Pleasant Road, Mt. Pleasant,
D.O.B. - 9/8/1907, I am sending the following up-dated
Medical Report.
Her condition has changed significantly, since my last Medical Report dated 10
February 1998. Both her wrists are painful and stiff
as a result of fractures
of wrist bones, due to fall on 19/5/98. Recently, she also has developed
She needs to be looked after in a more careful manner and feel more comfortable
at home in her own environment.
With regards,
Yours sincerely
DR S C LOOMBA, M.B., B.S.'
The results of recent medical tests conducted at the Illawarra Area Health
Service confirm that Ms Ellen Crowley's recent history
of diarrhoea was caused
by a malignancy of the bowel. She has refused a colostomy due to her age and
frail condition.
The medical reports and test results were provided to the Aged Care Unit of the
Illawarra Area Health Service and a Geriatric Assessment
was requested by the
Tribunal. On 21 September 1998, the following report was provided:-
'RE: Mrs Ellen CROWLEY
IRT Ref: N98/00414
Thank you for your letter of 26th August, 1998 requesting as assessment of Ms
Ellen Crowley. I attended a home visit on 17th September
to gain this
Medical Condition
Recent history of diarrhoea which led to investigations including a
colonoscopy. Results confirmed a malignancy of the bowel. Client
was offered
surgery, but was told she may have pain post-operatively and would need a
colostomy. Mrs Crowley declined due to her
age and fear of pain. She is now
being treated palliatively.
Client fractured both wrists following a fall in May 1998. She still
hasn't regained full use in her wrists.
Generalised arthritis with decreased range of movements to her upper
Hiatus hernia
Shortness of breath on exertion.
Hypertension
Hypermanic attack - 5 years ago.
Short term memory loss
Activities of daily living
Mrs Crowley and her family related that due to her poor movements in her upper
limbs, she is dependent on being showered and dressed.
The set up in the
bathroom is adequate, that is, a small step into shower, a rail and hand held
hose are installed. After shower
Mrs Crowley is then able to sit on a shower
chair in the bathroom whilst being dried and dressed by family or Community
Health Nurse.
She uses an over toilet aid to assist with transfers on/off the
She can transfer from bed or chair to standing independently. She walks with
walking frame with seat attached, so she can sit down
easily if breathless or
Mrs Crowley is continent of urine, but is constantly passing small amounts of
soft faeces unknowingly due to her cancer. She wears
Depend pads which her
daughter assists with.
Mrs Crowley is dependent on her family for cooking. She needs her meals cut up
due to poor movement and weakness in her wrists.
She does feed herself but
tends to drop some of the food. The family attend to all housework, gardening
etc. Client has become
house bound due to her fear of faecal incontinence.
Availability of Services
Mrs Crowley is receiving Community Health Nurse visits once weekly at present.
This service will increase as her condition deteriorates.
She also receives
three hours in-home respite which commenced yesterday from Home Care.
Mrs Crowley declined further assistance for showering as she feels more
comfortable with her daughters assistance.
The Palliative services are known to the family and can be used at any time.
At present, because her daughter is her main carer,
no other services are
needed. Other services which could be utilised include in-home respite on a
regular basis (maximum 6 hours
per week) and/or emergency in-home respite up to
72 hours. Another service is a Community Care Package which can give a maximum
of 6 hours care per week.
Family Assistance
Mrs Crowley is living with her son and daughter-in-law. They both work
bull-time so are unable to give her assistance during the
day. Her daughter
Marion who is from England, is "willing and able to provide substantial and
continuing assistance" to her mother.
On my home visit they had a good
Due to Mrs Crowley's prognosis and her short term deficit it would be in her
best interests to remain at home with family in an environment
she is aware of
and comfortable with.
If you need any further assistance, please contact me ...
Yours faithfully,
E.K. Foster
CNS Aged Care
Rehabilitation and Geriatric Services
Illawarra Area Health Service'
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
The central issue for determination by this Tribunal is whether the visa
applicant Marion Penn and review applicant Trevor Crowley
are able to satisfy
the substantive provisions of subregulation 1.03, which provides a definition
of the term
'special need relative'
. These grounds are relied upon by
the parties in this instance with a view to demonstrating satisfaction of the
criteria. In particular, given the said definition, it is
the mother of both parties, Mrs Ellen Crowley, aged 91 years, who requires
assistance in this instance.
The authorities in relation to
'special need relative'
instructive. The Tribunal has consistently followed the observations of
Burchett J in
Fuduche v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and
Ethnic Affairs
[1993] FCA 503
(1993) 117 ALR 418
, as follows:-
'It is appropriate to observe the definition of 'special need relative' is
largely concerned with medical issues. There must be
a need, not necessarily
permanent but at least long term, for some form of assistance because of death,
disability, prolonged illness
or other serious circumstances. (The last
matter, of course, need not be of medical, unless the earlier words create a
genus, which
would be a very restrictive view to take of a beneficial provision
under the broad rubric of 'special need', particularly as there
cannot be a
genus of medical conditions of the citizens of residents to be assisted, since
the first condition is death). There
must be an inability to obtain 'the
assistance' from the other sources mentioned ....
...The assistance with which the relation is concerned is the assistance the
relative is able to provide. If that is mowing lawns,
of course, other may do
it. The more complex and personal it is, the less this can be so. Indeed,
such cases are probably at the
heart of the benevolent intent of this
regulation which, on ordinary principles, as I have already indicated, should
be given a broad
and generous construction in the favour of the Australian
citizen and resident that it was intended to benefit ....
There is also another aspect of this consideration. The definition of 'special
need relative' does not ask only whether the particular
assistance the relative
can give is in fact replaceable. It also asks whether it can 'reasonably' be
obtained elsewhere. From that
point of view, no-one would suggest it
reasonable to expect a person suffering from psychiatric illness of the
severity here in question
to obtain the same support and encouragement from
uninvolved strangers (however professional) as that available from her loved
In respect of the matter which must also be considered by this Tribunal, namely
the reasonable availability of alternative sources
of support and care, the
Tribunal has held that
'reasonableness ... should have a subjective measure,
and what is reasonable in one case may not be reasonable in another. The
of the circumstances affecting the individual and his family must be
considered in each case ....'
Re Yung Hwagchi
(IRT Decision
2440, 9 August 1993)).
Further support for such an approach can also be found in the decision of
Foster J in
Moskal v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic
(1994) 125 ALR 307
at 315 as follows:-
'Once the particular needs are carefully and accurately delineated by the
decision-maker, the next question must be whether these
needs generate 'a
permanent or long term need for assistance'. If this question be answered in
the affirmative, then the decision-maker
must determine, in a case where no
Australian citizen or permanent resident is available to provide such
assistance, whether they
can be provided by 'welfare, hospital, nursing or
community services in Australia' or can only be provided by a 'special need
This question again, cannot be properly addressed or answered by a mere general
and broad consideration of the types of services
available in Australia.
Common humanity demands that a disadvantaged citizen not be deprived of the
special caring assistance of
a near relative on the basis that, in some general
sense, it may be arguable that some aspect of that assistance can be provided
through visits from community welfare organisations. If there be demonstrated
a clear and definite need for ongoing emotional support,
attributable to the
special condition of the citizen, then the question is necessarily and squarely
raised, whether this support
can reasonably be provided by such organisations.
The essential issue for determination in such a case is whether such
organisations
can reasonably supply the necessary special care available from
the 'special need relative'.'
On the basis of such authorities, and in respect of the evidence considered,
the Tribunal now sets outs its findings as follows.
The review applicant
Trevor Crowley has lived in Australia for almost 20 years. He lives with his
second wife in the Illawarra
region, and is engaged full time in the running of
his successful business. He has a daughter from a previous relationship who is
now 18 years of age, and who suffers from a degree of paraplegia as a result of
an accident which occurred some time ago. Ostensibly,
she lives with her
mother in the Queanbeyan region. Mr Crowley has a brother who lives with his
family in Melbourne. It was this
brother who was charged with the task of
looking after the Crowley's mother, Mrs Ellen Crowley, who is aged 91 years at
Mrs Crowley lived with her son in Melbourne for some 20 years until the
beginning of 1996, when she moved to Illawarra to live with
applicant. She has been there since that time. The review applicant and his
spouse gave compelling evidence of their
day to day concern for his mother's
health, and in particular, expressed some guilt at being away from the family
Notwithstanding this, they made efforts to supervise
Mrs Crowley, and regularly attended upon her for lunch every day. From the
evidence before the Tribunal, it appears as if Mrs Crowley's condition was as
good as any person of her age up until the beginning
of 1998. During the
course of the last year, she suffered a fall at home while alone, thereby
realising the real fears held by Mr
Crowley and his spouse. As a result of
injuries sustained to both wrists, her condition has worsened considerably.
She suffers now
from severe non-organic symptoms also, and medical reports have
attested to such matters. She has numerous other complaints, for
takes medication. As a result of pursuing medical treatment for one such
complaint, it was recently discovered that she
had contracted bowel cancer.
Notwithstanding this, she is apparently alert, and comfortable living at home
with Mr Crowley and his
For her part, Marion Penn, ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom, has been
in Australia now for a number of months, and living
at the residence of her
brother, where she provides constant care for her mother. In the United
Kingdom, she lives in retirement
having spent most of her working life in the
nursing area. No doubt this has given her good skills with which to discharge
her current
supervisory obligations in respect of her mother. Marion Penn has
a daughter who lives independently in the United Kingdom, as well
as a sibling.
She has some property there, which she is prepared to liquidate should she be
granted permanent residence. From all
accounts, she is willing and able to
provide continuing care for her mother for the latter's remaining time.
The medical and other reports, particularly the one provided by the Geriatric
Assessment Unit, confirm the deterioration in Ellen
Crowley's condition, but
make firm findings with respect to her continued care. In this regard, as can
be seen from the contents
of the said reports themselves, it is clear that
medical and in general professional opinion is that Ellen Crowley should remain
in the family home, where she receives the devoted care of her daughter, and to
some extent, her son and daughter-in-law.
On the basis of the foregoing evidence, the Tribunal finds that Ms Marion Penn
is willing and able to provide substantial and continuing
assistance to her
mother, who is a long term resident of Australia.
The medical and other evidence before the Tribunal has confirmed, in the
Tribunal view, that Ellen Crowley, a member of the review
applicant's family,
has a long term need for assistance as a result of a prolonged illness and/or
other serious circumstances. On
the basis of the Tribunal's long term
treatment of these provisions, including the preferred meaning of the term
'other serious circumstances'
, and in the context of the aforementioned
Federal Court authorities, the Tribunal is prepared to find that the assistance
by the review applicant's mother cannot reasonably be obtained from
another relative, or more particularly, from an institution or
Australia. The Tribunal, closely following professional expert opinion, finds
that there is a lack of adequacy and appropriateness
in the institutional and
community services which are potentially available to the review applicant's
mother in this case. In the
Tribunal view, given Ellen Crowley's current
condition, it is best that she remains in her daughter's full time care in the
dignity. For this purpose, the Tribunal finds that Marion
Penn should remain
in Australia for such purpose.
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the visa applicant has satisfied the
definition of
'special need relative'
as set out in subregulation 1.03
in this instance. On such basis, the Tribunal is also satisfied that the
relevant prescribed criteria
have also been met.
The outstanding criteria now require assessment by the Department, and the file
will be returned there for that purpose.
The Tribunal, pursuant to
Section 349
Migration Act 1958
this application to the Department with the direction that Ms Marion Penn meets
all of the relevant criteria for the grant
of the Subclass 104 (Preferential
Family) visa on
'special need relative'
grounds, except for the public
interest criteria.
Michael Radin
Senior Member
xx January 1999
RTF format (90.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format