Mermaid Beach Radiology Pty Ltd v Kirralee Jo Sherif [2025] ATMO 215 (17 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by FORME WHOLE
BODY PTY LTD to registration of trade mark application number 2432715 (class 44)
- in the names of Mermaid Beach Radiology Pty Ltd and Kirralee Jo
Anne Makrigiorgos
REPRESENTATION:
McBratney Law
Applicants:
Self represented
2025 ATMO 215
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – opposition under
– grounds of opposition under
sections 58
– no ground
established – trade mark to proceed to registration
decision concerns an opposition under
Trade Marks Act 1995
by FORME WHOLE BODY PTY LTD
’) to registration of the following trade
Trade mark number
Application
Mermaid Beach Radiology Pty Ltd and Kirralee Jo Sherif
Filing date
6 March 2024 (‘
Relevant Date
Specification
Radiology services (‘
Applicants’
Trade Mark was examined and advertised as accepted for possible registration on
7 August 2024.
30 September 2024, the Opponent filed a Notice of Intention to Oppose the
Application. On 24 October 2024, the Opponent filed a
Statement of Grounds and
Particulars (‘
’). The Applicants filed a Notice of
Intention to Defend the opposition on 29 November 2024. No evidence was filed by
of the parties.
parties were given the opportunity to either request an oral hearing or to file
written submissions. While neither party elected
to be heard, the Applicants
requested a decision without a hearing. I am a delegate of the Registrar of
Trade Marks and this matter
has been allocated to me to determine. I have
decided this matter based on the particulars set out in the
Grounds and onus
SGP nominates grounds of opposition under
The Opponent
carries the burden of establishing a ground of
on the balance of
probabilities.
The date at which
the rights of the parties are to be determined is the Relevant
provides that the registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground
that the applicant is not the owner of the trade mark.
right to registration under the Act depends upon ownership of the trade mark and
not ownership by registration.
requirement as to ownership must be satisfied at the filing date of the
application.
Ownership of a trade
mark may be established ‘either by reason of authorship and prior use or
by reason of authorship, filing
an application and an intention to
Authorship in this
context is not predicated on being the first to coin the trade mark, instead it
refers to the first to adopt the
trade mark with an intention of using it in
Australia in respect of the claimed goods and/or
concept of trade mark ownership was discussed in
Anchorage Capital Partners
Pty Limited v ACPA Pty Ltd
wherein the Full Court of the Federal Court
[O]wnership may be acquired by the act of applying for
registration of a trade mark even though the applicant has not previously used
the mark and the mark has already been used outside Australia by someone else.
However, the applicant’s claim to ownership
of the mark may be defeated if
another person has previously used the mark, or a substantially identical mark,
in Australia as a
trade mark in relation to the same goods or services, or goods
or services of the same kind, as those that are the subject of the
application
for registration.
default position under the Act is that the Applicants are prima facie considered
to be the owners of the Trade Mark. Consequently,
it is the Opponent who bears
the evidential onus of establishing that the Applicants were not the owners of
the Trade Mark at the
Relevant Date.
Opponent has made unsubstantiated claims in the SGP as
“FORME” - Forme Whole Body Pty Ltd (Forme Whole
Body) was formed with the Applicant's knowledge while the Applicant and
ultimate owners were co-owners and directors of an incorporated joint venture
business, Brisbane Radiology Pty Ltd, with the
Opponent's ultimate owners.
“Forme” was a proposed new business for that business. In breach of
various duties including
directors duties due to Brisbane Radiology Pty Ltd, the
ultimate owner of the Applicant filed the application in its own name knowing
full well it was a business to be pursued by the business.
Opponent has not provided any evidence or submissions to support any assertions
made in the SGP. In particular, the Opponent has
not provided evidence of the
corporate ownership of either Brisbane Radiology Pty Ltd or the Opponent, nor
evidence of the name(s)
of the director(s) of these companies. As the Opponent
has not provided any evidence or submissions, the Opponent has not satisfied
burden of establishing that the Applicants were not the owners of the Trade Mark
at the Relevant Date. Consequently, the Opponent
has failed to establish the
ground of opposition pursuant to
provides (notes omitted):
not intending to use trade mark
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the applicant
does not intend:
(a) to use, or authorise the use of, the trade mark in Australia; or
(b) to assign the trade mark to a body corporate for use by the body
corporate in Australia;
in relation to the goods and/or services specified in the application.
, an intention to use or authorise use of a trade mark in Australia is a
prerequisite to a valid application for registration.
is well established that applying for registration of a trade mark brings with
it a presumption that an applicant intends to use
Aston v Harlee
Manufacturing Co
, Fullagar J stated:
I do not regard his Honour
[Dixon J in
The Shell Co of Australia Ltd v Rohm & Haas
271] as meaning that an applicant is required, in order to obtain registration,
to establish affirmatively that he intends
to use it. There is nothing in the
Act or the Regulations which requires him to state such an intention at the time
of application,
and the making of the application itself is, I think, to be
regarded as prima facie evidence of intention to
presumption arising from filing an application to register a trade mark may be
challenged by evidence from the Opponent that establishes
the contrary, thereby
shifting the onus from the Opponent onto the Applicants and requiring evidence
from the Applicants which demonstrates
the intention to use the Trade Mark.
mere assertion of lack of intention to use does not require a response from an
applicant. Further as Hearing Officer Homann said
Intel Corporation v
Magnatex International Pty Ltd
No evidence as to these matters
was led by the applicant. At the same time I must also say that there was no
obligation on the applicant
to do so. Failure on the part of the applicant to
establish affirmatively its capacity or intention to use the mark is in no sense
evidence of a lack of such capacity or
first question for consideration is whether the Opponent has satisfied its
burden of establishing a prima facie case of lack of
intention to use by the
Applicants. The Opponent has made unsubstantiated claims in the SGP as
Forme Whole Body Pty Ltd (Forme Whole Body) was formed with
the Applicant's knowledge while the Applicant and its ultimate owners
co-owners and directors of Brisbane Radiology Pty Ltd. “Forme” was a
proposed new business for that business. In
breach of various duties including
directors duties due to Brisbane Radiology Pty Ltd, the ultimate owner of the
Applicant filed
the application in its own name knowing full well it was a
business to be pursued by the joint venture business. The Applicant did
a bona fide intention as at the date of filing the Opposed Mark to use the
Opposed Mark in respect of the goods.
Opponent has not provided any evidence or submissions to support the mere
assertion of lack of intention to use. The Opponent’s
mere assertion of
lack of intention to use does not require a response from the Applicants. The
Opponent has not discharged its overall
ground of opposition
Section 62A
Application made in bad faith
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the
application was made in bad faith
stated by Dodds-Streeton J in
Fry Consulting Pty Ltd v Sports Warehouse Inc
The question is whether, in all the particular
circumstances, the applicant’s knowledge was such that his decision to
for registration at the relevant date would be regarded as in bad faith by
persons adopting proper
Cheqout Pty Ltd
, Bennett J noted that:
faith is a combined test that involves subjective and objective elements. The
subjective element refers to the knowledge of the
relevant person at the time of
making the application. The objective element requires the decision-maker to
decide whether, in the
light of that knowledge, the relevant person’s
behaviour fell short of acceptable commercial
Opponent bears the onus of establishing that the filing of the Application was
in bad faith and it will not be easily established
given the serious nature of
the allegation.
Opponent has made unsubstantiated claims in the SGP as
Forme Whole Body Pty Ltd (Forme Whole Body) was formed with
the Applicant's knowledge while the Applicant and its ultimate owners
co-owners and directors of Brisbane Radiology Pty Ltd. “Forme” was a
proposed new business for that business. In
breach of various duties including
directors duties due to Brisbane Radiology Pty Ltd, the ultimate owner of the
Applicant filed
the application in its own name knowing full well it was a
business to be pursued by the business. The Applicant did not have a bona
intention as at the date of filing the Opposed Mark to use the Opposed Mark in
respect of the goods.
the Opponent has not provided any supporting evidence that the Applicants’
filing of the Application falls below acceptable
commercial standards, the
Opponent has not established the ground of opposition under
relevantly provides:
(1) Unless subsection (3) applies to the proceedings, the Registrar
must, at the end, decide:
(a) to refuse to register the trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations)
in respect of the goods and/or services then specified
in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
limitations
find that the Opponent has failed to establish a ground of opposition it
nominated in the SGP. Accordingly, registration of the
Application may proceed
not less than one month from the date of this decision.
the Registrar is served with a notice of appeal, I direct that registration
shall not occur until either the appeal is withdrawn
or discontinued. Otherwise,
the disposition of the Application should be in accordance with the
Court’s order or direction.
Applicants have sought costs. It is usual for costs to follow the event, and I
see no reason to depart from that principle here.
I award costs against the
Opponent under
in the relevant amounts under Schedule 8 of the
Regulations.
Anne Makrigiorgos
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
Unless otherwise stated, each
reference to a section is a reference to a section of the
Trade Marks Act
’) and each reference to a regulation is
a reference to a regulation in the
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
Regulations
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd
v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and
Telstra Corporation Limited
v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot
and Edelmann JJ).
Southern Cross Refrigerating
Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 82
, [4] (Kitto J).
Accor Australia & New
Zealand Hospitality Pty Ltd v Liv Pty Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 56
, [170] (Greenwood,
Besanko and Katzmann JJ). See also
PB Foods Ltd v Malanda Dairy Foods Ltd
[1999] FCA 1602
, [78]-[80] (Carr J).
Pham Global Pty Ltd v
Insight Clinical Imaging Pty Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 83
, [29] (Greenwood, Jagot and
Anchorage Capital Partners
Pty Limited v ACPA Pty Ltd
[2018] FCAFC 6
, [48] (Nicholas, Yates and Beach
Aston v Harlee
Manufacturing Co
[1960] HCA 47
[1998] ATMO 20.
[2012] FCA 81
[2013] FCA 478
Hard Coffee Pty Ltd v
Hard Coffee Main Beach Pty Ltd
[2009] ATMO 26
, [12] (Hearing Officer
Nancarrow).
RTF format (259 KB)
Signed PDF/A format