Winemakers' Federation of Australia v European Commission [2013] ATMOGI 1 (22 November 2013)
WINE AUSTRALIA CORPORATION ACT
DECISION OF A DEPUTY REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH
Re: Objection by the Winemakers’ Federation
of Australia, pursuant to regulation 58(5) of the
Wine Australia Corporation
, to an application by the European Commission for protection in
Australia of the Italian geographical indication Prosecco.
DEPUTY REGISTRAR:
Michael Arblaster
REPRESENTATION:
Luke Merrick of Counsel instructed by James Omond, Omond
& Co and Tony Battaglene, Winemakers’ Federation of
Christian Dimitriadis of Counsel instructed by
Justin Senescall, Truman Hoyle Lawyers
2013 ATMOGI 1
Regulation 58(5)(b):
The ground has been
The word Prosecco found to have been used in Australia as the
name of a grape variety. Declined to exercise the discretion to recommend
the term be determined despite the ground being made out. The term may not be
determined without permission of the WFA.
Regulation 71 provides that the
Registrar is not entitled to make an award of costs.
Introduction
Wine Australia Corporation Act 1980
(‘the Act’) and its
Regulations (‘the Regulations’) set out the process for protection
of a foreign geographical
indication (‘GI’) in Australia. By virtue
of Italy’s membership of the European Union, and an
Agreement between
Australia and the European Community on Trade in Wine
Agreement’), Italy is an ‘Agreement Country’ for the purposes
of the Act. On 1 April 2010, by letter,
the European Commission
(‘EC’) requested
that the term Prosecco be listed
on the Register of Protected Geographical Indications and Other
(‘the Register’)
as a GI for Italy.
15 March 2012 notice of the application was given under reg 57 of the Act
inviting persons to make written objection to the Registrar
of Trade Marks. On
3 April 2012 an objection was received from the Winemakers’
Federation of Australia (‘WFA’).
Although the notice of objection
cited all of reg 58(5) the only particulars raised in the notice referred to the
claim that Prosecco
is the name of a variety of grapes and has been used in
Australia in this way for many
the evidence stages had been completed the EC requested a hearing and the matter
was set down before me in Canberra on 2 September
2013. Shortly before the
hearing the EC requested that that date be vacated in order to allow counsel the
opportunity to file a request
for further evidence. I directed that the hearing
should proceed on that date, on the basis of the material already lodged, but
to adjourn for two weeks rather than close the hearing in order to allow
a request for new evidence to be made. In the event, on
13 September 2013 the EC
indicated that it would not be making an application to file new
International context
will be useful at this point to set out in some detail the context provided by
the Agreement which entered into force on 1 March
1994. Each party undertook to
protect a number of GIs listed in the Annex to the Agreement (‘the
Annex’) and agreed to
continue negotiating on a number of unresolved
the conclusion of those negotiations a new Agreement, replacing the old, came
into force on 1 September 2010
second Agreement which is still in force closely reflects provisions of the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights
(‘TRIPS’), one of the World Trade Organisation treaties to which
both the EC and Australia are
signatories.
Relevantly, the
Incorporates
the definition of a GI from TRIPS Article 22. A GI is an indication which
identifies a good as originating in a place
reputation or other characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to
its geographical origin”
Provides a mechanism for parties to seek protection for additional
a provision governing the use of the names of vine varieties. Article 22 of the
Agreement provides that
“Each Contracting Party
agrees to allow in its territory the use by the other Contracting Party of the
names of one or more
vine varieties, or, where applicable, their synonyms, to
describe and present a wine”.
Relevantly, the name or synonym must
appear in one of the international classification systems such as that provided
by the International
Organisation of the Vine and Wine (‘OIV’), and
use of the name must not be misleading.
The Wine Australia Corporation Act
Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation Act (as it then was) and the Regulations
were amended to reflect the revised Agreement.
3 of the Act sets out the objects of the Act and expressly provides that the Act
“shall be construed and administered”
according to these
objects. Section 3(1)(e) indicates that one of the objects is:
enable Australia to fulfill its obligations under prescribed wine-trading
agreements and other international agreements
4 provides that:
geographical indication
relation to wine goods, means an indication that identifies the goods as
originating in a country, or in a region or locality
in that country, where a
given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the goods is essentially
attributable to their geographical
Act relevantly protects registered GIs against false and misleading
Division 4B of Part VIB of the
Act sets out the framework through which foreign GIs may be entered on the
Register. Section 40ZAQ
stipulates that the Regulations may provide for a
process through which objections to the determination of a foreign GI may be
to the Registrar of Trade Marks.
provisions of Part 6A of the Regulations set out this process and relevantly in
reg 58(5) provide that:
(5) A person may object to the determination of a proposed item on the
ground that the proposed item is used in Australia:
(a) as the common name of a type or style of wine; or
(b) as the name of a variety of grapes.
Explanatory Statement introducing this regulation simply refers to 5(a) without
explanation and makes no reference to 5(b).
The evidence
Regulations provide for both parties to simultaneously file evidence in relation
to the matter (reg 62) and then to simultaneously
provide evidence in answer
WFA filed and served evidence in support of its objection on 14 December 2012.
The material evidences:
the term Prosecco was referred to as the name of a grape variety in the original
(1994) Wine Agreement.
activities of Dal Zotto and Brown Brothers to plant, produce and market wine
made from Prosecco grapes and identified accordingly
import and subsequent availability of Prosecco plant material in Australia from
quantities of wine made from Prosecco grapes being available in Australia from
establishment of a regional tourism route, the ‘Road to Prosecco’,
in King Valley, Victoria.
of wine made from Prosecco grapes to New Zealand, China, Hong Kong and
of Prosecco as the name of a grape variety internationally, including in Europe
until 2009.
annexes to this submission include
copies of labels from four Australian
research paper dated 2009 about viticultural and oenological aspects of
producing wine from Prosecco grapes in Australia.
from nurseries listing and describing the characteristics of the grape variety
International list of vine varieties and their synonyms
produced by the OIV which lists Prosecco as the name of a grape variety for use
in Australia
from the reference book ‘
Wine grapes’
with a chapter
describing the history of use, production and DNA of the grape variety
excerpt from EC Regulation No 1166/2009 of 30 November 2009 which provides
that in the European Union the
“vine variety
‘Prosecco’ is now renamed ‘Glera’”
follows a decree in Italy dated 17 July 2009 with the same
response, the EC filed and served evidence in answer on 15 March 2013. The
EC’s material evidences that:
name Prosecco is associated with a wine product originating from a delimited
area in Italy.
EC submitted that:
“majority of consumers worldwide consider Prosecco to have a
geographical rather than varietal
connotation”.
marketing of wine made from Prosecco grapes in Australia carries evocation of
Italian language and culture and references to the
Italian origin of both the
grape and the style.
EC’s annexures include:
and links to online wine retailers in Australia referring not only to the
variety but also evoking its Italian origin and
from the sites of Australian wine producers, with labels and descriptions
referring to Prosecco as both a style and variety
with references to its origins
The submissions
WFA clarified that, although it had objected broadly under reg 58, its objection
was based on the claim (outlined in the notice
of objection) that Prosecco was
the name of a grape variety (reg 58(5)(b)) and not on the basis that Prosecco
was the common name
of a style of wine. It submitted that:
is recognised internationally as the name of a variety of grapes and has been
used in association with the sale of wine in
Australia since at least the
20 provides that the names of grape varieties to be used in Australia are those
recognized by the OIV (the 2012 edition
of which lists Prosecco as a grape
variety for
1994 Wine Agreement expressly referred to Prosecco as a vine
EC submitted that
“the evidence shows that the name Prosecco has
retained its longstanding character as a geographical indication for wine
from the Prosecco region in north eastern Italy”
and that the
use in Australia, which is fairly recent, reinforces that geographical
connotation.
further submitted that the construction of reg 58(5) makes it clear that
“what is contemplated
(as a basis for objection)
is the use of a
name ... independently of its significance as a geographical
indication”.
Thus according to the EC what must be shown is that
“the name in question is used in Australia as the .... name of a
variety of grapes, in a way that does not involve reliance
on any geographical
connotation”.
to use, the EC submitted that
use would not be sufficient to
establish the ground and that such use must rise to the level of common use.
They argued that this
construction was supported by the heading to the
regulation which reads
‘Common use’
, the provision of reg
58(5)(a) relating to terms which are “commonly used as the name of a style
of wine”, and by reference
to rest of reg 58 which provides for objections
on the basis of trade mark rights in the term.
EC further submitted that any use relied on to support a ground under
reg 58(5)(b) must also be lawful. That is, it must not fall
foul of the
false or misleading conduct provisions of either the
Australian Consumer
. Moreover, it must also be
in relation to the presentation and description of wine. These it claims are
consistent with the objects
of the Act and the policy underlying reg
is not a point of contention between the parties that the onus is on the WFA as
the objector to establish the grounds and that
the standard of proof must be the
balance of probabilities.
Regulations are silent about the date from which the ground is to be assessed
and about both the period and the extent of use
of a proposed term that would be
sufficient to establish the ground.
parties have agreed that the date from which to assess the ground appears to be
the date that the application for entry on the
Register was made. This is
appropriate because any later date would disadvantage an applicant by allowing
an objector to commence
use of a term after the applicant's intention had become
known, and the application had been made, and then to rely on such use as
basis for the objection. Similarly, there is nothing in the Act or Regulations
that would suggest an earlier date. The relevant
date is therefore 1 April 2010
and to establish the ground the objector must satisfy me that there was relevant
use before this date.
is clear from the evidence that there have been imports of Italian Prosecco to
Australia for some time and that there are also
some references to Prosecco as a
style of wine which, at least originally, derives from Italy and is made from
the Prosecco grape.
The EC argues that much, if not all, of the use in evidence
references the Italian language, the Italian origins of the grape variety
style, and evokes Italian culture and tradition. In this context, I agree that
in order for a term to become
“the common
(or ordinary)
a style of wine”
it must be broadly understood in that way. Where
there is another meaning to overcome (such as the geographical significance of a
GI) the evidence of use would need to show that it has done this. In this
situation there would need to be more than
use and the
evidence would need to show that the significance of the term, in Australia, is
as a generic descriptor independent of
its geographical or GI significance.
However, in the present case, although the EC have argued for the GI
significance of Prosecco
in Australia, the evidence is mixed and I do not need
to resolve the question because the WFA have not objected on the basis that
Prosecco signifies a generic product or is the “common name of a
style” of wine.
objection is limited to reg 58(5)(b), that Prosecco has been used in Australia
as the name of a variety of grapes.
EC raised ‘policy’ as one perspective for understanding reg
58(5)(b). The regulation is one of the objection provisions
which provide an
opportunity for interested parties to prevent the determination of monopolistic
protection, if granted, would have the effect of preventing those interested
parties from using a term they would otherwise
be reasonably entitled, and
indeed may need, to use. For an objection based on reg 58(4), establishing a
claim to ownership of a
trade mark that may otherwise be a descriptive or
geographic term will understandably require significant use. However, the WFA is
making no claim to ownership but rather a claim to be allowed to use a term that
is commonly available. In this situation, there
is no secondary meaning or
significance to be established beyond the fact that the name has been used to
describe a variety of grapes.
To the extent that the heading
applies to reg 58(5)(b) there is no more reason to read this as
‘widespread’, as the EC would have it, than ‘ordinary’.
In any case, unlike reg 58(5)(a) which does make reference to
common name of”
, reg 58(5)(b) requires use
“as the name
a variety of grapes”
. I see no compelling reason to insert
language into the regulation which is not present.
the purposes of reg 58(5)(b) it is therefore enough that the WFA establishes use
where on its face the clear meaning of the term
is as a variety of grapes.
Similarly, for reasons identified above very little use will be sufficient to
satisfy this requirement.
Moreover although the EC have argued in, oral
submission, that to be relevant for this purpose use must only be that in
to the marketing and sale of wine, I am satisfied for reasons outlined
below that other use may also be relevant.
the present case it is clear that a number of nurseries and horticultural
suppliers use the name Prosecco as the name of grape
varieties for sale. That
they provide further information about its historical and genetic origin adds
little to the key point at
issue - the name of the plant variety for sale from
these suppliers is Prosecco.
first imports of Prosecco vines in evidence date back to at least 1997 and the
first commercial quantities of wines made from
Prosecco grapes and labeled
accordingly were produced in Australia in 2004. Throughout this period Prosecco
was described as a variety
in the extant Agreement. It was also officially
accepted as the name of a variety of grape by European regulation and within
This situation continued until at least 2009.
purchasing this variety, planting a vineyard, cultivating and eventually making
and selling wine will have a need to use
the term Prosecco in
presentation and
description”
their wine. This is especially the case as the OIV, prescribed by reg 20 as one
of the organisations that must recognize the name
(or synonym), lists Prosecco
but none of its overseas synonyms. The effect of this appears to be that, for
Australian producers of
wine made from these grapes, Prosecco is the only
variety name that can be used on a label in
number of vineyards in Australia growing Prosecco, and the total area under
cultivation, are both very small. Nonetheless, even
if there had been no
production and therefore no use of the variety name in the description and
presentation of wine there has been
significant activity (at least for these
growers) in planting and cultivating vines and in planning to produce wine from
variety. Moreover the Australian wine industry relies significantly
on marketing wine by grape variety. Against this context, I am
satisfied that
the use in evidence by nurseries, in industry magazines and in statute
regulating the sale and marketing of wine is
sufficient to establish that the
ground has been made out. The term Prosecco has been used in Australia as the
name of a grape variety.
I am wrong, and use as the name of a variety of grapes must be in relation to
the description and presentation of wine then I am
also satisfied that this has
occurred for the reasons which follow.
response to the WFA’s evidence the EC has conceded that
“commercial quantities of Australian wine labeled with "Prosecco" are
available in Australia since
(sic). However
the EC argues that, worldwide, the overwhelming production, in terms of both
time and volume, has been from the
“PDO Prosecco”
further argue that much of the use in evidence, particularly in promotional
material, makes reference to Italian language and
culture and sometimes carries
direct reference to the Italian GI, and could therefore be considered
misleading.
am not satisfied that any of the use in evidence is in fact misleading in terms
of the Australia Consumer Law. It clearly references
that the wine is made in
Australia (a requirement of the labeling regulations), makes references to the
Australian GI King Valley
as the place where the grapes are grown and clearly
identifies the name of the grape variety as being Prosecco. Cultural and other
similar references must be seen in the context of Australia as a migrant
community where references to the rich tapestry of history
and tradition of our
forbears are commonplace. Moreover, Australian wine consumers typically buy
their wine according to grape variety
rather than regional origin, to the point
where this is the most common way of organising wine in liquor stores. Against
this context
the evidence of misleading use would need to be considerable and
the EC has done nothing more than show that some promotional material
reference to the origin of the grape and of the style.
is not under contention that Wine Australia’s database records five
exporters shipping to New Zealand, China, Hong Kong and
Indonesia in the 12
months to June 2012. I have not considered this as establishing use. The dates
are outside the relevant period,
there is no information about the volume or
value of these exports and no information about the presentation of the wines
and whether
they carry the description of the grape variety Prosecco.
Nevertheless, for the sake of completeness and because an issue has arisen
what constitutes use in Australia I consider that, because the Act governs the
description and presentation of wine for export,
if properly particularised,
such use could be used to support a ground of objection under reg 58(5)(b).
there are at least two labels in evidence, one from 2006 and one from 2008,
where Prosecco is clearly presented as a grape
variety. In each of these (Dal
Zotto and Brown Brothers) the house brand is prominently displayed together with
the vintage. In both,
King Valley is shown clearly as the geographical origin of
the wine and, in both, Prosecco is displayed in the position where these
holders typically represent the grape variety. In both cases, the back labels
make express reference to the name of the grape
variety being
I have no evidence of the volume or value of sales I am satisfied that this
constitutes use for the purpose of reg
EC have requested that if I should find that the ground has been made out, as I
have done, that I should nonetheless exercise
my discretion under reg
Registrar of Trade Marks decides that the ground of objection is made out;
Registrar of Trade Marks is satisfied that it is reasonable in the circumstances
to recommend to the Geographical Indications
Committee that the proposed item be
determined despite the objection having been made
the Registrar of Trade Marks may make that
recommendation to the Committee in writing.
considering whether it is reasonable to make such a recommendation the Registrar
“must have regard to Australia's international
obligations”
provides that member states must provide legal means for interested parties to
protect GIs. However, it also provides
to this obligation.
Relevantly the obligation does not extend to situations where the term in
question is generic for the product
in a jurisdiction or where the term is the
customary name of a grape variety in a
exceptions are reflected in the Agreement and although recourse to these
provisions is at the discretion of Member States, as
we have seen in paragraph 5
above, the Agreement expressly provides that the EC and Australia will allow use
of the name of grape
varieties under specified
Indeed, Prosecco was at least available for use as a grape variety name in Italy
until 2009 and until 2010 the Agreement expressly
referred to Prosecco as a
grape variety. It is precisely because there is no obligation under the
Agreement to protect Prosecco that
this application has been made.
EC further argues that the significant international distribution and reputation
of Prosecco and the evocation of that reputation
in much of the promotional
literature also argues for exercise of the discretion. However, the EC tendered
no evidence to show that
the term Prosecco carried GI signification beyond it
being a wine produced from a grape which had its origin in Italy. Given that
EC itself points to
“several centuries”
of wine produced from
grapes called Prosecco (which name continued until four years ago) it remains
unclear, in the absence of evidence,
whether Prosecco denotes a grape variety, a
style or carries the GI significance. This lack of clarity is reinforced by the
of countries for which Prosecco is listed as a variety by the OIV. It is
also reinforced by several publications in evidence commenting
international status of Prosecco and suggesting at least some confusion about
whether Prosecco is a style of wine, a GI or
a grape variety and concluding that
it can be all three. Finally, in evidence is an excerpt from a leading text on
grape varieties,
dated 2012, which describes the history and DNA profile of the
Prosecco grape and makes reference to it being
“misleadingly renamed
I do not need
to accept that the change was misleading, nor to consider any possible
motivation for it, to conclude that at the very
least the signification or
denotation associated with Prosecco is murky.
is clear is that Italy and the European Union changed their regulatory regime in
2009 and that while Prosecco was available for
use in Europe as the name of a
plant variety up until that time, it no longer is. Similarly, the Annex to the
new Agreement which
came into force in 2010 removed reference to Prosecco as a
grape variety associated with Italian GIs. It is now silent. Moreover,
1994 when the first Agreement came into force, Prosecco has been available for
use in Australia, and much of the rest of the
world, as the name of the variety.
Indeed for most of that time it has been the approved name in Australia, a
situation which still
argument put by the EC for exercise of the discretion suggests that the issues
are more appropriately dealt with by the Geographical
Indications Committee
(‘GIC’) of the Wine Australia Corporation rather than the Registrar
because the GIC has the necessary
expertise. I do not agree with this
suggestion. First of all, I agree that the GIC does have specialist expertise in
assessing geographic
(and related human) factors which contribute to the
consistency of quality, reputation or other characteristics of wine from a
However, neither those factors nor the boundary is in question here.
What is at issue is the significance of a term in Australia
and in particular
what it connotes or denotes. These are precisely the areas in which the
Registrar does have expertise. Secondly,
in Divisions 2 & 3 of Part 6A of
the Regulations Parliament has expressly given that assessment to the Registrar.
Ultimately,
I must decide whether it would be reasonable for the GI to be
determined in light of the circumstances in evidence before me.
Prosecco was entered onto the Register as a GI the effect would be to prevent
Australian producers from continuing to use it as
the name of a grape variety.
Forestalling such an outcome appears to be precisely the purpose of the statute.
There are no other
circumstances before me which would mitigate this conclusion.
Indeed vines have been imported into Australia, planted and cultivated,
has been made, promoted and sold at a time when the name was not only available
for use but prescribed by statute as the
only available name. Moreover, for the
most part, this activity and the business plans behind it took place when the
name was available
and in use as a variety name, not only elsewhere in the world
but specifically in Italy and Europe.
86 stipulates when the GIC may determine a GI. It may not do so until an
objection has been resolved (reg 86(2)(a)) and
subject to the outcome of any
appeal process (reg 86(3)). Once a ground has been made out, it may only do so
if one of the following
circumstances exists (reg 86(2)(b)):
objector agrees to the determination being made; (reg 86(4)) or
Registrar exercises her discretion under reg 68 to recommend that it be
determined despite the ground being made out; (reg
Registrar subsequently decides, pursuant to reg 80, that the ground no longer
exists (reg 86(6)).
the effect of finding that the ground has been made out and refusing to exercise
the discretion is that the GI may not be determined
by the GIC, or entered onto
the Register, without the express permission of the objector.
the sake of clarity I should emphasise that allowing the objection should not be
interpreted as giving
carte blanche
to Australian producers to promote
their product, based on the grape variety Prosecco, in a way which would mislead
consumers abut
the origin of their wine. They are still subject to the
strictures of the Australian Consumer Law governing misleading and deceptive
reasons outlined above, I:
that there has been use of the term Prosecco as the name of a grape variety in
Australia, which predates the date of application
to exercise the discretion available to me under r68.
appeal to this decision may be made to the Federal Court under section 40RF of
Michael Arblaster
Deputy Registrar of Trade Marks
The register is kept under
S40ZC of the Act.
On 13 April
2012 a second objection was received from Mr J Clawson, JBC International, on
“behalf of the US wine industry”.
That objection was based upon
Prosecco being a “common varietal name”, but did not
The text of the
revised Agreement was settled on 1 December 2008 but came into force only after
the implementing statute was
As at the date of this
decision, the internet address at which TRIPS may be accessed is
http://www.dfat.gov.au/ip/downloads/trips_text.pdf
Article 30, the mechanism through which the present application was
Subdivisions B & C of
Division 2 of Part VIB (Ss 40C to 40FB) set out the scope and limits of
protection for registered
These references (such
Montello c Colli Asolani – accompanied by one of the
following grape varieties .... Prosecco
”) have been replaced simply by
reference to the GI and this now reads “
Montello c Colli
Brown Bros, Pizzini and Sam Miranda. It is also undisputed that there are at
least 11 Australian producers of wine made
from Prosecco
And for other countries
including at least Argentina, Bulgaria, Croatia and
Ufficiale della Repubblica Italiana
, No 173, 28 July
This claim appears to
be supported by generalised figures on the volume of sales, including export
sales, rather than survey evidence
or expert opinion about the significance of
the term in the market place either internationally or more specifically in
I note that the
EC have made no suggestion that this is a recent
S 18(1) & s
Substantial use after
this date is not necessarily irrelevant as later events may cast light on the
state of the market at the relevant
date. See for example
Publications Pty Ltd v Taylor
[1998] FCA 864
For the sake of clarity
I have made no finding about whether Prosecco is a generic term or common for a
style of wine in Australia.
Although the Act does not expressly confer the owners of protected terms with
property rights, geographical indications (as distinct
from traditional
expressions and other related terms) are recognised internationally as a form of
intellectual property and the effect
of protection under the Act is to reserve
terms for a particular class or group of producers, as against any
It is exactly this
use which determination of the GI would
The Regulations
also allow the use of names associated with new varieties accepted by the
International Union for the Protection
of New Varieties (UPOV) and the
International Plant Genetic Resources Institute. Although Bella Glera and Briska
Glera are shown
on the UPOV database they have expired and are not available.
Glera as a proposed German name for a cannabis variety has a similar
Paragraph 2, page 2
of the EC evidence in
There are other
labels in evidence which I would also be inclined to accept.
There are related
provisions dealing with prior trade mark rights but the
Final reports (2006)
of the Panel from the WTO DSB Panel Proceedings WT/DS174 - 21 December 2004,
in a dispute between Australia and the USA on one hand and the EC on the other,
made it clear that the obligation to protect pre-existing
trade mark rights
(including from GIs) arises out of Article 17 of TRIPS and nothing in Part II
Section 3 (dealing with GIs) diminishes
this obligation.
I have already dealt with
both conditions – the name Prosecco is recognised by the OIV and I am not
satisfied that use as a
grape variety will necessarily be misleading nor that it
has been in the evidence of use before
It is of course possible
for parties to waive this right, as Australia has done in relation to the grape
variety Lambrusco, and Tokay
previously the Australian synonym for the
Muscadelle grape. Similarly, The European Court of Justice has for instance
given significance
to the fact that in its agreement with Hungary the EC
expressly waived its right to an Article 24(6) exception in relation to the
Hungarian grape variety Tokay. Case C-347/03
Regione autonoma Friuli-Venezia
Giulia and ERSA
[2005] EUECJ C-347/03
Robinson, J. Harding
J, Vouillamoz, J;
Wine Grapes: A Complete Guide To 1,368 Vine Varieties,
Including Their Origins and Flavours,
Ecco; Harper Publishing pp 1244.
RTF format (241 KB)
Signed PDF/A format