1413757 [2015] RRTA 326 (22 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 326
(22 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
Philippines
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Susan Pinto
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the
applicants Protection visas.
Statement made on 22 May 2015 at 12:32pm
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
BACKGROUND AND APPLICATION FOR
applicants are a married couple who are citizens of the Philippines. The
applicants are aged in their early [age]. The delegate’s
decision record,
provided to the Tribunal, sets out the applicants immigration history. It
indicates that the first named applicant
(hereafter referred to as the
applicant) arrived in Australia on a Visitor visa [in] October 1999. The
applicant departed Australia
[in] October 1999, before returning to Australia
[in] November 1999 with the second named applicant, her husband. [In] December
the applicant’s husband lodged a Protection visa application. The
delegate’s decision record indicates that the applicant’s
made claims that he had run a successful business but was accused of being a
Communist and subsequently sought by the police
who arrested his parents and
they then died in jail. The visa application was refused [in] January 2000 and
on 6 September 2000,
the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT) affirmed the
delegate’s decision. [In] October 2000, the second named applicant sought
Ministerial
Intervention under s.417 of the
Migration Act 1958
[In] January 2001, the Minister decided not to exercise his powers. [In] June
2003, the applicant’s husband lodged
an application to the Federal Court,
which was withdrawn [in] March 2004.
applicants Bridging visas ceased [in] April 2004 and they remained in Australia
as unlawful non-citizens until [January] 2006
when they were both granted
Bridging visas on departure grounds. When those visas ceased, the applicant and
her husband remained
in Australia as unlawful non citizens.
the decision in
SZGIZ v Minister v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
(2013) 212 FCR 235 (see below), the applicants lodged further
applications for Protection visas [in] July 2013. When lodging the
application, the applicant provided brief claims on the application form with
the assistance of her migration agent, which
primarily focused on her [medical]
condition and inability to obtain adequate treatment in the Philippines. The
applicant also made
detailed claims at that time that because she and her
husband had been in Australia for a significant period of time they would be
targets for extortion. A more detailed statutory declaration, provided a year
later, included claims regarding a debt owed by the
applicant to money lenders
in the Philippines.
delegate of the Minister for Immigration refused to grant the visas [in] July
2014. This is an application for review of a decision
made by a delegate of the
Minister for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicants Protection visas
of the Act. The delegate did not accept that the applicant’s
claims were truthful and found her evidence regarding the debt
credible. Although the delegate accepted that the applicant suffered from [a
medical condition], the delegate found that
any harm which may be incurred did
not fall within the provisions of the Refugees Convention or the Complementary
Protection provisions.
delegate assessed the applicants against both the Refugees Convention and the
Complementary Protection provisions. For the reasons
discussed below, the
Tribunal has assessed the applicants only against the Complementary Protection
provisions.
RELEVANT LAW
48A imposes a bar on a non citizen making a further application for a Protection
visa while in the Migration zone in circumstances
where the non-citizen has made
an application for a Protection visa which has been refused. In
[2013] FCAFC71, 3 July 2013, the Full Federal Court found that s.48A
did not prevent a non-citizen who had made a valid application
on the basis of
the Refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a) from making a further application on the
basis of the Complementary Protection
provisions in s.36(2)(aa) whilst he or she
remained in the migration zone. According to
, a person who had
previously applied for and been refused a Protection visa on the basis of one of
the criterion in s.36(2) is eligible
to lodge a further valid application on the
basis of one of the other criterion.
Complementary Protection provisions (see attachment for the full text of these
provisions) in s.36(2)(aa) essentially require
that the applicant is a non
citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied Australia has
protection obligations
because there are substantial grounds for believing that,
as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the applicant being removed
Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that he or she will
suffer ‘significant harm’. Significant
harm is defined in s.36(2A)
of the Act to include that the non citizen will be arbitrarily deprived of his
or her life; the death
penalty will be carried out on the non-citizen; the non
citizen will be subjected to cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment; or
non citizen will be subjected to degrading treatment or punishment. 'Cruel or
inhuman treatment or punishment', 'degrading treatment
or punishment', and
'torture', are further defined in s.5(1) of the Act.
Subsections
36(2)(c) provides an alternative criterion that the applicant is a non-citizen
in Australia who is a member of the same
family unit as a non-citizen mentioned
in s.36(2)(aa) who holds a protection visa. Section 5(1) of the Act provides
that one person
is a 'member of the same family unit' as another if either is a
member of the family unit of the other or each is a member of the
family unit of
a third person.
indicated above, the applicants have previously been refused Protection visas in
Australia. However, the visa application under
review is a valid application
because the applicants are considered ‘
-affected’ as
they have not left Australia since the final determination of their previous
Protection visa applications which
preceded the Complementary Protection
provisions. As the applicants have previously had their claims for protection
assessed under
s.36(2)(a), the Tribunal must confine its consideration to
whether they satisfy the requirements of s.36(2)(aa) and (c).
CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
Application to the Department
lodging the application to the Department, the applicant indicated that she
speaks, reads and writes Tagalog and English. She
stated that she is a Roman
Catholic. The applicant and her husband were married [in] December 1979. The
applicant’s husband
also indicated that he speaks, reads and writes
Tagalog and English and his religion is Roman Catholicism. The applicants
that they have a [child] residing in [another country] and an [child]
who lives in the Philippines. The applicants also have several
siblings residing
in the Philippines.
response to questions 43 to 48 on the application form as to why she left the
Philippines and her experiences in that country,
the applicant stated that she
is suffering from [a medical condition]. The applicant states that doctors have
advised her to undergo
[a procedure] and her husband is willing to [assist].The
applicant fears that if she returns to the Philippines she will be unable
obtain adequate medical treatment and she will face a risk of harm. In addition,
the applicant fears that because she has been
in Australia for more than 14
years, the people in the Philippines may perceive her as a person with wealth
and may abduct and extort
a ransom from her. The applicant fears that because of
the corruption and the ineffective nature of the authorities she will be unable
to obtain State protection. The applicant fears that she will be unable to
relocate to other parts of the Philippines as a result
of her medical condition.
an accompany submission, dated 4 July 2013, the representative submitted that a
statutory declaration providing further details
of the applicant’s claims
will be provided “shortly”.
16 July 2014, a statutory declaration was provided by the applicant who states
that she is an applicant for a Complementary Protection
visa. The applicant
states that during the period between 1989 and 1999 she was a [trader] at [a]
Trading Post [in the] Philippines.
The [trading] post is a place where
[suppliers] bring their [products] for sale. As [traders] they buy from the
[suppliers] and sell
them to traders who come from different provinces. During
her first years as a trader, business was fairly good, despite the normal
and losses. From around 30 or 40 regular traders were doing business. The
competition was “stiff” as the number
of customers remained the
same. To stay in business they had to sell though consignment. When needed they
had to go straight to the
[supplier] to buy the [products] and as they were
selling through consignment they needed additional capital because they had to
wait for their customers remittances. There were some money lenders around to
provide quick loans without collateral, but with excessively
high interest
rates. Post-dated personals cheques and a written and signed promissory note
were all that was needed to obtain a quick
loan from these money lenders.
Sometime in 1998, the applicant was introduced to a fellow trader called [Mr A]
who was a money lender.
The applicant was able to borrow money from him about
four times and she paid back the money. As she was a good payer, he offered
convince his business partners to extend long term loans to the applicant on
which she would only need to pay the monthly interest
if she needed the money in
the future.
applicant states that in the early months of 1999, she was able to borrow
. [Mr A] executed the transaction on behalf of his business
partners with the terms agreed upon. The loan was renewable after one
interest rate of 10% per month. Interest was to be paid in advance for 12
consecutive months through post-dated personal
cheques. If she needed to renew
the loan after one year, she had to sign a new promissory note and issue fresh
post-dated personal
cheques for the amount she owed. The applicant ended up with
nothing, and they had no money for business transactions. Their business
because they ran out of money. They bought the [products] at a high price and
because supplies had flooded the market they
could not sell all the [products]
at [once]. The price of [products] also dropped. There were many other suppliers
which inevitably
resulted in high competition. That is why the debt increased
and they were unable to make the payments on time. As they were unable
the payments on time to [Mr A], further interest was added to the principal.
November 1999, the applicant and her husband arrived in Australia. During the
early months of 2000, the applicant remembers
sending her sister [Ms B] to
travel [to] see [Mr A] to convey the message to him that there is no way she
could renew her loan but
she would be able to resolve the problem overseas and
they would pay whatever was owed to the group in the future. The
applicant’s
sister was told by [Mr A] that he would try to understand the
situation, but he had no control over his business partners. He stressed
his partners were capable of locating them in any part of the country and they
needed to pay whatever was due to them including
any amount of interest which
was owed. The applicant’s sister told her that between 2001 and 2008 some
strangers tried to ask
could not remember the exact year when these incidents occurred. Threats
made to his sister, [Ms B] who could not make the payment and [Mr A] asked [Ms
B] where the applicant and her husband were living
and warned her that
“something bad would happen”. During 2006 strangers went to [Ms
B]’s house and asked where
the applicant and her husband were living. The
strangers did not mention their names. The applicant fears that if they return
the Philippines, because they were unable to clear the debt, that [Mr A] and
his business partners will extort money from them and
if they are unable to pay
they will kill them. They fear that they will be unable to obtain state
protection. The applicant also
states that due to her medical condition, [she]
is unable to work and she needs to undergo daily [treatment] to survive. She
that if she returns to the Philippines she will be unable to relocate to
another part of the Philippines.
provided in support of the applicant included several medical documents relating
to the applicant’s [medical] condition;
a permit to engage in business
issued by the office of the Municipal Mayor in the [province]; Sanitary Permit
to Operate a [Product]
Dealer issued to the applicant by the office of the
Municipal Mayor; Promissory Note for [Product] Dealers at [location]; Several
Promissory Notes for [Mr A], dated between July 1988 and August 1999 for varying
amounts, totalling approximately .
applicant was interviewed by the delegate [in] July 2014. The Tribunal has
listened to the CD Rom recording of the interview and
is satisfied that the
summary as set out in the delegate’s decision record is accurate.
Application for review
lodging the application to the Tribunal, the representative provided a copy of
the delegate’s decision record. The Tribunal
subsequently received a
submission advising the Tribunal that it did not consider it was in “our
clients’ lawful interests”
to give the Tribunal a copy of the
delegate’s decision record and it would be a “breach of our
professional and ethical
obligations to our clients to do so”. The
submission also included advice on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to review
matter. At the Tribunal hearing, the applicant and representatives were
advised that a copy of the delegate’s decision record
had been provided to
the Tribunal.
the submission provided to the Tribunal, the representative provided statutory
declarations and letters from various persons supporting
the applicants and
requesting that they are permitted to stay in Australia permanently. Various
photographs of the applicants with
children and other persons were provided. A
letter from the applicant’s Parish Priest [was] also provided.
applicant also provided a letter from a Specialist [at a hospital] who states
that the applicant has [a medical condition] and
needs daily [treatment] in
order to sustain her life. [The doctor] states that the best treatment for the
applicant [is an organ]
replacement. He states that to the “best of my
knowledge” neither [medical treatment] nor transplantation is provided
free of charge in the Philippines and were the applicant to return she would be
unable to survive unless she was able to pay the
high cost of [treatment]. If
she were to undergo transplantation she would also need costly medications to
prevent the transplant
from rejecting.
applicants appeared before the Tribunal on 21 May 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The Tribunal hearing was conducted
with the assistance of an
interpreter in the Tagalog and English languages. The applicants were
represented in relation to the review
by their registered migration agent.
ASSESSMENT OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
Are there substantial grounds for believing that,
as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the applicants being removed from
Australia to the Philippines, that there is a real risk that they will suffer
significant harm?
Tribunal has considered whether there is a real risk that the applicants will
suffer significant harm in the Philippines, which
is their “receiving
country”. The Tribunal does not accept, having considered all of the
evidence, that the applicants
are truthful witnesses. The Tribunal considers
that they have fabricated their most recent claims to fear harm in the
Philippines
due to a debt owed to money lenders. The Tribunal considers that
these claims have been manufactured in an attempt to remain in Australia
several years in which the applicant and her husband pursued an application on a
different basis, before becoming unlawful
for several years. The
Tribunal’s consideration of the evidence and its reasons for reaching
these conclusions follows.
Claims relating to debts to money
indicated above, the delegate’s decision record indicates that the
applicants initially lodged an application for Protection
visas [in] December
1999. In that application, the applicant’s husband claimed that he ran a
successful business and in 1998
his envious neighbours accused him of being a
communist. He claimed that in April 1998 the police came to their home to look
them. The applicant’s husband claimed that he and his wife were not
subsequently died in
jail. The applicant’s husband also claimed that the government sent agents
to look for him and they came
to Australia to escape. The decision record also
indicates that the applicants appealed the decision to refuse to grant them the
Protection visas to the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT) but they did not appear
before the RRT for their scheduled hearings on 16 August
2000. They subsequently
appealed the decision to the Federal Court, but withdrew that application and
then made an application to
the Minister for Intervention, which was later
refused. The applicants resided in Australia unlawfully for a number of years.
the Department interview, the applicant was asked why she had made no mention of
her claims to fear harm from money lenders
in the previous application and she
was also advised that when she lodged the current application in July 2013 she
again made no
mention of owing money to money lenders. In response, the
applicant stated that she was scared that people would get to know about
applicant also told the delegate that her claims were truthful and she could not
“think along these lines” due
to her poor health. The
applicant’s migration agent submitted during the interview that the
applicant had not put forward these
claims because she was unrepresented when
she lodged her previous application, and she did not realise when she lodged her
application that they were legitimate claims for Protection.
this issue was discussed during the Tribunal hearing, the applicant was advised
that the initial set of claims which were provided
for the first application did
not refer to a debt in the Philippines, and even when she lodged the current
application she did not
include this claim. In response, the applicant stated
that she was ashamed to mention such a “big debt”. The applicant
also stated that she cannot remember what she claimed and they had some serious
problems and the people who they owe the debt to
want to have them kidnapped or
killed. When asked why there was no mention of a loan and the first application
was made on the basis
that envious neighbours had told the police and asked
whether the claims in the 1999 application were true, the applicant stated
“we were telling the truth then, but they did not believe us”. When
asked if she could explain in further detail
what had happened in relation to
her husband being accused of a Communist and her parents in law dying in jail,
the applicant stated
that she cannot say that they died. The applicant stated
that somebody helped them to do that because they wanted Bridging visas.
Tribunal again queried whether the claims were true or if they had been
fabricated. The applicant stated they were made by a
“fake agent”.
The applicant confirmed that the claims were not true. When asked why she had
pursued those claims for
several years to the RRT, the Federal Court and the
Minister, the applicant stated that they did not make those claims and they were
made by the “fake agent”. When asked whether she was aware she was
making false claims, the applicant stated that they
were “just signing
off”. When asked what she thought her claims for protection were about,
the applicant stated that
what she is now saying is the truth. When asked why
she did not make the claims relating to the debt for 15 years, and not for a
year after the application was made to the Department, which was when she
provided a statutory declaration, the applicant stated
that what we are saying
now is true, “really true”.
Tribunal does not accept the applicant’s evidence to the Department or the
submission that the applicant did not make the
debt claims in the initial
application because she was unrepresented. The Tribunal considers that the
applicant’s evidence
indicates that she and her husband obtained a
“fake agent” and knowingly pursued an application based on false
for several years because they wanted to obtain Bridging visas, so that
they could live and work in Australia lawfully, and following
the refusal of
their initial application they remained in Australia unlawfully for some years.
The Tribunal considers it evident
that the applicant was aware she and her
husband had made an application on a false basis. The Tribunal considers that
the applicants’
willingness to pursue an application which was based on
false claims to the Department, the Refugee Review Tribunal, the Federal
and to the Minister, for some five years, casts considerable doubts on their
credibility and the truthfulness of their current
claims. As discussed during
the hearing, despite being in Australia for some 15 years, the first time any
claims to fear harm in
relation to a debt were made were in July 2014 when the
applicant provided a statutory declaration to the Department. This was a
after the application on Complementary grounds was lodged in July 2013, and at
that time referred only to the applicant’s
medical condition and fear that
she and her husband would be perceived as targets for extortion due to their
extended period of time
in Australia. The Tribunal does not accept that the
claims relating to the debt would not have been made at some time in the
15 years, during which the applicants pursued various other
applications in an attempt to remain in Australia, if the applicants
feared harm in the Philippines due to a debt. The Tribunal also does not accept
the explanation provided by the applicant
and migration agent for failing to
include this claim when the application was lodged in July 2013 with the
assistance of the registered
migration agent. The Tribunal considers that the
evidence in relation to this issue is indicative of the fact that the applicants
have manufactured their current claims in relation to the debt in an attempt to
provide a basis for remaining in Australia.
Tribunal further considers that aspects of the applicant’s evidence in
relation to the debt are not credible. The applicant
told the Tribunal that she
owes about 1 million
to money lenders and, despite the fact that
her sister had been threatened by the money lenders, she and her husband had not
back any of the money. When asked why she would put her [children], her
sister and other siblings in the Philippines at risk of harm
by not paying the
debt or at least some of the debt, the applicant stated that in Australia they
had to pay rental and other costs
and she then developed [a medical condition]
and all of their money went to other costs. The applicant also claimed that she
not pay any of the money back because the money lenders wanted her to pay it
all at once rather than in small lots. When asked why
the money lenders would
not want to take whatever money they could, the applicant stated that they only
wanted it in one repayment.
The applicant also claimed, when asked what would
happen to them when they returned to the Philippines, that people would be
for them at the airport and they would immediately be killed. When
advised that it is difficult to accept that after 16 years and,
given the size
of the population of the Philippines, that she and her husband would be unable
to reside safely somewhere in the Philippines,
the applicant stated that
wherever they live they will track them down and even in Australia people have
been asking about them.
Tribunal does not accept that it is credible that the applicant would genuinely
believe that she would be caught and harmed as
soon as she arrived at the
airport. Nor does the Tribunal accept that she would genuinely believe she would
be unable to live safely
somewhere in the Philippines which has a population of
several million people, as a result of a debt which arose 16 years ago. Nor
the Tribunal accept that the applicant and her husband would not have made all
efforts to ensure that at least some of the debt
was paid off or arrangements
made for them to pay it instalments rather than leaving the applicant’s
sister to allegedly be
threatened over the course of several years by money
lenders. The Tribunal considers that the evidence in relation to this issue
further indicative of the fact that the applicants’ claims regarding the
debt have been manufactured.
Furthermore,
the Tribunal considers that the evidence, as set out in the delegate’s
decision record, indicating that the applicant
arrived in Australia by herself
[in] October 1999 and then returned to the Philippines [in] October 1999, before
again returning
to Australia with her husband [in] November 1999, is further
indicative of the fact that she had no fear of harm in the Philippines
and she did not owe a debt to money lenders. When this issue was discussed
during the Department interview, the applicant
told the delegate that her
husband was in hiding in the Philippines and although her husband had been
granted a visa for Australia
[in] October 2009 they were told not to leave the
Philippines immediately because they may be questioned. The representative also
submitted that a month was not a significant amount of time for the applicant to
spend in the Philippines to finalise her affairs
and referred to evidence
regarding loan sharks in the Philippines. When asked during the hearing about
her return to the Philippines
in October 2009 for one month, the applicant
stated that her husband was in hiding and she needed to go back to accompany him
Australia. When asked why her husband would not have been capable of
travelling to Australia without her assistance, the applicant
stated that
because he was in hiding she needed to collect him and help him to travel to
Australia. In response to the Tribunal’s
comments that her return to the
Philippines would have made it more dangerous for both of them, the applicant
again stated that she
had to ensure her husband would come to Australia.
Tribunal does not accept that the applicant would risk her own safety and her
husband’s by returning to the Philippines.
The Tribunal does not accept
her explanation or the representative’s submission and considers that the
applicant returned to
the Philippines because she did not genuinely fear harm at
that time from money lenders. The Tribunal considers it evident that the
applicant came to Australia in 1999 with the intention of fabricating a false
set of claims to enable herself and her husband to
reside in Australia for an
extended period of time whilst holding Bridging visas, and that it was their
intention to extend their
time in Australia by pursuing different applications
to the RRT, the Court and the Minister. The Tribunal considers that following
the cessation of their Bridging visas they knowingly remained in Australia and
have since lodged a further application for Protection
in reliance on the
Complementary Protection provisions which is again based on false claims in
relation to a debt in the Philippines.
Having considered all of the evidence in
relation to the claims relating to a debt in the Philippines, the Tribunal does
that the applicants borrowed any money from money lenders which has
not been repaid or that they left the Philippines and came to
Australia for this
reason. Nor does the Tribunal accept that the applicant’s sister has been
threatened or anyone has pursued
the applicants or made inquiries about them in
either Australia or the Philippines as a result of any debts they owe to money
The Tribunal does not accept that the applicants were ever in hiding in
the Philippines and considers that the applicant’s
Philippines was undoubtedly that she wished to finalise some affairs before
returning to Australia with her husband,
where they intended to pursue false
claims for protection to enable them to live and work in Australia for an
extended period. The
Tribunal does not accept that the documetns provided to the
Department which are purportedly loan documents to [Mr A] are genuine
and considers that the documetns have been fabricated to support the
applicant’s claims regarding a debt.
Claims relating to
the applicant’s [medical] condition
Tribunal has also considered the applicant’s claims that she will suffer
significant harm in the Philippines due to her
inability to pay for medical
costs for [medical treatment and organ] transplant, which she requires in order
to save and prolong
her life. The Tribunal accepts the medical documentation in
relation to this issue. The Tribunal accepts the representative’s
submission and his reference to an article indicating that costs associated with
[the] disease and associated operations are expensive
in the Philippines.
However, as discussed during the hearing, the independent evidence indicates
that the Philippines has made significant
improvements in terms of health care
and a recent Freedom in the World Report from 2015 states that the Philippines
is one of only
a few countries in Asia that has made significant improvements in
health and education.
Other reports also indicate that the Philippines has a good standard of health
care and generally hospitals and medical care is affordable.
A report from
Allianz Worldwide Care from 2014 states that the healthcare system in the
Philippines is considered to be of “a
good standard” and medical
practitioners are graduates from the top universities and most of them have
studied in medical schools
in the United States and Filipino nurses are trained
by nursing schools that have excellent standards. The report also states that
“finding the right hospital in the Philippines is not considered too
difficult as there are a number of hospitals to choose
from” and public
and private hospitals both offer good services, although private hospitals are
more expensive. The report
also states that “generally speaking, hospitals
are not that expensive in the Philippines. Medicines are also affordable; both
locals and expatriates will attest to this
Tribunal has doubts about the applicant’s claims that she and her husband
will be unable to afford to pay the costs associated
with [an organ] transplant.
The Tribunal considers that the applicant’s evidence about her and her
husband’s financial
circumstances was not truthful and does not accept
that her husband has not worked in Australia for some nine years and they have
been reliant on friends and welfare agencies and “odd jobs” to
support themselves. The Tribunal also has doubts that
she would be unable to
obtain sufficient funds from friends and family members to enable her to undergo
an operation which would
save her life. The Tribunal also has doubts that she
and her husband have no savings or resources after many years of living and
working in Australia. However, even accepting that she is unable to pay the
costs associated with medical treatment for her [condition],
as discussed during
both the Department interview and the Tribunal hearing, the applicant’s
circumstances do not fall within
the Complementary Protection provisions. The
five limbs of the definition of ‘significant harm,’ as defined in
and s.5(1), require that there is a real risk that the applicant will
suffer arbitrary deprivation of life, the death penalty, torture,
inhuman treatment or punishment or degrading treatment or punishment. 'Cruel or
inhuman treatment or punishment', 'degrading
treatment or punishment', and
'torture', are further defined in s.5(1) of the Act. 'Cruel or inhuman treatment
or punishment' is
defined to mean an act or omission by which severe pain or
suffering, whether physical or mental, is inflicted on a person, or pain
suffering, whether physical or mental, is inflicted on a person, so long as, in
all the circumstances, the act or omission could
reasonably be regarded as cruel
or inhuman in nature. The pain or suffering must be intentionally inflicted.
Degrading treatment
or punishment is defined to mean an act or omission which
causes, and is intended to cause, extreme humiliation which is unreasonable.
Torture is defined as an act or omission by which severe pain or suffering,
whether physical or mental, is inflicted on a person.
The pain or suffering must
be intentionally inflicted. Furthermore, it must be inflicted for one of five
purposes: for the purpose
of obtaining from the person or a third person
information or a confession; for the purpose of punishing the person for an act
they or a third person committed or is suspected of having committed; for
the purpose of intimidating or coercing the person or a
third person; for any
purpose related to one of those purposes; or for any reason based on
discrimination that is inconsistent with
the Articles of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (the ICCPR).
the applicant claimed during the Department interview that she will suffer the
death penalty if she is forced to return to
the Philippines where she has
claimed she will be unable to access medical treatment due to the costs
associated with the operation
as well as any ongoing costs associated with
medications and treatment following the operation, the Tribunal does not accept
the inability to access medical services in the Philippines will result in
the applicant suffering the death penalty, which is a
term of punishment for a
criminal offence which is not available in the Philippines. The Tribunal does
not accept that the term ‘death
penalty’ in the definition of
significant harm envisages the type of harm described by the
the Tribunal accept that the applicant will suffer arbitrary deprivation of
life. The Department's Complementary Protection
Guidelines, although not binding
on the Tribunal, refer to arbitrary deprivation of life as involving elements of
injustice, lack
of predictability, lack of proportionality and that the concept
of arbitrariness is broader than unlawfulness. The Guidelines also
certain circumstances which will generally not be considered inconsistent with
Article 7, such as general socio-economic
conditions, breach of social and
economic rights, absence or inadequacy of medical treatment or medical treatment
which is a medical
or therapeutic
Federal Circuit Court has also held that the circumstances where such things may
amount to significant harm may be few, although
it also stated that they need to
be determined with actual reference to an applicant's circumstances rather than
in the abstract.
Tribunal is not satisfied, having considered the applicant’s circumstances
and the independent evidence, that appropriate
medical treatment is unavailable
or that her difficulties in paying for medical treatment in the Philippines for
any of the conditions
from which she suffers, constitutes significant harm.
Accordingly, the Tribunal is also not satisfied that any difficulties the
may have in paying for medical treatment constitutes arbitrary
deprivation of life or the death penalty. The Tribunal is also not
that there is the necessary element of intent to constitute torture, cruel or
inhuman treatment or punishment or degrading
treatment or punishment. The
Tribunal finds that there are not substantial grounds for believing, as a
necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the applicant being removed from
Australia to the Philippines that there is a real risk that she will suffer
significant
harm on this basis.
reaching the above conclusions, the Tribunal has considered the
applicant’s claims that she had difficulties recalling dates
due to her health problems and the medication that currently takes. The
applicant’s husband also stated that the
applicant may have had some
difficulties with dates due to her medical condition. The Tribunal is prepared
to accept her evidence
in relation to this issue, but does not accept that any
claims or evidence was provided indicating that she was unfit to attend the
hearing or unfit to provide evidence. The applicant’s husband was present
throughout the hearing and given an opportunity to
explain in further detail any
of the claims he felt the applicant had difficulty articulating. The Tribunal
makes no adverse findings
in relation to any difficulties the applicant had in
recalling dates or some aspects of her claims. The Tribunal’s adverse
findings as discussed above are not based on the applicant’s failure to
recall dates or specific incidents.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is not satisfied on the evidence before it that there are
substantial grounds for believing that as a necessary
and foreseeable
consequence of the applicants being removed from Australia to the Philippines
that there is a real risk that they
will suffer significant harm as a result of
a debt or as a result of any difficulties paying for medical costs. The Tribunal
not satisfied that there is a real risk that they will be the victims of
extortion because of their extended period of time in Australia,
initially claimed. Although the Tribunal accepts that the applicants will have
difficulties returning and resettling in the
Philippines and has regard to their
claims that they have “nothing” there, the Tribunal is not satisfied
that they will
be unable to resettle in the Philippines where they lived for
most of their lives before coming to Australia. The Tribunal is also
satisfied that any difficulties that they will have in resettling in the
Philippines due to their financial situation or any
other factors rises to the
level of significant harm. The Tribunal is not satisfied, therefore, that there
are substantial grounds
for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the applicants being removed from Australia to a receiving
the Philippines, there is a real risk that they will suffer significant
harm, including arbitrary deprivation of life, the death
penalty, torture, cruel
or inhuman treatment or punishment or degrading treatment or punishment.
Request for Ministerial Intervention
applicant’s representative requested that the Tribunal consider making a
recommendation to the Minster for Intervention
due to the compassionate
circumstances relating to the applicant’s need for [an organ] transplant.
The Tribunal accepts that
the applicants have found themselves in difficult
circumstances in relation to the applicant’s poor health. As stated above,
the Tribunal has been prepared to accept that the applicants would have
difficulties paying for [treatment], the costs of a transplant
operation in the
Philippines and any associated ongoing costs. The Tribunal has considered the
request to refer the matter to the
Minister, but has declined to do so. The
applicants are represented by experienced migration agents who will be able to
assist them
with any such application without the need for a referral from the
Tribunal. Furthermore, having regard to the Ministerial Guidelines
applicants lengthy and poor immigration history, the Tribunal does not consider
it appropriate to refer this matter to the
CONCLUSIONS
the reasons given above the Tribunal is not satisfied that any of the applicants
is a person in respect of whom Australia has
protection obligations. Therefore
the applicants do not satisfy the criterion set out in s.36(2)(aa) for a
protection visa. It follows
that they are also unable to satisfy the criterion
set out in s.36(2)(c). As they do not satisfy the criteria for a protection
they cannot be granted the visa.
Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicants Protection visas.
Susan Pinto
ATTACHMENT A - RELEVANT LAW
accordance with
Migration Act 1958
(the Act), the
Minister may only grant a visa if the Minister is satisfied that the criteria
prescribed for that visa by the Act
and the Migration Regulations 1994 (the
Regulations) have been satisfied. The criteria for the grant of a Protection
visa are set
out in section 36 of the Act and Part 866 of Schedule 2 to the
Regulations. Subsection 36(2) of the Act provides
(2) A criterion for a protection visa
is that the applicant for the visa is:
(a) a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations under the Refugees
Convention as amended by
the Refugees Protocol; or
(aa) a non citizen in Australia (other than a non citizen mentioned in paragraph
(a)) in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as
a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the non citizen being removed from
Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that the non citizen will
suffer significant harm; or
(b) a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (a); and
(ii) holds a protection visa of the same class as that applied for by the
applicant; or
(c) a non citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a non
citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (aa); and
(ii) holds a protection visa of the same class as that applied for by the
Complementary protection criterion
applicant for a protection visa who does not meet the refugee criterion in
paragraph 36(2)(a) of the Act may nevertheless meet
the complementary protection
criterion in paragraph 36(2)(aa) of the Act, set out above. A person will
suffer ‘significant
harm’ if they will be arbitrarily deprived of
their life, if the death penalty will be carried out on them or if they will
subjected to ‘torture’ or to ‘cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment’ or to ‘degrading treatment
or punishment’. The
expressions ‘torture’, ‘cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment’ and ‘degrading
treatment or punishment’ are
further defined in subsection 5(1) of the Act.
Ministerial direction
accordance with Ministerial Direction No. 56, made under section 499 of the Act,
the Tribunal is required to take account of policy
guidelines prepared by the
Department of Immigration and Citizenship - ‘PAM3: Refugee and
humanitarian - Complementary Protection
Guidelines’ and ‘PAM3:
Refugee and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines’ - and any country
information assessment
prepared by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
expressly for protection status determination purposes, to the extent that
are relevant to the decision under consideration.
CXBD6A0DE5206:
"Freedom in the World 2015 - Philippines",
Freedom House
"Healthcare in the Philippines",
Allianz Worldwide Care
, 01 January 2014,
http://www.allianzworldwidecare.com/healthcare-in-the-philippines?
[2013] 13 (Reithmuller FM, 31 January 2013) which discusses the wording
of s.36(2A)(b). In this case, the Federal Magistrates Court
found that it is not
sufficient that the person has committed a crime punishable by the death
penalty, but that there is a real risk
that it would be carried out.
Department of
Immigration, PAM3 ‘Complementary Protection Guidelines’, section 27,
as re-issued 1 January 2014. The Guidelines
go on to state that certain
circumstances of extreme deprivation, deliberately inflicted by a state, may
violate Article
[2013] FCCA 1768 (Nicholls
J, 31 October 2013) at [114]. The Court
referred to circumstances such as payment for medical expenses and inability to
attain employment.
RTF format (222 KB)
Signed PDF/A format