Howieson v Chief of Army [2021] ADFDAT 1 (9 July 2021)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Howieson v Chief of Army
[2021] ADFDAT 1
Appeal from:
General Court Martial
File number:
DFDAT 1 of 2021
Judgment of:
LOGAN J (PRESIDENT), BRERETON JA (DEPUTY
PRESIDENT) AND PERRY J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
DEFENCE AND WAR
– appeal from a
General Court Martial – where the appellant was found guilty of
prejudicial conduct per
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) – where the prosecution had adduced tendency evidence to the
effect that the appellant had a tendency to expose his penis
to female members
of the Papua New Guinea Defence Force – where the Judge Advocate had
directed an acquittal on a charge of
an act of indecency without consent after
the close of the prosecution’s case – where the tendency evidence
was no longer
admissible – where the directed acquittal was made before
the appellant had an opportunity to produce evidence inconsistent
prosecution’s case on the charge subject to the directed acquittal –
whether there was a material irregularity
in the course of the proceedings
before the General Court Martial and whether a substantial miscarriage of
justice had occurred in
the terms of
Defence Force
Discipline Appeals Act 1955
(Cth) – where the Judge Advocate gave
clear directions to the panel – where the panel was formed of experienced
– held that the panel was exposed to highly prejudicial evidence
irrelevant in the circumstances which had a tendency to induce
subconscious bias
against the appellant – material irregularity occasioning substantial
miscarriage of justice – appeal
Legislation:
Constitution
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Migration Act 1958
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Regulation 2016
(Cth) reg 8
Defence Regulation 2016
(Cth) reg 24
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Criminal Appeal Act 1907
Cases cited:
Armstrong v The Queen
[2017] NSWCCA
CNY17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] HCA 50
Crofts v The Queen
[1996] HCA 22
(1996) 186 CLR 427
Gilbert v The Queen
(2000) 201 CLR 414
Hembury v Chief of the General Staff
(1998) 193 CLR 641
Mraz v The Queen
[1955] HCA 59
(1955) 93 CLR 493
Nudd v The Queen
[2006] HCA 9
(2006) 80 ALJR 614
Patel v The Queen
[2012] HCA 29
(2012) 247 CLR 531
Private R v Cowen
[2020] HCA 31
(2020) 94 ALJR 849
Public Utilities Commission of the District of Columbia v Pollak
[1952] USSC 69
(1952) 343 US 451
[1965] VicRp 63
[1965] VR 469
Sutton v The Queen
[1984] HCA 5
(1984) 152 CLR 528
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
(2005) 224 CLR 300
Wilson v Wilson
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 23
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr RA Pearce
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Salerno Law
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 1 of 2021
WILLIAM MICHAEL HOWIESON
CHIEF OF ARMY
LOGAN, BRERETON AND PERRY JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
appeal be allowed.
conviction of the appellant by a General Court Martial on 15 September 2020 in
respect of a charge of prejudicial conduct contrary
Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth), being the third charge set out in a charge
sheet dated 18 March 2019, be quashed.
be a new trial of the appellant for that offence.
Registrar send to the Judge Advocate General a copy of the Tribunal’s
reasons, together with a copy of the reviewing officer's
report in respect of
the conviction and sentence.
REASONS FOR
THE TRIBUNAL:
INTRODUCTION
7 September 2020, then Captain William Michael Howieson was presented for trial
before a General Court Martial convened at the
Court Martial Facility at
Fyshwick in the Australian Capital Territory in respect of the following alleged
service offences under
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
First Charge –
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) – Act of indecency without consent
Being a defence member at Taurama Military Barracks, Port Moresby, Papua New
Guinea, at approximately 0900h on 16 November 2018,
committed an act of
indecency in the presence of [named female nursing officer of the Papua New
Guinea Defence Force (PNGDF) –
“CAPT N”], a member of the
Papua New Guinea Defence Force, without her consent, and being reckless as to
whether she
was consenting, by exposing his erect penis to her and saying,
“Have a feel”, or words to that effect.
Second Charge – s 61(3), DFDA and s 60(1),
Crimes Act 1900
– Act of indecency without consent
Being a defence member at Taurama Military Barracks, Port Moresby, Papua New
Guinea, at approximately 0900h on 16 November 2018,
committed an act of
indecency in the presence of [CAPT N], a member of the Papua New Guinea Defence
Force, without her consent, and
being reckless as to whether she was consenting,
by exposing his penis to her, pointing to his groin and saying, “I do have
a lump”, or words to that effect.
Third charge – s 60(1), DFDA – Prejudicial conduct
Being a defence member at Taurama Military Barracks, Port Moresby, Papua New
Guinea, at approximately 1300h on 16 November 2018,
did an act likely to bring
discredit on the Australian Defence Force by telling [CAPT N], a member of the
Papua New Guinea Defence
Force, that his doctor had requested in a letter that
she help [CAPT Howieson] to “collect a semen sample” or words to
that effect.
Fourth Charge – s 61(3), DFDA and s 60(1),
Crimes Act 1900
– Act of indecency without consent
Being a defence member at Taurama Military Barracks, Port Moresby, Papua New
Guinea, at approximately 1230h on 7 December 2018, committed
an act of indecency
in the presence of [named female Lance Corporal – “LCPL B]”, a
member of the Papua New Guinea
Defence Force, without her consent, and being
reckless as to whether she was consenting, by exposing his penis to her and
masturbating.
the dates of the alleged offences, CAPT Howieson (to use his then rank) was
attached as a liaison officer to an infantry battalion
in the Papua New Guinea
Defence Force (PNGDF), the 1st Battalion, Royal Pacific Islands Regiment (1
RPIR), based at Taurama Military
Barracks on the outskirts of Port Moresby in
the National Capital District of Papua New Guinea. This case therefore
illustrates the
extra-territorial application which, by s 9, the DFDA has in
respect of defence members such as CAPT Howieson (and “defence
civilians”, as defined by that Act).
is a matter of history that the offences alleged to have been committed on 16
November 2018 occurred during the period in which
the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC) Economic Leaders Meeting was held in Port Moresby. The
evidence discloses that this
meeting brought with it a heightened operational
tempo for 1 RPIR and, related to that, particular duties for CAPT Howieson in
that unit to prepare for its APEC-related responsibilities.
10 September 2020, the third day of what proved to be a six-day trial, the
prosecution’s case having closed and CAPT Howieson
having embarked earlier
that day in giving his evidence in chief as the first of the witnesses then
proposed to be called in the
defence case, the Chief Judge Advocate, Brigadier M
Cowen QC, who was appointed as the Judge Advocate to the court martial, directed
the court martial panel to return a verdict of “Not guilty” in
respect of charge 4. This they did. There was no application
by the defending
officers for a mistrial to be declared and for the court martial to be dissolved
in light of this development.
Chief Judge Advocate immediately gave explicit directions (detailed below) to
the panel that they were to disregard evidence given
by CAPT N to the extent it
related to charge 4, by LCPL B and by her husband. Their evidence had been
tendered not only in respect
of charge 4 but also, as a result of a pre-trial
ruling by the Chief Judge Advocate, the making of which was opposed
unsuccessfully
by CAPT Howieson, admitted as tendency evidence in respect of
charges 1 and 2 but not charge 3. A corollary of the opposition to
admission of the tendency evidence was a related pre-trial application by CAPT
Howieson, also unsuccessful, for the charges entailing
different complainants,
charges 1, 2 and 3 on the one hand (where CAPT N was the complainant) and charge
4 on the other (where LCPL
B was the complainant), to be tried separately.
the direction in respect of the ignoring of evidence led in relation to charge
4, CAPT Howieson continued and completed his
evidence and other witnesses
were called in the defence case, although no evidence was led by the defence
relative to charge 4.
the sixth day of trial, 15 September 2020, the panel returned verdicts of not
guilty in respect of charges 1 and 2 but guilty in
respect of charge 3. The
following day, the panel sentenced CAPT Howieson:
(a) to be reduced to the rank of Lieutenant
with seniority in that rank to be dated from 16 September 2018; and
(b) to be severely reprimanded.
sentencing CAPT Howieson, the court martial described the offence found proven
as, “a premeditated breach of trust in an
important representational
role with a key regional partner” and “a clear violation of Army
values”. The panel
added that they had taken “into account the delay
to the conduct of the trial and the strong referee reports”. They stated,
“[i]mportantly the sentence reflects the seriousness of the offence but
affords CAPT Howieson the opportunity for rehabilitation.”
Howieson has now appealed by leave against his conviction in respect of charge
3. Under the
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
(Cth) (Appeals
Act), no appeal lies against sentence. A grant of leave was necessary in order
to appeal against the conviction, as
the appeal was lodged after the 30-day
period prescribed by s 21 of the Appeals Act. With commendable fairness,
the respondent Chief
of Army did not oppose the grant of leave. CAPT Howieson
filed evidence by affidavit which, in our view, provided a reasonable
explanation
for the delay. In light of the stance adopted by the Chief of Army,
it is not necessary that we detail that evidence. Leave to appeal
was granted at
the commencement of the hearing.
pleaded, the grounds of appeal are as follows:
(a) the learned Chief Judge Advocate having directed
mid-trial (in the course of the Appellant’s examination-in-chief) that
verdict of acquittal be entered in respect of the Fourth charge, the failure to
direct a mistrial of the proceedings in respect
of the remaining charges so
prejudiced the Appellant’s trial as to render the ultimate finding of
guilt in respect of the Third
charge unfair and unjust, occasioning a
miscarriage of justice; and
(b) that in all the circumstances of the case, the conviction is unsafe or
unsatisfactory.
pleaded grounds correspond with grounds of appeal made permissible by
s 23(1)(c) and s 23(1)(d) of the Appeals Act respectively.
developed in written and oral submissions, only ground (a) was pressed.
as was confirmed by counsel for CAPT Howieson in the course of oral submissions
before the Tribunal, the grounds of appeal
do not include an allegation that the
verdicts in respect of charges 1 and 2 on the one hand and charge 3 on the other
were inconsistent.
basis upon which a court martial may be dissolved by a judge advocate is where
the judge advocate considers that this course is
in the interests of justice: s
125(3), DFDA. On the appeal, CAPT Howieson submitted that, in the circumstances
prevailing at the
time of the directed acquittal, the Chief Judge Advocate ought
to have exercised this power so as to dissolve the court martial.
The admission
of evidence on charge 4 which was prejudicial to CAPT Howieson, but was rendered
irrelevant by the directed acquittal,
was said to be a material irregularity
which was beyond cure by directions, thus necessitating an order for
dissolution, with the
consequence that there was a substantial miscarriage of
the reasons which we set out below, that submission must be accepted and the
appeal upheld, with the third charge set out in a
charge sheet dated 18 March
2019 remitted for a new trial.
2. RELEVANT CONSIDERATIONS
was no difference between the parties as to the considerations which are
relevant. The case was argued with reference by analogy
to cases decided in the
exercise of judicial power in determining criminal appeals against conviction.
Some care needs to be adopted
with such authorities. A service tribunal such as
a general court martial does not exercise the judicial power of the Commonwealth
under Ch III of the
Constitution
but is obliged to act judicially,
“that is to say, in accordance with the requirements of reasonableness and
procedural fairness
to ensure that discipline is just”:
Private R v
[2020] HCA 31
(2020) 94 ALJR 849
Private R v Cowen
), at [56], per Kiefel CJ,
Bell and Keane JJ. Further, though comprised exclusively of superior court
judges, neither does this Tribunal
exercise the judicial power of the
Commonwealth:
Hembury v Chief of the General Staff
(1998) 193 CLR 641
). The limits of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in relation to
the quashing of a conviction are as specified by the text of s 23
of the Appeals
Act. As to s 23(1)(c) of the Appeals Act and as Gummow and Callinan JJ (with
whose reasons Hayne J agreed) stated
Paragraph (c) contains the two elements of
“material irregularity” and “substantial miscarriage of
There may be a “material irregularity” which does
not amount to a “substantial miscarriage of justice”.
Further, an
“irregularity” may not be “material” because, for
example, it was cured by what was done later
in the proceeding.
[Footnote references omitted]
The specification in s 23(1)(c) of the Appeals Act is progressively cumulative.
There must be an irregularity, it must be material,
and a substantial
miscarriage of justice must have occurred.
phrase “substantial miscarriage of justice” is a technical one with
a lengthy provenance. In
, at [37], Gummow and Callinan JJ (Hayne
J agreeing) cited with approval this observation made by Asprey JA in
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 23
Wilson v Wilson)
, at 35, about the
What will constitute a miscarriage of justice may
vary, not only in relation to the particular facts, but also with regard to the
reach the conclusion that a miscarriage of justice has taken place does not
require a finding that a different result necessarily
would have been reached in
the proceedings said to be affected by the miscarriage. It is enough if what is
done is not justice according
[Emphasis by Gummow and Callinan JJ – footnote references
authority cited by Asprey JA in
Wilson v Wilson
for the passage just
quoted is a judgment delivered by Fullagar J in
Mraz v The Queen
[1955] HCA 59
Mraz v The Queen
), at 514, an Australian case in respect of
criminal appellate jurisdiction conferred by a statute analogous to s 4(1) of
Criminal Appeal Act 1907
, at [41], the
plurality considered that it was erroneous to regard cases decided upon
provisos, for example as found in
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW), as equally applicable to what constitutes a “substantial
miscarriage of justice” in terms of s 23(1)(c) of the
Appeals Act.
Nonetheless, via the citation with approval of the passage from
of a use by analogy of observations in an authority derived from an
exercise of criminal appellate jurisdiction,
Mraz v The Queen
that such authorities are not regarded as completely irrelevant, providing they
are not uncritically applied to the exclusion
of the text of s 23(1)(c) and what
was observed in
in respect of that text and of the status of the
Tribunal. Responding to the approach adopted by the parties, we consider such
authorities
below but we make it plain that we regard what is stated by Gummow
and Callinan JJ (Hayne J agreeing) comprising the plurality in
authoritative.
is clear from the passage from
Wilson v Wilson
emphasised in
, whether or not there is a miscarriage of justice is inherently
specific to the circumstances of a given case, which circumstances
necessarily
include the nature of the jurisdiction exercised by a court martial as described
Private R v Cowen
(and quoted above). It was common ground between the
parties that a passage in the joint judgment in
Crofts v The Queen
[1996] HCA 22
186 CLR 427
) was pertinent. Necessarily, that must be by analogy
, at 440 – 441, Toohey, Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby JJ
canvassed, in a non-exhaustive way, considerations which are relevant:
No rigid rule can be adopted to govern decisions on an
application to discharge a jury for an inadvertent and potentially prejudicial
effect that occurs during a trial. The possibilities of slips occurring are
inescapable. Much depends upon the seriousness of the
occurrence in the context
of the contested issues; the stage at which the mishap occurs; the
deliberateness of the conduct;
and the likely effectiveness of a judicial
direction designed to overcome its apprehended impact
. As the court below
acknowledged, much leeway must be allowed to the trial judge to evaluate these
and other considerations relevant
to the fairness of the trial, bearing in mind
that the judge will usually have a better appreciation of the significance of
complained of, seen in context, than can be discerned from reading
transcript. ·
Nevertheless, the duty of the appellate court, where the exercise of discretion
to refuse a discharge is challenged, is not confined
to examining the reasons
given for the order to make sure that the correct principles were kept in mind.
The appellate court must
also decide
whether, in these
circumstances, the result of the refusal to discharge the jury occasioned the
risk of a substantial miscarriage
of justice.
[Emphasis added]
the statement in
, at 441, that: “In other words, can the
appellate court say with assurance that, but for the admission of the
inadmissible
evidence, the conviction was inevitable?”, has not passed
without later criticism. In
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
(2005) 224 CLR 300
), at [32] – [33], Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne, Callinan
and Heydon JJ stated, with reference to it and other similar pronouncements
statements are to be found in the decided cases that describe the task presented
by the proviso as being to decide whether conviction
“inevitable”. Other cases ask whether the accused was deprived of a
“chance which was fairly open ... of being
acquitted” or a
“real chance” of acquittal.
expressions attempt to describe the operation of the statutory language in other
words. They must not be taken as substitutes
for that language. They are
expressions which may mask the nature of the appellate court’s task in
considering the application
of the proviso.
[Footnote references omitted]
Recalling what was said in
, this criticism has added resonance in
relation to an appeal to the Tribunal.
so, it is always relevant, in our view, to take into account the direction given
in respect of the inadmissible evidence and
the likely effectiveness of that
direction as part of the overall factual matrix.
3. HAS A MATERIAL IRREGULARITY BEEN ESTABLISHED?
(a) The Chief Judge Advocate’s direction to the
Chief Judge Advocate’s direction to the panel following the directed
acquittal was immediate and emphatic. He stated:
I direct you to ignore any evidence that you heard in
relation to Charge 4 and that was all of the evidence of [the second complainant
– LCPL B], all of the evidence her husband, and part of the evidence of
[the first complainant – CAPT N], where she gave
evidence about what [the
second complainant] told her about that offence. You will remember it's been
referred to as complaint evidence.
You will treat that as if that evidence was
never before you. You're not to speculate and I will remind you in due course
that you're
not to speculate about matters which are not before you.
You are only to determine the guilt or innocence of [the appellant] on those
remaining three charges, only on the evidence that's
relevant and admissible to
those three charges and none other. The evidence that I have just referred you
to is only relevant to
Charge 4 which is no longer before you. So you must put
that other evidence out of your mind and it is irrelevant to any consideration
of the remaining three charges.
... There will be no such tendency available to you now in this case because
Charge 4 is not before you.
... you are to ignore any invitation about tendency reasoning that he did that
act on more than one occasion because he’s been
acquitted of Charge 4 and
it simply doesn't arise because Charges 1 and 2 are the one event. ...
To that extent, the evidence for you to consider when you retire has been
reduced with those directions in mind. I can’t stress
that direction
enough. None of that evidence in relation to Charge 4 is now before you, nor any
consideration of any allegation that
existed in relation to the circumstances
arising from Charge 4.
The Chief Judge Advocate returned to this subject in his final summing up. He
re-iterated to the panel that “you must not speculate
is not before you that you think may be relevant.” In this regard, he
made specific reference to the evidence
hitherto led concerning charge 4. He
repeated his previous directions to look at the evidence relating to each
particular charge
and deal with each charge separately. He also directed the
panel that it was impermissible for them to reason that because there
charges, CAPT Howieson must have committed the offences.
Joinder for trial of the four
charges and tendency ruling
part of the overall factual matrix of this trial was the ordained joinder for
trial of the four charges and the tendency ruling.
Even absent the making and
timing of the directed acquittal in respect of charge 4, these ordained trial
features consigned to the
panel a complex adjudicative task. The permitted
tendency tender was not a tendency on the part of CAPT Howieson to behave lewdly
in the presence of indigenous female members of the PNGDF, however much that
might be thought to be a unifying theme permeating all
of the conduct alleged in
the four charges. The permitted tendency tender was
in respect of
a tendency to display his penis to such female soldiers, such that evidence in
relation to charge 4 was admitted in
respect of charges 1 and 2 but not 3.
Neither was the evidence given in respect of charges 1 and 2 admissible as
relevant to charge
3. As it was, this situation required the panel to make
sophisticated distinctions about the use to be made of the evidence tendered
the prosecution.
the possibility of a unifying theme of the kind mentioned and the fineness of
the evidentiary distinction ordained may, in our
view, be discerned in the way
in which the prosecution case was opened (including our
interpolations):
Madam President and members of the panel, you are here
because it’s alleged that CAPT Howieson acted in a way that no person
should act, let alone a member of the Australian Army. On two separate occasions
to two different female members of the Papua New
Guinea Defence Force CAPT
Howieson exposed his erect penis. On another occasion, he engaged in conduct
likely to bring discredit
on our Defence Force.
[We note that the three occasions mentioned might be thought exemplifications
unifying into a theme of disreputable conduct.]
... there is also another reason why the two trials are being conducted
together. That is because the prosecution is alleging that
the accused’s
conduct in Charges 1, 2, and 4, show that the accused had a tendency to act in a
particular way, that is to intentionally
expose his penis to female members of
Papua New Guinea Defence Force. Consequently, you can [use] evidence in relation
to the first
two charges in your assessment of the evidence in relation to the
fourth charge and conversely.
[We note that this was conceded on the appeal to be proper and an accurate
reflection of the pre-trial ruling but a narrower tendency
than the impression
created by the first sentence of the opening.]
[Our interpolations]
That opening also forms part of the overall factual matrix that informs
consideration of the potential impact on the panel of the
evidence relative to
charge 4. There was nothing inappropriate about it, in the circumstances which
prevailed when it was made. But
it inevitably set the context for a trial which
later took an unexpected course.
(c) What was the prosecution evidence?
considered the prosecution evidence ourselves, we find that the summary offered
by the reviewing officer in the report prepared
for the purposes of s 154 of the
DFDA is accurate, as are the observations he makes about consistency of
evidence. Though lengthy,
it is both convenient and desirable to quote that
summary, anonymising witness identities in so doing. We have chosen to anonymise
not just the complainants but witnesses out of an abundance of caution in
respect of providing a means of identifying the complainants:
Charges one – three. According to CAPT N at the
relevant time, she was posted to the Taurama Military Hospital as a nursing
officer. However, during the APEC meeting she was allocated to work at the
Regimental Aid Post (RAP) at Taurama Barracks. As far
as she knew no ADF
personnel attended the RAP for treatment. However, she had met the accused the
day before the incident when he
delivered medical supplies to her.
It was the prosecution case that on 16 December 2018 at approximately 1000hrs
CAPT Howieson attended the RAP. He parked his vehicle
under a mango tree. He was
wearing PT gear comprising of shorts and a T-shirt. CAPT N was working with LCPL
T and CPL M.
CAPT Howieson asked to speak to CAPT N in private. She complied and he said he
had a lump he wanted examined. She informed CAPT Howieson
that she would need to
be accompanied by a male soldier as per protocol but CAPT Howieson did not want
that. CAPT N agreed to conduct
the examination in private and they went into the
first treatment room. She stated that she did not close the door completely, a
fact that differed from the evidence of the others present.
In the treatment room CAPT N said: “
Okay. Where is the - you said that
there was a lump around your groin. So where is the lump?
alleged that when CAPT Howieson pulled down his shorts his penis was fully
erect. She asked; “
where is the lump
” and he said it was
around his groin. He said; “
Have a feeI
”. (Charge 1) CAPT N
agreed to do the examination and CAPT Howieson pointed to his scrotum so she had
a feel and stood back
and told him there was no lump around the area. CAPT N
asked him to pull up his shorts which he did. According to CAPT N he was not
wearing underwear. It was the prosecution case that CAPT Howieson was not there
for a legitimate medical examination and that he
intended to expose his erect
penis with the hope the complainant would touch it.
The accused then pulled his shorts down again and said that the lump was still
there and told CAPT N to have a feel. (charge 2) She
said there was no lump,
turned around and walked out of the room. Whilst not explicit the witness on two
occasions agreed to questions
from the prosecutor which inferred the
accused’s penis was erect on the second occasion he pulled his pants down
as well. These
questions were not objected to. ...
CAPT Howieson followed CAPT N to where LCPL T was positioned and despite not
having found a lump she wrote a prescription for CAPT
Howieson and told him to
take it to his regimental outpost. According to CAPT N she told LCPL T and CPL M
the fact the accused had an erect penis. Whilst both
recounted a complaint by her neither adverted in their evidence to her having
told them his penis was erect. The complaint evidence was to an extent
inconsistent.
That afternoon the accused returned to the RAP and asked CAPT B for CAPT N. She
spoke to him in the reception area of the RAP. He
told her that he came with a
lab form that requested semen samples for 5 days. He said his doctor told him to
have the samples collected
at the RAP. The name on the bottom of the form said
Dr Niall. CAPT N arranged for a specimen bottle for CAPT Howieson and told him
to provide the sample to his regimental Doctor, but he told her that he needed
it immediately. She told him how to collect the sample
and said he could use the
RAP toilet. It was at this point that the accused said words to the effect that;
the paper said she had to assist him collect it
refused and told him to collect it himself. (charge 3) It was the prosecution
case that the comment clearly had a sexual
connotation. The accused used the
toilet to collect a sample and said he had to come back for the next four days.
CAPT N gave him
two extra specimen bottles and told him not to come back.
CAPT Howieson was said to have left but returned the following day. He saw CAPT
N again and asked to see her. He said his doctor
had flown out and so the
management of specimen collection was left to her. CAPT N told him she was not
comfortable and told him
to leave and not come back. She did not see him again.
She told CAPT B about the incident a few days later.
In support of the evidence of CAPT N was that of LCPL T. He corroborated the
assertion that CAPT Howieson came seeking treatment
at the RAP in the morning of
16 November 2018 and it was the first time to his knowledge that any ADF member
had sought treatment
there. It was his evidence that he was wearing PT gear,
parked his car and asked for CAPT N to assist him. He saw them go into the
treatment room and when he came out he was given a prescription and left. After
CAPT Howieson left CAPT N mentioned something was
wrong with CAPT
Howieson’s penis but that that was all he could remember. LCPL T also gave
evidence that around lunchtime CAPT
Howieson returned and gave CAPT N a note
Howieson. His
recollection was that CAPT Howieson was instructed to use the RAP
toilet for the specimen and he could not remember if anything was
said before he
went to give the sample. During cross examination he also stated that the
accused had attended the RAP on 17 November.
CPL M also gave evidence corroborative of CAPT N. At the time she was a medic
posted to the RAP from Taurama Hospital. She recalls
seeing the accused around
previously but on 16 November 2018 he came into the RAP and he was wearing
at­ shirt, shorts and runners.
He and CAPT N went into the treatment room
together and closed the door behind them. When they came out CAPT N looked a bit
LCPL T gave him a prescription for some medicine and CAPT Howieson left.
According to CPL M, CAPT K said that the accused wanted
her to examine his
private part and when she was examining his testicles CAPT Howieson attempted to
kiss her. She was not at the
RAP in the afternoon. In cross examination she
denied that he was in uniform when he arrived.
The importance of the evidence of LCPL T and CPL M was that it contradicted the
evidence of the accused who claimed he came to the
RAP in uniform in the morning
and returned in uniform with medical supplies around lunch time. He denied the
examination and the
request for the semen sample.
In addition the prosecution called CAPT B who was [a] medical practitioner also
posted to the RAP. He confirmed that he had never
had a member of the ADF come
in for treatment. According to CAPT B the accused came to him around 1330h and
asked to see CAPT N and
he called her over. That was the first time he had seen
CAPT Howieson that day although he had been to deliver medical supplies in
week prior to that. He saw CAPT Howieson and CAPT N go into the RAP. On 18
November he stated that the CAPT N came and saw him
and she refused to do the examination. He also stated that CAPT N told him that
CAPT Howieson had a medical
document asking her to assist in the collection of a
semen sample. CAPT B stated that CAPT Howieson also attended on the RAP on 17
November and CAPT B saw him in his car parked under the mango tree. In cross
examination he stated he did not see CAPT Howieson bring
any t-shirts on 16
November 2018 nor did he have any medical supplies with him on 16 November
In addition the prosecution called a Dr Roy the only doctor attached to the
Australian High Commission in Port Moresby. He saw amongst
others ADF members
based in Port Moresby. His uncontested evidence was that he had never met CAPT
Howieson or provided him any referral
to the RAP to have semen samples
collected. CAPT Howieson's replacement CAPT Joseph also gave evidence that the
first point to contact
for medical issues for him was the Australian High
Commission doctor, although there were some other options.
Charge four.
... The complainant was LCPL B, an Entomologist, posted to
the Preventative Medicine Unit at Taurama Barracks. On 7 December 2018
walking along the main road past the barracks Q Store on her way down to the
canteen to meet her husband, who was about to
deploy. It was day time. As LCPL B
was walking she saw CAPT Howieson who she knew as the ALO [Australian Liaison
Officer], but had
not met. He was standing to the left of a tree or bush (as
depicted in photo 2 of Exhibit 2). He was in his ADF camouflage uniform
saw him pull down his zipper. According to LCPL B’s evidence CAPT Howieson
was; “helping himself, like masturbating
or something”. He was
looking towards the road and she thought he was looking at her (although he was
wearing sunglasses).
She describes being shocked and scared and that she ran.
When she got to the canteen she told her husband that she said she had seen
[ALO] standing near the banana plant and he was showing his private part to me.
She also told this to CAPT N. During the course
of her evidence LCPL B was asked
what she saw and she said he; “
had his hands on his penis and he was
masturbating
LCPL B’s evidence included that the accused’s penis was outside his
trousers. In cross examination she agreed that she
had said the following to her
I was walking back to the canteen and when I came toward
battalion Q-store, I saw the [ALO] standing there like he wanted to pee.
removed his private part out and instead of facing away to urinate he was facing
towards me and I was afraid so I started to walk
away quickly
agreed that this was what she told her husband.
She agreed that the first time she mentioned the term “pleasuring
himself” or referred to masturbation was in her third
statement. However
she disagreed that what the accused was doing was urinating at the tree. She
stated there was a toilet nearby.
In re-examination she maintained that she saw
CAPT Howieson masturbating and that what she meant by that was: “
his hands down, hold his private part and he was yes helping himself or
’. She also indicated that she was scared to tell her husband
that she saw him masturbating because she was scared that her
husband might do
something to him.
LCPL Z, the husband of the complaint gave some evidence that his wife spoke to
him about seeing CAPT Howieson remove his (it would
appear penis) out and was
past quickly. In support of
the allegation was also evidence from CAPT N who
said that LCPL B complained to her that she had seen CAPT Howieson masturbating
on about 9 December 2018.
cross-examination of LCPL B indicates that CAPT Howieson’s case in respect
of charge 4 was intended to be that he was innocently
urinating at the
location concerned at the time that LCPL B came across him. Given the time when
the directed acquittal occurred
and the impact that necessarily had on what was
relevant for the defence to lead in evidence, the panel never heard that
explanation from CAPT Howieson. Part of the explanation, at odds with
evidence given by LCPL B in re-examination, was going to be
that there were no
nearby toilet facilities and that it was not uncommon for those in that area of
the barracks to do exactly what
CAPT Howieson was doing that day.
(d) Consequences flowing from the timing of the directed
the time of the directed acquittal, CAPT Howieson’s evidence included
emphatic denials of the conduct on 16 November related
by CAPT N and an
explanation that he had attended the RAP to deliver basic medical supplies
acquired by him from a Port Moresby pharmacy
from aid funds at his disposal and
which were otherwise not able to be supplied from Papua New Guinea defence
budget resources. His
evidence was that he had also taken the opportunity to
drop off to the RAP T-shirts, also aid funded, specially made to mark the
involvement with APEC support. His further evidence was that he had explained to
CAPT N, to her displeasure, that he was unable
to supply from aid funds oxygen
to fill empty oxygen tanks in ambulances which the Chinese government had
donated in conjunction
with APEC and, further, that he was unable to pay from
aid funds any allowances to her and others in respect of APEC-related duties.
However, it had not reached what would have been his denial of the allegation in
not tendered, because it was likewise rendered irrelevant, was corroborative
evidence from Major E (a captain at the time of
the alleged offences) of the
PNGDF, who had given a signed statement to the defending officers
Due to the absence of ablution and toilet facilities at
and around the Main Q Store the adjoining building used by Field Engineers;
soldiers have regularly resorted to using the drains and cement walls surround
the carpark area to urinate.
MAJ E was still called in the defence case and did give evidence inconsistent
with prosecution evidence in terms of observed attire
worn by CAPT Howieson
– disruptive pattern camouflage uniform, not sports gear – but his
evidence did not extend to the
passage in his signed statement or other
observations relative to charge 4.
the allegations made in charge 4 would have been the subject of strong contest
by CAPT Howieson. As characterised and contextualised
by LCPL B, the
incident was very much contested, and contested in a way capable not only of
calling into question her reliability
but also, through the corroboratory
evidence of MAJ E, of enhancing the credibility of CAPT Howieson generally.
The timing of the
directed acquittal meant that CAPT Howieson was deprived of
that opportunity.
course it might be said that the same consequence of rendering irrelevant
defence evidence which might have been led in response
to charge 4, would have
occurred if a no case submission in respect of that charge had been made and
upheld at the end of the prosecution
case. But there was no such application.
Rather, it was, in effect, solicited by the Chief Judge Advocate in the course
of CAPT Howieson’s
evidence in chief. Yet further, it might be said that
the defending officers were not obliged to make the application. But,
unsurprisingly
when so invited, they did, it was upheld, and there was no
dissolution of the court martial.
basis for the directed acquittal was that LCPL B’s assigned description of
masturbation in respect of the observation she
made of CAPT Howieson was
insufficient strictly to prove the act alleged. However that may be, as with a
civilian jury, it was neither
necessary nor appropriate for the panel to be
informed of the detail as to why they were being directed, despite the evidence
had by then heard, to acquit CAPT Howieson of charge 4, and they were not
so informed. They had by then heard the opening made by
the prosecution and
evidence, including fresh complaint to CAPT N, that CAPT Howieson was
masturbating in broad daylight in the middle
of a barracks area under the gaze
of a female member of the PNGDF. This was highly prejudicial evidence. It was
also irrelevant evidence
as a result of the directed acquittal. Yet further, the
impact of that directed acquittal was not just markedly to change the
prosecution
case after it had been opened as mentioned, and closed, but also
(although unknown to the prosecutor or the judge advocate at the
deprive the defence of a forensic opportunity to enhance the credibility of CAPT
Howieson which may have had ramifications
for the whole of the prosecution case.
Essentially,
the directed acquittal, beneficial as it was for CAPT Howieson, came at a time
when the prejudicial evidence had already
been adduced, but he was deprived of
the opportunity of answering it with evidence of an independent witness who
corroborated his
own version, thus enhancing his credibility not only in respect
of charge 4 but generally. That would not itself have been an irregularity,
because an accused who succeeds in having one of several charges dismissed at
the close of the prosecution case necessarily loses
the opportunity of calling
evidence to answer it. But that it had this consequence, when the prejudicial
evidence had already been
adduced, involves an element of unfairness (which
would not have been apparent to the judge advocate, who was not aware of the
that the defence was intending to adduce). In the events which
transpired, the admission of the evidence in respect of charge 4 with
consequences mentioned, was not just an irregularity but a material one.
4. WAS THERE A SUBSTANTIAL MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE?
the question is whether there was a substantial miscarriage of justice?
Sutton v The Queen
[1984] HCA 5
(1984) 152 CLR 528
, at 541 – 542, Brennan J
When two or more counts constituting a series of
offences of a similar character are joined in the same information, a real risk
prejudice to an accused person may arise from the adverse effect which
evidence of his implication in one of the offences charged
in the indictment is
likely to have upon the jury’s mind in deciding whether he is guilty of
another of those offences. Where
that evidence is not admissible towards proof
of his guilt of the other offence, some step must be taken to protect the
accused person
against the risk of impermissible prejudice. Sometimes a
direction to the jury is sufficient to guard against such a risk; sometimes
is not. Where a direction to the jury is not sufficient to guard against such a
risk, an application for separate trials should
generally be
reasons already given, even before the directed acquittal, the basis upon which
this court martial was to be conducted was always
complicated, given the joinder
and the fine evidentiary distinctions which the panel would be required to make.
Even so, the ordained
trial did at least carry with it the potential advantage
for CAPT Howieson of not just a corroborated, innocent explanation in respect
charge 4, but with that an enhanced credibility which might have called into
question whether any of the charges could be proved
beyond reasonable
support of his submission that there was a substantial miscarriage of justice,
counsel for CAPT Howieson cited this passage from
[1965] VicRp 63
... if evidence of bad character is inadvertently and
improperly given there is undoubtedly a discretion in the trial judge to
whether or not the jury should be discharged, a discretion to be
exercised according to the circumstances of the particular case.
An examination
of the authorities leads us to the view that unless it can be said, upon the
evidence, that the irregular disclosure
could not in any way affect the
judgement of the jury in coming to their decision of guilty or not guilty, the
trial judge would
exercise his discretion in favour of the
care needs to be taken with this passage, not just because of the observations
later made in
(quoted earlier), but also because of what was stated
(as also mentioned above). Even so, a conclusion that a
miscarriage of justice has taken place “does not require a finding
different result necessarily would have been reached in the proceedings said to
be affected by the miscarriage”, as
Wilson v Wilson
passage approved in
Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ highlighted in
Private R v Cowen
CAPT Howieson was entitled to a trial which was procedurally fair. This was not
a case where inadmissible evidence was
inadvertently placed before a panel. It
was deliberately tendered but for purposes which, in the events which
transpired, became
obsolete, retrospectively rendering the evidence
inadmissible. The evidence was, as we have observed, highly prejudicial.
CNY17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] HCA 50
(2019) 268 CLR
), the High Court had occasion to consider the position of an
administrative tribunal, the Immigration Assessment Authority established
Migration Act 1958
(Cth), which had received information
concerning the applicant from the Secretary to the Minister’s department
that was irrelevant
to the Authority’s review task but which was
prejudicial to the applicant. As accurately summarised in the headnote to the
authorised report of the case, in addition to facts concerning offences of which
the applicant had been convicted or charged (which
the applicant had disclosed
in his protection visa application), the material included assertions that the
applicant had a history
of unspecified aggressive or challenging behaviour and
had been involved in many unspecified incidents. It also included assertions
that, while in detention, the applicant had some link to investigations of a
“riot”, was the subject of investigations
for unspecified matters,
had been of interest to “Det Intel”, and had been refused bridging
visas in the past. The Authority
affirmed the delegate’s refusal to grant
the protection visa. The statement of reasons stated that the Authority had
to the material referred by the Secretary, but did not make any reference
to the irrelevant and prejudicial material.
applicant in
contended that, in the events which had transpired,
the jurisdictional error ground of a reasonable apprehension of bias was made
out. That contention was upheld by the majority (Nettle, Gordon and Edelman JJ)
(Kiefel CJ and Gageler J dissenting). Of present
interest are the references in
each of the judgments to the phenomenon of subconscious bias in the face of
highly prejudicial material
and the sharp differences in resultant conclusions
on the facts as to whether there existed a reasonable apprehension of bias.
their joint judgment, Kiefel CJ and Gageler J, at [27], referred with evident
approval to this observation made in the United States
Supreme Court in
Public Utilities Commission of the District of Columbia v Pollak
[1952] USSC 69
, at 466 – 467, in relation to a professional judge:
The judicial process demands that a judge move within
the framework of relevant legal rules and the covenanted modes of thought for
ascertaining them. He must think dispassionately and submerge private feeling on
every aspect of a case. There is a good deal of
shallow talk that the judicial
robe does not change the man within it. It does. The fact is that on the whole
judges do lay aside
private views in discharging their judicial functions. This
is achieved through training, professional habits, self-discipline and
fortunate alchemy by which men are loyal to the obligation with which they are
But it is also true that reason cannot control the subconscious
influence of feelings of which it is unaware. When there is ground
for believing
that such unconscious feelings may operate in the ultimate judgment, or may not
unfairly lead others to believe they
are operating, judges recuse themselves.
They do not sit in judgment.
They do this for a variety of reasons. The
guiding consideration is that the administration of justice should reasonably
be disinterested as well as be so in fact.
[Emphasis added]
set out this passage, Kiefel CJ and Gageler J, at [28], observed:
The fair-minded lay observer would recognise that
although the Authority is not a court and although a Reviewer is not necessarily
a lawyer, the Authority as constituted by a Reviewer is a professional
decision-making body that can ordinarily be expected to be
capable of discarding
“the irrelevant, the immaterial and the prejudicial”. But, the
fair-minded lay observer must also
be taken to recognise that even a
professional decision-maker is not “a passionless thinking machine”
and that information
consciously and conscientiously discarded might still
sometimes have a subconscious effect on even the most professional of
decision-making.
[footnote references omitted]
prism through which the present case falls to be viewed is, of course, not the
a reasonable apprehension of
bias but rather of the elements specified in s 23(1)(c) of the Appeals Act and,
more particularly now,
whether there was a substantial miscarriage of justice.
But the recognised phenomenon of a risk of subconscious bias is hardly confined
to administrative decision-making. It may attend the judicial process, whether
the tribunal of fact is judge or jury, and it may
also attend a body such as a
court martial panel which is obliged to act judicially.
Armstrong v The Queen
[2017] NSWCCA 323
, at [24], and with reference to
Patel v The Queen
[2012] HCA 29
(2012) 247 CLR 531
), amongst other cases,
the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal stated:
In assessing prejudicial effect, it is appropriate to
take into account the ameliorating effect of any directions available to be
given to the jury: see
(2011) 81 NSWLR 568
[2011] NSWCCA 63
(Spigelman CJ), [104] (Allsop P), [171] (Simpson J);
(Ward JA, Harrison and RA Hulme JJ agreeing).
becomes necessary to consider whether such directions would sufficiently
“overcome the prejudicial effects of the evidence,
individually and
collectively, upon the jury”
Patel v The Queen
(2012) 247 CLR
[2012] HCA 29
(French CJ, Hayne, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
consideration may depend on whether the evidence tends to induce a subconscious
bias against the accused
Sokolowskyj v R
[2014] NSWCCA 55
(2014) 239 A Crim R 528
–[57] (Hoeben CJ at CL, Adams and Hall JJ
[Emphasis added]
was put on behalf of the Chief of Army that the composition of the panel made it
inherently likely that the judge advocate’s
direction would have been
treated as binding and authoritative. Reference was made to the rank structure
found in the panel’s
composition and to the expectation that such officers
would follow what amounted to an order. The panel comprised four field rank
officers – a Major, two Lieutenant Colonels and a Colonel – and a
general officer, a Major General, as President.
some extent, the composition of a general court martial panel is dictated by
statute. Subject to service exigencies, the panel
at least had to comprise
officers not junior in rank to CAPT Howieson with at least three
years’ service and the President
had at least to hold the rank of Colonel
(or equivalent): s 116, DFDA.
panel well and truly met, indeed exceeded, that ordinary statutory requirement.
The DFDA does envisage that a court martial may
bring to bear service knowledge
and experience in the resolution of whether charges are proved beyond reasonable
doubt: s 147, DFDA.
Even though formally bound by the rulings on matters of law
by the appointed judge advocate (s 134(4), DFDA), the President of this
martial was senior in rank to him. Moreover, a court martial panel is
nonetheless a panel of laypersons in terms of legal
Gilbert v The Queen
(2000) 201 CLR 414
, Gleeson CJ and Gummow J stated,
The system of criminal justice, as administered by
appellate courts, requires the assumption, that, as a general rule, juries
understand,
and follow, the directions they are given by trial judges. It does
not involve the assumption that their decision-making is unaffected
of possible prejudice.
earlier explained, the Tribunal does not exercise judicial power. There is
nothing in the Appeals Act which specifies that the
Tribunal exercise its
appellate jurisdiction on the footing that, as a general rule, members of court
martial panels understand,
and follow, directions given to them by a judge
advocate. Nonetheless, the analogies between a trial by court martial and a
trial before a jury are such that the same approach should apply.
Moreover, as mentioned, the DFDA does afford a court martial panel
status in relation to matters of service knowledge. However, the prescription as
to a panel being bound by the rulings
on matters of law by a judge advocate is
no more or less rigorous than the requirement that a jury in a civilian criminal
obey the directions of the trial judge on matters of law. It is by no
means apparent to us that a hierarchy of authority as between
Majesty’s judges and jurors in a criminal trial is any more or less
conducive to deference and obedience than a
disposition inculcated by training
on the part of commissioned officers in a military hierarchy to obey lawful
orders. But even if
there were anything in the point sought to be made by the
Chief of Army, no less than with a civilian jury, it would not involve
further assumption that the decision-making by a panel of officers was
“unaffected by matters of possible prejudice”,
including in
particular unconscious prejudice.
more fundamentally, the task ordained for the Tribunal by s 23(1)(c) of the
Appeals Act is not one of attempting to predict what
a court martial panel
(whether this panel composed of officers holding the ranks mentioned or some
hypothetical future panel) would
or might do. Rather, the task is to determine
whether there was an irregularity, whether it was material, and whether there
a substantial miscarriage of justice. In this regard, the position is not
dissimilar to that described in
, at [34] – [36], by reference
to civilian juries and the role of criminal appellate courts. To adopt by
analogy and paraphrase
what was stated in
, at [36], where
evidence that should not have been adduced has been placed before a court
martial panel, it will seldom be possible,
and rarely if ever profitable, to
attempt to work out what the members of the panel actually did with that
evidence. In cases, like
the present, where the evidence that has been wrongly
admitted is evidence that is discreditable to the accused, it will almost always
be possible to say that that evidence
have affected the
panel’s view of the defendant, or the defendant’s evidence. However,
“unless we are to return
to the Exchequer rule (where any and every
departure from trial according to law required a new trial) recognition of the
possibility
that the [panel] might have used wrongfully received evidence
against [the defendant] cannot be treated as conclusive of the question”,
if there was a material irregularity, of whether a “substantial
miscarriage of justice” has actually occurred.
are distinctions between a court martial panel and a civilian jury, and the
submission that the former might be expected to
be better able to exclude from
its mind prejudicial material when directed to do so is not without force. It
may accurately be said
of many if not most commissioned members of the
profession of arms, at least those who are general service officers, that they
professional decision-makers. Most are educated to tertiary level. They are
trained and accustomed to adhere to and implement directions.
However, they are
not immune to the effects of unconscious prejudice. And unlike a judge (or
Defence Force magistrate for that matter)
or the Authority in
like a civilian jury, a court martial panel does not give reasons for its
verdict, with the result that the impact on their decision
of evidentiary
material they are directed to ignore cannot be scrutinised.
officers who comprised the panel in this case were, in the events which
transpired, deliberately exposed to evidence of seemingly
gross behaviour in
December 2018 in public by a fellow officer in the barracks of a friendly army
and in sight of a female member
of that army. It is certainly possible to see
how one might regard their not guilty verdicts in respect of charges 1 and 2 and
guilty verdict in respect of charge 3 as indicating that the panel had taken
to both heart and mind the direction given by the Chief
Judge Advocate, found in
the evidence indicative of consensual examination a reasonable doubt, but
excluding everything heard about
charge 4 found proved beyond reasonable doubt
by corroborated testimony that the event specified in charge 3 occurred. But so
entails speculation about the reasoning of a panel no different from
speculation about the reasoning of a jury. As they were not
obliged to give
reasons, one cannot know what use or exclusion was made of the evidence led in
respect of charge 4. Looking at the
whole of the circumstances which attended
this particular trial, including the manner in which the case was opened by the
prosecutor,
the tendency of the highly prejudicial and ultimately inadmissible
evidence adduced in respect of charge 4 to induce a subconscious
bias on the
part of the panel adverse to CAPT Howieson was such that it cannot be concluded
that it was overcome by the directions
given by the Chief Judge Advocate.
has been mentioned, there was no application by CAPT Howieson at trial following
the directed acquittal for the dissolution of
the court martial. However, the
appeal is against the conviction, not against the failure on the part of the
Chief Judge Advocate
to dissolve the court martial. The position is analogous to
that described by French CJ, Hayne, Kiefel and Bell JJ in their joint
, at 551, [67]:
If there was a miscarriage of justice, it was because
the prosecution case changed at a very late point in the trial with the result
that much of the evidence that had been admitted on the wide-ranging prosecution
case no longer remained relevant to the more confined
case that went to the
jury. This is the matter which requires further consideration. The question is
not, however, whether the trial
judge was wrong in refusing to discharge the
jury on this basis. As Sachs LJ observed in
, there is no rule
that, where inadmissible or prejudicial evidence is admitted through
inadvertence, a jury must be discharged. This
statement was referred to with
approval by Gibbs A-CJ in
Maric v The Queen
. His Honour said that when an
accused has been convicted, the appeal is not against the failure to discharge
the jury, but against
the conviction. His Honour’s observation remains
relevant to a case such as this, even if the test as to what constitutes a
miscarriage of justice sufficient to warrant the quashing of a conviction
referred to in
is affected by what was later said by this Court in
Weiss v The Queen
[Footnote references omitted]
the absence of any application at trial is relevant to whether there was a
material irregularity and a substantial miscarriage
of justice, it is not
determinative. On the appeal, evidence was led, without objection, from CAPT
Howieson, that he was neither
advised about the prospect of making an
application for a mistrial, nor were instructions sought from him with respect
to the making
of such an application. At the pre-trial stage (directions hearing
of 21 June 2019), the defence had resisted, unsuccessfully, the
prosecution’s application for evidence led in respect of charge 4 to be
admitted as evidence of a tendency on the part of CAPT
Howieson to expose his
penis to female members of the PNGDF. In the result, the ruling made by the
Chief Judge Advocate was that
such evidence could be so admitted. At trial,
following the directed acquittal in respect of charge 4 and related direction
the ignoring of related evidence, all that occurred was that CAPT Howieson
simply continued his evidence in chief. Although one can
speculate that at that
point, having just been acquitted of one the charges, the dissolution of the
court martial with the prospect
of a new trial on the remaining three might have
seemed an unattractive proposition, the Chief of Army did not submit that this
a case where there was a deliberate tactical decision made by the defending
officers (who did not include at that stage Mr Pearce)
not to apply for the
dissolution of the court martial; in any event, as mentioned, there was evidence
before us that CAPT Howieson’s
instructions were not sought on the issue.
Further and in any event, as Gleeson CJ observed in
Nudd v The Queen
[2006] HCA 9
(2006) 80 ALJR 614
, at 618, [9]: “It is the fairness of the process that
is in question; not the wisdom of counsel.”
we have explained, the panel was exposed to highly prejudicial material which
had a tendency to induce a subconscious bias against
CAPT Howieson. The
ultimate impact of this on the possibility of an acquittal was accentuated by
the timing of the directed acquittal,
after the prejudicial evidence had been
adduced but before CAPT Howieson had the forensic opportunity, of which he was
to deny on oath the charge 4 allegations, and to enhance his
credibility by calling evidence from MAJ E which would have corroborated
version. It certainly cannot be said that conviction was nonetheless
inevitable; in the light of the acquittals on charges
1 and 2, there must have
been a real possibility that had the charge 4 evidence never been adduced, or
had CAPT Howieson had an opportunity
not only to refute it but also to call
evidence that corroborated him and thus enhanced his general credibility, he
might have been
acquitted. It follows that there has been a substantial
miscarriage of justice.
5. CONCLUSION AND OBSERVATIONS
conviction in respect of charge 3 must therefore be quashed and, as sought by
CAPT Howieson in that event, in the exercise of
the power conferred on the
Tribunal by s 24 of the Appeals Act, an order must be made that there be a
new trial of CAPT Howieson
in respect of that charge. A necessary consequence of
these orders is that the sentence dependent upon that conviction is a nullity.
is only fair to add that this outcome does not reflect on the prosecutor, who
opened the case entirely properly in the circumstances
which then prevailed; on
the Chief Judge Advocate, who conducted the proceedings with great fairness to
CAPT Howieson and gave as
strong directions as could have been given –
short of the unattractive course, which the accused did not seek, of dissolving
the court martial – to minimise the risk that arose in the unanticipated
circumstance that the evidence was ultimately insufficient
to leave charge 4 on
foot; or on the panel, whose verdict and ultimate sentence bears all the
appearance of diligent attention to
and discharge of their duty. Rather, it
reflects the rightful insistence of the criminal law, albeit in the context of
discipline, to the entitlement of an accused to a fair trial and not to
be deprived by irregularity of a real possibility of an acquittal,
when a trial
which was always going to be complex took an unexpected turn, the effect of
which was to render retrospectively inadmissible,
prejudicial material which had
earlier properly been admitted.
the reasons just given are sufficient to explain why we have made the orders
mentioned, we consider ourselves duty bound to
make the following additional
observations.
of the documents which, by reg 8(1)(b) of the
Defence Force Discipline
Appeals Regulation 2016
(Cth), the Registrar of Military Justice is obliged
to transmit to the Tribunal’s Registrar is “a record of any review
with respect to the proceedings of the court martial or Defence Force
magistrate”. The reviewing officer’s report under
s 154 of the DFDA
is such a document. Such reports in no way bind the Tribunal but they can be of
assistance in provoking thinking
on the part of an appellant, a service chief
respondent, and the Tribunal about legal issues or, as in the present case, for
summaries of evidence they may offer. Their transmission to the Tribunal,
and thus the Tribunal’s scrutiny of them, is not
coincidental but intended
by the Governor-General in Council in making this regulation pursuant to the
Appeals Act.
the case of a conviction by a court martial or Defence Force magistrate, such a
report must be prepared by a legal officer appointed
by instrument in writing by
the Chief of the Defence Force or a service chief on the recommendation of the
Judge Advocate General:
s 154(1)(a) DFDA. Subject to any contrary opinion which
may be expressed by the Judge Advocate General or a Deputy Judge Advocate
General upon any further review, a reviewing authority is bound by any opinion
on a question of law set out in a report obtained
under s 154: ss 154(2) and
154(4), DFDA.
report made by a reviewing officer or the Judge Advocate General or a Deputy
Judge Advocate General under s 154 of the DFDA in
respect of a conviction and
sentence is intended to be an independent, internal opinion in respect of that
conviction and sentence.
Unfortunately, the report provided in this case, which
was otherwise comprehensive, careful and balanced, did not confine itself
expressing such an opinion, but also offered policy advice to the reviewing
authority in respect of the taking of administrative
action against CAPT
Howieson regardless of the outcome of the disciplinary proceedings. The
administrative action contemplated was
apparently early termination of his
service pursuant to reg 24 of the
Defence Regulation 2016
(Cth). This
policy advice, with respect, ought not to have been furnished by the reviewing
the DFDA, it is no part of the functions of the Judge Advocate General or a
s 154 reviewing officer to furnish such policy advice
to the Chief of the
Defence Force, a service chief or any reviewing authority. Those officers must
look to other advisers for such
policy advice. The author of a s 154 report must
not just be independent but be seen to be independent. Presuming to furnish such
policy advice is antithetical to that independence.
a case where a court martial panel has deliberately chosen not to impose a
sentence of dismissal from the Australian Defence Force
on a defendant and,
instead, imposed a sentence in which an opportunity for rehabilitation is an
element, the taking of such administrative
action could be regarded as
undermining the court martial process. We otherwise expressly refrain, because
it is no part of the Tribunal’s
function, from expressing any view about
the merits, if any, of the policy advice furnished in the s 154 report. However,
noted that it has been given, we do consider ourselves duty bound to draw
the report and our observations concerning it to the attention
of the Judge
Advocate General. We shall therefore give a direction to the Registrar to
furnish the Judge Advocate General with a
copy of these reasons and that
I certify that the preceding sixty-two (62)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of the
Honourable Justices
Logan, Brereton and
Dated: 9 July 2021
RTF format (435 KB)
Signed PDF/A format