B v Insurer [2004] IOSPCC 1 (15 September 2004)
Enquiries and Complaints Limited (IEC)
Complaint Determination No. 1 of 2004
Cite as B v Insurer
[2004] IOSPCC 1
1. Made under the
General Insurance Information Privacy Code
(the Code), clause 3.42.
2. This determination relates to a complaint by the Complainant registered by
IEC on 19 December 2002 under clause 3.13 of the Code.
3. The Respondent to the complaint is a signatory
to the Code [17 April 2004]. It is alleged that certain acts of the Respondent
interfered with the Complainant’s privacy.
4. The IEC Privacy Complaints Committee (the Committee) decided to seek to
resolve the complaint pursuant to clause 3.15 of the Code.
Background,
allegations and remedies sought
5. In November 2002, the Complainant requested
access to personal information about him held by the Respondent in connection
a workers compensation claim by him.
6. On 19 December, the Complainant complained to IEC about the
Respondent’s failure to provide him with access to the requested
information.
7. After ascertaining that the Complainant had already complained to the
Respondent, IEC accepted his complaint on behalf of the Committee
on 14 January
8. During the course of the Committee’s handling of this matter, the
Respondent has provided the Complainant with some of the
personal information he
requested, but has resisted the release of other information.
9. The Complainant has not been satisfied by the release of limited
information – insisting instead on access to all personal
information held
by the Respondent.
10. The Committee has met on several occasions to consider the complaint in
light of information received from both the Complainant
and the Respondent.
There was an interruption in the process between June and December 2003 due to
the Complainant’s absence
overseas, although the Committee continued to
deal with the Respondent during this period.
11. The remedy sought by the Complainant has consistently been provision of
all of the personal information held by the Respondent.
He has not expressly
sought compensation or an apology.
12. During the course of 2003 and 2004, the Respondent provided the
Complainant with the great majority of the information sought,
albeit sometimes
only after intervention by the Committee.
13. The General Insurance Information Privacy Principles (IPPs) in Part 2 of
the Code outline standards for handling personal information
that legally bind
organisations that have adopted the Code which was formally approved by the
The Code Principles replace the National
, and the IEC Privacy Compliance
Committee (The Committee) is the Code Adjudicator under the Act.
14. Personal information is defined in Appendix 1 of the Code as follows:
information or an opinion (including information or an opinion forming part of a
in a material form or not,
ascertained, from the information
or opinion.
15. The question in
this complaint is whether personal information held by the Respondent was
improperly withheld from the Complainant,
in breach of IPP 6.
16. IPP6 deals with access and correction and states that:
6 Access and correction
Wherever possible we will let you see the information we hold about you and
correct it if it is wrong
6.1 If an organisation holds personal information about an individual, it must
provide the individual with access to the information
on request. Exceptions to
this rule are:
Serious and imminent threat to life or
(a) in the case of personal information which is not health information –
where providing access would pose a serious and imminent
threat to the life or
health of any individual; or
(b) in the case of health information – where providing access would pose
a serious threat to the life or health of any individual;
Impact on others’ privacy
(c) where providing access would have an unreasonable impact upon the privacy of
other individuals; or
Frivolous or vexatious
(d) where the request for access is frivolous or vexatious;
Existing or anticipated legal
proceedings
(e) where the information relates to existing or anticipated legal proceedings
between the organisation and the individual; and the
information would not be
accessible by the process of discovery in those proceedings;
Prejudice to negotiations
(f) where providing access would reveal the intentions of the organisation in
relation to negotiations with the individual in such
a way as to prejudice those
negotiations; or
Unlawful, or where required or authorised by or under
(g) where providing access would be unlawful; or
(h) where denying access is required or authorised by or under law;
Prejudice to investigations of unlawful
(i) where providing access would be likely to prejudice an investigation of
possible unlawful activity; or
Prejudice to law enforcement
(j) where providing access would be likely to prejudice:
(i) the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or punishment of
criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing a penalty
or sanction or breaches
of a prescribed law; or
(ii) the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds of
(iii) the protection of the public revenue; or
(iv) the prevention, detection, investigation or remedying of seriously improper
conduct or prescribed conduct; or
(v) the preparation for, or conduct of, proceedings before any court or
tribunal, or implementation of its orders;
by or on behalf of an enforcement body;
Damage to national security
(k) where an enforcement body performing a lawful security function asks the
organisation not to provide access to the information
on the basis that
providing access would be likely to cause damage to the security of
Evaluative information
6.2 However, where providing access would reveal evaluative information
generated within the organisation in connection with a commercially
decision-making process, the organisation may give the individual an explanation
for the commercially sensitive decision
rather than direct access to the
information.
Note: An organisation breaches Principle 6.1 if it relies on Principle 6.2
to give an individual an explanation for a commercially
sensitive decision in
circumstances where Principle 6.2 does not
Use of intermediaries as an alternative to providing
6.3 If the organisation is not required to provide the individual with access
because one or more of paragraphs 6.1(a) to (k) applies,
the organisation must,
if reasonable, consider whether the use of mutually agreed intermediaries would
allow sufficient access to
meet the needs of both
Charges for providing access
6.4 If an organisation charges for providing access to personal information,
those charges:
(a) must not be excessive; and
(b) must not apply to lodging a request for access.
Correcting personal information
6.5 If an organisation holds personal information about an individual and the
individual is able to establish that the information
is not accurate, complete
and up-to-date, the organisation must take reasonable steps to correct the
information so that it is accurate,
complete and up-to-date.
6.6 If the individual and the organisation disagree about whether the
information is accurate, complete and up-to-date, and the individual
organisation to associate with the information a statement claiming that the
information is not accurate, complete or up-to-date,
the organisation must take
reasonable steps to do so.
Reasons for denying access to or for refusing to correct personal
information
6.7 An organisation must provide reasons for denial of access or a refusal to
correct personal information.
17. Clause 3.42 of the
Code provides that after investigating a complaint the Committee may either:
make a determination
dismissing the complaint; or
complaint substantiated and make a determination that: includes one or more of
the following:
a declaration that
the Respondent has engaged in conduct constituting an interference with the
not repeat or continue such
a declaration that the
Respondent should perform any reasonable act or course of conduct to redress any
loss or damage suffered by
Complainant.
a declaration that the
Complainant is entitled to a specified amount by way of compensation for any
loss or damage suffered by reason
of the act or practice the subject of the
complaint and for expenses reasonably incurred (Loss or damage can include
injury to the
Complainant’s feelings or humiliation suffered by the
Complainant).
a declaration that it
would be inappropriate for any further action to be taken in the
Investigation
18. The Committee’s investigation of this complaint involved the
• The Committee's investigation of this complaint principally involved the
examination of the voluminous material provided
to it by the Complainant and the
Respondent.
• In this matter, the Complainant and the Respondent corresponded directly
with each other at some length and each party is
well aware of the other party's
• In these circumstances it is unnecessary to describe the matters
investigated in greater detail than is set out elsewhere
determination.
19. The Complainant alleged that the Respondent failed to provide him with
access to all of the personal information to which he was
20. The Respondent has relied on some of the exceptions in Principle 6 to
withhold some information from the Complainant.
21. Some of the information initially withheld has subsequently been
provided, in some cases after specific advice from the Committee
Respondent’s grounds for withholding were not valid.
22. Negotiations about the access request have been interrupted and confused
by the temporary suspension of the Complainant’s
benefit payments in early
2003 due to alleged non-attendance at a medical examination. The circumstances
of this non-attendance
are themselves disputed by the parties.
23. Resolution of the complaint has also been hindered by administrative and
systems errors, and record-keeping inadequacies on the
part of the Respondent.
These included:
• Delay in re-commencement of payments in March 2003 due to an
acknowledged systems error;
• A missing independent medical report;
• A failure to internally forward correspondence faxed by the Complainant
to a different officer;
• Failure to locate two original letters from the Complainant;
• Contradictory advice to the Complainant about the Respondent’s
Customer Charter; and
• Inability to answer the Complainant’s question about the reasons
for the initial withholding of a medical report subsequently
25. There also seems to have been a reluctance on the
part of the Respondent, on occasions, to explain both processes and documents
the Complainant.
26. Some omissions of contact details by the Respondent, made with the
intention of protecting staff, pursuant to exception 6.1(c),
unfortunately had
the effect of further frustrating the Complainant and hampering the
communications. We doubt if there is sufficient
evidence of any risk to warrant
the suppression of the names of employees involved in communications. Even if
there was, there is
no reason why the Respondent could not have replaced names
with position titles or initials, and no reason why the basis of this
withholding should not have been explained.
27. The Respondent has suggested from time to time, particularly in the later
stages of negotiations, that the Complainant’s
requests are trivial and
that his behaviour has been vexatious. Exception 6.1(d) allows information to
be withheld on those grounds,
and they could also be grounds for the Committee
deciding not to investigate the complaint under Clause 3.39(d).
28. The Committee rejects the suggestion that the Complainant’s
complaint can be considered trivial or vexatious. Much of the
tedious and
repetitive nature of the correspondence can be attributed directly to the
Respondent’s handling of the case. The
Complainant has merely been
doggedly insisting on his rights under the Code.
29. After 18 months, the Complainant seems to have finally been given all of
the personal information to which he is entitled and
which can be located by the
Respondent.
30. The Committee takes the view that there is little to be gained by
continuing the correspondence which has now appears to be confined
accusations and rebuttals about the process that has been followed.
31. The Complainant may of course choose to exercise his access rights again
in respect of any further personal information collected
and held by the
Respondent in the future. But the Committee cannot see any merit in the
Complainant continuing to pursue the complaint
in relation to the information
32. The issues in this complaint go to the approach taken by organisations to
the access principle. While IPP6 clearly provides grounds
for withholding
information in certain circumstances, an over-enthusiastic embrace of these
exceptions is likely to lead to protracted
disputes of the kind seen in this
33. In the Committee’s view organisations would be well advised to deal
with requests for access under IPP6 from the perspective
of seeking to release
as much personal information as possible consistent with other obligations. The
exceptions in IPP6 are not
designed to shield organisations from mere
inconvenience or embarrassment. The motives of individuals exercising their
access will, as in this case, often be to pursue a complaint, claim or
other issue against the organisation. Many such individuals
will be persistent
and tenacious. Their motives and persistence should not influence the
organisation’s assessment of their
entitlement to access personal
information under IPP6.
Determination
34. In accordance with clause 3.42(b)(i) of the Code, the Committee finds the
Complainant’s complaint that his privacy has been
interfered with
substantiated and declares that the Respondent has engaged in conduct
constituting an interference with the privacy
of the Complainant by failing,
until the Committee intervened, to provide him with all of the personal
information to which he was
entitled under IPP 6.
35. The Committee declares, in accordance with clause 3.42(b)(ii) of the
Code, that the Respondent should apologise to the Complainant
for its attempts
over a considerable period of time to withhold personal information to which he
was entitled under IPP 6.
36. The Committee has no evidence before it of actual loss or damage suffered
by the Complainant, who has not requested compensation.
The Committee therefore
declines to make a declaration under clause 3.42(b)(iii) relating to
compensation, but recommends that the
Respondent give serious consideration to
making an ex-gratia payment to the Complainant in recognition of the
considerable effort
he has had to put into exercising his access rights, and the
frustration he has no doubt experienced as a result of the Respondent’s
unhelpful approach to his requests.
37. The Committee further declares in accordance with clause 3.42(b)(iv) of
the Code that it would be inappropriate to take any further
action in the
Right of appeal
38. Both the Complainant and the Respondent are entitled to seek a review of
this Determination by the Privacy Commissioner, who can
be contacted as
Director, Compliance
Office of the Federal Privacy Commissioner
GPO Box 5218
SYDNEY NSW 2001.
FAX: (02) 9284 9666
Telephone: 1300 363 992, or e-mail
Richard Viney
IEC Privacy Compliance Committee
RTF format (111 KB)
Signed PDF/A format