URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/SSATACSA/2011/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kent v Jozic [2011] SSATACSA 4 (10 June 2011)
APPLICANT Stacey KENT
OTHER PARTIES Sam JOZIC
Child Support Registrar
APPEAL NUMBER XXXXXXXX
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
A decision made by an objections officer on 22 October 2010, disallowing Ms
Kent’s objection as to the particulars of the administrative
assessment of
child support; namely, the inclusion of Daniela in the calculation of the
multi-case allowance / multi-case cap component.
SPECIAL PURPOSE HEARING BY TRIBUNAL
A special purpose hearing in the application for review was heard on 24 May
The members of the Tribunal were: XXXXXXXX, Presiding Member
Ms Kent attended the hearing.
Mr Jozic participated in the hearing by telephone.
Mr Foster attended the hearing as representative of the Child Support
On 10 June 2011 the Tribunal decided to affirm the decision under review.
DATE OF DESPATCH
DATE 14 June 2011
REASONS FOR DECISION
Kent is the mother of Mr Jozic. She cares for her grand-daughter Sophia, who is
Mr Jozic’s daughter. There has been a child
support assessment in force
where Mr Jozic is liable to pay child support to Ms Kent since 20 April 2010.
child support assessment with Mr Jozic as the payer came into existence on 25
June 2010 (hereafter “the other assessment”).
Another person is the
receiving parent in that case, and it is an assessment in respect of two
children. As a consequence of the
other assessment coming into existence, a
multi-case allowance and multi-case cap has been applied to Ms Kent’s
assessment,
and has reduced the annual rate payable to her by $725pa.
Kent is aggrieved by this because she asserts that one of the two children the
subject of the other assessment is not Mr Jozic’s
biological child, and
therefore not properly the subject of the child support assessment. She objected
to the particulars of her
assessment in that it now incorporated the multi-case
allowance and multi-case cap. Her objection was disallowed, and she has appealed
to the Tribunal for review.
An extension of time
the hearing, Mr Jozic identified that Ms Kent’s application to the
Tribunal was outside the requisite 28 day period from
service of the notice of
decision of her unsuccessful objection. As this matter was raised at the
hearing, it is necessary to confirm
that Ms Kent was granted an extension of
time on 4 February 2011. Brief reasons are provided for that decision here, as
issue which arose at the hearing.
summary, the reasons for this grant were that the Presiding Member, acting then
as a delegate of the Principal Member, considered
there was an acceptable reason
for Ms Kent’s delay in applying to the Tribunal for review, as she was
awaiting the outcome
of another closely-related decision by the Child Support
Agency (CSA) before taking further action. She contacted the Tribunal soon
the CSA made the other decision. Furthermore, the application to the Tribunal
was not very late, and there appeared to be no
scope for material prejudice to
either party in granting the extension of time. Finally, the reasoning as
expressed by the objection
officer was not so compelling that it could be said
that, on the face of it, any review lacked merit.
the Tribunal were to receive evidence and reach a finding of fact about the
assertion made by Ms Kent regarding whether or not
Mr Jozic is the biological
father of the child in question (either presumptively or otherwise), then the
interests of a third party
could potentially be affected, namely the receiving
parent in the other assessment. In light of the legal question to be resolved
set out below, the consideration of this application for review called for a
special procedure to be adopted.
is a fundamental legal issue to be resolved. It is best set out as a question:
In reviewing whether Ms Kent’s assessment
should be affected by a
multi-case allowance and multi-case cap in the way that it is, can the Tribunal
look beyond the fact of the
existence of the other assessment? It was plainly
undesirable to allow the parties to fully ventilate this contentious factual
where there was a real question about whether it was a lawful or
appropriate matter for the Tribunal to consider.
special purpose hearing was arranged, and the parties were notified by letter
dated 23 March 2011 of the issue to be considered
at the special purpose
hearing. Consistent with the approach set out in the Tribunal’s letter the
Tribunal did not permit any
evidence or argument to be led about the factual
dispute at the heart of this matter; namely, whether Mr Jozic is the biological
father of both children the subject of the other assessment.
matter proceeded on the basis that if the Tribunal decided that it could look
behind the fact of the existence of the other assessment
in reviewing the
particulars of Ms Kent’s assessment, then further directions would be made
for relevant evidence to be provided,
the other party might be joined if a
response to the Tribunal’s invitation to become a party was received, and
a further hearing
would be held. If the Tribunal decided that it could not look
beyond the fact of the existence of the other assessment, then the
parties were
put on notice that the Tribunal would affirm the substantive decision under
review without a further hearing or submissions.
issue for the Tribunal to determine is therefore whether the Tribunal can or
should enquire into the acceptance or particulars
of a paying parent’s
‘other assessment’ when undertaking a review of the particulars of
an administrative assessment
of child support.
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
Tribunal had before it Exhibit C1, consisting of relevant documents from the
Child Support Agency’s (CSA) records. The Tribunal
also had regard to
written submissions prepared on behalf of the Registrar, and written submissions
lodged by Mr Jozic.
the hearing, Mr Jozic denied having received Exhibit C1. The Tribunal arranged
for a copy of Exhibit C1 to be sent to Mr Jozic
after the hearing, with leave
for Mr Jozic to provide any written submissions arising from it. Mr Jozic
subsequently advised the
Tribunal’s Registry that he was no longer
collecting mail from the address previously provided. Mr Jozic declined to
an alternative postal address to the Tribunal. The Tribunal made a copy
of Exhibit C1 available for Mr Jozic to collect from its
Registry in the state
where Mr Jozic is apparently located, communicated this to Mr Jozic, and
extended the time in which he was
permitted to lodge written submissions arising
from Exhibit C1. No further written submissions were received from Mr Jozic.
CONSIDERATION
The Tribunal’s jurisdiction, and the decision subject to review.
are satisfied that there is a matter properly before the Tribunal for review. It
is relevant and useful to delineate the decision
that is before the Tribunal,
and identify the factually-related administrative decision that is not before
the Tribunal, and which
the applicant Ms Kent would not be able to bring before
the Tribunal.
mentioned above, Ms Kent is the receiving non-parent carer in a child support
assessment made in respect of Sophia. As such, she
is entitled to object to
decisions made by the Registrar ‘as to the particulars of an
administrative assessment’: section
80(1) item 11 of the
Child Support
(Registration and Collection) Act 1988
(the Registration and Collection
such, she is also able to apply to the Tribunal for review of the resulting
objection decision: section 89(1) item 2 of the Registration
and Collection Act.
is clear to us that the decision that is before us by virtue of these provisions
is the decision made about the particulars of
the assessment in which Ms Kent is
the carer entitled to child support: that is, Sophia’s assessment. It is
the particulars
of that assessment, and not ‘the other assessment’
which Ms Kent is entitled to object to and in respect of which she
can apply to
the Tribunal for review.
Specifically,
Ms Kent would not be entitled to object to particulars of the other assessment,
because she is not a person identified
in section 80(1) item 11 in respect of
that assessment. Likewise, she is not a person who may object to a decision to
an application for administrative assessment...’ in respect
of the other assessment, as Mr Jozic is the only person who falls
within section
80(1) item 9.
this way, it is clear to us that we are not reviewing a decision by the
Registrar to accept the ‘other assessment’,
or any decision as to
the particulars of that assessment.
provisions of section 80 of the Registration and Collection Act are clearly
aimed at restricting involvement in the objection
process to individuals whose
interests are directly affected by those decisions. In this way, section 80
operates a complete code
as to who has standing to initiate reviews of
particular child support decisions.
The application of the multi-case allowance and multi-case cap
complexity in this matter exists because the provisions of the
Child Support
(Assessment) Act 1989
(the Assessment Act) relating to the administrative
assessment of child support permit the existence of one child support assessment
to affect the rate of child support in another assessment via the
‘multi-case allowance’ and ‘multi-case cap’.
capacity for two different assessments to affect one another confronts the
express restrictions on who may object to particular
decisions, and thereafter
apply for review in the Tribunal.
manner in which the multi-case allowance and multi-case cap affect the
calculation of the rate of child support is set out at
sections 47 and 55E of
the Assessment Act respectively. The provisions are not easy to summarise. It is
sufficient for us to note
CSA’s summary of the purpose and effect of the
multi-case allowance and multi-case cap provided for in the Child Support Guide
(2.4.9 Assessments when a parent has multiple child support cases (Formulas 3
Multi-case allowance
The multi-case allowance is an allowance deducted from a parent’s
adjusted taxable income to recognise a parent’s responsibility
support for their children in another child support case.
The multi-case allowance is the sum of the ‘multi-case child
costs’, excluding the costs of the children of the case to
assessment relates...the parent has an amount deducted from their income to
recognise the costs of supporting the children
in their other case or
Multi-case cap
The multi-case cap is used to ensure that the parent does not pay more
child support for a child than they would if all the children
lived in the same
household...
Multi-case allowance or multi-case cap
...[b]oth the cap and the allowance are methods of recognising the
parent’s other obligations, so only one is needed at any
one time... Only
the amount arrived at by one mechanism will be the child support amount payable
for each child i.e. either the child
support amount is worked out using the
income after the deduction of the multi-case allowance, or the child support is
according to the cap. For each child, the lesser of the two amounts
calculated will be the assessed rate of child support.
Registrar’s representative helpfully provided the Tribunal with
calculations to demonstrate that in Ms Kent’s assessment,
the inclusion of
two children instead of one child in the other assessment has a material
consequence for the rate of child support
Mr Jozic is liable to pay her.
Can or should the Tribunal enquire into the acceptance or particulars of
Mr Jozic’s ‘other assessment’ when undertaking
a review of the
particulars of Ms Kent’s assessment?
Both the Registrar and Mr Jozic contended that the Tribunal could not look
behind the fact that the ‘other assessment’
Kent did not put forward any submissions regarding this limited issue. Ms Kent,
understandably, was searching for opportunities
to have the factual issue in
contention addressed.
have concluded that we cannot look beyond the undisputed fact that the other
assessment is in place, and that it relates to two
children. Our reasoning is
we are mindful of the legislative intent evident in the scheme set out in
section 80 of the Registration and Collection Act.
We infer from the scheme that
it is plainly not intended that people who are not parties to a particular child
support assessment
will be able to challenge factual aspects of an assessment
that they are not party to. In this case, the real factual issue in dispute
whether or not Mr Jozic is a parent of both children in the other assessment, or
of only one of them. Looking at sub-section 80(1)
in isolation then this issue
is properly understood to be an issue going to the acceptance of the application
for child support giving
rise to the ‘other assessment’ , or perhaps
as to a particular of the ‘other assessment’. We think there
clear legislative intent that any such review cannot be at the instigation of a
person who falls outside the classes of people
who may object to either of those
though Ms Kent is affected by that decision through the multi-case allowance and
cap, legal standing to commence the review process
of child support decisions is
not conferred simply by being affected by the decision. Rather there exists the
detailed provisions
of section 80 of the Registration and Collection Act, and
access to review is thereby closely restricted. We do not think those
restrictions
can be circumvented by enquiring into those very matters in the
context of a particular of another assessment. Our conclusion is
arrived at by paying due regard to the restrictions placed on reviews in this
if we are wrong in this regard, perhaps inferring too much from the scheme set
out in sub-section 80(1) of the Registration and
Collection Act, our conclusion
is reinforced by the second limb of our reasoning as follows.
Sub-section
80(1) does not appear in isolation. Sub-section 80(4) imposes an express
prohibition on the lodging of objections to decisions
to accept applications for
administrative assessment of child support on the ground that a person is not a
parent of the child concerned.
The principle behind this prohibition was
discussed by Halligan FM in
Bixby v Farraday
((SSAT Appeal)
FMCAfam 647)
that case, Halligan FM rejected a submission by the Registrar that the
acceptance of an application for a child support assessment
based on section 29
of the Assessment Act was capable of administrative review (Section 29 in
essence permits the Registrar to be
satisfied of parentage if satisfied of one
or more of a number of factors that may not necessarily conclusively establish
scientifically. It is a notion of presumptive parentage). Rather,
Halligan FM preferred a construction of sub-section 80(4) (and
provisions of sub-section 80(5)) that removed disputes about parentage decisions
of the Registrar from the formal administrative
review process. His Honour
concluded that the provisions require parentage issues affecting a decision of
the Registrar to accept
or reject a child support application to be brought to a
court under the applicable provisions reserved for that process (At [69]-[70]).
the matter before Halligan FM was not entirely analogous to the present matter,
we consider that the principles and conclusion
discussed by his Honour reinforce
our conclusion that we are not permitted to undertake any enquiry (presumptive
or otherwise) that
touches on the parentage of a child in the other assessment.
Bixby & Farraday
, the existence of express provisions permitting
proceedings leading to conclusive declarations to be made by a court as to
is relied upon to reject the submission that there is some scope for
administrative review of decisions made under section 29 of
the Assessment Act.
In reflecting on his Honour’s reasoning, we are conscious that when regard
is had to those express provisions,
there is a real question as to whether Ms
Kent would be permitted to initiate those proceedings.
Ms Kent could not initiate those proceedings either (and that is not for us to
conclusively determine), then we are troubled
by the apparent absence of any
path to a remedy for Ms Kent if her allegations were true.
this void steps the Registrar. In written submissions, the Registrar has
identified legislative scope for the CSA to investigate
and amend the register
if, for example, Mr Jozic’s name does not in fact appear on the relevant
child’s birth certificate.
We are told that the necessary investigations
are taking place now. As the Registrar is the administrator of the Child Support
and the common denominator in both Ms Kent’s assessment and the
other assessment, we consider that action by the Registrar
is the appropriate
mechanism for the issue to be progressed, not through administrative review in
the Tribunal.
note that the Registrar has conceded that in this case deficient administrative
practices in failing to obtain an extract of the
birth certificate have played a
role in the current dispute. We agree. Given that a birth certificate is
required to open a bank
account for a child, it seems remarkable to us that the
Registrar would act to commence a liability, with all the significant
consequences
that entails for the liable parents and receiving parents and
carers, without first requiring an applicant to at least produce the
certificate. This is the sort of thing that birth certificates are for. If the
Tribunal were called upon to reach findings
as to parentage (and we are not),
presumptively or otherwise, we do not think we would be adequately discharging
any such fact-finding
function by simply accepting a party’s word on the
matter when the usual documentary evidence relevant to identifying nominated
birth parents is readily available.
The resolution of the application for review
the reasons set out above, we do not consider it open to us to look beyond the
fact that the other assessment exists, and that
it is for two children. Based on
the records of the CSA in Exhibit C1, we find as a fact accordingly, and look no
further into the
particulars or circumstances of that other assessment.
follows that Ms Kent’s assessment is correctly arrived at through the
application of the multi-case allowance and multi-case
cap. The decision under
review is affirmed.
Presiding Member
for the Tribunal
The publication of Social Security Appeals Tribunal child support
decisions is authorised under
subsections 16(2AB)
(2AC) of the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act
Personal particulars of parties to an appeal and their children are
removed to protect their privacy. Names used in all published
decisions are
pseudonyms. Reasons for decisions are published in full (with any information
which may identify involved individuals
to a member of the public removed) to
ensure that the full context and basis for the decision can be understood. The
Social Security
Appeal's Tribunal's decisions in relation to child support
matters demonstrate the application of the Child Support legislation to
individual circumstances of the case being decided. Different fact situations
or subsequent changes to legislation may result
in different outcomes.
The CSA reviews all SSAT decisions to identify opportunities to improve
its services and ensure its processes and policies are robust
and accurate. The
CSA publishes further information about SSAT decisions on their website
www.csa.gov.au/publications/1313.aspx#ssat
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (172 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter