Downe v Barminco Pty Ltd [1998] IRCA 27 (3 August 1998)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
- UNLAWFUL DISMISSAL - whether VALID REASON connected
with employee’s capacity or conduct - whether employee given opportunity
to defend herself - remedy - whether reinstatement practicable - assessment of
compensation.
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Relations Act 1996
ss 170DC, 170DE, 170EA,
Wadey v Y.M.C.A. Canberra
(unreported, IRCA No. 542 of 1996, Moore J, 12 November
Selvachandran v Peteron Plastics Pty Ltd
(1995) 62 IR
Cosco Holdings Pty Ltd v Thu Thi Van Do
(1997) 150 ALR
; 77 IR 94.
Qantas Airways Limited v Cornwall
(unreported,
Federal Court No. 865 of 1998, Full Court, 24 July
YVONNE DOROTHY DOWNE -v-
BARMINCO PTY LTD
R.D. FARRELL JR
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
WI 1022 OF 1997
YVONNE DOROTHY DOWNE
BARMINCO PTY LTD
R.D. FARRELL JR
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The termination of the applicant’s
employment by the respondent contravened Section 170DC of the
Relations Act 1996
2. Within 21 days of the date of making these orders, the respondent pay to
the applicant compensation in the sum of $5,950.00 less
any amount payable to
the Commissioner of Taxation pursuant to the
Income Tax Assessment Act
and actually paid.
Note: Settlement and entry of orders is dealt with in Order 36 of the Industrial
Relations Court Rules.
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
WESTERN AUSTRALIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
WI 1022 OF 1997
YVONNE DOROTHY
BARMINCO PTY LTD
R.D. FARRELL JR
REASONS FOR DECISION
This is an application under Section 170EA of the then
Relations Act 1988
, now known as the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(“the Act”). The application is for reinstatement or, in the
alternative, compensation, arising from the alleged unlawful
termination of the
employment of the applicant, Mrs Yvonne Downe (“Mrs Downe”) by the
respondent, Barminco Pty Ltd (“Barminco”).
Barminco Pty Ltd is a company which supplies contract drilling and mining
services to the Western Australian mining industry, particularly
to the Eastern
Goldfields region.
Mrs Downe was employed by Barminco in March 1995 as an Occupational Health
and Safety Officer, and was dismissed in November 1996.
Barminco contends that it terminated Mrs Downe’s employment for a valid
reason connected with her conduct. While Barminco relies
primarily on a final
incident of alleged misconduct related to an unauthorised stay at a mining camp
(“the final incident”),
it contends that Mrs Downe’s conduct
and performance had been unsatisfactory for some time. Barminco contends that
incident was a valid reason for Mrs Downe’s dismissal, when
viewed in the context of Mrs Downe’s past performance.
Mrs Downe disputes Barminco’s contentions as to her past performance,
and disputes that the final incident relied upon by Barminco
was conduct capable
of giving rise to a valid reason for dismissal. She contends, therefore, that
the termination of her employment
was in breach of Section 170DE(1) of the
Mrs Downe further contends that she was not given the opportunity to defend
herself against the allegations made about her conduct
or performance, and that
Barminco therefore also failed to comply with Section 170DC of the Act.
While Mrs Downe’s particulars of claim included a contention that the
termination amounted to discrimination on the basis of
her gender, that
contention wasn’t pursued at the hearing.
Barminco contends that reinstatement, the primary remedy sought by Mrs Downe,
is impracticable.
Employment History
Mrs Downe was employed by Barminco on 22 March 1995 as an Occupational Health
and Safety Officer, having previously worked in that
capacity on a consultancy
basis for Barminco, and for several other mining companies in the goldfields.
The employment was made permanent
in May 1996.
The position of full-time Occupational Health and Safety Officer was newly
created. Barminco had experienced significant growth in
its operations in recent
times. The growth in its workforce, and the increasing emphasis placed on
occupational health and safety
by the clients to whom it provided drilling and
mining services, made the employment of a full-time Occupational Health and
Officer necessary. The workforce continued to grow during Ms
Downe’s period with the company, nearly doubling from about 95
in March-April 1995 to over 180 in September 1996.
Barminco’s employees were located at a number of different mines with
whom Barminco had contracts. During Mrs Downe’s
employment, Barminco had
contracts with mines situated at Plutonic (near Meekatharra), Wiluna and
Davyhurst. Barminco had a site
manager at each of these mines.
Barminco’s Managing Director, Mr Peter Bartlett, was based in
Barminco’s Kalgoorlie office. The company divided the mines
with which it
had contracts or with which it was seeking contracts into two areas, North and
South, each of which had an Area Manager.
The Northern Area Manager was Mr Ron
(“Rock”) Manning and the Southern Area Manager was Mr Gary Mayes.
Site Managers
reported to their Area Manager. Mr Bartlett and the Area Managers
were often out of the office, moving from site to site. However
the Kalgoorlie
office had an Office Manager, Mr Des Wearing, who remained full-time in the
office. Barminco also had a Perth office,
but it was at that time chiefly a
service centre, handling shared administrative functions such as the payroll. Mr
Brian Glasson,
the Paymaster, was in the Perth office.
Mrs Downe was based at the Barminco office in Kalgoorlie, and was required to
service Barminco’s three contracted mine sites.
Site visits were necessary
from time to time. Davyhurst, which is 140 kilometres north-west of Kalgoorlie,
could be readily reached
by car. Wiluna and Plutonic, being 560 and 900
kilometres from Kalgoorlie respectively, could be reached by car or by
charter-aircraft.
Mrs Downe was considered well-qualified for the position. Among other things,
she was a registered nurse, and had training and experience
as a occupational
health and safety consultant.
Mrs Downe’s role, based on her job
description and other evidence included:
• Policy Development
◊ Assisting with the formulation and ongoing maintenance of all
policies regarding the occupational health and safety of the
workforce - this
was expected to take the form of a safety manual
◊ Formulating pre-employment medical procedures
◊ Advising on personal protective equipment
• Policy Implementation
◊ Instigation of pre-employment medical procedures
◊ Maintaining first aid facilities on site
◊ Following up accident reports
◊ conducting safety audits
• Client Liaison
◊ Liaising with clients to ensure their safety requirements are met by
Barminco’s employees
◊ Assisting in the preparation of tenders
• Employee Liaison and Training
◊ Conducting inductions of employees
◊ Endorsing Barminco’s safety policy with all employees of the
◊ Preparing and conducting site safety meetings as required
◊ Preparing and conducting training in occupational health and safety
as required
• Emergency Response Capability - Mrs Downe was, at least after 11
October 1996, “on call” in case of a medical
emergency at the
Davyhurst mine site, to provide first aid in her capacity as a registered
Mrs Downe regarded as her over-riding objective the enhancement of
employees’ safety and the prevention of injury at Barminco’s
The duties listed above were, in her view, merely means to that end.
Importantly, Mrs Downe’s contract of employment stated that, as
Occupational Health and Safety Officer, she was “responsible
Office Manager, Mr Des Wearing. Mr Bartlett adds that, when she was on site, she
was responsible to the relevant Site
Mrs Downe says that it was decided during a meeting about the restructuring
of the company in November 1995 that she would report
to the Managing Director,
Mr Bartlett, about matters of policy and to the Office Manager, Mr Wearing,
says an organisational structure in those terms was
written up onto a white board. Mr Bartlett denies this was ever the formal
but I accept that as a matter of practice Mrs Downe tended to raise
issues where possible directly with Mr Bartlett, whatever the
Past Issues Relating to Conduct
From at least July 1996, concerns were being expressed to Mrs Downe by other
managers within Barminco about her conduct and performance
as an employee.
Mr Wearing, the office manager to whom she reported, issued a memorandum to
Mrs Downe dated 22 July 1996. The memorandum complained
professional conduct, reminded her of the original terms of her employment, and
insisted that she adhere to
them. It went on to say that if she was unable to
carry out her duties as required, then she might wish to seek alternative
employment.
Then, in August 1996, it was proposed at a meeting between Mr Bartlett, Mr
Wearing, Mr Glasson, Mr Manning and Mrs Downe that Mrs
Downe revert to being
engaged as a consultant rather than a full-time employee. Under this proposal
she would work as required and
only be paid for the hours she worked. Mrs Downe
had no difficulties with the proposition in principle, and some steps were taken
to implement it. Mrs Downe was paid out her accrued leave and other entitlements
as at the end of August 1996. Mr Bartlett wrote
to Mrs Downe on 12 September
1996 to advise her that her employment had ceased on 31 August 1996 and to
provide details of the new
“as required” consultancy arrangement.
The letter nominated an hourly fee of $45.00. However, no rate had been agreed
and soon after, Mrs Downe rendered an invoice to Barminco for time worked by her
during September 1996 at her previous consultancy
rate of $75.00 per hour
worked. Mr Bartlett did not accept this and the invoices were never paid.
Eventually Mr Richard Webb, Barminco’s
newly appointed Finance Director
who was based in the Perth office, resolved the impasse by paying Mrs Downe for
that period on the
basis that she had remained employed. Thus, the consultancy
proposal lapsed following the failure to agree on an appropriate hourly
pay. It was not contended at the hearing that there had been any break in Mrs
Downe’s employment.
After a further discussion, another consultancy proposal was put to Mrs Downe
by Mr Webb in a letter dated 11 October 1996. Under
this proposal, Mrs Downe
would, for a weekly retainer, assume the role of First Aid Officer for the
Davyhurst operations, providing
a 24 hour call-out service. Any other consulting
work would be done on request for $40 per hour, subject to Mr Wearing’s
authorisation.
Mrs Downe never formally responded to this proposal, and voiced
some misgivings about it to Mr Webb.
Mr Wearing then wrote to Mrs Downe
again on 23 October 1996:
• referring to her conditions of employment setting out her hours of
duty and the requirement that she report to him;
• requiring that requests for site visits be directed through him;
• requiring that she attend the Kalgoorlie office for a minimum 40
hours per week and regularly complete a fortnightly timesheet;
• observing that her attitude to direction by him had not changed since
his earlier warning in July; and
• recommending that she consider her position and advise whether she
wished to continue her employment.
In late October 1996, Mrs Downe had a further meeting in Kalgoorlie with Mr
Richard Webb, Mr Manning and Mr Mayes. Mrs Downe’s
apparent inability to
work with Mr Wearing was discussed, among other things. She was told that, if
she chose to remain as an employee
rather than resign and accept work as a
consultant, then she had the option of either resolving her difficulties and
functioning
effectively within the Kalgoorlie office’s management
structures or of facing the termination of her employment.
Mrs Downe has led evidence about these developments from her perspective, but
on any view they indicate that there was dissatisfaction
on the part of Mr
Wearing and the other senior management of Barminco about the manner in which
Mrs Bartlett was functioning as an
employed Occupational Health and Safety
Officer. Mrs Downe’s evidence indicates that she too was dissatisfied with
the situation,
for reasons she attributes to Barminco.
There was a great deal of evidence about these events prior to the
“final incident”. I do not propose to detail that evidence,
recount the many specific incidents about which evidence was given. However, a
number of themes arose from the evidence and
I propose to identify those issues,
and my findings on them.
Mrs Downe was critical of deficiencies in Barminco’s management
systems. Barminco’s operations had grown rapidly, and
I accept that the
informal arrangements which had been adequate to manage a smaller company
remained in place for some time after
they had ceased to be adequate.
Thus, Mrs Downe found that the organisational structure and lines of
authority within the company were, in practice, fluid and unclear.
For example,
I note in passing that Mr Bartlett and Mr Mayes’ evidence was in dispute
as to whether Mr Mayes held the title
of Southern Area Manager. Mrs Downe also
found that many managers preferred oral dealings to the use of paper. She was
discouraged
by some managers from providing reports in a written form, and had
difficulties obtaining the resources to prepare such reports.
She referred to
the difficulty in getting things typed.
However, while acknowledging Mrs Downe’s criticisms and difficulties, I
have come to the conclusion that in fact Mrs Downe preferred
to work informally.
Faced with a lack of systems throughout the company, she took few steps to put
systems in place in her own area
of responsibility. Faced with a formal chain of
responsibility to Mr Wearing, which she considered unsatisfactory, she took
of the readiness of other senior managers, such as Mr Bartlett, to
deal with her if she went to them directly.
It is interesting, for example, that Mrs Downe’s response to Mr
Wearing’s first warning letter of 22 July 1996 was to
state to Mr Bartlett
that informal or verbal communications with Mr Wearing would stop, so that all
communications and authorisations
would be in written form. There was no
evidence, however, that this threat was ever implemented, though it does seem
that for a time
before the late October meeting with Mr Webb, Mr Manning and Mr
Mayes, there was no communication at all between Mr Wearing and Mrs
Ironically, it appears to have been Mr Wearing who was more concerned to put
appropriate systems in place. This was perhaps to be
expected, given his long
work history with the Commonwealth Bank and then with Western Mining, both of
whom were large organisations.
I accept that from time to time Mr Wearing requested regular written reports
from Mrs Downe. He also, for example, sought a structured
programme for the
safety induction of new employees, which others could follow if Mrs Downe was
not available to perform the induction.
Mrs Downe resisted these requests. She
raised some impediments in her evidence to compiling some of these reports, but
does not seem
to have persisted in any attempts to overcome them. Ultimately, a
consultant, Mr Craig Power, was engaged to put in place those systems
regard to occupational health and safety. His engagement reinforces my
acceptance of Mr Wearing’s evidence that such systems
were first sought
from Mrs Downe but not provided.
Mrs Downe’s failure to prioritise those requests should be seen in the
context of her other responsibilities. In the reorganisation
that has occurred
since her dismissal, there are now many more personnel attending to the
responsibilities which had been borne for
some time by Mrs Downe as the sole
Occupational Health and Safety Officer. It seems likely that there was more to
be done than one
person could deal with; Mrs Downe had at one point complained
to Mr Bartlett that the numerous responsibilities ascribed to her in
documents were akin to a fairy tale.
In those circumstances, it is understandable that Mrs Downe would do first
the things which seemed to her to be most important, and
it would be the tasks
she found less congenial which would tend to remain undone.
Mrs Downe’s preference appears to have been to get out and attend to
what was happening at the sites from day to day on an ad
hoc basis rather than
to focus on methodically putting in place systems which might have made her work
more effective in the longer
term. I note while there may have been other
factors involved, it was not until Mr Power had analysed Barminco’s safety
and developed the appropriate systems that Barminco’s management
took the decision to hire more safety personnel.
Mrs Downe seemed to feel a very personal responsibility for the health and
safety of Barminco’s employees. She placed great
weight on the level of
training and experience she brought to her position, and regarded herself as
almost uniquely qualified to
make assessments on health and safety issues for
the company. Thus, for example, she gave herself considerable latitude in the
in which she conducted inductions, so that an experienced worker might be
given a relatively short induction and an unexperienced
worker a relatively long
one. She resisted the idea that the induction should have a standard content and
be in a standard format
so that someone without her level of training could
perform it.
Mrs Downe’s preferred method of recording her activities was to note
them in her diary. It is apparent that an important part
of the diary’s
function was to provide her with the means of “covering her self” if
something went wrong. This
diary was thus used by her as a personal resource,
rather than as a communication of her activities to other people within the
Mrs Downe explained that she was always able to copy relevant pages of
the diary if a record was needed of a particular visit or
incident. However,
this was rarely done, and certainly did not happen as a matter of course. The
diary was not available at the hearing.
It is not necessary for me to decide
what became of it because I am prepared to accept that it was kept in the manner
Mrs Downe contends.
Mrs Downe’s approach to the job might fairly be summarised as
individualistic. From her evidence, I was left with the impression
tended to see herself as a lone campaigner for health and safety within the
company, rather than a team builder. Her response
when confronted by
inadequacies or by resistance was to criticise and demand, rather than to
encourage and persuade.
I accept that, given Mrs Downe’s strength of feeling about safety
issues, her interactions with employees when she found their
safety arrangements
to be inadequate sometimes led to agitation within the workforce. It seems that
these incidents tended to occur
in Wiluna and Plutonic, where Mrs Downe had less
ready access to the mine sites and felt as if she did not have a
on the health and safety situation. Given her
frustration’s, she would sometimes react to situations she perceived to be
by criticising the employee’s involved and by purporting to
unilaterally change systems of work, without reference to the site
management.
The reaction of site managers was thus to insist that they have greater control
over Mrs Downe’s activities on
site. I accept that Mrs Downe was in a
difficult position, and that it was probably impossible for her to adequately
fulfil her responsibilities
with regard to the Plutonic and Wiluna mine sites.
She would probably have been better served, however, by seeking to establish a
co-operative relationship with the site managers, and to address the problems
with them more systematically, rather than run the
risk of them regarding her as
a “loose cannon”, and seeking to restrict her activities.
In addition to these general difficulties with Mrs Downe’s employment,
there was a particular problem in her relationship with
Mr Wearing.
It seems clear that Mr Wearing’s and Mrs Downe’s temperaments
were not compatible. Mrs Downe resented being required
to report to him and
having to rely on his authorisation for access to the resources she considered
necessary to do her job. The
most common issue was access to the company cars
or, on occasion, to charter flights, so that she could visit the mine sites.
Mrs Downe believed that Mr Wearing did not display appropriate respect for
her qualifications or expertise. For example, I accept
that it was his practice
not to accept her assessments on health and safety matters unless they were
confirmed by the relevant Site
Manager. Mrs Downe found this both frustrating
and demeaning.
Given that Mrs Downe was over-stretched in her position, it is also
understandable that she tended to focus her frustration’s
concerning her
lack of resources on Mr Wearing.
Additional irritants arose from some of Mr Wearing’s “old
fashioned” attitudes. He was disturbed, for example,
when Mrs Downe used
bad language in the office, while accepting that he would not have been so
disturbed if the same language had
been used by a man.
From Mr Wearing’s point of view, however, his wish to check on Mrs
Downe’s demands and to make her more accountable for
her time was
As I have already noted, given Mrs Downe’s tendency to act
unilaterally, it may sometimes have been prudent for Mr Wearing
to check that
she had consulted with those managers who would be affected by her proposals.
Certainly, the result of this practice
was that Mrs Downe tended to go to the
relevant managers and ask them to make any requests concerning safety matters
directly to
Mr Wearing, because he would make them confirm any request from her
More fundamentally, I formed the clear impression that Mr Wearing did not
trust Mrs Downe, and suspected that she was using Barminco’s
further her personal interests. This distrust was shared by Mr Bartlett. Mrs
Downe held some mining tenements near the Davyhurst
mine site. It was a
condition of those tenements that a prescribed amount of work be done developing
them each year. Mr Bartlett
indicated in his evidence that he believed Mrs Downe
was devoting some of her time to those tenements when she should have been
Barminco’s interests. Mr Wearing was therefore constantly seeking
to make Mrs Downe more accountable for her time. The proposed
consultancy
arrangements were also proposed for that purpose. Assuming for present purposes
that Mrs Downe was not working her tenements
on Barminco time, Barminco were
nonetheless entitled to require her to be accountable for her time.
For her part, Mrs Downe’s reaction, given Mr Wearing’s apparent
failure to grasp and accept what she needed to do to meet
her responsibilities,
was to seek more autonomy, so that she was less accountable to Mr Wearing. I am
satisfied that she would, disregard
from time to time, his directions and
Mrs Downe disputes the relevance of the allegations raised by Barminco
concerning her conduct and her performance.
Mrs Downe takes pride in the objective occupational health and safety
outcomes achieved while she was with Barminco. For example,
on 4 December 1996,
shortly after her dismissal, Mr Bartlett had cause to congratulate the workforce
on the attainment of 12 months
without a lost time injury. While there was some
of the evidence Ms Downe wished to lead concerning Barminco’s safety
was disputed, there was no dispute between the parties that
Barminco’s safety record during Ms Downe’s employment was
Ms Downe takes credit for those outcomes and argues that her performance cannot
properly be criticised by Barminco when
she was “getting
Barminco submits, with some justification, that any number of factors
contributed to its excellent occupational health and safety
record at the
relevant time. It submits that compliance by Mrs Downe with the requirements
imposed by Barminco would have tended
to enhance Barminco’s occupational
health and safety outcomes, or at least would not have harmed it.
As Mrs Downe’s employer, Barminco was entitled to control the manner in
which she did her job. She was required to comply with
directions, provided they are lawful and reasonable. It is possible to imagine a
scenario where a direction to an
Occupational Health and Safety Officer would
have such adverse consequences to the safety of employees that it would properly
considered unreasonable. I am satisfied, however, that Barminco’s
directions and policies as they related to Mrs Downe’s
employment were not
unreasonable.
I am satisfied that the requirement that she answer to Mr Wearing with regard
to her day to day activities was again confirmed to
her at the final meeting in
late October with Mr Webb, Mr Manning and Mr Mayes. While she was clearly
unhappy with that requirement,
I accept that it was in place at the time of the
final incident.
The Final Incident
Mrs Downe had plans to go to Davyhurst mine site on the weekend commencing
Saturday 23 November 1996 to access the private mining
tenements nearby in which
she had an interest. She had, since September, been in a relationship with Mr Ed
Smylie who worked for
Barminco as a shift boss at the Davyhurst mine site; Mrs
Downe describes him as having been her defacto husband. Mr Smylie was living
the mining camp, which was controlled and supervised by Barminco’s client.
Barminco’s client was variously referred
to in the evidence as
“Aberfoyle (Pty Ltd)”, “Bardock” or “Consolidated
Gold NL”, so I will simply
refer to it as “the Client”. Mrs
Downe intended to stay with Mr Smylie over the weekend at the camp, so that she
convenient access to her tenements.
Mrs Downe and her business partner in the tenements, Mr Peter Milne, had been
given permission about six weeks earlier by Mr Andrew
Shaw, Aberfoyle’s
mine superintendent at Davyhurst, to use the mining camp for accommodation when
they checked their tenements.
It seems that the client was a potential purchaser
of the tenements. Mr Milne never availed himself of this permission. Mrs Downe
had stayed at the camp twice before for this purpose. The first time, she had
arranged a separate room for herself, though in fact
she stayed with Mr Smylie.
The second time she did not bother to arrange a separate room.
Mr Shaw later expressed the view to Mr Mayes that the permission given to Mrs
Downe did not extend to Mrs Downe sharing Mr Smylie’s
room overnight. Mr
Shaw did not give evidence.
Mr Mayes, Barminco’s Southern Area Manager with responsibility for
Davyhurst, says that while visits to the camp during the
day were permitted,
overnight stays with employees were discouraged. It seems that Mr Shaw had
objected to employees’ partners
staying overnight in the past. It was, Mr
Mayes says, an unwritten rule. It seems, however, that it was not a very precise
Mr Mayes himself says merely that “conjugal visits weren't really
encouraged on the site”.
Mrs Downe’s past stays had led to friction between Mr Shaw and Mr
Smylie; Mr Shaw believed that the other employees resented
the fact that Mr
Smylie was enjoying “conjugal visits” when they were not able to.
However, rather than raise the matter
with Mr Smylie directly, Mr Shaw arranged
to have Mr Smylie’s double bed removed from his room. Mr Smylie chose to
ignore this
Mr Shaw discussed his concerns with Mr Mayes, and Mr Mayes says he had
mentioned “in passing” to Mrs Downe and Mr Smylie
that Mr Shaw was
upset by Mrs Downe staying with Mr Smylie at the camp. Mr Mayes says he
considered the issue sensitive and did not
feel comfortable interfering with Mr
Smylie’s personal life. Mrs Downe and Mr Smylie deny that Mr Mayes raised
the matter at
all. I accept that, given his embarrassment, Mr Mayes did not
directly raise the matter.
Mr Mayes says that Mr Shaw contacted him at Davyhurst on the afternoon of
Thursday 21 November 1996 to request that Mrs Downe not
come to the Davyhurst
mine site that weekend, because the camp wasn't set up for conjugal visits. Mr
Shaw also suggested that Mrs
Downe was attending the site too frequently, and
more frequently than she used to. Mr Shaw linked this to her relationship with
Smylie. He went on to tell Mr Mayes that he did not want Mrs Downe turning up
on site unexpectedly, and indeed did not want her to
go on site unless her
presence was requested by the Client.
Mr Mayes did not convey this request directly to Mrs Downe, though he was in
the Kalgoorlie office with her on the morning of Friday
22 November 1996. He
says, however, that he advised Mr Wearing of Mr Shaw’s request.
Mrs Downe approached Mr Wearing that morning and told him she had to go to
Davyhurst that day. Mr Wearing cannot now recall the reason.
Mrs Downe says that
Mr Power had asked that she collect information about certain safety procedures
on the site. Mr Wearing believes
that if Mr Power had been mentioned, then he
would have spoken to him. Mr Wearing told her there was no need for her to go to
for that purpose at that stage, and told her not to go.
The respondent’s particulars suggest that Mrs Downe requested the use
of a Barminco vehicle to go to Davyhurst. There was no
evidence to that
Mr Wearing later confirmed with Mr Mayes that he had told Mrs Downe not to go
to Davyhurst. When Mr Shaw rang the Kalgoorlie office
later on Friday morning to
remind Mr Mayes of his request, Mr Mayes reassured him that Mr Wearing had
instructed Mrs Downe not to
go to the site.
While Mr Mayes denies speaking directly to Mrs Downe at all that morning, she
claims they had three conversations about her going
to Davyhurst that day.
She says she told Mr Mayes that Mr Power had asked her to review the safety
inspections which were occurring at the Davyhurst site,
but which had not been
documented, and showed him a facsimile from Mr Power. She says she also told Mr
Mayes that she would be going
to Davyhurst to complete the documentation and
would be staying there for the rest of the weekend. Mr Mayes says that if that
been the case, he would have asked her not to go.
Mr Wearing left the office at about 10.30 am to go to Perth. Soon after, Mrs
Downe left the Kalgoorlie office for the Davyhurst mine
site, using her own
vehicle. She says she arrived at Davyhurst by about 1.30pm.
At Davyhurst, Mrs Downe spoke to the mine foreman. Mr Darren Russell, for
her by Mr Power.
Mr Mayes had to go out to Davyhurst that afternoon. When he arrived, he
confirmed that Mrs Downe had been out to the mine site, but
did not locate her
on site. When he had completed his business there, he returned to Kalgoorlie. He
presumed Mrs Downe had left the
site and was at her tenements, so he decided to
take it up with Mr Smylie and Mrs Downe the next morning. He says he did not
at that stage, whether Mrs Downe intended to stay the night; he tried to
He did not attempt
to warn Mr Smylie that Mrs Downe should not stay overnight; Mr Smylie was
working underground at the time.
Mrs Downe shared Mr Smylie’s accommodation on Friday night. On Saturday
morning, she went out to her tenements, visiting the
town of Menzies
and bringing back some supplies to the camp. She had told some of the
employees of her intended movements should she be required
in an emergency; her
mobile telephone did not have coverage in that area. She had returned to the
mining camp by 10:00 am.
Mr Mayes called the camp at about 10:00 am and spoke with Mr Smylie. He told
Mr Smylie “you had better just cool it down”.
Mr Mayes explained
that Mr Shaw had advised that there were no conjugal visitation rights on site,
and that Mr Shaw had asked him
to remove Mr Smylie from site if Mrs
Downe’s visits did not stop.
Mr Smylie, though a little taken aback at first, agreed to refrain from
sharing his accommodation with Mrs Downe. Mrs Downe, who was
with Mr Smylie when
he took the call, says she was surprised to learn that Mr Shaw had a difficulty
with her staying at the camp
with Mr Smylie, but on learning of his concerns,
Mrs Downe immediately left the mining camp and returned to Kalgoorlie.
number of issues are raised by this incident. The aspects of Mrs Downe’s
conduct which are expressly or implicitly the subject
of complaint are:
• The fact that she went to Davyhurst at all on Friday, given that:
• Mr Wearing had instructed her not to;
• The Client did not want her on site other than at its request;
• The Barminco business she conducted on site on Friday was possibly
not sufficient to justify a separate trip, and was not
• The trip was in part motivated by her private business interests in
the tenement and personal interest in spending time with
Mr Smylie, and
• The fact that she stayed overnight with Mr Smylie, given Mr
Shaw’s objection to “conjugal visits”.
Mr Shaw’s position that he did not want Mrs Downe coming up
“unannounced” or other than at the Client’s request
extraordinary, and was surely not to be taken at face value by Barminco. It is
difficult in principle to see how Mrs Downe could
do her job and how Barminco
could meet its occupational health and safety obligations to its employees at
Davyhurst with Barminco’s
Occupational Health and Safety Officer subjected
to such a restriction.
Mr Shaw’s statement appears to have been motivated by his concerns
possibly, though this
was not expressed, by any unsettling effects on employees of Mrs Downe’s
interventions concerning safety,
of the sort referred to generally above. While
one can appreciate Barminco’s concern not to alienate their client, I
have thought that Barminco it could not, consistent with its statutory
obligations, accept a position where its employees’
access to its
Occupational Health and Safety Officer was dependent on the whim of its client.
Certainly, Barminco’s response
to Mr Shaw’s position was a matter to
be determined by its management, and not a decision to be taken by Mrs Downe
alone. There
is no evidence, however, that Mr Shaw’s position was ever
drawn to her attention. She was simply told not to go to the site
I have no doubt that Mr Wearing shared Mr Shaw’s suspicion that Mrs
Downe had ulterior motives to visit Davyhurst. However,
joint motives are not
always blameworthy. In principle, Mrs Downe could quite properly organise her
work-related travel schedule
in such a way that it coincided with her business
and personal interests, provided that it did not negatively impact on the
performance
of her responsibilities to her employer. If it were genuinely
necessary, therefore, for her to make a site visit at Davyhurst on
one day that
week, there is no reason in principle that she should not go on Friday rather
than Wednesday, all things being equal.
There is, however, no right for employees to be able to so arrange their
affairs where their employer decides otherwise. Barminco
would, for example,
have been entitled to insist that Mrs Downe be present at the Barminco office at
the end of the working day every
Friday and at the beginning of the working day
every Monday.
I am also not satisfied that this was a case of “all things being
equal”. I accept that Mr Power requested that certain
information be
gathered from Davyhurst. It would appear from some of the facsimiles exchanged
between Mrs Downe and Mr Power that,
on Wednesday 10 November, he had fixed a
“target completion” date for this task of Monday, 25 November 1996.
however, nothing inherent in the nature of the work to be done which
made it urgent.
Further, it seems to have been considerably less than a full day’s
work. One would have thought that, given the travel time
between Kalgoorlie and
Davyhurst, it would be most efficient to accumulate a full day’s worth of
work for each visit, where
Mrs Downe may well have decided that she should go to Davyhurst before
Monday, rather than keep Mr Power waiting. When Mr Wearing
instructed her not
to, however, she could and should have advised Mr Power that she was unable to
meet his target date, and why.
It was then a matter that Mr Power could take up
with Mr Wearing, if he wished to. Mrs Downe suggested in her evidence that Mr
had claimed the right to direct her. Mr Power did not give evidence. If Mr
Power made such a claim, it seems unlikely that such a
right was intended to
prevail over that of Mr Wearing, and one would have expected some formal
confirmation of any change from Barminco,
given the extent to which Mr
Wearing’s authority had become an issue.
The communication between Mr Wearing, Mrs Downe and Mr Mayes left much to be
desired. The difficulties flowed from the history between
those involved. Mr
Mayes was a friend of Mr Smylie and was friendly with Mrs Downe. He was
embarrassed to be seen to be interfering
with their relationship. Being aware of
Mr Shaw’s complaints, he responded indirectly, leaving it to Mr Wearing to
Mrs Downe’s dealings with Mr Wearing were coloured by their history.
She advised she intended to go to Davyhurst, but did not
detail the reasons, or
the reason why it needed to be done urgently. He told her not to go, on the
basis that it was unnecessary,
and without reference to the particular issues Mr
Shaw had raised. Mrs Downe did not try and persuade him otherwise. She did not
refer to Mr Power, nor to the fact that he had fixed a “target
date”. She treated it as a typical exchange where Mr Wearing
frustrating her work because he did not accept its importance.
On balance, I accept that Mrs Downe then went to Mr Mayes, explained why she
believed she had to go and declared her intention to
go. I accept that Mr Mayes
did not intervene, and that Mrs Downe’s interpreted his acquiescence as
support. She may have reasoned
that by raising it with the Southern Area Manager
with responsibility for Davyhurst, she had covered herself against any future
form Mr Wearing.
It is understandable that Mr Mayes might not have intervened to stop Mrs
Downe. He may not have seen it as his job, and wanted to
stay out of it. Mr
Shaw’s strength of feeling on the matter may not have been apparent to him
at that stage. After Mrs Downe
had left, when Mr Shaw rang again and Mr Mayes
realised that it might become a bigger issue, Mr Mayes simply reiterated that Mr
had told her not to go, and made no mention of his involvement. He
purported not to know where Mrs Downe had gone.
Later that day, at the mine site, Mr Shaw was very annoyed. He upbraided Mr
Mayes and accused Barminco of having no control over Mrs
Downe, given that she
hadn’t followed Mr Wearing’s direction. It would have been apparent
to Mr Mayes by then that the
issue was causing a serious problem between
Barminco and the client. Even so, he did not do anything to warn Mr Smylie and
that she should not stay with Mr Smylie at the mining camp that
On the evidence before me, I am satisfied that Mrs Downe’s conduct in
going to Davyhurst that day during working hours could
properly have been a
disciplinary matter. While I accept that there was the potential for confusion
between instructions from Mr
Wearing and Mr Power and the apparent acquiescence
of Mr Mayes, I accept that, in the face of Mr Wearing’s instruction not
go, the onus was on Mrs Downe to ensure that any conflict in direction between
Mr Wearing and the others was resolved between
them. In that situation,
particularly where there was no inherent urgency in the task, it was not up to
Mrs Downe to choose who to
listen to, or to approach other managers in search of
contrary indications. Mr Wearing’s direction could not be said to be
unreasonable, in all the circumstances and given the limited information with
which he was provided by Mrs Downe.
However, I do not find that Mrs Downe’s conduct in staying overnight in
Mr Smylie’s room at the Davyhurst mining camp
was blameworthy.
Given that she had permission to stay at the mining camp to access her
tenements, it was not self-evident that she should not stay
with Mr Smylie. Even
assuming she were aware of an unwritten policy discouraging employees from
having overnight visitors, it was
not clear that such a policy would apply to
sharing the room with a fellow employee who was independently entitled to be at
Mr Shaw, as manager of the client with supervision of the camp, would have
been entitled to notify Mrs Downe that she would not be
permitted to share Mr
Smylie’s room. The fact remains that he did not do so. Nor did Barminco.
Once Mrs Downe was so advised,
she left the camp immediately.
Had Mrs Downe set out for Davyhurst after working hours, Barminco would, in
my view, have had no ground for complaint.
On returning to Kalgoorlie on Saturday, Mrs Downe attempted to discuss the
matter with Mr Mayes, without success.
She went to the Kalgoorlie office on the morning of Monday 25 November,
having drafted in handwriting a response to Mr Shaw’s
complaint, as she
understood it. Mr Mayes was late into the office that day, having other business
to attend to first. Mrs Downe
therefore faxed her hand-written draft to Mr
Manning, the Northern Area Manager, with a Barminco cover sheet identifying it
“reply to A. Shaw as drafted by me”. Mr Manning was in the
Perth office that day. The draft read as follows:
U/Ground Manager
As to Your “Request” of Friday 22nd November
RE: Yvonne Downe Barminco Safety Officer
The terms you wish to apply to her presence at Barminco Davyhurst do not seem
to be appropriate.
The following information may assist you in reviewing your request and give
you some insight into how we see our position.
1. The company is aware of the relationship between Mr Smylie and Mrs Downe -
they in fact attended a function at which our management
2. The company do not nor could not impose any restrictions or terms to their
private time or activities.
3. Further the company is satisfied as to their professional conduct and
performance.
4. Our company is now aware of another major factor in this situation and I
refer to Tenement E16/94. The following information has
reluctantly been made
available to us in the last few hours:
(a) You gave permission in October for Mrs Downe and Mr Milne permission to
use camp accommodation (sic).
(b) Mrs Downe (but to date not Mr Milne) has used your permission to use this
(c) The Tenement is prospective enough that the consulting geologist Mr Peter
Schwan is evaluating it with view to the terms of its
potential and an
appropriate offer.
1. Mrs Downe has used your approval of accommodation and requires all
accommodation charges as they are part of and proof of Form
5 expenditure
requirements. Please forward these accounts to her as they are important.
(October has not been received)
2. Clearly your claims the camp accommodation does not provide for females
cannot be sustained.
3. To publicly declare a single sex accommodation facility would leave our
company vulnerable to a claim of sexual discrimination.
4. To comply with the terms of your “Request” would leave our
company and you open to a claim of harassment from both
Mrs Downe and Mr Smylie
Conclusion.
We do not understand nor can comply with your request.
We do understand the strain and frustration you are under at this
We have persuaded Mrs Downe from contacting Mr Barry Sullivan and informing
him of the turn of events and withdrawing her offer of
E16/94 in favour of
another buyer.
Please feel free to contact us and discuss any other problems as we
understand this is a difficult time for you.
Yours faithfully
Copy of today’s 25th Nov 1996 newspaper article.
Re. “Cons Gold Exploration Intentions”.
Manning appears to have faxed a copy of the draft to Mr Bartlett, who was at the
Plutonic mine site, and to Mr Mayes, who arrived
at the Kalgoorlie office at
the letter had been sent
to the client, and instructed Mr Mayes to dismiss Mrs
Downe if that were the case. Mr Mayes eventually checked, choosing to call
Shaw rather than ask Mrs Downe. When Mr Shaw advised that he had received no
such letter, Mr Mayes, somewhat unhelpfully, read
it out to Mr Shaw.
Barminco submits that this draft letter was inappropriate and improper, as it
amounted to blackmail and did not accept the Client’s
right to control the
mining camp. It was also more appropriately the subject of a personal letter
from Mrs Downe than a letter from
Barminco. However, while it would have been a
disciplinary matter to have sent such a facsimile to the client without
authorisation,
Mrs Downe’s conduct in drafting it and presenting it to Mr
Manning for his consideration was not a matter for which she could
reasonably be
criticised. The draft could have functioned as a basis for the discussion of the
incident within Barminco, and was
only intended as a possible response to the
client. If the letter was intemperate or misconceived then it could have been
Any damage done by the letter to Barminco’s relationship with
the client was caused by Mr Mayes disclosing it, not by Mrs Downe.
In summary then, I accept that Mrs Downe’s decision to go to Davyhurst
during working hours on Friday on Barminco business was
a disciplinary matter,
given Mr Wearing’s instruction to the contrary.
I do not accept, however, that Mrs Downe’s decision to stay at the camp
with Mr Smylie overnight was conduct for which she might
be penalised, given
that she had never been advised by the Client nor by Barminco that she should
not do so. Nor were her actions
in merely drafting a response to the Client a
basis for complaint.
The Dismissal
Mrs Downe’s employment was terminated at a meeting held at about 9:00
am on the morning of Monday, 25 November 1996 with Mrs
Carol Bartlett, who was
Mr Bartlett’s wife and personal secretary, and with Mr Mayes. Only Mrs
Downe and Mr Mayes gave evidence
of what took place.
Mrs Downe says the meeting was conducted in an unstructured and very
emotional manner by Mrs Bartlett. Mrs Downe says that when she
attempted to
offer an explanation of her conduct, she was shouted down. Mr Mayes agrees that
the meeting was very heated, describing
it at one point as a “shouting
match”, but says that Mrs Downe was given leeway to explain herself.
Mrs Bartlett had spoken to her husband, Peter Bartlett, prior to the meeting.
It is unclear whether she had taken the opportunity
to read the draft letter
herself, or whether she was relying on what she had been told about it by Mr
Bartlett and others. While
the evidence on this point was confused, it appears
that Mrs Bartlett initially believed that the draft had been sent by Mrs Downe
to the client. Mr Mayes’ recollection is that she continued to hold this
belief during the meeting. However, notes made by
Mrs Downe soon after the
meeting have Mrs Bartlett complaining that “
this got into
‘wrong hands’ it would jeopardise the Davyhurst contract - it was
sent on Barminco letter head (my emphasis)”.
She is also noted to have
complained that Mrs Downe put Mr Mayes’ name at the bottom of the letter,
when she had no right to
do so. While Mrs Downe protested that it was merely a
draft, Mrs Bartlett does not appear to have been mollified.
It would appear that Mrs Bartlett had become angry with Mrs Downe in the
mistaken belief that the draft had been sent to the Client.
Moreover, Mrs
Bartlett’s anger persisted even when the fear which was its immediate
cause was allayed. Mr Mayes recalls that,
before the meeting, Mrs Bartlett had
told him, “Right, I am going to get Yvonne, we'll meet in the board room,
I want you to
be present, I've had enough of this.”
During the meeting, a number of issues were raised but, as Mr Mayes put it,
the other matters “seemed to pale into insignificance
compared to the
As well as the draft letter, Mrs Bartlett complained that:
• Mrs Downe did not have permission to use the Davyhurst
accommodation;
• Mrs Downe’s professional conduct was compromised by her
“animal instincts”; and
• Mrs Downe was not contactable on her mobile telephone for emergency
Mrs Downe responded to each of these points. She asserted, for example, that
Mr Shaw had earlier given her permission to stay at the
camp, which had not been
retracted, and that Mr Shaw and Mr Smylie knew where they could find her if she
were needed for emergency
response (in which case she would be closer to the
mine than if she were in Kalgoorlie). No attempt was made by Mrs Bartlett to
these assertions. In Mrs Downe’s opinion, she “didn’t
want to hear”.
Mr Mayes’ recollection is that Mrs Bartlett also raised the fact that
Mrs Downe went to Davyhurst after Mr Wearing had told
her not to. Mrs
Downe’s evidence and notes make no reference to this issue having been
raised at the meeting. I accept that
it may have been raised, probably in the
context of the accommodation issue, but it seems clear that it was not given any
as a separate issue.
At the end of the meeting, Mrs Bartlett purported to terminate Mrs
Downe’s employment, telling her her services were no longer
required. Mrs
Downe challenged Mrs Bartlett’s authority to dismiss her. Mrs Bartlett
left the room and spoke with her husband,
the Managing Director. She returned to
tell Mrs Downe “I’ve spoken to Peter and you’re
finished”. I accept
that Mr Bartlett delegated to Mrs Bartlett the
authority to dismiss Mrs Downe.
Whether Valid Reason
Section 170DE(1) provides that an employer must not terminate an
employee’s employment unless there is a valid reason, or valid
connected with the employee’s capacity or conduct or based on the
operational requirements of the undertaking, establishment
or service.
Barminco contends that it had a valid reason connected with Mrs Downe’s
conduct in the period from Friday 22 November 1996 to
Monday 25 November 1996,
and that the Court, in assessing this conduct, should take into account Mrs
Downe’s past conduct.
Submissions of this sort are common where employees are dismissed for reasons
connected with their conduct. Typically, there is a
history of unsatisfactory
conduct. Warnings may have been given, but in any event the employer has chosen
to retain the employee
in employment, notwithstanding its dissatisfaction with
their performance or conduct. Then there is a final incident of poor conduct
performance which is the catalyst for the employer to reach the decision to
dismiss the employee, having taken into account their
overall performance and
conduct. This final incident is said to be “the straw that broke the
camel’s back”, a tired
but reliable metaphor often pressed into
There will be occasions where the final incident is of sufficient
significance to constitute a valid reason for termination in its
without reference to the background against which it occurred. No difficulties
arise in those circumstances. However,
in its closing submissions Barminco
conceded that the final incident in this case would not have provided a valid
reason for dismissal
if it had occurred in isolation.
At the other extreme, it can sometimes be shown that the employer is wrong
the relevant employee
was not involved, or the employee’s conduct in the incident was not
improper (because, for example, the
employee was entitled to act in that way).
In those circumstances, where there is no longer any real catalyst for
dismissal, but
only the employee’s past conduct or performance, it is
generally held that there was no valid reason for the termination. However
the camel’s load, without that final straw, its back is not broken. This
is an application, in the context of Section
170DE(1), of the common law
principle that the right to dismiss for misconduct is waived where an employer
retains an employee with
full knowledge of his or her
The more problematic scenario is that where the final incident was relatively
trivial and would not constitute a valid reason for
termination in its own
right, but was to some extent blameworthy. Will any straw do, however light?
Does it depend on the camel’s
existing load? Is it up to the camel to
decide when it has reached breaking point?
I have found that Mrs Downe’s conduct in going to Davyhurst on Friday
22 November 1996 during working hours in disregard of
Mr Wearing’s
instruction to the contrary could properly have been a disciplinary matter. It
cannot, therefore, be said that
Mrs Downe’s conduct on the Friday was
entirely beyond reproach.
However, a significant part of the catalyst for Barminco’s decision to
dismiss Mrs Downe was Mrs Bartlett’s initial misconception
that Mrs Downe
had sent the facsimile to the client, and the assumption that Mrs Downe had no
grounds for believing that she had
permission to stay at the camp with Mr
Smylie. Barminco decided it had reached breaking point in the mistaken belief
that the weight
of Mrs Downe’s misconduct was greater than in fact it was.
It is a matter for speculation whether the mere fact that Mrs Downe decided
to go to Davyhurst, notwithstanding Mr Wearing’s
instruction, would have
been sufficient to bring about the dismissal, particularly given the
involvement, as I have found it, of
Mr Power and Mr Mayes in Mrs Downe’s
decision. It was a matter of which Barminco was aware when it decided to dismiss
but at the time it was overshadowed by the other issues.
Wadey v Y.W.C.A.
, Justice Moore
“It is not for this Court to approach the matter as if it is to make
a decision whether termination should occur or not. A range
of rational and
reasonable views may exist as to whether particular conduct warrants
termination. If the view adopted by or on behalf
of the employer is rational and
reasonable then, in my opinion, the employer has established a valid reason for
the purposes of section
170DE(1). In putting it this way, I am not attempting to
depart from the views expressed by Northrop J in
Selvachandran v Peteron
Plastics Pty Ltd
... which have been referred to with approval on a number of
occasions since...”
Selvachandran v Peteron Plastics Pty
, Justice Northrop had
“In its context in s 170DE(1), the adjective ‘valid’ should
be given the meaning of sound, defensible or well founded.
A reason which is
capricious, fanciful or prejudiced could never be a valid reason for the
purposes of s 170DE(1)... The provisions
must be applied in a ‘practical
commonsense way’ to ensure that the employer and employee are each treated
This is not a case where an employer can assert that the Court
is second-guessing management’s assessment of whether the conduct
question justified Mrs Downe’s dismissal, because management in this case
mistakenly attributed his conduct to Mrs Downe
which did not take place.
However, if management could reasonably have relied upon Mrs Downe’s
disregard of Mr Wearing’s instruction, together with
her past conduct, to
dismiss Mrs Downe, then Barminco could be found to have had a valid reason for
the termination of Mrs Downe’s
employment connected with her conduct.
Did Mrs Downe’s disregard of Mr Wearing’s instruction in those
circumstances amount to a defensible reason for dismissal,
when viewed in the
context of her past conduct? On balance, I accept that it did. Given my findings
as to the history of Mrs Downe’s
employment, the load on the camel was so
great that a relatively minor weight was sufficient to cause the break.
I find, therefore, that Mrs Downe’s employment was terminated for
reasons which included a valid reason connected with her conduct,
Barminco was not in breach of Section 170DE(1).
Whether Mrs Downe Was Given an Opportunity to Defend
Section 170DC of the Act provides that an employer must not terminate an
employee’s employment for reasons related to the employee’s
or performance unless the employee has been given the opportunity to defend
himself or herself against the allegations made.
I am satisfied that Barminco
could reasonably have been expected to give Mrs Downe that opportunity.
The meeting on the morning of Monday 25 November 1998 was not, in my view, an
adequate opportunity for the purposes of the Act.
The evidence indicates that Mrs Bartlett, while appearing to give Mrs Downe
an opportunity to respond to some of the matters of concern,
did not approach
the meeting with an open mind. She appears to have given no attention to the
matters raised by Mrs Downe in her
Mr Bartlett conceded in his evidence that he probably should have asked Mrs
Downe to stand down until he could return to the Kalgoorlie
office. While
Section 170DC requires no particular formality, it does require that all of the
relevant allegations be put clearly
to Mrs Downe, and that her responses receive
serious consideration. Whether this opportunity was provided by Mr Bartlett, Mrs
or some other authorised person, it should have been done at a time
when any high feelings had subsided sufficiently to permit such
a process to be
conducted properly and dispassionately.
One of the consequences of the manner in which the meeting was conducted was
that there was insufficient focus on the issue which
I have found constituted a
valid reason for dismissal. As a result, it seems likely, on the evidence, that
the involvement of Mr
Power and Mr Mayes in Mrs Downe’s decision to go to
Davyhurst did not arise during the meeting.
I find, in the circumstances, that Mrs Downe was not given a real opportunity
to defend herself against the allegations against her,
and that Barminco has
therefore not complied with Section 170DC of the Act.
Whether Reinstatement Practicable
Mrs Downe seeks the primary remedy available under the legislation, which is
reinstatement to her former position.
Barminco led evidence about the restructuring of the safety positions since
Mrs Downe’s dismissal in an attempt to show that
she could no longer be
accommodated within the company.
More important, however, was the breakdown in relations between Mrs Downe and
those with whom she would have to deal if reinstated,
which was evident
throughout the proceedings. While the litigation may have aggravated the
position, it seems likely, on the evidence,
that much of the damage to Mrs
Downe’s relationships with others at Barminco took place before her
dismissal. While Mr Wearing
appeared somewhat fatalistic about the prospect of
Mrs Downe being reinstated, and I do not doubt that he would attempt, in good
faith, to work with her as best he could, I do not expect that a successful
working relationship would result.
When Mrs Downe was asked why she sought reinstatement, notwithstanding her
admitted difficulties working with Barminco, she responded
that she believes
that reinstatement by Barminco is the only way her reputation can effectively be
restored within the goldfields
community in which she lives and hopes to
I accept that Mrs Downe feels very strongly on that point, but it was more
than usually clear to me in this case that the parties
would not be able to
re-establish an effective working relationship should Mrs Downe be reinstated. I
therefore find that reinstatement
is impracticable, and turn to the assessment
of compensation, which is the alternative remedy under Section 170EE of the
Assessment of Compensation
In assessing the compensation that is appropriate, the Court will have regard
to what is reasonable in the circumstances and will
look at what would have been
likely to occur had the Act not been contravened.
It cannot be assumed that, had Barminco given Mrs Downe a proper opportunity
to defend herself, Mrs Downe would have been dismissed
anyway. As I have found,
most of the matters which formed the catalyst for the decision were without
foundation. While I have found
that Barminco could reasonably and defensibly
have dismissed Mrs Downe for disregarding Mr Wearing’s instruction, given
past history, it does not follow that Barminco would have necessarily chosen
However, this is a case where, had Barminco not acted in breach of the Act,
it was quite likely that Ms Downe’s employment with
Barminco would have
ended anyway in the short to medium-term future, either by way of a lawful
dismissal or by way of her resignation.
Alternatively, some amicable agreement
may have been reached whereby the employment ended and was replaced by a
consultancy arrangement.
Mrs Downe conceded in her evidence that she expected
that she would have become a consultant for Barminco, had she not been
In assessing Ms Downe’s loss as a result of her dismissal, I cannot
therefore proceed on the basis that she had secure employment
and would have
continued indefinitely to receive her Barminco income, had she not been
dismissed on 25 November 1998.
My best estimate in all the circumstances of the
likely longevity of her employment would be about three months. I have assumed
Mrs Downe would have been paid notice at the end of her employment in any
event. I have assumed that it was as likely as not that,
had Barminco complied
with Section 170DC, then Mrs Downe would have been dismissed. I will therefore
award compensation of about
half of the loss I estimate has resulted from her
dismissal, ie about 6 weeks’ salary. On the basis that her fortnightly
was $1980.70, I will award compensation of $5,950.00.
I certify that this and the preceding thirty (30) pages are a true copy of
the Reasons for Judgment herein of Judicial Registrar R.D.
Dated: 3 August 1998
The Applicant represented herself
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Retallack
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Wilson & Atkinson
Dates of Hearing:
21 March, 12-13 June, 4-5 August and 6-7 October 1997
Date of Judgment:
See “Macken, McCarry and
Sappideen’s The Law of Employment” LBC 4ed 1997 at pp213-214
Wadey v Y.W.C.A. Canberra
(unreported IRCA No. 542 of 1996, Moore J, 12 November 1996)
(1995) 62 IR 371
approved by the Full Court of the Federal Court in
Cosco Holdings Pty Ltd
v Thu Thi Van Do
(1997) 150 ALR 127
; 77 IR 94 and
Qantas Airways
Limited v Cornwall
(unreported, Fed. Ct No 865 of 1998, Burchett, Cooper
and Finn JJ, 24 July 1998).
RTF format (110 KB)
Signed PDF/A format