Own Motion Investigation v Telecommunications Company [2010] PrivCmrA 16 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
Own Motion Investigation v Telecommunications Company
[2010] PrivCmrA
Subject Heading:
Security of personal information
National Privacy Principle 4.1 in Schedule 3 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
A telecommunications company allowed individuals to access their mobile phone
account information by calling a 1800 number, following
the voice prompts and
keying in the relevant mobile phone number.
The account information available to the caller was the credit balance and
transaction details of the last payment.
National Privacy Principle 4.1 requires an organisation to take reasonable
steps to protect the personal information it holds from
misuse and loss and from
unauthorised access, modification and disclosure.
The Commissioner commenced an own motion investigation under
section 40(2)
The Commissioner took the view that a mobile phone was a personal
communication device. That is, whilst a landline is synonymous with
a household
or place of business, a mobile number is usually synonymous with an individual.
Individuals freely provide their mobile phone number to other people and
organisations for a vast range of personal and professional
reasons. Therefore,
a mobile phone number is easily accessible by many parties.
The Commissioner formed the view that the telecommunications company was not
adequately protecting account holders’ personal
information from
unauthorised access as required under NPP 4.1. This is because anyone who
knew an individual’s mobile phone
number and mobile carrier could call the
1800 number and access the individual’s account balance without their
In response to the Commissioner’s view, the telecommunications company
proposed various changes. In particular, the telecommunication
company system
would now only authenticate and process the incoming call when the calling
number was the number of the account.
This meant that a caller dialling from another phone number could no longer
access the account information, without satisfying other
criteria. Customers
could register other phone numbers from which they could call. Customers could
also ask the telecommunications
company to place additional security measures on
their account, including the requirement for a date of birth and/or a pin number
to be keyed in.
The Commissioner was satisfied that the changes the telecommunications
company was implementing would enable it to meet its obligations
NPP 4.1. The Commissioner therefore ceased the own motion
investigation into the matter.
Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner
December 2010
RTF format (121 KB)
Signed PDF/A format