Zabini & Zabini [2013] FMCAfam 298 (5 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2013] FMCAfam 298
FAMILY LAW – Children – parenting
orders – best interests of the children – competing residence
applications
– parental responsibility – equal shared parental
responsibility – protected enforced time.
FAMILY LAW – Evidence
– credibility – weight.
Evidence Act 1995
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
rr.3.03, 15.09
In the Marriage of Hall
(1979) 5 Fam LR
; FLC 90-713
[2002] HCA 36
(2002) 29 Fam LR 74
Zabini & Zabini
[2009] FMCAfam 963
[2010] FamCAFC 10
Respondent:
File Number:
SYC 4364 of 2009
Judgment of:
Scarlett FM
Hearing dates:
9-10 November 2010, 22-23 February, 14 – 17
June, 13 July 2011, 18 – 19 April, 22-24 May 2012
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Watts McCray
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms Haughton
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Rachel Stubbs & Associates
Counsel for Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Ms Haughton
Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Legal Aid NSW
(1) All previous parenting Orders are discharged.
(2) The Applicant father and the Respondent mother are to have equal shared
parental responsibility for the children of the marriage
[X] born [in] 2000 and
[Y] born [in] 2003.
(3) The children [X] and [Y] are to live with the father.
(4) The children [X] and [Y] are to spend time with the mother as
mother’s time with the children is to be suspended for a period of twenty
eight (28) days to commence on a date being
no later than forty eight (48) hours
from the date of these Orders and the mother is to have no contact with the
children for the
duration of this 28 day period AND THE COURT NOTES that the
father will take the children on a holiday for the duration of this 28
period within Australia.
period of two (2) months following the expiration of the 28 day period referred
to in Order (4)(a) above, from 9:00 am to
5:00 pm on Saturday and from 9:00 am
to 5:00 pm on Sunday each alternate week commencing on the first Saturday
following the expiration
of the 28 day period.
expiration of the period of 2 months referred to in Order (4)(b) above and for a
period of 2 months thereafter from 9:00
am on Saturday to 5:00 pm on Sunday each
alternate week.
expiration of the period of 2 months referred to in Order (4)(c) above and for a
period of 2 months thereafter from immediately
after school on Friday to the
commencement of school the following Monday each alternate week PROVIDED THAT if
the Monday is a public
holiday then to the commencement of school on the
following Tuesday.
expiration of the period of 2 months referred to in Order (4)(d) above and
thereafter:
immediately after school on Wednesday until the commencement of school on the
following Monday each alternate week PROVIDED
THAT if the Monday is a public
holiday then to the commencement of school on the following Tuesday;
period of three (3) hours on each of the children’s birthdays and on the
mother’s birthday if on a school day
and for a period of six (6) hours if
on a weekend if such day should fall on a day when the children would not
otherwise be spending
time with the mother according to these Orders;
(iii) For half
of each of the Autumn, Winter and Spring school holidays in each year and
failing agreement for the first half of each
of the school holiday periods;
(iv) For half
of the Christmas/January school holiday periods as agreed between the parties
and failing agreement for the first half
of the Christmas/January school holiday
period commencing in 2014 and each even numbered year thereafter and the second
half of the
Christmas/January school holiday periods commencing in 2013 and each
odd numbered year thereafter.
(v) The time
that the children spend with the mother according to these Orders is to
recommence after the Christmas/January holiday
period on the second complete
weekend after the commencement of the new school term in odd numbered years and
the first complete
weekend after the commencement of the new school term in even
numbered years.
(f) From 9:00
am until 7:00 pm on Mother’s Day in each year if the children would not
otherwise be spending time with the mother
on that day in accordance with these
(g) During the
Christmas holiday period as follows:
(i) From 9:00
am on Christmas Eve until 9:00 am on Christmas Day in 2013 and each alternate
year thereafter;
(ii) From 9:00
am on Christmas Day until 7:00 pm on Boxing Day in 2014 and each alternate year
thereafter; and
(h) At all such
other reasonable times as may be agreed between the parties.
(5) The mother’s time with the children under Order (4) above is to be
suspended between the hours of 9:00 am and 7:00 pm on
Father’s Day in each
(6) For the purposes of Order (4)(3)(iii) above the following will
holiday periods are defined to commence at 5:00 pm on the last day of the school
term and to conclude at 5:00 pm on the
Sunday immediately preceding the
commencement of the next school term;
(b) Changeover
is to occur at 12 noon at the father’s residence on the middle Saturday of
the second school holiday period.
(7) In respect of changeover the following arrangements are to
(a) Where the
commencement or conclusion of the mother’s time with the children is to
occur whilst the children are at school,
the mother is to collect the children
from their school or schools at the commencement of their time with the mother
and return the
children to their school or schools at the conclusion of their
time with the mother;
other circumstances provided for by these order changeover is to occur by
agreement and failing agreement the father must
deliver the children to the
mother’s residence at the commencement of their time with the mother and
the father must collect
the children from the mother’s residence at the
conclusion of their time with the mother.
(8) Each party must inform the other in writing of any change to his or her
residence no less than seven (7) days prior to such change
occurring and of any
change to his or her contact telephone number within seven days of such change
(9) Both parties are permitted to take the children out of Australia for
holidays for a period of up to four (4) weeks at a time
PROVIDED THAT they give
to the other party:
(a) A copy of
the children’s travel itinerary;
(b) A copy of
the details of the return airline bookings for each of the children including
details of airlines and flight numbers;
(c) A telephone
number upon which the children can be contacted whilst they are out of
(10) Each party must permit and do all things necessary to facilitate the
children making telephone calls to and receiving telephone
calls from the other
party whilst the children are in the care of the other party according to these
(11) Each party must ensure that the children have privacy during telephone
conversations with the other party and must not place
the telephone on
loudspeaker.
(12) Each party must do all acts and things necessary to continue to cause the
children and themselves to attend family therapy with
Ms B psychologist and meet
half the costs of the family therapy.
(13) In addition to Order 11 above, Ms B is appointed to facilitate and
supervise the implementation of these Orders and in particular
but not limited
to Orders (4)(a) to (4)(d) inclusive and the parties shall:
(a) Be granted
leave to provide Ms B with a copy of these Orders and the Court Expert Reports
of Dr R of 16 February 2011 and 16 April
(b) Each meet
half of the costs associated with Ms B’s appointment in accordance with
Order (13) above; and
themselves or either of them with or without the children or cause the children
without the parents to attend upon Ms B
from time to time as they may be
determined by Ms B for this purpose.
(14) Each party must notify the other as soon as is reasonably practicable of
any accident or emergency involving either or both
of the children which
involves medical treatment or hospitalisation whilst the children are in their
care in accordance with these
(15) The parties are restrained from changing the children’s usual place
of residence to any place outside the Sydney Metropolitan
(16) Both parties are to ensure that the children attend all extracurricular
activities in which they are currently enrolled including
training, games and
presentations whilst the children are in their care according to these Orders
and neither party is to enrol the
children or either of them in any further
extracurricular activity without first obtaining the approval of the other
(17) The parties are restrained from criticising or denigrating each other in
the presence or hearing of the child [X] and [Y] or
either of them or from
permitting any third person to do so.
(18) The parties are restrained from using any form of physical discipline on
either of the children [X] or [Y].
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
Zabini & Zabini
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYC 4364 of 2009
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Application
is an Application for parenting Orders. The parties’ children
who was born [in] 2000; and
who was born [in] 2003.
is now 12 years and 6 months old. [Y] is now 10 years old. They live primarily
with their mother and spend time with their father.
for the Applicant father has accurately described these proceedings as having
“a long and somewhat chequered history”.
The parties’
lawyers initially estimated that the proceedings would take three days to hear,
which was perhaps rather optimistic
at the time. As it turned out, the evidence
took twelve days and the parties’ counsel made written submissions over a
period of three months. The length of time that the proceedings took to
hear was not entirely due to the fault of the parties’
legal advisers, as
adjournments became necessary for unforeseen reasons, including the
hospitalisation of the Federal Magistrate
hearing the case on more than one
is an application for property orders between the parties which will form the
subject of a separate decision.
Applicant husband was born [in] 1967. The wife was born [in] 1970.
parties commenced living together on about 24 April 1999 and were married on
[date omitted] 1999. They separated on 16 July 2009.
are two children of the marriage, [X] and [Y], who was born [in] 2003.
proceedings between the parties commenced when the husband filed an Application
for parenting orders on 23 July 2009. The Application
was filed on an urgent
basis, seeking an order that the mother return the children to the father and,
if she failed to return the
children, a recovery order under
Family Law Act
Application was returnable on 28 July 2009 before Kemp FM, who made interim
orders by consent, providing that:
children would live primarily with the mother but would live with the father in
alternate weeks from the conclusion of school
on Sunday to 6:00 pm on
mother would return to live in the former matrimonial home at [O], by 31 July
father would vacate the home by 30 July 2009;
children would continue to attend the [O] School;
father would provide the children with a mobile telephone and charger;
parties would have liberal and flexible telephone communication with the
children; and
ancillary orders.
order was made for the appointment of an Independent Children’s Lawyer
under the provisions of
Family Law Act
mother filed a Response on 14 August 2009, seeking final and interim parenting
interim hearing took place before Kemp FM on 31 August 2009. On 15 September
2009 his Honour delivered a decision (
interim orders providing that:
parties should have equal shared parental responsibility for the two
children should live with the father:
alternate week from Thursday after the conclusion of school to 6:00 pm on
half of the school holidays;
days of special significance such as Father’s Day and at Christmas;
times by agreement.
children would otherwise spend time with the mother.
father appealed against this decision. On 2 February 2010 Warnick J, sitting as
the Full Court of the Family Court of Australia,
allowed the appeal and set
aside Order 2(a) made on 15 September 2009, save for its continued operation as
an interlocutory order
pending resolution of the application for interim
remitted the Application to the Federal Magistrates Court for rehearing.
2(a) was the order that provided that the children should live with the father
each alternate week from Thursday from the conclusion
of school to 6:00 pm
22 February 2010 the husband filed an Amended Application in which he sought
orders for settlement of property between the parties
as well as parenting
the proceedings came back for mention before Kemp FM, his Honour made
transferring
the matter to my docket;
the wife to file and serve an Amended Response within 7 days;
the parties to a Conciliation Conference before a Registrar.
Conciliation Conference took place on 6 May 2010 but the property matter did not
proceedings came before me for mention that same day. The solicitors for the
parties told the Court that, notwithstanding the
success of the appeal on
interim children’s issues, they had agreed that the matter should go
directly to a final hearing.
A Family Report was ordered under the provisions of
Family Law Act
and the proceedings were listed for hearing
for three days, from 9 to 11 November 2010.
Family Report, prepared by Mr L, a
Regulation 7
Family Consultant, was released
on 12 October 2010.
hearing commenced on 9 November 2010. The Applicant husband was cross-examined
by Ms Haughton of counsel, for the Respondent wife.
10 November 2010 the oral evidence of Ms T, a witness for the Applicant, was
interposed.
were made by consent that Dr R be appointed as a single Court Expert witness
under the provisions of Division 15.2 of the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
to prepare a report.
parties also entered into Interim Consent Orders varying the earlier Orders,
providing that:
children would live with their father:
school term on each alternate week from Wednesday afternoon after school to
Monday morning before school;
any other day during the school term when the mother was required to work for a
24 hour period;
the second half of all school holidays;
9:00 am on Christmas Eve until 9:00 am on Christmas Day;
other times as agreed between the parties;
children would live with their mother at all other times;
children would live with their maternal grandparents during their time with
their mother during the school holidays;
Changeovers
would occur at school during the school term and at the front gate of the
maternal grandparents’ home during the
school holidays;
mother was restrained from consuming alcohol at any time when the children were
in her care or for 24 hours prior to the commencement
proceedings were adjourned to 22 and 23 February 2011 but no evidence was taken
on those days.
hearing proceeded on 14 June 2011. The Applicant’s cross-examination by Ms
Haughton of counsel continued throughout the
day and into Wednesday 15 June.
Counsel for the Independent Children’s lawyer, Ms Clifford, cross-examined
the Applicant until
Thursday 16 June.
Z, the children’s paternal grandfather, was cross-examined on 16 and 17
Respondent wife was cross-examined for the rest of Friday 17 June. On that day,
further interim Orders were made by consent, varying
the earlier interim
parenting Orders by providing that:
the Interim parenting orders dated 11 November 2010 concerning time that the
children [X] born [in] 2000 and [Y] born [in]
2003 shall spend with the father
is hereby suspended.
the commencement of Term 3, 2011 the children shall spend time with the father
as follows:
Wednesday 22 June 2011, commencing from after school until 5:00 pm with the
father to return [X] and [Y] to the mother’s
after school on Friday after 24 June 2011 to Monday morning 27 June 2011 before
school; and
second half of all school holidays commencing from 6:00 pm Sunday 10 July 2011;
d) at other
times as agreed by the parties.
other orders concerning telephone communication between the children and the
parents be suspended and in lieu thereof the
children shall be permitted to make
telephone calls to the mother when they are spending time with the father and
the children shall
be permitted to make telephone calls to the father when they
are spending time with the mother at any reasonable time.
matter was adjourned to 13 July 2011 to continue to 15 July.
13 July the mother’s cross-examination by Mr Sansom of counsel continued
throughout the entire day and was adjourned part-heard
until the following
morning. Regrettably the matter was not able to proceed during to the sudden
illness and hospitalisation of the
Federal Magistrate.
Respondent’s cross-examination resumed on the next hearing day, 18 April
2012. The Respondent was cross-examined by counsel
for the Independent
Children’s Lawyer on 18 and 19 April.
Respondent’s father Mr O, the children’s maternal grandfather, gave
oral evidence on 19 April and was cross-examined
by counsel for the Applicant
and counsel for the Independent Children’s lawyer.
proceedings were further adjourned and resumed on 22 May 2012. The Applicant was
subjected to further cross-examination about
events that had transpired since
the previous hearing.
Court Expert, Dr R gave oral evidence and was cross-examined on 23 May.
that same day, Mr D, the Applicant’s brother, gave evidence and was
cross-examined.
24 May 2012 the Respondent underwent further cross-examination, as did Dr R. The
evidence then concluded and directions were made
for counsel for the parties to
prepare written submissions.
The Family Report of 12 October 2010
parties attended on Mr L, a psychologist by profession and a Regulation 7 Family
Consultant, for the purpose of the preparation
of a Family Report. Mr L
interviewed the following:
The maternal
grandparents
The paternal
grandfather.
L completed his Report on 9 October 2010 and the Report was released on 12
his Report, Mr L noted that both children responded to their parents
“positively and
enthusiastically”.
He went to state that:
clear that [Y] and [X] have close relationship with
Mr Zabini and Ms
Zabini, and that their maternal grandparents and paternal grandfather are
important figures for
L noted that the children indicated that they have a preference to live with
their mother and suggested:
arrangement whereby the children live with Ms Zabini and spend substantial time
with Mr Zabini...Five or six evenings per fortnight
may be appropriate given the
quality of Mr Zabini’s relationship with the
Family Consultant’s recommendation was:
recommended that [X] and [Y] spend six days per fortnight time with their
The Court Expert Reports
R interviewed the parties and the children on two separate occasions for the
purpose of preparing Expert Reports.
interviewed the parents, the children and the mother’s then friend Mr
on 1 February 2011.
By this stage, it was apparent that the relationship between [X] and his father
had deteriorated. Dr R noted
that the father expressed some concern about his
relationship with [X], commenting that the relationship had changed since the
had been to court the previous November and the child now swore at him
and abused him.
his Report of 12 February 2011, released to the parties on 16 February, Dr R
expressed the view that the children had
“a close loving relationship
with their father”
and said that:
appeared to have a strong connection with him. I formed the view that he was a
capable parent and that he had a great deal
to offer the
R said of the mother:
the view that the mother had a close loving relationship with (the children). I
believe that the mother has been providing
well for the children and that she is
dedicated to them. I do believe that she supports the children’s
relationship with the
father. The children have been developing well in her
the doctor noted that following the breakdown of her marriage the mother had
“developed significant alcohol problems with blackouts and excessive
amounts of alcohol resulting in
intoxication”
He described that situation as
“clearly a major
R made the following recommendations (summarised):
Ultimately,
a shared parenting arrangement;
the parents both have individual separate counselling to deal with their issues
– drug and alcohol for the mother, trauma
and grief from the loss of the
marriage for the father;
neither parent denigrates the other in front of the
the mother be
“very cautious about reintroducing alcohol or
prescription drugs, such as benzodiazepines into her life”
shared parenting arrangement should prove not to be possible then the father
should be the primary carer and the mother should
“substantial
the mother were to relapse into alcohol use at times of stress then arrangements
may need to be made for the care of the children
during that relapse;
both parents take part in post separation counselling and positive parenting
courses; and
the father were to be unwilling to undertake grief work with regard to the loss
of the marriage then it may be necessary for the
fortnight to
R interviewed the parents and the children again on 3 April 2012 for the purpose
of preparing an updated Report.
R noted the mother’s advice that her relationship with Mr M had recently
ended. The mother also told him that despite the
order that the children should
spend five days a fortnight with their father, [X] had not had contact with his
father for four months
but [Y] was still attending contact regularly.
[Y] told Dr R that he wished that the court case could all be
that the current arrangement was “OK” and “Good” for him
and nothing bad had happened to him. He
was reported to have said that
“the only bad things happened with
told Dr R that his father was mean to him, not patient, not fun and after a bad
day was angry. He said he felt angry with his
father. Whilst he said that his
father could not change in two years he then added:
R noted that the father had undergone grief counselling and psychological
treatment since he had seen him previously.
doctor stated that he had formed the view that [Y] had a close and loving
relationship with his father. However, whilst he believed
that [X] did have a
strong bond with his father:
there is a lot of emotional hurt in the child as well as empowerment. I think he
is missing his father and that this is
hurting him a great deal. He feels
responsible for his mother and I believe that he is caught in a loyalty bind and
want to leave his mother to be with his
Disturbingly,
Dr R had this to say about a possible outcome:
children remain largely with the mother where [Y] is attending contact on a
regular basis but [X] has refused to attend,
it’s likely that eventually
the relationship between the father and [Y] will become diminished and could
also break down. There
is great concern that fact that [X] has not been
attending and spending time with his father. The longer this time passes the
difficult it becomes for that relationship the more inappropriately
empowered [X] remains; there needs to be some opportunity for
R made these recommendations (summarised):
children should spend five days a fortnight with their father and nine days a
fortnight with their mother;
order to re-establish the relationship that [X] and the father both want they
should have some
“protected enforced time”
together, by going
away on a holiday for perhaps four weeks with [Y] where they have no contact
with the mother in any way, then there
should be a regular fortnightly split of
five to nine days and half the school holidays;
individual respective counselling should continue;
mother and father should not use any alcohol or drugs, particularly the mother;
with Ms B should continue
“and the decider should not be
R set out in paragraphs 5 and 6 of his recommendations on page 14 of his Report
why he felt that there was a need for protected
enforced time between [X] and
[Y] was necessary to re-establish [X]’s relationship with his father.
These two paragraphs are
at the core of the recommendations and, for that
reason, are set out in full:
5. In order
to ensure that [X] attends contact with the father, I don’t believe that a
transition plan or therapy between the
two of them is likely to determine
success. I believe that some time and privacy, and lack of ability (for) the
child to run back
to the mother will be necessary. This will require some
coordination between the parents who need to become empowered parents. The
mother and father need to be able to skilfully cooperate with each other to
ensure that this happens as [X] will not relinquish his
powerful position at
first voluntarily. It’s important that eventually the children resume a
plan to restore the balance where
the two of them are attending contact together
so that there is no difference between them. I believe that parentification is
an issue that [X] is struggling with and that the mother’s been
distracted. Therefore, it’s important for the parents
to take strong
measures to now place themselves back in a position of power and authority for
the children’s welfare.
essence, I believe that both parents are well intentioned and I believe that
both parents have made some significant progress
in their emotional and
psychological issues over the past 12 months. The challenge however is that [X]
still remains parentified.
He appears to have less separation anxiety but he is
still I believe, overly concerned about the mother’s wellbeing. There
have also been some concern about the mother’s relationship with
Mr M and the potential instability (of) that relationship. If [X]
runs home the mother would need to return the child or leave him
perhaps four weeks. Another consideration may need to be that the father move
further away from the mother to prevent [X]
leaving. The long term risk of [X]
not seeing the father is that the relationship with [Y] will break down and that
the father will
be alienated from both children which would be very damaging for
these children. Should these interventions be unsuccessful I would
that the children reside exclusively with the father for a period of three
months with no contact with the mother and then
introduce contact
his oral evidence on 23 and 24 May 2012, Dr R said that he was still of the view
that the situation could be managed. He spoke
of establishing an arrangement
where both boys would spend nine nights each fortnight in their mother’s
care and five nights
in their father’s care. This should probably be block
time because of the difficulties in [X]’s separating from his mother.
R said that there had been a deterioration in [X]’s relationships with
both parents. He said that he was also concerned about
doctor said that there had been a shift and [X] has become empowered. He makes
all the decisions and the parents react. There
is a danger that this will affect
his relationships in the future.
[X] loses his relationship with his father he could become resentful towards his
mother. He is very confused but he criticises
his father for not paying enough
attention to him. All three of them, the mother, the father and [X] are at a
loss to find a solution
to the problem.
R said that both of the boys should travel together.
doctor was asked by counsel for the Independent Children’s Lawyer for his
suggestions for a reconnection between [X] and
his father. He said that the
cause of the child’s reluctance to spend time with his father initially
started with separation
anxiety. He was reluctant to leave his mother because he
saw her as unwell. He is now used to deciding what happens in his life.
the father need some “protected enforced time together”.
R said that the parents rely too much on what [X] says and does rather than
taking a step back and putting the children into a
situation where they can be
father has withdrawn from [X]. The mother listens to the child’s every
doctor said that he had come to the conclusion that there probably needed to be
a longer block period of time for [X] and his
father. There would need to be
rigid and enforced parameters set by the Court. He was of the view that the
protected enforced time
between the father and [X] should be for four
the long term, if shared parenting were not possible, then the boys should be
put into the primary care of their mother. Dr R departed
from that view on the
second day of his cross-examination, conceding that if the Court were to make
certain findings about the mother
as put to him by Dr Sansom, then the Court
should consider a change of primary care for the boys.
should be put to the children that they are not in charge of the parents or of
their own lives. The risks are high for these children
if the current
arrangements continue. There is a risk that the two boys would lose their
relationship with their father. He said
that the current arrangement of [X] not
seeing his father is a doomed one.
for the father put to Dr R that the father had proposed a three week block of
time with him but the mother had not responded.
Dr R said that it would be
“a shame” if the mother did not accept that proposal.
it was put to him that if the Court were to make an order that both children
were to spend a block period of time with the
father and were told of this by
the mother, [X] would be resistant. Dr R suggested that Ms B might be
appropriate. He said it would
need to be managed in a way that supported [X] but
too much preparation would enable [X] to become empowered.
answer to cross-examination by counsel for the mother, Dr R said that clearly
[X] loves his father, which was why it did not make
a lot of sense that he did
not want to spend time with him. He reiterated that [X] was a very empowered
child who was controlling
the family. It is important that [X] should not be
given an opportunity to exercise his power by subverting what the adults have
decided for him.
Orders Sought
orders sought by the Independent Children’s Lawyer are contained in a
Minute attached to the submissions of the Independent
Children’s Lawyer.
are as follows:
1. That all
previous parenting orders regarding the children [X] born [in] 2000 and [Y] born
[in] 2003 (herein after referred to
as “the children”) be and are
hereby discharged.
parties shall have equal shared parental responsibility for the
3. That the
children shall live with the father as follows:
a) From the
date of these orders for a period of twenty eight consecutive days during which
period the mother’s time with the
children shall be suspended;
that period in Order 3a) the father shall be permitted to spend at least 21 days
of that period at any other holiday location
within Australia; and
the conclusion of the period referred to in Order 3a) of these orders the
children shall live with the father at all times
unless they are spending time
with the mother as referred to in these orders.
4. That for
the purpose of implementing Order 3a) of these orders the mother and father
appropriate arrangements with the assistance of
Ms B Psychologist for
the mother to deliver [X] and [Y] to the father at the father’s residence
at the commencement of Order
3a) unless otherwise
5. That for
the purpose of implementing these orders the parties shall be required to do the
father shall continue to liaise with Ms B, Psychologist, should he require
assistance with parenting issues, during that period
and subsequent to that
period in Order 3 of these orders, including participating in family therapy
with [X] and [Y] during the period
referred to in Order 3a) of these orders;
mother shall attend any family therapy sessions with Ms B and the father during
the above period when requested to do so by
father shall pay all fees for himself and the children when attending family
therapy with Ms B and where the mother and father
attend any joint sessions of
family therapy the parties shall each pay one half of the fees for
children shall spend time with the mother as follows:
period of two calendar months commencing on the first weekend after the
conclusion of the twenty eight day period referred
to in Order 3 of these Orders
on each weekend from Saturday at 10am to Saturday at 2pm; and then
period of two calendar months commencing on the first weekend after the period
referred to in Order 6a) of these orders
on each weekend from Saturday 9am until
Saturday at 5pm; and then
period of two calendar months after the period referred to in Order 6b) of these
orders on each alternate weekend from Saturday
9am until Sunday 4pm
period of two calendar months after the period referred to in Order 6d) of these
orders on each alternate weekend from after
school Friday until Sunday
period of two calendar months after the period referred to in Order 6c) of these
orders on each alternate weekend from after
school Friday until before school
f) Thereafter,
upon the conclusion of the period referred to in Order 6e) from after school
Wednesday until before school Monday;
the completion of the period referred to in Order 6e) for the first half of all
school holidays at the end of Terms 1, 2
and 3 of each school year commencing
from the school holidays 10:00am on the first Saturday of the school holidays
until 5:00pm the
Second Saturday of the school holidays;
consecutive weeks (14) days in the Christmas/new Year school ho9lidays
commencing at 10:00 am on Christmas Eve and ceasing
at 5:00pm commencing
Christmas Eve 2013 and each even numbered
thereafter.
three consecutive weeks (14) days commencing 10:00 am on 26 December 2014 and
each alternate year thereafter.
9:00am to 5:0opm on Mother’s Day where the children are not otherwise with
the mother on that day.
additional times as agreed between the parties.
purposes of Order 3a) above:
father is hereby restrained from permitting the children to make any telephone
calls to the mother for the duration of that
period in Order 3a) of these
orders, and shall ensure that the children do not retain any mobiles in their
custody for their private
use during this period; and
mother is hereby restrained from making any telephone calls to the children or
to the father or tot the children’s schools
during (the) period in Order
3a) of these orders; and
commencement of arrangements pursuant to Order 6 of these orders the mother
shall collect and deliver the children:
school days from and to their school at the commencement of and end of her time
with the children;
non-school days from the father’s residence at the commencement of her
time with the children;
father shall collect the children from the mother at her residence on non-school
days at the end of her time with the children.
father shall advise and continue to advise the mother of the details of all
soccer events and other extra curricular events
in which the children may
participate including but not limited to the children’s musical activities
or sporting activities
that the children must attend.
mother shall have telephone communication with the children as follows, save as
otherwise specified in Order 3 and 7 of these
Wednesday of each week at any time between 6:00 pm and 7:00 pm on the mother to
telephone the children on the father’s
mobile or a mobile contact number
or landline number provided for that purpose and the father or his nominee shall
make the children
available to speak to the mother and shall ensure that the
father’s telephone contact numbers are turned on at that time.
children’s birthdays when their birthdays do not fall on a weekend the
children are spending time with the mother,
the mother may telephone the
children between the hours of 8:00 am and 8:00pm and the father shall ensure
that his mobile phone number
and any relevant contact telephone numbers are
switched on and the children are available to take the mother’s call at
time during that period.
father shall, save as specified in Order 7 of these orders, permit the children
to telephone the mother at any reasonable
time, and no later than 8:00 pm on any
day the mother is not spending time with the children.
children shall, save as specified in Orders 4 and 5 of these orders, be
permitted to make telephone calls to the father when
they are spending time with
the mother at any reasonable time and no later than 8:00 pm,
event that either child is admitted to hospital suffering illness or injury the
parent having care of the child at that
time shall immediately advise the other
parent and provide the other parent with the details necessary for him/her (to)
make contact
with the treating medical team.
mother is permitted, upon the expiration of Order 6a) of these orders to contact
the children’s schools and to provide
the schools with her contact details
so that she can obtain reports, photographs, copies of any correspondence or
newsletters or
other written material produced by the school which would
normally be distributed to the parents or which relate to the children
school activities.
the expiry of the period referred to in Order 6a) of these orders the mother
shall be permitted to attend all events involving
(the) children
a) sporting
curricular activities that allow for parental attendance;
functions and events that allow for parental attendance including but not
limited to concerts, school assemblies, sports
days, parent and teacher
interviews, and social functions;
parent who has the children in their care on the day of such activity referred
to in Order 16 of these orders will be responsible
for their day to day care at
such event and the children’s transportation to and from that
the parents shall communicate all arrangements for the children in writing,
including SMS and email and shall, where possible,
ensure that communication is
limited to arrangements for the children.
neither party shall discuss these court proceedings with the children directly,
or with other third parties (including family
members) in the presence or
hearing of the children, and where other persons discuss these proceedings in
the hearing or presence
of the children, the party who has the care of the
children on any such occasion shall immediately remove the children from that
location where such discussion may be taking place.
each parent is hereby restrained from making critical or derogatory remarks in
relation to the other parent in the presence
or hearing of the children and that
each party shall do all things necessary to ensure that no third party makes
critical comments
children and shall immediately remove the children from the vicinity where
person is making such remarks.
each parent shall advise the other parent and keep the other parent advised of
their current address and contact telephone
numbers (including both landline and
mobile phone number if applicable) and shall advise the other parent of any
changes to these
details prior to any such change and no later than 24 hours of
such changes occurring by email, SMS or in writing.
each parent is hereby restrained from physically disciplining the children and
shall not permit any other person to physically
discipline the
the mother shall not drink alcohol whilst the children are in her care.
mother and father are hereby restrained from taking the children to any domestic
violence counsellor, family therapist, social
worker, family support service or
any organisation or person/s providing therapy or counselling for adults or
children or to any
of the mother’s or father’s treating
psychologists or psychiatrists or to any counsellor on whom they may attend from
time to time, other than Ms B, psychologist or to any psychologist/s or
therapists to whom the parents and children may be referred
within seven days of the date of these orders the Independent Children’s
Lawyer shall provide a sealed copy of these
orders to the Principal, [O] School
and the father shall provide a sealed copy of any final parenting orders to the
Principal of
any High School which [X] may attend in 2013.
parenting orders sought by the father are contained within the Submissions of
the Applicant Husband under the heading
Parenting Orders now sought by
the Husband
for the father makes it clear that the orders now sought by the father have been
amended following the evidence of Dr R. The
Court was referred to the decision
of the High Court of
was said that:
however also be cases, and not a few of them we suspect, in which it will be
simply not possible for a Judge to adopt
exclusively or perhaps even
substantially, a proposal by a party. In such a case the final order will evolve
out of the evidence
as it emerges, and submissions as they are developed. Indeed
almost in terms the Appellant herself acknowledges this to be
Accordingly,
the father now seeks orders in these terms:
1. That the
parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children [X] born [in]
2000 and [Y] born [in] 2003 (
“the children”
2. That the
children live with the Father.
3. That the
children spend time with the Mother as follows:-
the Mother’s time with the children shall be suspended for a period of 28
days, such period to commence on a date
being no later than 48 hours from the
date of these orders, and the Mother shall have no contact with the children
over this 28 day
Court NOTES that the Father will take the children on a holiday for the duration
of this 28 day period, within Australia.
period of 2 calendar months following the expiration of the 28 day period
pursuant to paragraph 3.1 herein, from 9am to
5pm Saturday and 9am to 5pm Sunday
every alternate week, such time to commence the first Saturday following the
expiration of the
28 day period.
expiration of the period of 2 calendar months referred to in paragraph 3.2
herein, and for a period of 2 calendar months
thereafter, from 9am Saturday to
5pm Sunday every alternate week.
expiration of 2 calendar months referred to in paragraph 3.3 herein, and for a
period of 2 calendar months thereafter,
from after school Friday to before
school the following Monday in every alternate week.
expiration of the period of 2 calendar months referred to in paragraph 3.4
herein, and thereafter:-
after school Wednesday until before school the following Monday in every
alternate week.
one half of each school holiday period as agreed between the parties and failing
agreement for the first half of each
school holiday period.
one half of the Christmas holiday period as agreed between the parties and
failing agreement:
3.5.3.1 For
the first half of the Christmas holiday period which commences in an even
numbered year and the second half of the Christmas
holiday period which
commences in an odd numbered year.
3.5.4 That the time the children spend with the Mother pursuant to these
orders shall recommence after the Christmas holiday period
on the second
complete weekend after the commencement of the new school term in the odd
numbered years and the first complete weekend
after the commencement of the new
school term in the even numbered years.
3.6 From 9am until 7pm on Mother’s Day in each year if the children
would not otherwise be spending time with the Mother pursuant
to these orders on
3.7 During Christmas holiday period as follows:-
9am Christmas Eve until 9am Christmas Day in the year 2013 and each alternate
year thereafter;
9am Christmas Day until 7pm Boxing Day in the year 2012 and each alternate year
thereafter.
3.8 At all such reasonable times as may be agreed between the
4. That the Mother’s time with the
children pursuant to order 3 above shall be suspended from 9am until 7pm on
5. That for the purposes of order 3.5.2 the following will
holiday periods are defined to commence at 5pm on the last day of the relevant
school term for New South Wales and to
conclude at 5pm on the Sunday immediately
preceding the commencement of the next school term for New South Wales.
5.2 Changeover
is to occur at 12 noon at the Father’s residence on the mid-point day
between the first and last day of the
defined school holiday period.
event that there are two consecutive “mid-point days”, then
changeover is to occur at 12 noon at the Father’s
residence on the first
of those two “mid-point days”.
6. That, in respect of changeover, the following shall
the commencement or conclusion of the Mother’s time with the children is
to occur whilst the children are at school
in accordance with these orders, the
Mother shall collect the children from their school or schools as they may
attend from time
to time at the commencement of the children’s time with
the Mother, and the Mother shall return the children to their school
school as they attend from time to time at the conclusion of their time with the
other circumstances provided by these orders, changeover is to occur by
agreement and failing agreement, the Father shall
deliver the children to the
Mother’s residence at the commencement of the children’s time with
the Mother, and the Father
shall collect the children from the Mother’s
residence at the conclusion of their time with the Mother.
7. That each party inform the other, in writing, of any change to his or
her residential address not less than 7 days prior to such
change occurring and
of any change to his or her contact telephone within 7 days of such change
8. That both parties be permitted to take the children out of Australia on
holidays for no more than a period of 4 weeks provided
give the other parent:-
copy of the travel itinerary for the children.
copy of the return airline ticket for the children.
telephone number on which the children can be contacted whilst away from
9. That each parent shall permit, not prevent or interfere with, and do all
things necessary to facilitate the children making telephone
calls to and
receiving calls from the other parent whilst in the care of the other parent,
subject to paragraph 3.1 herein.
10. That both parties ensure the children have piracy during telephone
conversations with the other parent and ensure the telephone
is not placed on
loud speaker.
11. That each party do all acts and things necessary so as to continue to
cause the children and themselves to attend family therapy
), and that they shall each meet half the costs of the
family therapy.
12. That Ms B, in addition to order 11, be appointed to facilitate and
supervise the implementation of these parenting orders (and
in particular, but
not limited to, paragraphs 3.1 to 3.4 herein), and that the parties
granted leave to provide Ms B with a copy of these orders, and the family
reports of Dr R dated 16 April 2012 and 16 February
meet half the costs associated with Ms B’s appointment in accordance with
paragraph 12 herein; and
themselves or either of them with or without the children, or cause the children
or either of them without the parents,
to attend upon Ms B from time to time as
may be determined by Ms B, for this purpose.
13. That each party notify the other as soon as reasonably practicable of
any accident or emergency involving the children which
involves medical
treatment or hospitalisation whilst the children are in their respective
14. That the parties be restrained from changing the children’s usual
place of residence to any place outside the Sydney Metropolitan
15. That both parties ensure the children attend all extracurricular
activities in which they are currently enrolled, including training,
presentations whilst the children are in their respective care and neither party
shall enrol the children in any further
extracurricular activity without first
obtaining the approval of the other parent.
16. That both parties be restrained from physically disciplining the
75. Counsel for the mother did not provide a
minute of proposed orders with her submissions, although it is clear that the
opposes the orders suggested by counsel for the Independent
Children’s Lawyer and counsel for the father. However, it is strongly
submitted by counsel for the mother that putting [X] in his father’s care
“a recipe for disaster for not only [X], but also his
Further, counsel for the mother has submitted that:
... if the court were to place the children in the primary care of the
husband, he will not be able to cope with the care of the
children and given the
attitude [X] has towards his father, it is submitted that it is almost
inevitable that there will be further
proceedings.
76. The mother set out the final parenting orders that she
sought in her Amended Response filed on 18 March 2010.
proposed orders are:
the child(ren) of the relationship namely [X] born [in] 2000 and [Y] born [in]
2003 live with the mother.
the parties have shared parental responsibility for long term care, welfare and
development of the children.
each party be solely responsible for the day to day welfare and development of
the child(ren) whilst the child is
each party’s care.
the child(ren) spend time with the father as follows:
alternate weekend from after school on Friday until 4:00pm Sunday, unless the
father is travelling for work and therefore
such time will end at 12:00 noon on
Father’s Day from 9:00 am on Father’s Day until 4:00pm unless the
children are otherwise spending time with him.
c. One week
during each NSW School Holiday period provided that the father gives the mother
at least one months notice of which week
he proposes to have the children, as
agreed between the parties and failing agreement in the first week of school
holidays in even
numbered years and the second week of school holidays in odd
half of each Easter period, being from Good Friday until Easter Sunday in odd
numbered years and from Easter Saturday
until Easter Monday in even numbered
years unless otherwise agreed between the parties.
the Christmas period being Christmas Eve until Boxing Day as agreed between the
parties and subject to family gatherings
that may be scheduled during that
time by telephone.
g. At other
times as agreed between the parties in writing.
the father’s time with the children shall be suspended on Mother’s
Day each year from 9:00am until 4:00pm on
Mother’s Day should the children
be spending time with the father.
for the purpose of the father spending time withy the children the parties shall
meet at a midway point between their residences
as agreed and failing agreement
at the McDonald Family Restaurant [address omitted].
the parties are hereby restrained from physically chastising the children or
allowing any third party to do so.
the father have liberal and flexible telephone contact with the
the care of the mother, provided however, that the mother shall also have
liberal and flexible telephone contact with the
the father’s care.
neither party shall remove the children from the State of New South Wales or the
Commonwealth of Australia
written consent of the other parent or an Order of the Court provided such
consent shall not be reasonably withheld in
the event that either party wishes
to take the children on interstate holidays, provided that the party wishing to
take the children
on the interstate or international holiday provides the other
parent with an itinerary in respect of the same, including details
of flights as
applicable, accommodation at which the children will be staying whilst
interstate and telephone details at which the
children can be
29. For the
purpose of Order (2)8 above, each party notify the other if they intend to take
the children interstate or overseas by
giving at least 4 weeks notice to the
other party.
whilst the child(ren) are in their respective care, the parties shall advise
each other as soon as reasonably practicable
of any major medical issues
involving the child(ren) and each party shall keep the other properly informed
of any required medical
treatment or medication required in relation to the
child(ren) and the parties shall ensure the proper administration of such
medications
and treatments is performed by them.
the father be at liberty to contact the child(ren)’s school from time to
time, organisations pertaining to sports
the child participates in from time to
time, and health organisations or professionals the child is associated with
for the purposes
of obtaining copies of reports, notices or other such
communications regarding the child(ren) or events in which the child is
are) to be involved.
the mother provide to the father details of all specialists appointments, at
least seven days prior to the appointment and
provide all consents necessary for
the father to attend the appointment and discuss the child’s medical
condition with a relevant
Medical Practitioner or Specialist.
each party take the child(ren) or ensure that the child attends (children
attend) their sports training sessions, weekend
games and all social activities
in which the child is (children are) enrolled during the period that the child
is (children are)
in their respective care.
the parties shall keep each other advised in writing of their current
residential address and current phone numbers.
neither party denigrate the other in the presence of the child(ren) and shall
use their best endeavours that no other person
neither party discusses these
children or in their presence and hearing and shall remove them from the
presence or hearing of any third person who does
the father undertakes a parenting after separation course aimed at providing him
with alternative disciplining methods and
reasonable direction from the course provided to complete the course
satisfactorily.
Submissions
directed, the parties filed written submissions. The submissions of the
Independent Children’s Lawyer, unsurprisingly, dealt
only with parenting
issues, but the submissions of from counsel for the husband and the wife dealt
with both parenting and property
decision deals solely with the parenting issues, which took up the major part of
the evidence. A decision on the property issues
between the parties will be
delivered in the near future.
Submissions of the Independent Children’s Lawyer
submissions of the Independent Children’s Lawyer were filed on 11 July
2012. In those submissions, the Independent Children’s
Lawyer set out a
number of relevant findings based on the evidence. Those findings, in summary,
12 October 2010, according to the Family Report of that date by Mr L, the
children were stable children who had a substantial
relationship with both
mother believed at that time that the children had a close relationship with
their father and he loved them;
that time the children benefited from having the relationship with each parent
maintained;
at least January 2011 the elder boy, [X], was unable to maintain a close
relationship with his father;
absence of that formerly close relationship with his father has caused [X]
distress and emotional harm and if
“left unremedied will continue to
cause him significant emotional harm in the
ongoing absence of a close relationship between [X] and his father is a risk
factor for the ongoing relationship between [X] and
his mother during his
adolescence;
is a significant risk that the close relationship between [Y] and his father may
follow the same path as that of [X] and his
remains in the children’s best interests that they have regular contact
with each of their parents to maintain their close
relationship with each
the evidence the father is capable of and willing to care for the children
appropriately and he recognises that he and the children
will continue to
require professional assistance in restoring his relationship with [X];
the evidence the Court cannot be satisfied that the Mother has demonstrated that
she is capable of supporting and facilitating
the children’s ongoing
relationship with the
the Court makes finding in accordance with those set out in the above paragraph,
the Independent Children’s Lawyer submits
that the parenting arrangements
most likely to be effective in restoring the important parent-child
relationships are those that
would provide for:
“protected” block of time between the two children and their
A change in
their primary care
The provision of
ongoing support and assistance for the children, the father and the mother from
Ms B, the psychologist.
however, the Court were not to make a finding of satisfaction that the mother
has demonstrated that she is capable of supporting
and facilitating the
children’s ongoing relationship with their father, it is submitted that
the Court should still make orders
that would provide for:
“protected” block of time with their father
The children
should live primarily with their mother
The provision of
ongoing support and assistance for the children, the father and the mother, from
basis for this submission comes from the recommendations of
Dr R in his
later Report, released on 16 April 2012.
was submitted that none of the alternatives available in this matter are ideal
and each of them contains significant risks for
both children. However, the
Independent Children’s Lawyer cites the incident that occurred early in
the morning on 5 May 2012
when [X] called his father to pick him up from his
mother’s home and then went back to his mother’s home as
illustrative
of the escalating severity of the problems for [X] under the
current circumstances. The submission goes at paragraph 10:
On any view
of the evidence, by the conclusion of that chaotic event, [X] was in tears
walking the streets after 4am, having been
authorised to make all the adult
decisions for both households. At eleven years of age and applying that level of
maturity, [X] had
decided to leave his Mother’s care in the early hours of
the morning and go into his Father’s care. So that is what occurred.
then decided it was appropriate in the early hours of that morning to then
happened. The father’s
involvement of the Police meant that [X] was interviewed upon his return home
and it was [X] who was
left in the impossible position of having to explain his
behaviour to a police officer. On his mother’s evidence. [X] was not
to tell the truth in that situation. As neither of his parents seemed able to
understand his behaviour and assist him that morning,
it is not surprising that
[X] was not able to do so on his
is also submitted by the Independent Children’s Lawyer that the orders
sought are proposed on the basis that the Court finds
that there is no risk of
abuse or physical harm to the children in the Father’s care.
Independent Children’s Lawyer justifies the proposal to change the
children’s primary care to the father by submitting
balance, the change in living arrangements proposed by the Independent
Children’s Lawyer is warranted in this matter
given the significant,
lengthy and ongoing deterioration in the children’s formerly close
relation with the Father while in
the care of the Mother. It is submitted that
the Mother presented as a caring and loving mother but one who was overwhelmed
circumstances. Unfortunately, she remained unable to display the ability
to manage her own distress and fears sufficiently so as
to assist [X] with his
fears, thus leaving [X] with no choice but to assume the responsibility for both
of them for which he is,
understandably,
ill-equipped.
Independent Children’s Lawyer submits that the orders sought will be in
the children’s best interests, noting the
evidence in these proceedings
and in particular the evidence of Dr R.
Submissions of the Independent Children’s Lawyer refer the Court to the
provisions of
sections 60B
Family Law Act
which I have read.
Independent Children’s Lawyer also stated in her submissions that she
noted the submissions on behalf of the Father in relation
to the parties, their
witnesses and issues of credit found on page 6 paragraph 12 (and following) of
the submissions.
Submissions of the Applicant Husband
submissions of the Applicant Husband were filed on 14 June 2012. After giving a
history of the litigation and setting the orders
sought, counsel for the Father
makes detailed submissions about the parties, their witnesses and the issue of
referred the Court to the provisions of
Family Law Act
which provides that certain provisions of the
Evidence Act 1995
not apply to child-related proceedings. Mr Sansom noted that the proceedings
before the Court related to both parenting and property
issues. Division 12A of
Family Law Act
applies to the parenting issues.
was contended that the Court would either apply the relevant provision of the
Evidence Act
(in accordance with s.69ZT(3) or find, in the event that the
provisions of
Evidence Act
are said not to apply that in
any event the credibility of a witness is an important matter that needs to be
considered.
Sansom referred to the evidence of various witnesses and to the weight that
should be given to their evidence.
Sansom submitted that the father had been extensively cross-examined, as would
be expected in a case running over so many days.
It was contended that the
father generally gave his evidence in a responsive and forthright manner,
notwithstanding some “odd
quirks” in relation to the way in which he
answered a question,
“such as for example answering questions to
Counsel with the beginning
and then going on to
answer those
questions”.
for the father submitted that in relation to the father’s
was not at all critical about the mother’s capacity to protect or advance
the children’s welfare;
was able to make concessions when they were appropriate, such as his agreement
to a question by counsel for the Independent Children’s
Lawyer that when
he took off his belt to threaten to chastise his then five year old son,
although he had no intention of actually
doing so, the child would not have been
aware of that; and
showed an ability to realise his own shortcomings, which ultimately the mother
was submitted that the boys’ paternal grandfather, Mr Z, gave straight
forward and credible evidence, even though his grasp
of English was “far
from perfect”. He was unshaken under cross examination by counsel for the
Sansom submitted that the father’s brother, Mr D, whose evidence was
within a fairly narrow scope, gave that evidence in
a forthright and credible
T, the Finance Director of the father’s employer, gave evidence about the
father’s ability to work from home, as long
as he was contactable. Her
evidence was described as unshaken by cross-examination, even though she was
cross-examined “forcefully”.
was submitted that the mother was a witness who, despite her obvious
intelligence, showed herself to be lacking in insight as to
her children’s
real needs, particularly their emotional needs. Further, it was contended that
the mother often used the witness
box to answer, not the question asked, but the
question she wanted asked. Thus, she often made speeches in order to justify her
for the father submitted that the mother’s evidence about when she made
the actual decision to separate from the father
showed that she took every
opportunity not to answer the question but to justify herself by some
additional, uncalled for, denigration
of the father.
it was submitted that when the mother, when seeking admission into hospital on 9
August 2010, whilst being interviewed by
a Dr F exaggerated her condition as to
the serious issue of her plans accompanying her suicidal ideation so as to have
the hospital
staff take her more seriously.
counsel for the father submitted that the mother admitted that she had lied to
officers of the (then) NSW Department of Community
Services (DOCS) about the
father’s methods of disciplining the children.
for the father submitted that the evidence of the children’s maternal
grandfather, Mr O, was “simply unbelievable.
As an example, it was
submitted that he was quick to make an allegation in his affidavit that the
father had locked the children
in a car on his property on a hot day as a
punishment, but when challenged on the detail in cross-examination could not
explain whether
the children were locked in the car or not and gave answers that
were “simply not credible”.
for the father submitted that a critically important time in these proceedings
had been reached in the lives of the children:
auspices of his Mother’s parenting [X] is no longer spending time with his
Father and [Y] is in recent times becoming
resistant to doing so.
relationships of both parents (the Father now and in the longer term – and
the Mother in the longer term) and the children
are at real risk. And so too are
both children’s long term emotional welfare at
Importantly,
Mr Sansom submitted that whereas at the commencement of his evidence in
cross-examination by counsel for the Independent
Children’s Lawyer, Dr R
was still supporting the recommendations within his second report that there
should be a nine versus
five split between the parents together with half the
school holidays after the period of “enforced protected time”,
changed his position through subsequent cross-examination.
was submitted that the Transcript of the proceedings on 23 May 2012 gives these
exchanges in Mr Sansom’s cross-examination
this suggestion, Doctor, that whilst you might have all the goodwill in the
world, at this stage the mother hasn’t
shown, so far as you’re
aware, an indication that there has – there is needing to be, as you put
it – go back to
your – an acceptance that the father is a good
enough parent? ---It would appear that’s the case with – well, with
[X], anyway.
occurs, there can be, in my suggestion to you, Doctor, little hope for the
children having a meaningful relationship wit
their mother and their
father?---Correct.
you’re weighing up the competing factors, Doctor, as you sit here now, can
I make the suggestion that an arrangement
which leads to a 9/5 or thereabouts
split of time in favour of the father, preceded by a block holiday – call
it that. I keep
forgetting your earlier phrase, “protected ---“?---I
tried to be a little bit over-inclusive, I think. Yes.
which itself follows my client going to Ms B’s offices and taking the
children, is, in my suggestion
to you, the best way forward for these two little
boys?---Well, I think if his Honour is of the view that the mother is not
emotionally
capable of separating out her need to respond to [X] at a childlike
level, or whether she’s – if she is able to respond
parental level, then if she’s not capable of that, then I would agree that
it would be better, as you suggest. If
his Honour is of the view that she is
quite capable, then I would follow my original
recommendation.
for the father submitted that the mother’s evidence on the following day,
24 May 2012, clearly shows that she does not
have such a capacity and her views
have not changed. He submitted that she still accepted [X]’s complaint
that his father did
not comfort him in his distress, notwithstanding that [X]
may have been telling her something that was not literally true regarding
Sansom submitted that this exchange in his cross-examination of the mother at
page 180 of the Transcript of 24 May 2012 gives a
stark illustration of her
deficits in this area:
not even willing to give Mr Zabini the benefit of that doubt are you? ---No. To
me, to comfort – comforting your
son is fundamental – when your son
is distressed, you would hug them.
Yes. And Mr
Zabini is a man who you say should share with you equal shared parental
responsibility, and yet you think that he is
capable of not carrying out that
fundamental parental requirement of affording your son comfort? ---I hope that
he will get the help
that he requires and – not just for the grief, but
also for the anger and that once the court case is over, there will be some
change in that area, otherwise I do have concerns that I have expressed
Submission then addressed the primary considerations under subsection 60CC(2)
and the additional considerations under subsection
60CC(3) of the Act.
considering the matters in paragraph (l) of subsection 60CC(3), Mr Sansom
submitted, in what can be considered a summary of the
submissions on behalf of
the father:
...When one
is weighing these competing factors or considerations and given the importance
of the maintenance or development of a
long term meaningful relationship between
the children and both of their parents if orders can’t be made which
preclude the
institution of further proceedings then in those circumstances
(although not desirable) the Court should it is contended err on the
making orders which will enable the children to have such a meaningful
relationship.
Submissions on behalf of the Mother
Submissions on behalf of the Respondent wife as to both property and parenting
issues were filed on 2 August 2012.
of the Submissions is headed
“Wife’s Parenting Submissions”.
Submissions refer the Court to the matters set out in
sections 60CA
Family Law Act
for the mother then addresses each of the considerations in subsections 60(2)
and (3) of the Act.
to the primary considerations in
, Ms Haughton submits that the father
has throughout the majority of the proceedings maintained that unless he had the
children for
50% of the time he could not have a meaningful relationship with
them, yet he had since taken the view that the children do not need
to spend at
least 50% of the time with their mother in order to maintain their relationship
submissions consider in some depth the matters in
s.60CC(2)(b)
, the need to
protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subject to,
or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
is conceded that the mother has in the past had
“vulnerabilities
associated with alcohol
Reference was made to the mother’s voluntary admission to [omitted]
Hospital in August 2010,
“with no plan for suicide”,
“mental and behaviour disorder due to the use of alcohol”
“reaction to severe
it is submitted that, apart from one subsequent incident, the mother has since
maintained her sobriety and wellbeing.
for the mother submitted that Dr R-bell’s opinion that [X] may have
concerns about his mother’s vulnerability
does not reflect the history of
the matter, noting Mr L’s report that on 3 October 2010 [X] said that he
was happy to spend
additional time with his mother.
Haughton submitted that:
is no evidence that the children have suffered any detrimental effect from the
periods when the mother has had personal difficulties;
uncontroversial that the children are happy and settled in their mother’s
father has at times been short tempered with the
events that occurred between [X] and his father during the five days from 17 to
22 November 2010 that caused the significant fracture
relationship.
is strongly submitted on behalf of the mother that forcing [X] to spend time
with his father against his wishes, let alone moving
to his full-time care,
“will inevitably lead to
The father has not been able to effect any reconciliation with [X], despite
months of counselling by Ms B, and has not even attempted
for the mother submits that the children should remain in the primary care of
their mother. The mother does not support the
proposal for the
“holiday” for [X] and [Y] with their father, even if [X] were to
agree to go, and submits that there
is no evidence that this proposal will
result in the father changing his attitude to [X].
submitted that as the mother can’t make [X] stay with his father and
neither can his father, Dr R’s assessment
that there is still
“parental control and influence” is somewhat optimistic and does not
accord with the reality of the
to the additional considerations in
subsection 60CC(3)
Ms Haughton
submitted that [X]’s views should be taken into account, given his age.
The child told Mr L when he was interviewed
for the Family Report that he was
against the father’s proposal for a week about shard care
arrangement.
is younger. He told Mr L that he wanted to spend more time with his father but
did not express a preference for a shared care
arrangement. He has more recently
expressed the mother some resentment at having to continue to attend at his
father’s home
in the absence of his older brother.
on a number of occasions has expressed strong resistance to attending his
father’s home and has frequently run away.
for the mother submitted that, having regard to the children’s ages, their
wishes would carry some weight. In particular:
the age and maturity level of [X], his wishes should be given very significant
to the nature of the relationship of the children with each of their parents and
any other persons (see
s.60CC(3)(b))
, it is submitted that both children have a
close and loving relationship with their mother and [Y] has a close and loving
relationship
with his father. However, [X]’s relationship with his father
is at times troubled, and the mother places the blame for this
squarely at the
feet of the father.
Haughton has on a number of occasions in her submissions taken issue with the
evidence and opinions of Dr R. For example:
it is unfortunate that Dr R’s recommendation was that the father have the
primary care of the children if the parties
were unable to co-operate to
facilitate a workable care arrangement (his recommendations in paragraph 1 and 5
of his report dated
16 February 2011). It is submitted that at least after that
report issued, other than actually going to Ms B, the evidence demonstrates
the husband did not do anything to co-operate with the wife and he rejected both
her offers and [X]’s proposal for re-introduction
submitted that Dr R’s possible explanation that the father does not know
what to do with [X] would be rejected...many
of the complaints that [X] has
concerns about his conduct
for the mother’s submissions under the heading
changes in effect of any the child’s circumstances,
including the likely effect on the child of any separation
of their parents;
other person with whom they have been
paint a gloomy picture of the likely outcome of
the father’s (and the Independent Children’s Lawyer’s)
orders involving [X] living with his father or spending any extended
time with him:
It is submitted that [X] is likely to be devastated if he were forced to
live with his father on a full time basis.
...[X] is not going to accept living with his father without a great deal of
anger and resentment and the prospect of police involvement
inevitable.
...the problem between [X] and his father is not one the Court can fix given
[X]’s age – it is however likely to make
it worse if it makes the
Orders sought by the husband.
There is ample evidence for the Court to be satisfied that the husband does
not have the emotional tools to be able to calm [X] down
or to be able to reason
with him in a manner that will prevent [X] trying to escape from him in
...There is no evidence the husband can point to in order to satisfy that he
will be able to cope with [X] in the future if [X] continues
to struggle against
his father. At least in the past [X] knew he could go to his mother. If he knows
he has to live with his father,
the Court would, it is submitted, have grave
concerns about where he will run to the next time.
[X] is well settled in the care of his mother. It is submitted that
withdrawing him from that settled and nurturing environment would
be tantamount
to a social experiment to see if a forced period with his father (is) going to
break him down sufficiently for him
to be compliant with his father’s
directions. At least he has one parent he can count on at the moment.
It is submitted that (the) major reason for the breakdown in the
relationship between the father and [X] is the father’s conduct
[X] and if his father can’t or won’t take the first step, [X] is
only setting himself up for another
my view, with respect, the passages quoted above effectively encapsulate the
mother’s case. The relationship between [X]
and his father has
irretrievably broken down and is beyond the power of the Court to make orders to
resolve it. The blame lies with
the father, and unless he changes his attitude,
there is no hope of reconciliation between [X] and himself.
pessimistic submission points to a bleak outcome. This is reinforced by the
submission about whether it would be preferable to
make the order that would be
least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings
(s.60CC(3)(i))
court were to place the children in the primary care of the husband, he will not
be able to cope with the care of the children
and given the attitude [X] has
towards his father, it is submitted it is almost inevitable that there will be
proceedings.
Haughton in her submission addressed the issue of credit, which is reasonable in
the circumstances, as the issue of credit has
been raised by counsel for the
for the mother submitted that the father has told untruths to
Mr L and Dr R
and in his affidavits. Further, the Court should accept the evidence of the
mother about the incident on 9 June 2011
where it conflicts with the
father’s evidence about that same incident. The change in her evidence
“as to the amount of money she received from the sale of her property
at the commencement of the relationship was not due to
any deliberate error,
rather it was due to the passage of time.
is submitted that the Court would accept in its entirety the evidence of Mr O,
the maternal grandfather, as to his observations
of the conduct of the father
towards both the mother and [X].
The law to be applied in parenting proceedings
Proceedings
involving children are situated in
of the Act. The objects of
and the principles underlying those objects are to be found in subsections (1)
of the Act. The objects are to ensure that the best interests
of children are met, which is made clear in
, which provides that in
deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child,
the Court must regard the best
interests of the child (or children, in this
case) as the paramount consideration.
Court determines what is in children’s best interests by considering the
matters set out in subsections (2) and (3) of
primary considerations are in subsection (2):
benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the
child’s parents; and
need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
those two primary considerations, the Court is required by
subsection 60CC(2A)
to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b).
are additional considerations set out in
subsection 60CC(3)
, from paragraphs (a)
through to (m) inclusive. The issue of family violence, which is referred to in
paragraph (2)(b), is also referred
to in paragraph (3)(j) and (3)(k), which
refers to family violence orders either in place or formerly in place.
of the additional considerations are very important, such as:
views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity
or level of understanding) that the court thinks
are relevant to the weight it
should give to the child’s views;
nature of the relationship of the child with:
of the child’s parents; and
persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the
to the former of the above two considerations,
section 60CD
provides how the
views of a child are expressed.
Subsection 60CD(2)
may inform itself of views expressed by a child:
having regard to anything contained in a report given to the court under
subsection 62G(2)
making an order under
section 68L
for the child’s best interests in the
proceeding to be independently represented by a lawyer; or
(c) subject
to the applicable Rules of Court, by such other means as the court thinks
appropriate.
this case, the Court has the benefit of a Family Report under
and two Court expert reports from Dr R, ordered under the provisions of Rule
15.09. The Court has also ordered that the
children’s interests should be
independently represented by a lawyer under
of the Act.
my view, the views of the child and factors relevant to the weight to be given
to those views in paragraph (3)(a) should properly
be considered in conjunction
with the matters referred to in paragraph (3)(g):
maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and
traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s
parents, and any
other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant.
the evidence of the Family Consultant and the Court Expert are of importance in
assessing the children’s maturity and
level of understanding in order to
decide the weight to be given to the children’s views.
relevance of each of the considerations in paragraphs (3)(a) and (b) is
immediately obvious in this case, as is the consideration
in paragraph
effect of any changes to the child’s circumstances, including the likely
effect on the child of any separation from:
of his or her parents; or
other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the
child) with whom he or she has been living.
has been considerable evidence and there have been submissions about the
consideration in paragraph (3)(f):
capacity of:
(i) each of
the child’s parents; and
other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the
for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual
are some considerations that are not relevant, such as the consideration in
paragraph (3)(h), which relates specifically to
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander children only.
has been evidence and there have been submissions concerning the attitude to the
children and to the responsibilities of parenthood
demonstrated by each of the
children’s parents (see
s.60CC(3)(i)).
making a parenting order, the Court is required by
presumption that it is in the best interests of the child concerned for the
child’s parents to have equal shared
parental responsibility for the
presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a
parent or other person has engaged in;
of the child or another child; or
provides that the presumption my be rebutted by evidence that satisfies
the Court that it would not be in the child’s best
interests for his or
her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.
Court must also consider the matters in
where a parenting order is made
that provides or is to provide that a child’s parents are to have equal
shared parental responsibility
for the child.
subsection (1), in such a case the Court must consider whether the child
spending time with each parent would be:
the child’s best interests; and
practicable; and
so, consider whether to make such an order.
is important to note that the Court must be satisfied about paragraphs (a) and
(b). One or other of them is not sufficient to enliven
the consideration in
paragraph (c).
the Court, after the above consideration, does not make an order for the child
to spend equal time with both parents, it is required
the same exercise in considering whether it would be in the child’s best
reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial
and significant time with each of the child’s parents.
“Substantial
and significant time” is defined by
s.65DAA(3).
determining reasonable practicability for the purposes of subsections (1) and
(2) the Court must have regard to the matters in
s.65DAA(5).
Conclusions
is a matter where the parties appear to be
that there should be
an order that they should have equal shared parental responsibility for the
children. That does not mean, of
course, that the Court must automatically make
such an order, but, unless the Court were to be satisfied that the presumption
not apply because of abuse or family violence, or unless the Court were to
find that the presumption is rebutted because it is satisfied
that it would not
be in children’s best interests, the Court is required by
apply the presumption.
have been allegations by the mother of abusive behaviour by the father, but that
matter has not been strongly pressed. It is
certainly the case that both the
Independent Children’s Lawyer and the father in their submissions and the
mother in her Amended
Response all seek an order to the effect that neither
party should use physical discipline on the children, and I intend to make
mother’s position is that the relationship between the father and [X] is
virtually irreparable unless he makes some major
effort, although the same claim
is not made about his relationship with [Y]. No submission is made that the
mother should have sole
parental responsibility for either child.
propose to apply the presumption that it is in the best interests of [X] and [Y]
for their parents to have equal shared parental
responsibility for them and
order accordingly.
being the case, the Court is required to consider the matters set out in
of the Act. Neither of the parents nor the Independent Children’s Lawyer
seeks an order that the children should spend equal
time with each parent,
although that was formerly the father’s position. Again, the Court is not
bound by the parties’
proposals but may make whatever orders the Court
sees fit as being in the best interests of the children (see
the circumstances regarding [X] and the poor communication between the parents,
it is difficult to see that equal time would
be reasonably practicable, even if
it were in the best interests of the children. Whilst the parents do not live
prohibitively far
away from each other, there are two considerations in
which, to my mind, would militate against a finding that an equal
time order would be reasonably practicable:
parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the
children to spend equal time with each of the parents
(s.65DAA(5)(b))
parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and
resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing
an arrangement of that
(s.65DAA(5)(c)).
Accordingly,
I am not satisfied that an order should be made that the children should spend
equal time with each parent.
then follows that the Court must consider the question in
subsection 65DAA(2)
the Act, whether it is both in the best interests of the children and reasonably
practicable for the children to spend substantial
and significant time with each
of their parents.
course, it would appear that the same obstacles apply in respect of the
reasonable practicability of an order for substantial and
significant time as
were mentioned at [163] above, at least in so far as [X] is concerned. If [Y]
were to be considered in isolation,
it would appear that the parents would have
a capacity to implement an arrangement for him to spend substantial and
significant time
with each parent and they may well have, although this is more
doubtful, a capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties
that might arise in implementing such an arrangement.
the difficulties appear to be:
fact that Dr R has strongly recommended that the boys should “travel
that there should be similar arrangements for each
of them; and
parents are now at issue on the question of which parent should be the primary
father now seeks that the children should live with him, after a period of
“protected enforced time” when they would
go away on a holiday with
him for 28 days, and then spend individual days without overnight time on
alternate weekends with their
mother for a period of two months, followed by
another period of two months where they spend alternate weekends including
night with their mother, expanding then three nights on alternate
weekends with her.
proposal is supported in broad terms, but in a more restrictive form, by the
Independent Children’s Lawyer. This latter
proposal does not meet the
definition of substantial and significant time in
subsection 65DAA(3)
in its initial stages.
father’s proposal does not meet that requirement either, in my view.
the other hand, the mother proposes that the children’s primary residence
should remain with her. She does not support the
proposal for “protected
enforced time” even, presumably, in the alternative form proposed by the
Independent Children’s
Lawyer in paragraph 9 of her submissions. This
proposal would not involve a change in the children’s primary care.
proposals must be considered in the light of the requirement that the Court
should regard the children’s best interests
as the paramount
consideration.
father and the Independent Children’s Lawyer submit that their proposals
have the imprimatur of the Court Expert, Dr R.
It is certainly the case that Dr
R espoused the concept of the protected enforced time together between the
father and the two boys
in Recommendation 2 of his second report of 16 April
that recommendation looked at the children living primarily with the mother and
spending five days a fortnight with the father.
It was only as a result of
cross-examination by counsel for the father that Dr R discussed the issue of a
change in primary residence.
It is, in my view, a conditional opinion and not
necessarily endorsement.
mother opposes these proposals and submits that Dr R’s opinions and
recommendations should not necessarily be followed,
drawing more on the Family
Report prepared by Mr L and released on 12 October 2010.
is the case that Family Reports, and, for that matter, Court Expert Reports, are
not the be-all and end-all of a case. A judge
is not bound to accept it and it
is the trial judge who decides the matter, not the Family Consultant or Court
In the Marriage of
said, it is incumbent on the Court, when giving reasons, to include in those
reasons why the opinion of the Court Expert is
not being followed.
considering what the best interests of the children are, it is the evidence of
both parties that there is a benefit to both [X]
and [Y] to have a meaningful
relationship with both parents. This is supported by the Family Report and the
Reports and evidence
is a matter of concern that the relationship between [X] and his father has
become strained so that [X] has not been spending time
with his father at all.
Whilst the mother submits that there is nothing that the Court can do to resolve
that problem, and any enforced
time for [X] will be counter-productive, I prefer
the view of Dr R that, in effect, it is not too late to take positive steps to
deal with that relationship. In deed, Dr R has expressed the view that if steps
are not taken to repair [X]’s relationship
with his father, the
relationship between [Y] and his father will suffer such strain that it, too,
may collapse. This would not be
in the boys’ best interests and could lead
to resentment on their part against the mother.
R considered the current arrangement to be a “doomed one”.
is a primary consideration, and a most important consideration, that children
need to be protected from physical or psychological
harm from being subjected to
or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence. The mother has alleged abusive
behaviour by the father
towards the boys, particularly [X], supported to some
extent by her father, Mr O.
there is very little evidence that the father poses a physical risk to the
children, although he admitted smacking them when
they were younger. Dr R opined
in his Report of 16 February 2012 that:
don’t believe that there is any indication that the father is an
unacceptable risk to the
younger child, [Y], did not show to Dr R that he had any particular preference
for one parent over the other when he was interviewed
by the doctor on 3 April
on the other hand,
“appeared to be very stressed and in a bind. I
believe that he was happy with his mother but that he was tortured at not seeing
his father. He is still parentified and the hierarchy of power is
R’s report shows that
“Both children are developing normally,
emotively and cognitively for their respective ages. They both appear to be
progressing
reasonably well
was born [in] 2003, so he was nine years old when he saw Dr R. [X] was born [in]
2000, which means that he was eleven years and
seven months old when he saw Dr
children are at a level of maturity where their views should be given some
weight. This does not mean that the views of either
child will decide this
matter. [X] is only twelve years old now. He is a long way from being an
appears to have a close and loving relationship with each of his parents.
on the other hand, still has a strong bond with his father, in the view of Dr R,
and is missing his father,
“which is hurting him a great
responsible for his mother and I believe that he is caught in a loyalty bind and
doesn’t want to leave his mother
to be with his father.
that the child is unwilling to relinquish his position of empowerment within the
family and he is able to make decisions
himself unilaterally with apparent
children appear to have good relationships with their maternal grandparents and
paternal grandfather.
for the father does not see that the mother has retained a willingness and
ability to facilitate and encourage a close and
continuing relationship with the
father, whilst the father still does. The Independent Children’s Lawyer
expresses a similar
view, saying that the mother’s automatic and
unquestioning belief in [X]’ reports about his father has undermined or
compromised her ability and willingness to facilitate a close relationship with
his father.
for the mother submits that the father has not taken sufficient or any steps to
fulfil his responsibilities as a parent in
participating in making decisions
communicating with them,
especially as far as [X] is concerned.
father has been criticised for failing to fulfil his obligation to maintain the
children, by seeking a reduction in child support
and refusing to pay for their
dental treatment.
likely effect on the children of any changes in their circumstances has been
described by counsel for the mother as likely to
be devastating for [X].
this, the father submits that the mother’s proposal is “more of the
same”, a situation seen by Dr R as untenable
for the children in the long
term. As submitted by the Independent Children’s Lawyer, the current
arrangement where the children
live primarily with their mother does not appear
to be of benefit to them and may result in their losing their relationship with
their father.
is conceded that a transition to the primary care of their father would not be
easy, especially for [X].
is no evidence of any great practical difficulty or expense of the children
spending time with or communicating with a parent,
as neither parent is planning
to move away from the general area.
capacity of the parents to provide for the children’s needs, including
their emotional and intellectual needs is a very
important issue.
parties have great difficulty in communicating about matters concerning their
children, including which High School [X] should
mother has suffered anxiety issues and has in the past taken to alcohol as a
coping aid. The father, by comparison, has a difficult
style of communication
and appears at times to be insensitive.
mother apparently believes everything that [X] says, which has led to Dr R
describing the child as “parentified” and
“empowered”.
The fact is that [X] at a young age is now making his own decisions without the
maturity to reflect on them.
children are boys of a mixed Croatian, on their father’s side, and Dutch,
on their mother’s side, heritage. They are
twelve years and ten years old.
parents’ attitude to the children and the responsibilities of parenthood
has been very much in question. They are basically
good parents. The mother has
sought assistance to address her alcohol use. The father has participated in
family therapy with Ms
B, psychologist.
father’s relationship with [X] has deteriorated drastically and neither
parent seems to be able to find a remedy. The mother
blames the father’s
attitude. The father has been at a loss to know what to do, but he desperately
wishes to find a solution.
am not satisfied that there are family violence issues that would cause a
concern about the children being in the care of either
parent. There are no
family violence orders.
would take the wisdom of Solomon to make an order that would be least likely to
lead to the institution of further proceedings.
There are risks inherent in the
three options that seem to be available.
first option, advocated by the father and the Independent Children’s
Lawyer, is for a “protected enclosed time”
of four weeks for both
boys with the father, with a gradual reintroduction of time with the mother but
a change of primary residence
from the mother to the father. It is apparent that
[X] will react strongly against this option, [Y] probably less so.
second option, the Independent Children’s Lawyer’s “fallback
position”, is for there to be the “protected
enclosed time”
with the father with no change of primary residence at the conclusion of the
time. [X] is likely to react strongly
against this proposal, also. [Y] will
probably have less of an adverse reaction.
third option, advocated by the mother, is to change nothing and continue on as
mother’s “no change” option is not in the best interests of
the children. The mother’s proposal is to
do nothing and she is offering
nothing except a continuation of a situation that has been tried and has not
risk to both children with a continuation of the present arrangement is that
[X]’s estrangement from his father will continue
and, eventually, it will
have a negative effect on [Y]’s relationship with his father. Dr R has
made it clear that without
a drastic step, such as the protected enclosed time
with the father and the two boys, the current arrangement is doomed and the
are at great risk of losing their relationship with their father
completely.
accept the opinion of Dr R that the adults need to take control back from [X]
and allow him to be a twelve year old boy with a more
normal relationship with
each parent. He needs to be made aware that it is the parents who make the
decisions in his best interests,
rather than have him making decisions that his
parents appear to be powerless to contradict. The mother’s acceptance of
that the child says does not offer hope of an early resolution of
[X]’s estrangement from his father.
fact that the mother has not supported the proposal of Dr R for the boys to have
an enforced holiday away with their father in
an attempt to repair [X]’
relationship with him and, incidentally, take some pressure off [Y], does not
argue well for the
proposition that the children should then return to the
primary care of their mother.
likelihood is that, in the face of the mother’s attitude and her
inability, as shown by her evidence, to see the benefit
to [X] in rebuilding his
relationship with his father, let alone taking any steps to support it, any
gains would be lost.
would appear to be more likelihood of the boys maintaining a positive
relationship with their mother if they were in the primary
care of their father
than the reverse. The second option has already been tried and it appears to
have failed.
my view, it is in the best interests of the children to make orders along the
lines of those proposed by the father.
Orders proposed by the father and the Independent Children’s Lawyer in
their respective Minutes refer to “calendar
months”. Rule 3.03
defines the meaning of the word “month”:
Rules and in a judgment, decree, order or any document in a proceeding, unless
the context otherwise indicates:
means a calendar month.
Accordingly,
the word “month” has been used throughout these
I certify that the preceding two hundred and eighteen
(218) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Scarlett
Date: 5 April 2013
[2009] FMCAfam
[2010] FamCAFC
Family Report
12.10.2010 page 11 at paragraph
reference to one Mr M, with whom the mother was in a relationship for a time
after separation
Report of Dr R 16.2.2011 page
Report of Dr R 16.2.2011 pages 19 &
Dr R 16.4.2012
Report of Dr R 16.4.2012 page
of Dr R 16.4.2012 page
– the Minute does not include a proposed Order 4
[2002] HCA 36
(2002) 29 Fam LR 74
[2002] HCA 36
29 Fam LR 74
per Gummow and Callinan
Wife’s Parenting Submissions page 41 at paragraph
Wife’s Parenting Submissions page 60 at paragraph (l)
– presumably “proceedings”
– presumably “subject himself
Submissions of the Independent Children’s Lawyer (ICL) 11.7.2012 at page
3, citing the first Expert Report of Dr R at page
9 and Dr R’s oral
evidence on 23 May
the mother’s evidence in cross-examination by counsel for the ICL on 24
Submissions of the ICL pages 4 & 5 paragraph
page 5 paragraph
Submissions
of the Applicant Husband page 9 paragraph
Submissions
of the Applicant Husband page 17 at paragraph
Submissions
of the Applicant Husband at page 18 paragraph 74 (citing pages 127-129 of the
Submissions of the Applicant Husband at page 19 paragraph 77 (citing page 180 of
the Transcript of
Submissions of the Applicant Husband at page 27 paragraph
Mother’s Parenting Submissions page 26
Mother’s Parenting Submissions page
Mother’s parenting Submissions page
Mother’s Parenting Submissions page
S.60CC(3)(d)
Mother’s Parenting Submissions pages
(1979) 5 Fam LR 609
of Dr R 16.4.2012 at page
Dr R 16.4.2012 page 11
RTF format (391 KB)
Signed PDF/A format