Leah Saul; Toni McNamara; Sally Riley & Annie Baartz v Craigslea Kindergarten & Preschool Association Incorporated [2025] FWC 3399 (13 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3399
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Unfair dismissal
Leah Saul; Toni McNamara; Sally Riley
& Annie Baartz
Craigslea Kindergarten & Preschool
Association Incorporated
(U2025/16053, 16059, 16061, 16066)
COMMISSIONER HUNT
BRISBANE, 13 NOVEMBER 2025
Applications for unfair dismissal remedies – Respondent placed into
liquidation – applications stayed.
October 2025, Ms Leah Saul, Ms Toni McNamara, Ms Sally Riley and Ms Annie Baartz
(the Applicants) made applications to the Fair
Work Commission (the Commission)
Fair Work Act 2009
(the Act), alleging that they had
been dismissed from their employment with Craigslea Kindergarten & Preschool
Association Incorporated
(the Respondent) and that their dismissals were harsh,
unjust and unreasonable. The applications were filed by the Independent
Union of Australia (IEU) on behalf of the Applicants.
Applicants alleged that they were dismissed by the Respondent on 15 September
2025, and in the case of Ms McNamara on 14 September
2025. In their
applications, the Applicants noted that David Clout and Associates (the
Administrators) were appointed administrators
Respondent.
Commission sent correspondence to the Administrators on 21 October 2025 noting
that the unfair dismissal applications had been
made against the Respondent. The
Administrators were asked to confirm that they had in fact been appointed
administrators of the
Respondent and whether the Administrators were willing to
participate in conciliation before the Commission. The same day, the
Administrators
sent the following correspondence to the Commission:
“We confirm that David and Scott Clout of this office were appointed
Administrators of Craigslea Kindergarten & Preschool
Association
Incorporated (“Association”). Attached for your records is a copy of
the instrument of appointment.
Whilst the Administrators are willing to participate in any proposed
conciliation and have the authority to settle the matter, there
will be no real
benefit to the parties in doing so, as it is appears at this stage, that the
Association will likely be placed into
liquidation, following which eligible
employees may be entitled to make a claim for their outstanding entitlements
under the Fair
Entitlements Guarantee scheme.”
further email sent on 22 October 2025, the Administrators advised the
Commission:
“The Administrators do not propose to attend any conciliation conference
as it would serve no purpose and only add to costs.
As you may be aware the Association is in administration, and it is
anticipated that it will be placed into liquidation at the forthcoming
of creditors.”
October 2025, the IEU sent the following correspondence to the
Commission:
“We are instructed that members are not opposed to the matters being heard
in a joint conciliation.
We note however that a second creditors meeting is scheduled for 4 pm on
Wednesday, 29 October 2025 for creditors to vote on whether
the administration
should end, the Association being wound up or a Deed of Arrangement being
entered to. Considering matters discussed
at the next creditors meeting will
directly impact the applications before the Commission, we undertake to provide
a further update
following the meeting.”
matters were allocated to me on 10 November 2025. Noting the prior
correspondence from the parties in relation to the likelihood
of the Respondent
being placed into liquidation, on 11 November 2025 I sent correspondence to the
parties, seeking an update from
the Administrators as to the status of the
Respondent following the creditors meeting scheduled on 29 October 2025. The
Administrators
advised as follows:
“We can confirm that at the second meeting of creditors held on 30 October
2025, it was resolved that the Respondent be wound
up and the Administrators be
appointed Liquidators.
The applicant(s) and/or their representative were also in attendance on the
informed the parties that in light of the appointment of a liquidator, it would
be necessary to stay the applications on account
of the Commission being unable
to further determine the applications without leave of the court. I advised the
Applicants that if
they wished to withdraw the applications if they do not
intend on seeking leave of the court, they may consider doing
500(2) of the
Corporations Act 2001
(the Corporations Act)
“(2) After the passing of the resolution for voluntary winding up, no
action or other civil proceeding is to be proceeded with
or commenced against
the company except by leave of the Court and subject to such terms as the Court
58AA of the Corporations Act provides the following definition in relation to
the meaning of ‘court’ and ‘Court’:
58AA Meaning of court and Court
(1) Subject to subsection (2), in this Act:
means any court.
means any of the following courts:
(a) the Federal Court;
(b) the Supreme Court of a State or Territory;
(c) the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 1);
(d) a court to which
Family Law Act 1975
because of a Proclamation made under
subsection 41(2)
of that Act.
(2) Except where there is a clear expression of a contrary intention (for
example, by use of the expression “the Court”),
proceedings in
relation to a matter under this Act may, subject to Part 9.6A, be brought in any
Note: The matters dealt with in Part 9.7 include the applicability of limits
on the jurisdictional competence of courts.”
Smith & Ors v Trollop Silverwood & Beck Pty
the Full Bench held that
the Commission is not a “Court” and is therefore unable to grant
leave as prescribed in s.500(2)
of the Corporations Act. Further, in
v CMI Industrial (Forge)
Commissioner Jones considered relevant authorities and found that an application
pursuant to s.394 of the Act falls within the meaning
proceedings” in s.500(2) of the Corporations Act.
regard to the provisions in s.500(2) of the Corporations Act and the authorities
cited above, in
Wallis v Defence Electrical Pty
I stayed the
applicant’s unfair dismissal application on account of the respondent
having appointed a liquidator.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that this application cannot proceed any further in the
Commission except by leave of the Court.
The Applicants’ applications are stayed until leave of the Court is
COMMISSIONER
(2003) 142 IR 137.
, [11]–[16].
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government
RTF format (994 KB)
Signed PDF/A format