Wu v Cohen [2000] HREOCA 36 (12 September 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
INQUIRY UNDER THE
SEX DISCRIMINATION ACT 1984
DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION ACT 1992
Matter: H 99/43
First Complainant
Textile Clothing & Footwear Union of Australia
Second Complainant
First Respondent
Express Embroidery Pty Ltd
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION OF INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
KATHLEEN MCEVOY
Date of Decision: 12 September 2000
Dates of Hearing: 7 - 11 February 2000, 26 - 29
June 2000, and 17, 18 and 19 July 2000
Location of Hearing Melbourne
Appearances Mr Kenyon of Counsel, instructed by Maurice Blackburn and Co,
Solicitors for the complainants.
Mr McDermott of Counsel, instructed by Lewenberg & Lewenberg,
Solicitors for the respondents.
1. INTRODUCTION
On 12 February 1999 two complaints were referred for public inquiry by the
Sex Discrimination Commissioner (acting in that capacity
and as a delegate for
the Acting Disability Discrimination Commissioner) as not amenable to
conciliation, pursuant to section 57(1)
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth) (“SDA”), and pursuant to section 76(1)(b) of the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) (“DDA”). The
complaints which were referred for a public inquiry were made by Eva Wu, the
first complainant, and
the Textile Clothing and Footwear Union of Australia
(“the Union”). Both complaints were made to the Equal Opportunity
Commissioner of Victoria as agent for the Sex Discrimination Commissioner and
the Disability Discrimination Commissioner. The first
complaint, dated 26 June
1995, alleges breaches of the SDA by Mr Eli Cohen, the first respondent, and
Express Embroidery Pty Ltd,
the second respondent (“Express
Embroidery”). Express Embroidery was Ms Wu’s employer and Mr Cohen
is a director
of the second respondent. The second complaint is dated 21 July
1995 and alleges breaches of the DDA by Mr Cohen and Express Embroidery
In particular, the first complaint alleges Ms Wu was sexually harassed by Mr
Cohen in the course of her employment, and that Express
Embroidery was
vicariously responsible for this unlawful sexual harassment. The complaint
further alleged that Ms Wu had been subjected
to unlawful discrimination by both
respondents on the ground of her sex and family responsibilities, contrary to
the SDA. The second
complaint alleged Ms Wu had been discriminated against by
both respondents in the course of her employment in relation to a disability
after she suffered injuries at work, and that she was harassed in the course of
her employment in relation to her disability. The
second respondent was alleged
to be vicariously liable for any loss as a consequence of unlawful acts in
respect of both complaints.
Further, in respect of both complaints Ms Wu
alleged she had suffered loss and injury to feelings as a consequence of the
respondents’
unlawful acts. Both respondents denied all allegations of
unlawful behaviour.
Pursuant to
of the SDA and s.79 of the DDA, I conducted an inquiry into
these complaints in Melbourne on 7-11 February 2000, 26-29 June 2000,
and 19 July 2000. All parties were given leave to be represented by counsel at
the inquiry. It was agreed at the inquiry
that the issue of liability would be
initially determined and if it was then necessary and appropriate there would be
a further inquiry
to determine the issue of quantum of any compensation payable
as a consequence of any finding of liability in relation to the respondents.
the inquiry evidence was given by both individual parties, and both the
complainants and the respondents called witnesses who
gave evidence on their
The complainants alleged that the respondents’ conduct was in breach of
of the SDA (discrimination in employment) and s.28B of the SDA
relating to sexual harassment in the course of employment.
Section 14(2)
of the SDA provides as follows:
14 Discrimination in employment or in superannuation
is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the ground of
the employee’s sex, marital status,
pregnancy or potential pregnancy:
(a) in the terms or conditions of employment that the employer affords the
(b) by denying the employee access, or limiting the employee’s access,
to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training,
or to any other benefits
associated with employment;
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by subjecting the employee to any other detriment.
Section 28B(1) of the SDA is as follows:
28B Employment, partnerships etc.
(1) It is unlawful for a person to sexually harass:
(a) an employee of the person; or
(b) a person who is seeking to become an employee of the person.
The complainants also alleged the respondents had discriminated against Ms Wu
on the ground of her family responsibilities as defined
in s.4A of the SDA. This
provides as follows:
4A Meaning of family responsibilities
(1) In this Act,
family responsibilities
, in relation to an
employee, means responsibilities of the employee to care for or support:
(a) a dependent child of the employee; or
(b) any other immediate family member who is in need of care and
(2) In this section:
includes an adopted child, a step-child or an ex-nuptial
dependent child
means a child who is wholly or substantially
dependent on the employee.
immediate family member
(a) a spouse of the employee; and
(b) an adult child, parent, grandparent, grandchild or sibling of the
employee or of a spouse of the employee.
includes a former spouse, a de facto spouse and a former
de facto spouse.
Section 107(1)
of the SDA is as follows:
107 Acts done on behalf of bodies
(1) Where, for the purposes of this Act, it is necessary to establish that a
body corporate has done an act on a particular ground,
it is sufficient to
establish that a person who acted on behalf of the body corporate in the matter
so acted on that ground.
The complainants also alleged the commission of acts by the respondents which
are made unlawful by provisions of the DDA. In particular
it was alleged that
Ms Wu had been subjected to discrimination by Mr Cohen and Express Embroidery on
the basis of a disability contrary
of the DDA; and further that she had
been subjected to harassment in the course of her employment by her employer in
relation to
that disability.
Section 15(2)
of the DDA is as follows:
15 Discrimination in employment
is unlawful for an employer or a person acting or purporting to act on behalf of
an employer to discriminate against an employee
on the ground of the
employee’s disability or a disability of any of that employee’s
associates:
(a) in the terms or conditions of employment that the employer affords the
employee; or
(b) by denying the employee access, or limiting the employee’s access,
to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training,
or to any other benefits
associated with employment; or
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by subjecting the employee to any other detriment.
Section 35(1)
is as follows:
35 Harassment in employment
(1) It is unlawful for a person to harass another person who:
(a) is an employee of that person; and
(b) has a disability;
in relation to the disability.
The complainants relied on
section 123(2)
of the DDA in relation to the
second respondent:
123 Conduct by directors, servants and agents
conduct engaged in on behalf of a body corporate by a director, servant or agent
of the body corporate within the scope of
his or her actual or apparent
authority is taken, for the purposes of this Act, to have been engaged in also
by the body corporate
unless the body corporate establishes that the body
corporate took reasonable precautions and exercised due diligence to avoid the
3. THE EVIDENCE
The general background concerning this complaint was not in contention. Ms
Wu qualified as a medical doctor from the University of
Shanghai in 1982, and
practiced medicine in China until 1990, when she came to Australia, leaving her
husband and son in China.
She commenced employment for the second respondent on
10 August 1991 as a machinist. Prior to that she had worked as a process worker
and as a packer and product inspector with different employers.
Mr Cohen is a director of Express Embroidery which employs about 30 workers
at premises in Collingwood, designing and providing embroidery
onto partly
finished garments supplied by other garment manufacturers. Prior to the return
of the garments to Express Embroidery’s
clients, the embroidered designs
are “finished” by “finishers” employed in the factory.
The finishers clean
up the embroidery and snip off loose threads. Express
Embroidery employs designers to design the motifs; people to work on the sample
machine (which gets up the sample from the design proposed for approval by the
client); machinists who operate the embroidery machines;
and finishers. Express
Embroidery operates on a 24 hour basis five days a week with night, afternoon,
and day shifts. Mr and Mrs
Cohen, who are both directors of the company, work
at the factory, and their children from time to time also work there.
Various aspects of Ms Wu’s employment which relate to her complaint
under the DDA are also not contested by the respondent.
Ms Wu suffered a back
injury in the course of her employment on 5 May 1994. She reported the injury
and completed her shift but
was unable to return to work the following day and
was then absent from work until 6 June 1994. She made a WorkCover claim in
of this absence from work. Ms Wu was further absent from work, as a
consequence of an aggravation of the same work injury, from
28 June 1994. She
made a further claim for WorkCover and returned to work on 5 October 1994 on
restricted duties.
On 6 February 1995 there was an altercation between Ms Wu and Mr Cohen at the
factory in the course of Ms Wu’s work. Ms Wu
alleged Mr Cohen kicked her
in the course of this altercation. Mr Cohen does not deny the altercation, but
denies he kicked Ms Wu.
Ms Wu left the work premises following this altercation
and has not returned to her employment since. Ms Wu made a WorkCover claim
alleging she was suffering work related stress and an injury to her left leg as
a consequence.
Since the events the subject of these complaints Ms Wu has qualified for
medical practice in Australia and at the time of the inquiry
was employed as a
resident in a major Melbourne teaching hospital.
3.1 The complainants evidence
Evidence at the inquiry was limited to evidence in support of the first
complainant’s complaint. There was no separate evidence
given on behalf
of the second complainant.
The complaints before the inquiry relate to two separate matters and there
was no suggestion in the evidence that the complaints related
to each other,
other than the factual relationship arising out of Ms Wu’s employment by
Express Embroidery and her dealings
in that employment with Mr Cohen.
3.1.1 The evidence of Eva Wu
Ms Wu gave sworn evidence at the inquiry. The Commission was assisted by an
interpreter in the Mandarin language, but Ms Wu was able
to give some evidence
herself in English and clearly has a reasonable command of the English language.
Ms Wu told the inquiry both her parents were surgeons who operated a clinic
in Shanghai. After her graduation with a medical science
degree in 1982 she had
eight years post graduate experience and had taught in a teaching hospital. She
had decided to leave China
for Australia in order to obtain better
opportunities, but she had found it difficult to leave her husband and son.
After obtaining
some employment in Australia she was keen to find a job which
would enable her to study English at the same time. She attended at
respondent’s factory and spoke to Mr Cohen. He told her he wanted someone
to work in “quality control”
and told her she could start the next
day on a shift from 7.00 am to 3.30 pm with overtime as required. Ms Wu
commenced work as
a finisher but after some time a position on night shift as a
machinist became available and she asked for that position. She worked
shift as a machinist from October 1991 to February 1993. At that time she
returned to day shift to work on the sample machine.
Ms Wu described the sample
machine as entailing more skilled and less heavy work than on other
Ms Wu said at Christmas 1992 she was working the afternoon shift. Mr Cohen
arranged a Christmas dinner at a nearby restaurant. After
the dinner she and
the other afternoon shift workers returned to the factory at about 9.00 pm to
continue their shift work. She
needed new needles for her machine and had to
obtain them from Mr Cohen’s office in a building separate from the main
area. Ms Wu went with Mr Cohen to his office to get the needles but
as she turned away from him to go out the door he hugged her
from behind with
his arms around her at breast level and said, “I’m crazy about
you”. Ms Wu said she was “very
scared”, and said
“No”, and ran out of the office. She felt insulted and humiliated
at this physical contact and
felt palpitations. She said no one else was in the
office at the time. Ms Wu said that following this incident Mr Cohen had on
occasions tried to approach her and had squeezed her bottom. Ms Wu said whenever
she saw Mr Cohen coming towards her in the factory
she would come round to the
other side of her machine where she could be clearly seen so that he could not
pinch her bottom. If
she met him in the corridor she ran past him to get by
quickly. Ms Wu said on at least three occasions after this Mr Cohen invited
her to dinner, saying “just the two of us”. She never accepted these
invitations. Ms Wu said although Mrs Cohen worked
at the factory, she was
rarely there after 3.30 in the afternoon, when Mr Cohen was alone with the
factory workers.
Ms Wu also gave evidence of sexually loaded comments and jokes she alleged Mr
Cohen made in the factory to her and in her hearing.
In particular, one
“joke” related to the tightening of a screw or bobbin on the
machine. Ms Wu said on one occasion
the two women operating a machine asked her
to help them to undo a screw as they could not do it themselves. She was unable
the screw and she called Mr Cohen to assist her. Mr Cohen attended to
the screw but made all of them feel very uncomfortable as
he did so saying,
“I like it tight”, and using his mouth in an obscene way suggesting
oral sex. Ms Wu described this
event as “feeling like oral
Ms Wu also referred to sexual innuendos made by Mr Cohen, and referred to an
occasion where she believed Mr Cohen had sexually harassed
another worker called
Yenna. Ms Wu said she saw Mr Cohen squeeze Yenna’s bottom. She also saw
Mr Cohen put his arm around
another worker, Dan Xiang Shi (known as Amy). A
worker from New Zealand complained to Mr Cohen that he had touched her hips and
this amounted to sexual harassment: Ms Wu said she heard this complaint being
made directly to Mr Cohen and the following day the
worker who had complained
was dismissed.
Ms Wu gave evidence of another specific occasion on which she alleged Mr
Cohen had subjected her to sexual harassment. She said in
October 1993 she was
working in the sample area on a weekend shift. Mr Cohen came into the room,
pointed to his crotch and said,
“Eva, look, you want me to open
it?”. Ms Wu said Mr Cohen was pointing to his crotch which was
Ms Wu said she was angry and got up and walked away
without answering him. She said she felt Mr Cohen saw her “as a
prostitute”.
On another occasion at Christmas Mr Cohen had shown Ms Wu a Christmas card
which he had received from Yenna. Mr Cohen referred to
this as “a card
from my girlfriend”. Ms Wu said she felt Mr Cohen was simply showing he
had power in a sexual as well
as an employment sense over his employees.
Ms Wu said Mr Cohen knew that she was a qualified doctor. She said Mr Cohen
at one stage in the course of her employment had appointed
a manager, Mr Huang.
She met Mr Cohen with Mr Huang in the corridor and Mr Cohen introduced her as
“Eva”, but he then
commented in her hearing to Mr Huang, “What
sort of a mother is she? She has left her child in China”. Ms Wu said
was extremely hurt and became quite tearful after this comment. She said
she had never intended to leave her child in China but
had been unable to return
to China because of the political situation.
In cross-examination Ms Wu told the inquiry she had not made any complaint
or March 1995. She
believed she had first discussed her concerns about the sexual harassment with
Julie McKeown, an official of
the Union, on 28 February 1995 in the course of
the investigation of a WorkCover claim.
Ms Wu said the sexual harassment issues had ended by May 1994. However, by
then she was afraid of Mr Cohen and avoided him wherever
possible. She agreed
she had attended at Mr Cohen’s home in April 1993, but at Mr Cohen’s
invitation as he had a bad
back and she had a doctor friend who could provide a
massage to give him some assistance. Ms Wu agreed she went to Mr Cohen’s
Mr Cohen’s bedroom while the massage was performed
and said she had waited
downstairs in Mr Cohen’s kitchen with Mrs Cohen. She denied she had a
meal with the Cohen family and
further denied she had remained in Mr
Cohen’s bedroom while the massage was taking place, or that he had asked
her to leave
while this occurred.
Ms Wu said Mr Cohen had driven her home on one occasion and that when she
worked night shift she generally caught the train, although
sometimes she drove
her car, until it was written off in an accident in August 1994.
Ms Wu agreed she had consulted a solicitor in August or September 1994
concerning a WorkCover claim in relation to a back injury,
and not long after
this also contacted the Union where she had discussed her claim with Ms McKeown
and another official. They had
given her advice concerning her claim, warnings
given to her by Mr Cohen and her rights to take annual leave. She also
the Union after the kicking incident in February 1995 and discussed
her WorkCover claim. However, she agreed it was only on 28 February
she raised her complaint of sexual harassment against Mr Cohen.
Ms Wu said it was not part of her Chinese culture to react actively or
violently when harassed. Accordingly when Mr Cohen pinched
her bottom she did
not yell at him to stop, but just said, “No don’t do it”.
In relation to the “screw” incident, Ms Wu said this particular
matter had only occurred once, but was indicative of the
sorts of things that
happened all the time on the factory floor. She said Mr Cohen’s gestures
were unmistakable and that she
and the other two women working on the machine
felt uncomfortable. Ms Wu ignored him and said to the other two women to ignore
and say nothing.
Ms Wu said the “screw” incident had occurred early in 1994, after
the incident where Mr Cohen suggested he undo his fly.
Ms Wu said she had
thought of going to the police about this particular incident but decided not to
because she thought she might
lose her job.
Ms Wu said she had not gone to the Union about her concerns about sexual
harassment because the Union was not active in that workplace
until about
October 1994. Ms Wu was elected as a shop steward at that time. When the New
Zealand woman was harassed in November
1994, she had asked Ms Wu whether Mr
Cohen’s behaviour amounted to sexual harassment and Ms Wu had suggested
she go to the
Union. However, she agreed she had not been to the Union about
her own concerns about sexual harassment even though the sexual harassment
alleged was more extensive and ongoing. She said she was anxious about keeping
her job, and at the time she went to the Union
to her WorkCover claims (from July 1994 on), the sexual harassment had ended and
her preoccupation
was with her injury. It was only when Ms McKeown asked her to
go through her history of employment she first told anyone of her concerns
sexual harassment. She had given a statement that day to the WorkCover insurer
concerning the circumstances of her employment
and had not mentioned any issues
relating to sexual harassment. She had been asked her if she had been happy at
the factory before
the kicking incident and had answered “yes”, but
this had made her consider whether she had truly been happy and it was
she raised with Ms McKeown.
3.1.2 Disability discrimination complaints
Ms Wu told the inquiry that on 5 May 1994 she had an accident at work and
injured her back. She reported this but continued to work.
The following day
she attended her general practitioner and then had about three weeks off work.
When she returned to work she
was supposed to be on light duties but Mr Cohen
required her to work on the machines which was difficult and heavy and required
good deal of bending and stretching. There was not as much of this on the
sample machine on which she had been working for some
months prior to her
accident. When she returned to work Mr Cohen had said to her that she had
damaged his business by having time
off work with an injury. Ms Wu complained
to Mr Cohen about being put on the production machine but he said to her,
can’t do it go home”. Ms Wu worked on the production
machines for about two weeks, but the constant stretching and bending
her back injury and on 28 June 1994 she stopped work because of this. Ms Wu
then sought legal advice and was advised
to seek further medical advice.
Accordingly she went back to her doctor who referred her to an orthopedic
surgeon. She had an MRI
investigation and she made a WorkCover claim. She was
paid by WorkCover until she returned to work.
Ms Wu said she was scheduled to return to work in late September 1994 on
restricted duties starting at 2 hours per day. Mr Cohen told
her she was
rostered for her 2 hours work from 11.00 pm to 1.00 am. Ms Wu objected to this
as no public transport was then available,
but Mr Cohen said,
“that’s not my business”. Ms Wu said Mr Cohen knew she caught
public transport and knew she
did not like catching the train late at night.
Prior to her work injury Ms Wu had worked day shifts. Ms Wu said when she asked
Mr Cohen why she was required to work from 11.00 pm to 1.00 am he replied
“I don’t want to see your face in the day time”.
Ms Wu said she felt she had been treated very badly. She had worked hard and
considered she was being punished for having the back
injury. Accordingly she
got in touch with the Union and the Union arranged for her to return to work on
4 October 1994 for two hours
a day on day shift.
However, Ms Wu said that when she did return to work she was placed in an
isolated storeroom in the office area at the factory. The
room was small with a
window covered by a drawn blind, it was dimly lit, and had never been used for
production work before. It
was next to Mrs Cohen’s office, and Mr
Cohen’s office was next to that. In the room she was surrounded by small
and there was no table, just a plastic chair. Mr Cohen had been advised
she was required to have an adjustable chair but this was
not provided. She was
required to do finishing work on her lap. When she opened the blind to obtain
more light Mr Cohen told her
it had to be kept shut. Ms Wu asked why she was
isolated and Mr Cohen had told her she was not allowed to work with others and
he could “put you here, there or anywhere. No one can stop me”.
He also told her, “you can take me to court on
this – I have a
million dollars to fight with you”.
Ms Wu was provided with work for finishing while she was in this room. She
was not permitted to collect bundles of work, but rather
Mr Cohen collected the
work as she finished it and brought her further bundles of work. Once she had
gone onto the production floor
to get another bundle but Mr Cohen stopped her
and told her she was not to go there and that if she required more work she was
see him. When she went to the toilet Mr Cohen would come out of his room and
follow her and watch until she came back to her room.
Ms Wu said she had never
see anyone else working in this room before or in isolation from the rest of the
factory. She worked there
until 6 November 1994 when the Union negotiated for
her to return to the factory floor. However, she was still isolated within the
factory as Mr Cohen required her to work at a table in the middle of the factory
away from other workers.
On 14 October 1994 Ms Wu was elected as union shop steward but Mr Cohen
opposed this and required a second election to be held. Ms
Wu was again
Ms Wu said Mr Cohen forbade her to speak to other workers in the factory in
Chinese. He required her to commence her work at an earlier
time while she was
on restricted hours so that her shortened shift would finish prior to the meal
time break and so that she could
not speak to other workers at meal time.
Ms Wu said by Christmas 1994 she was back to full time work. Just prior to
Christmas Mr Cohen instructed her to take four weeks recreation
leave in January
1995. Ms Wu said this did not suit her as she had intended to accrue her
recreation leave and return to China for
a visit later in the year. She had
raised this with the Union. She returned to work on 23 January 1995 but Mr
Cohen made it clear
she was still not permitted to speak to other workers and
she was required to work at a table by herself, still isolated from other
workers in the factory.
Ms Wu gave evidence about events that occurred on 6 February 1995. She said
the table at which she was working (a mobile trolley
table, not a fixed table)
was pushed into a corner so she was required to work facing the wall. Ms Wu
said she had been provided
with an adjustable chair and she had adjusted the
chair so the garments on which she was working would not touch the floor.
this meant that her feet did not reach the floor and this made her back
hurt. She put her feet on a box in order to rest her back.
remonstrated with her and told her to move her feet from the box as there were
garments in the box and she might dirty
them. Ms Wu conceded this could be the
case and took her feet from the box and found another box with rubbish in it and
feet on that box. Mr Cohen dragged that box away from her, saying to
her, “this is not a holiday”. Ms Wu told him her
back hurt but Mr
Cohen kicked the box away. Ms Wu said the box moved a few metres and Mr Cohen
seemed extremely angry. Ms Wu moved
to get the box back to put her feet on it
and Mr Cohen ran after her and kicked her in the back of her left ankle. Ms Wu
felt angry and frightened and said to Mr Cohen, “you kicked me,
you kicked me”. Mr Cohen immediately denied kicking
her and said,
“I didn’t kick you, I have a witness”. Ms Wu said there were
no witnesses present.
Ms Wu said she felt very frightened and distressed and went to call the
Union. However, Mr Cohen told her she could not use the factory
phone so she
went out and used a public phone. No one at the Union office was available to
speak to her and she decided not to return
to work. On her way home she went
into a police station and reported the assault. The police contacted the Union
and Union officials
attended at the factory. Ms Wu said she felt frightened and
was crying and shaking. On the advice of the Union officials she attended
doctor, Dr Stanley Chiang. He referred her to a psychiatrist, Dr Chau. Ms Wu
said she has never returned to work with the respondents
since those events.
Ms Wu said she believed in September 1994, when Mr Cohen advised her she
would be working from 11.00 pm to 1.00 am, that because he
could not dismiss her
from her employment, Mr Cohen was trying to set up a situation where she would
leave of her own choice. She
said she did not refuse to work those hours, but
advised the Union and told Mr Cohen she was unable to work those hours because
had no transport and no tram was available. At that time she had a
driver’s license but she did not have a motor vehicle.
Ms Wu denied receiving any warning letters from Mr Cohen concerning any work
issues. A warning letter dated November 1994, indicating
it was a first warning
letter for not wearing ear protection, was described by Ms Wu as a fabrication.
She said she had never received
the document although she agreed that she had
received one through the post by certified mail, for using a walkman at work.
she had never been provided with ear protection but had no need of ear
protection while she was working in the isolated storeroom
as it was quiet and
she was only doing finishing work and was alone. Ms Wu said that she was using
her walkman radio and Mr Cohen
asked her not to do so. Ms Wu said this occurred
while she was in the storeroom, but she received the warning notice dated 23
1994 which was some time after she had returned to the factory
Ms Wu said when she returned to the production floor she was located in the
centre of the factory some distance (3-5 metres) from
other workers. Again she
was told she was not to talk to other workers.
In cross-examination Ms Wu said the episode on 6 February 1995 occurred when
she was at her workstation at a special lower table.
She did no know why she was
placed at this table which she did not regard as more comfortable for her back.
She agreed that all
of the finishing tables faced the wall, but she was isolated
from the other finishers. This was the first day on which she had an
chair which she had been requesting for some time. Ms Wu said there was no
struggle over the box that she wanted to put
her feet on. She said that she had
pulled the rubbish box over to her after Mr Cohen objected to her feet being on
a garment box,
but that Mr Cohen kicked it away from her. At this stage he did
not touch her. She ran to get the box and Mr Cohen ran behind her
her in the middle of the back of her ankle of her left leg. She did not fall,
stumble or lose her footing, and she responded,
“you kicked me, you kicked
me”. In cross-examination Ms Wu said she did not know if anyone else saw
this incident, but
that Mr Cohen had immediately said “I have a
Ms Wu said that the kick left a light pink mark on her ankle, about 2 x 1
centimetres. She was quite sure Mr Cohen kicked her, and
said she had not been
hit by the box or anything else.
Ms Wu said she understood that another worker, Ms Ismail, gave Mr Cohen a
statement on that afternoon that she had seen that Mr Cohen
had not kicked Ms
Wu. However, Ms Wu said Ms Ismail rang her the next day and apologised for
giving this statement and said that
she felt she had to make the statement
because she was pregnant and needed to keep her job so she could get maternity
Wu said Ms Ismail told her that she had seen nothing.
Ms Wu regarded being kicked as a serious injury and that it increased the
considerable stress she had felt since she returned to work
on 4 October 1994.
She said she could not possibly return to the workplace.
Ms Wu went to see Dr Chiang that evening by which time her ankle was swollen.
The next day it was worse, and over the next few days
a black bruise appeared.
Ms Wu said she did not immediately intend to make a claim against Mr Cohen
and did not tell him that she was going to do so. She
said she was very
confused and frustrated on the day of the incident and could not remember what
she said to Mr Cohen. She put in
a claim to WorkCover on the following day. Ms
McKeown took the WorkCover form to Mr Cohen but Mr Cohen refused to sign it.
Accordingly
Ms Wu sent her application directly to the WorkCover agent, QBE. Ms
Wu’s WorkCover claim failed in respect of her leg injury
and she brought
an action against the respondents in the County Court. This action was
Ms Wu said Mr Cohen had made no complaint to her about the quality of her
work while she was working in the sample room prior to her
injury in May 1994.
Nor had he requested her to move to night shift. She denied making any
statement to Mr Cohen at any time suggesting
that as a doctor she could make a
complaint, make up symptoms, and destroy his business and family. She also
denied going around
the factory and kissing everyone goodbye shortly before she
made the claim in respect of her back injury in 1994.
Ms Wu said because she did not go back to Express Embroidery after the
episode on 6 February 1995. She had an opportunity to study
and to obtain
registration as a medical practitioner. She did this because of encouragement
by friends and because she “had
to occupy her mind”. She said she
would rather have stayed as a process operator and not be harassed than to have
those events
provide an opportunity to obtain a medical registration. Ms Wu
said following the settlement of her claim against the respondents
in the County
Court she had received back pay to the date of settlement and from 27 July 1995
she went onto sickness benefits.
Ms Wu said the events at Express Embroidery had “left a scar” and
she had “no mood to celebrate or make friends”.
She takes Chinese
medications for depression. She said her mental state prior to her back injury
in May 1994 was fine apart from
her concerns and anxiety resulting from sexual
harassment. She did not suffer from depression after the initial back
3.1.3 Dr Stanley Chiang
Dr Chiang gave sworn evidence at the inquiry. Dr Chiang was Ms Wu’s
treating general practitioner and he first saw her on 6
February 1995 when her
complaint was of major trauma.
Dr Chiang said Ms Wu had told him she had been receiving WorkCover payments
for a back injury and when she returned to work her employer
was trying to pick
on her. He had kicked a box away on which she had her foot resting and in the
course of a tussle her foot had
been kicked by her employer. Dr Chiang said his
observation revealed bruises on Ms Wu’s left ankle. Her pulse rate was
than usual and she appeared very upset. Dr Chiang said because Ms Wu
appeared very upset he referred her to a psychiatrist. The
psychiatrist had
confirmed Ms Wu was suffering from depression resulting from trauma but that she
did not require further treatment.
Dr Chiang said that Ms Wu told him about her back injury but that her only
complaint on 6 February was about a fight or an assault
at work. Her mental
state was a result of this assault, not her back injury. Dr Chiang advised Ms
Wu to return for further treatment
the next day because of her unstable mental
state. She consulted him again on 7 February 1995 and Dr Chiang authorised a
certificate on that day.
Dr Chiang was unsure from either his memory or his report as to where on Ms
Wu’s ankle was the bruise and whether it was on
the front or the back of
the ankle. He said there was a light blue bruise on Ms Wu’s ankle. The
treatment he prescribed was
rest, and he considered that her mental state
required more urgent treatment than her physical trauma, as her physical injury
certainly at the lower end of the scale.
Dr Chiang agreed he had written on the WorkCover certificate of 7 February
1995 that Ms Wu “will go through legal proceedings”
and he believed
Ms Wu had told him this on 7 February 1995.
Dr Chiang said the bruising on Ms Wu’s ankle could have been consistent
with her knocking her ankle, but he believed a kick
from her employer was more
consistent with the distressed state in which she presented. He said she
demonstrated a mixture of anger
and depression. He felt Ms Wu was a strong woman
and capable of hiding her emotion, but she was very distressed. She was not
but was not behaving normally, and her voice was shaky and trembling.
Dr Chiang said he had not been aware Ms Wu was studying while she was his
patient, but he had suggested she go back to her medical
studies. He believed
Ms Wu felt unhappy about not being able to practise medicine, but did not think
this was what led to her depression.
Dr Chiang provided a report dated 18 October 1999 which indicates that his
opinion was that Ms Wu was totally incapacitated for any
duties and this
incapacity continued for at least two to three years. He believed that after
this time Ms Wu had recovered well
enough to pursue her medical training and
career and under those circumstances had regained some capacity for work. In
cross-examination
Dr Chiang said he had been unaware Ms Wu was studying long
hours for medical registration in May 1995, which was only two months
kicking incident. He believed that in any event she would have been incapable
of working in a formal sense, but the stresses
of work are different from those
of study. He believed Ms Wu’s depression and mental trauma prevented her
from returning to
work, not her previous back injury. Dr Chiang conducted
counseling sessions with Ms Wu relating to the trauma, and believed Ms
presentation on 6 February 1995 was genuine and that she was highly
traumatised.
3.1.4 Julie Ellen McKeown
Ms McKeown is an officer of the second complainant and at the time of the
events the subject of these complaints was the Workcare
officer of the Union.
Ms McKeown gave affirmed evidence at the inquiry.
Ms McKeown said her first contact with Ms Wu was on 24 September 1994. Ms Wu
after time off for a work
injury. Ms Wu said that she was being required to return to work on a different
shift and from 11.00 pm
to 1.00 am. Ms McKeown said Ms Wu had told her she
previously had worked day shift and did not have a car but was reliant on public
transport and was anxious about traveling on public transport at those hours.
Ms McKeown raised these concerns with Mr Cohen and
advised him that part of the
program of return to work was that the injured worker must do so at the same or
equivalent duties, and
that Ms McKeown’s view was that in Ms Wu’s
case this meant she was to return to work on day shift.
Ms McKeown said there had been no union presence at the respondent’s
factory prior to May 1994 when discussions had commenced.
However on 14 November
1994, the second respondent was “roped” in as a respondent to the
appropriate federal award.
Ms McKeown said the negotiated outcome in relation to Ms Wu’s case was
that Ms Wu was to return to work on 4 October 1994 on
day shift to the factory
floor. On 5 October Ms Wu contacted Ms McKeown and advised she had not been
returned to work on the factory
floor but had been isolated in a small storeroom
where she felt she was “easy prey” for Mr Cohen, and she believed
purpose of her isolation had been to prevent her speaking to fellow workers.
Ms McKeown raised this with Mr Cohen. Ms McKeown said
that she would never have
agreed to put a worker in an isolated room as it was very important for an
injured worker to return to
work in a familiar and friendly environment. Ms
McKeown said in October 1994 she spent a considerable amount of time negotiating
with Mr Cohen to get Ms Wu out of the isolated storeroom.
On 14 October 1994 Ms McKeown received another phone call from Ms Wu saying
that she was still in the storeroom and asking her to
come to the factory and
inspect the room. Ms McKeown found Ms Wu isolated with only the receptionist
and Mr Cohen near to her. The
room was a small and cramped, furnished only with
a chair and Ms Wu was required to work on garments on her lap. She could not
a window and it seemed there was no natural light. Ms McKeown’s
view was that the room was not suitable for rehabilitation
and she told Mr Cohen
it was unfair to have located Ms Wu there and she should be moved. She believed
Ms Wu was placed in the room
for punishment. She also indicated to Mr Cohen
that Ms Wu had been elected as a shop steward in the factory and she was
and entitled to liaise with the shop floor and accordingly should be
located there and not be excluded from speaking to the other
workers. Ms McKeown
suggested to Mr Cohen he ought to seek legal advice with respect to equal
opportunity obligations. Mr Cohen’s
response was that he didn’t
care and she could take him to court. In particular he said, “I hate them
and they hate me”.
He indicated he would not communicate with Ms Wu as
shop steward and someone else would have to be elected. He told Ms McKeown
did not want Ms Wu talking to anyone else on the shop floor.
Ms McKeown said on 3 November 1994 an independent workplace assessment of Ms
Wu’s working conditions was carried out by an officer
of the Commonwealth
Rehabilitation Service (“CRS”). A report from the officer was
provided at the inquiry. Ms Wu was
moved to the factory floor three days after
this report.
Ms McKeown’s major concern about Ms Wu’s placement in the
storeroom related to isolation. Nevertheless she said the environment
unsuitable for a number of reasons. Ms Wu had nothing to rest her hands or arms
on and there was no table or adjustable chair
in the room. Altogether Ms
McKeown thought the work environment was completely unsuitable.
When Ms McKeown negotiated Ms Wu’s return to work with Mr Cohen she
indicated to Mr Cohen that Ms Wu did not have a motor vehicle.
Ms Wu had told
her this. Nor was there any discussion with Mr Cohen of Ms Wu being moved to a
different shift other than the day
shift on which she had initially worked. Mr
Cohen did not show Ms McKeown the storeroom into which Ms Wu was ultimately
placed when
she returned to work. Ms McKeown said the first time she saw the
room was on 5 or 6 October 1994 when Ms Wu was working in it. The
second time
she saw Ms Wu in the room was on about 14 October 1994 when she went to the
factory, again in response to Ms Wu’s
request. Ms McKeown thought it was
important that a shop steward be put in place at the factory. Her observation
was that the workers
were very frightened and not prepared to air their
grievances, they were vulnerable, many did not speak English, they were easily
preyed upon, and under those circumstances most workers would have reservations
in front of their employer.
Ms McKeown spoke to Mr Cohen about Ms Wu’s isolation although she had
not initially been aware that Ms Wu was also forbidden
to speak to other
workers. Mr Cohen refused to move Ms Wu as he was concerned that Ms Wu was a
shop steward and he did not want
her on the shop floor where she could speak to
others. Ms McKeown said she found Mr Cohen a very difficult person to deal with
it did not appear that he listened to others.
Ms McKeown had a discussion with Mr Cohen about possible equal opportunity
breaches on about 14 October 1994. Her discussion did
not relate to Ms
Wu’s election as shop steward, but rather to her isolation in the
storeroom. Ms McKeown regarded this isolation
as punishment for Ms Wu for being
injured, as the segregation clearly sent a message to the workers on the shop
floor that if they
got injured and put in a WorkCover claim they would be made
an example of and isolated. Ms McKeown said that this was not the view
her by Ms Wu, although she was very upset at being isolated. She said Ms Wu did
feel she was being made an example of, but
it was Ms McKeown’s assessment
that this was as a consequence of Ms Wu’s WorkCover claim. It was on this
occasion she
vividly remembered Mr Cohen saying to her, “I hate them and
they hate me”. She said this was a most unusual statement
for an employer
to make to her.
Ms McKeown believed her next contact with Ms Wu was on 6 February 1995. Ms
Wu was shaking, crying and appeared quite frightened,
and was crying as she
related the story of a “tussle” for the box on which she was resting
her legs. Ms McKeown understood
this had arisen in the finishing area beside
the machine and the wall. She believed adjacent workers were likely to have
was going on. Ms Wu told her Mr Cohen had obtained the box in the
tussle and had kicked it away a few metres, and had then come
up behind her and
kicked her on the left leg when she had gone to retrieve the box. Ms McKeown
believed this had been quite a hard
kick and could see a red or deep pink mark
on Ms Wu’s leg just above her ankle. Ms Wu did not say to her she was
take Mr Cohen to court, either then or on the following day.
When Ms McKeown discussed Ms Wu’s account with Mr Cohen in his office,
Mr Cohen’s son Eric was present. Another worker,
Ms Ismail, was also
brought in to speak to her. Both denied Mr Cohen had kicked Ms Wu.
After Ms Wu’s WorkCover claim was lodged (Mr Cohen having refused to
sign it), an investigator came to the Union office to interview
McKeown was present at the interview with Ms Wu. After Ms Wu had given the
statement to the investigator she told Ms
McKeown there was another matter she
wanted to discuss but that she found it very embarrassing. Ms McKeown
encouraged her to raise
the matter and Ms Wu then told her Mr Cohen had been
making advances to her. She said she did not know whether these advances
to sexual harassment but had felt uncomfortable and stressed by them.
Ms Wu told Ms McKeown Mr Cohen had put his arms around her and squeezed her
breasts, he had touched her on the bottom, she described
“zipper” incident and the “screw” comment, and many
other situations raising different issues. Ms Wu
told Ms McKeown she had not
raised these matters with anyone else as she was embarrassed. Ms McKeown advised
Ms Wu that she could
make an equal opportunity complaint and the Union would
provide her with assistance. She then drafted a complaint to the Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission (“the Commission”) but believed
this initial draft had never been sent to the Commission.
Ms McKeown said the initial drafted complaint dated 22 March 1995 (which was
tendered into evidence) had been drafted by her after
many discussion with Ms
Wu, the first being on 28 February 1995. Ms Wu had been very distressed, crying
and embarrassed when giving
her instructions relating to this complaint at that
time, but Ms McKeown believed Ms Wu’s complaints, and said there was
no reason to “jazz up” the disability complaint with a
sexual harassment complaint, as it was “bad enough as it
cross-examination Ms McKeown conceded some aspects in the initial draft
complaint were inaccurate. She agreed that
although the initial expression of
the complaint indicated Mr Cohen had squeezed Ms Wu’s breasts, this was
not in fact the
allegation, which was that Ms Cohen had put his arms around Ms
Wu and squeezed her “in a bear hug”. However, in preparing
documentation Ms McKeown had relied on what Ms Wu told her.
Ms McKeown said that on 7 February 1995 she received a phone call from Ms
Ismail, who had told her earlier (in Mr Cohen’s presence)
that she had
been a witness to the altercation between Ms Wu and Mr Cohen and that she had
seen that Mr Cohen had not kicked Ms Wu.
However on 7 February Ms Ismail told
Ms McKeown she was sorry she had supported Mr Cohen’s view by signing a
statement and
making a statement to Ms McKeown. She said that in fact she had
seen nothing and indeed could not see Ms Wu and Mr Cohen from where
seated in the finishing area. She told Ms McKeown she had given the statement
at Mr Cohen’s request because she needed
to keep her job as she was
pregnant and she needed maternity leave.
In her evidence Ms McKeown emphasised her major concern with Ms Wu’s
placement in the storage room/office was that of isolation,
and she believed
this was confirmed by the CRS report. Ms McKeown believed that the reason for
Ms Wu’s isolation, the excessive
supervision by Mr Cohen and the direction
to her that she was not to speak to other workers, was for the purpose of
isolating her,
and she believed the purpose was to send a message to all other
workers that if they became injured they could expect such treatment.
Ms McKeown made some comments concerning Aileen Leong (who also gave evidence
at the inquiry), describing her as a “company
suck”: Ms Leong was
not a union member and the Union regarded Ms Leong as a person the employer
would liaise with as a non-union
member on the factory floor.
3.1.5 Aileen Leong
Ms Leong was employed by Express Embroidery from November 1993 to November
1994. She gave affirmed evidence at the inquiry and told
the inquiry she had
been born in England and brought up in Australia where she had spent all her
working life. Ms Leong said she
had done sample and embroidery work for the
second respondent, and had also worked in the office area of the factory.
Ms Leong knew Ms Wu and had worked in the sample room with her. They had
chatted together as they worked which was permitted. Ms
Leong said Ms
Wu’s work was “fine, good and very professional”. She had
heard no concerns expressed or discussion
concerning Ms Wu moving to the night
shift. She and Ms Wu always worked together in the same room on the sample
Ms Leong said when Ms Wu returned to work following the injury she was put
into a “teeny, tiny storage room off the foyer”.
Mr Cohen had
seemed dismissive and slightly irritated that Ms Wu had been off work with an
injury and appeared quite angry when
Ms Wu again injured her back. Ms Leong
thought this room was not suitable for work, it had no furniture but just boxes
parts. Ms Leong told Mr Cohen he couldn’t keep Ms Wu working in
the room alone. Ms Wu was sitting on a stool with her work
all around her and
had to work on her lap. Mr Cohen’s response had been “don’t
tell me how to run my business,
get back to work”. Ms Leong suggested to
Ms Wu she should contact the Union as she should know what her working rights
Ms Leong could not remember whether Ms Wu had a table in the room but was
clear she was not working on a table but on her lap. There
was a large window
in the room but the blinds were drawn.
Ms Leong saw Ms Wu leave the room from time to time and when she did so Mr
Cohen asked her where she was going, and followed her even
to the toilet. Ms Wu
had stopped at one of the machines and spoken to Ms Leong but Mr Cohen said
“you can’t talk, shoo,
shoo”, and waited for her to come back
from the toilet. Ms Leong said he was making sure that Ms Wu did not speak to
else. Mr Cohen would often “patrol” the production area and
make sure no one was chattering and to ensure they were
getting on with their
work. She said in the past Ms Wu would talk while she was working, but she
“didn’t gossip”.
Ms Leong said Mr Cohen treated Ms Wu “special” and
“remarkably differently from other workers”. She said
like Mr Cohen was punishing Ms Wu, and her impression was that Mr Cohen resented
Ms Wu being on WorkCover and was particularly
angry when she went off injured a
second time.
Ms Leong could not remember when the Union became involved at the factory but
her impression was Mr Cohen was “furious”
and tried to stop it by telling some workers that they were not allowed to join
the Union. Ms Leong knew
she could not be sacked for joining the Union but did
not in fact do so.
Ms Leong described work in the sample room as “a privilege”.
Work on the machines was much heavier. Production machines
had twelve heads and
there was a need to be constantly bending, fixing and monitoring these machines.
It was also much noisier on
the production floor than in the sample room. The
sample machine was much physically easier to work with as it only dealt with one
garment at a time. Ms Leong remembered Mr Cohen providing ear plugs to workers
on the production floor but she was not required
to wear them in the sample room
because of the much lower noise level.
Ms Leong knew Ms Wu was a qualified doctor and had worked as a
cardio-vascular surgeon in China. Ms Wu had told her she couldn’t
doctor because her English was not good enough and she needed to pass exams. Ms
Leong believed Ms Wu was studying English in
1994 towards those exams.
Ms Leong had never been into the storage room but had seen it from the
doorway. She believed it was about 3 metres square and when
she had seen Ms Wu
in the room she was sitting on a stool with material around her on the floor.
There was no table. Ms Wu had to
bend over from the stool to pick up material
from the floor.
Ms Leong said when she saw Mr Cohen following Ms Wu to the toilet it was like
“tail-gating”. When she saw Mr Cohen stopping
Ms Wu from speaking,
Ms Wu was just passing by and greeting people and stopping and chatting. Ms Wu
was not known as a chatty worker,
and although she and some others were told to
stop talking and get on with their work, she believed Mr Cohen was treating Ms
Wu differently.
She said that it was clear Ms Wu was angry at this as she
frowned and muttered. When Ms Leong and Ms Wu worked together in the
room they chatted and Mr Cohen had never told them to stop talking as abrasively
as he did on the day she saw Ms Wu spoken
to on the way to the toilet.
3.1.6 Li Wu Zhou
Ms Zhou gave sworn evidence at the inquiry with the assistance of an
interpreter in the Mandarin language.
Ms Zhou told the inquiry she was known as Lisa while working for Express
Embroidery. She worked there as a machinist from March 1993.
She had come to
Australia in August 1992 from China where she had worked as a computer
programmer having completed a four year degree
at the University of Shanghai in
electrical engineering. At the factory she worked as a finisher on day shift
from 7.30 am to 3.30
pm from Monday to Friday, and from time to time in the
computer room doing design work. At this time Ms Wu was doing sample work
Ms Zhou never heard any complaint from Mr Cohen concerning the quality of Ms
Wu’s work, and it appeared Ms Wu had no difficulty
in doing the work.
Ms Zhou said that in November 1993 she had been injured at work. In July
1994 she was authorised to return to work on light duties
but Mr Cohen insisted
there was no light duty work available for her until in August 1994 when he said
that some work was available
but only for night shift. She had never worked on
night shift before and she was not happy with this. Mr Cohen advised her that
work was available for a shift from 11.00 pm to 3.00 am and she believed this
was very unreasonable. The light work provided to
her was finishing work and
she said that finishers did not generally work night shift at all.
Ms Zhou said when she eventually returned to work on day shift she saw Ms Wu
working in a small storeroom alone. No-one had ever
worked there before and
other workers told her that it would be better for her not to speak to Ms Wu as
Mr Cohen had forbidden this.
Ms Zhou said that when Ms Wu walked to the toilet
she saw Mr Cohen watch her walk to the toilet. She did not speak to Ms Wu as
she felt “scared” to do so. This was not treatment anyone else was
subjected to by Mr Cohen. There had never been a
ban on speaking to others.
Everyone was allowed to chat as they worked so long as it did not interfere with
their work. She said
when Ms Wu returned from the toilet Mr Cohen would go back
to his office, but while Ms Wu was away from her room he would watch everything
Ms Zhou also gave evidence about the way in which she perceived Mr Cohen as
treating her as a consequence of her injury, in particular,
in relation to the
provision of an ergonomic chair. There was an ongoing dispute with Mr Cohen
that unless Ms Zhou agreed to go on night
shift she would not be provided with an ergonomic chair. She had discussed this
Wu because Ms Wu was by then the shop steward and Ms Wu had argued with
Mr Cohen and insisted that a chair be provided. By the time
this issue arose Ms
Wu was working back on the factory floor as a finisher but was still not
permitted to talk to other finishers.
She was at a separate table from most of
the finishers and had been placed in the middle of the factory some distance
away from them.
Ms Zhou said this was the last time she saw Ms Wu at work. Ms
Zhou returned to work on full time duties in June 1995 but by that
was no longer working at the factory.
Ms Zhou said she thought Mr Cohen made people do night duty as a
punishment.
In cross-examination Ms Zhou gave evidence concerning her own WorkCover
claims against the respondents. Ms Zhou had brought an action
Anti-Discrimination Division of the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
in 1998 in which she had sought damages of
$215,000. She was ultimately awarded
damages of $1,000 but the balance of her complaint was not successful.
Ms Zhou said when Ms Wu returned to work and was placed in the storage
room/office she was only working four hours. For the whole
time Ms Zhou was
working Ms Wu was working in the storeroom/office. Ms Zhou said she never went
into the room and had only seen
Ms Wu from the reception area from which she
could see into the office which did not have a door. She said the room appeared
be full of cardboard boxes which she could see from the doorway. She thought
there was a window in the room but did not know if
there were blinds or a
carpet. She could not see whether there was a table or a chair although she
could see Ms Wu sitting on something.
Ms Zhou said Mr Cohen was always telling his employees to get on with their
work, work fast and not to talk too much. She did not
know whether Ms Wu had
better working conditions but thought she was being subjected to more pressure
than other workers. On a number
of occasions she saw Ms Wu emerge from her work
to go to the toilet and whenever she did so Mr Cohen would come to the door and
her – “follow her with his eyes” – to the
Ms Zhou said when she returned to work after her injury she considered she
had been subjected to excessive supervision by Mr Cohen
and believed Mr Cohen
was spying on her. She felt persecuted by Mr Cohen and did not like him, and
felt scared and afraid of him.
In the course of her cross-examination Ms Zhou was shown a photograph which
purported to be of the room in which Ms Wu had been situated
on her return to
work in October 1994. This photograph was not put to Ms Wu in her evidence. The
photograph shows a room with a
large window with open Venetian blinds, a plastic
chair with a cushion, a round plastic table, and a round plastic table with a
box on top of it. Ms Zhou said this was not how the room appeared
when she saw Ms Wu working there. She said that it was “totally
different”. Ms Zhou emphasised that no other workers were isolated in the
way Ms Wu had been, nor watched or supervised by
Mr Cohen on their way to the
toilet as Ms Wu was. She did not think Ms Wu was getting better treatment by
the isolation, but rather
was being subjected to greater pressure.
3.1.7 Dan Ziang Shi
Mrs Shi gave sworn evidence at the inquiry. She told the inquiry she was
known as Amy and had worked for the respondent from April
1994 to February 1995.
She had arrived in Australia in 1992 from China, had worked as a machinist for
the respondent and knew Ms
Wu who was then working on samples.
Mrs Shi said that Mr Cohen would often try to touch her on her shoulder and
waist. She felt uncomfortable and initially was shocked.
Mr Cohen often put
his arm around her and she did not think this was right. She mentioned this to
Ms Wu who said, “he’s
always doing it” but she did not see Mr
Cohen touch Ms Wu. Mrs Shi thought “he always takes advantage of
Mrs Shi said that Mr Cohen used “dirty language” and she referred
to an episode where Mr Cohen was tightening a screw
when he said, “you
should screw this up tighter”, and laughed in an obscene way.
Mrs Shi said she did not know what “screw” meant in the
vernacular at that time, but she recognised from Mr Cohen’s
expressions that it was “dirty” and she found out later what people
usually used it to mean. She said Mr Cohen
made similar jokes four or five
times in her presence. Mrs Shi said that on one occasion in May 1994 she was
working alone on night
shift and Mr Cohen came into the factory and put his arm
around her.
Mrs Shi initially met Ms Wu when she first came to the factory but then Ms Wu
was off work for some time as a result of an accident.
When Ms Wu returned to
work, Ms Shi asked Ms Wu how she was. Mr Cohen then called Ms Shi over and asked
her what she had said to
Ms Wu. Mrs Shi said she thought this was very odd.
She was then taken off the table where she had been working and sent to do
work, so she was then not near Ms Wu.
When Ms Wu returned to work in October 1994 Mrs Shi was working on night
shift. At this time Ms Wu was put into a storeroom. Mrs
Shi described the room
as a very dark and dirty room which had never been used before. It contained
boxes and no one ever went in
there. She had never been in the room and had
simply seen it from the doorway.
Mrs Shi said generally there was no issue about workers talking amongst
themselves. However after Ms Wu returned to work, if anyone
spoke to her Mr
Cohen demanded to know what was being said. She said all of the workers were
scared of speaking to Ms Wu because
of this. This only applied in relation to
After she moved from the storeroom Ms Wu continued to work as a finisher.
Mrs Shi said initially Ms Wu was placed on the same table
as all the other
finishers but after about a week the others did not want to work with her
because Mr Cohen wanted everyone to report
on Ms Wu. After that Ms Wu worked on
a second table alone. Mrs Shi said it was not that people did not like Ms Wu
but they felt
under pressure from Mr Cohen.
Mrs Shi said it was clear Ms Wu did not get on very well with Mr Cohen. When
she initially came back to work in June 1994 she was
not given light duties but
rather given heavier duties. She had previously had been working on samples
which only involved using
one head, but when she came back to work she was
working on a machine with eight heads which was much heavier work. When she
to work the second time she was only allowed to work in the dark
Mrs Shi gave evidence that she was at work when the “kicking
incident” occurred on 6 February 1995. She did not see Ms
Wu being kicked
but she could see some of the altercation. She could see Ms Wu sitting on a
chair arguing with Mr Cohen but could
not see clearly what was happening as a
machine was in the way. She could see that Ms Wu was red and angry and
eventually raced
outside the factory. She had seen Mr Cohen throw a box in Ms
Wu’s direction. She then saw them go together to another machine
something with Ms Wu in front and Mr Cohen following. Mrs Shi could only see
their heads. She then saw Ms Wu run out red
faced and did not see her again
that day. The following day other workers told her Ms Wu had alleged that Mr
Cohen had kicked her
and the police had come to the factory. A few days after
that Mrs Shi went to the Union with Ms Wu. On this occasion Ms Wu told
Julie McKeown, and two other Union officials (Harry and Terry), that Mr Cohen
had been sexually harassing her. Mrs Shi
had gone to the Union with Ms Wu
because she too wished to make complaints against Mr Cohen.
3.2 The respondents’ evidence
At the inquiry evidence for both respondents was given by Mr Cohen, his wife
Ziva and son Eric, Mei-Lan Qiu, Dr Arthur Klepfisz and
Dr Mervyn Cass. The
respondents had advised that evidence would also be given by two former
employees, Liu-Ping Luo and Ms Ismail.
At the respondents’ request the
Commission issued summonses for both Ms Ismail and Ms Luo, but neither attended
at the inquiry.
Ms Ismail and Ms Luo were to give evidence about the alleged
incident on 6 February 1995. Both had signed a statement on that day
Cohen’s request indicating they had a clear view of the events of that
altercation and asserting Mr Cohen had not kicked
Ms Wu. Counsel for the
respondents, indicated that both Ms Luo and Ms Ismail had difficulties attending
the hearing because they
were conducting their own businesses and found it
difficult to make themselves available. I indicated that I was prepared to
conducting the inquiry after hours to enable these witnesses to give
evidence. Nevertheless neither attended the hearing.
3.2.1 Eli Cohen
Mr Cohen gave sworn evidence at the inquiry. He is a director of Express
Embroidery which he described as a family business, with
his wife as the other
director. Mrs Cohen runs the business with him and their children Karen and
Eric, worked in the business from
time to time. Mr Cohen said the business
operated full time with three shifts and a total of 35 staff of different
nationalities
and backgrounds. He had both large and small embroidery machines
and sample machines which all operated at the premises. Some members
staff operated these machines and others did finishing work, which comprised
cutting off loose threads from the completed
embroidery. The finishers worked
standing at a high bench, on a rubber mat over the concrete floor.
Mr Cohen described the entrance to the factory. Immediately to the left of
the front door was Mrs Cohen’s office and to the
right was his office.
Next to that was a design room, and to the left of Mrs Cohen’s office was
another office, the room in
which Ms Wu worked in October and November 1994. Mr
Cohen described this office as the same as his and his wife’s offices,
with a window covered with Venetian blinds, carpeted, and furnished with a table
and a chair. When Ms Wu worked there a box was
placed on the table so she could
either stand or sit to conduct her finishing work. There was a doorway but no
door. When Ms Wu
worked there two chairs had been available to her, one plastic
with a cushion, and the other an adjustable chair. When Ms Wu complained
being cold he provided a small heater, and a lamp when she complained it was too
dark. Mr Cohen provided the inquiry with a photograph
which he said was of the
office as it had been. However, he conceded he no longer used the factory as it
had been stripped and leased
out for other purposes, and the photograph had been
taken in February 2000, after the commencement of this inquiry. The photograph
appears to be of a reconstruction of the room; however, Mr Cohen’s
evidence was this was how the room was set up when Ms Wu
was working in it in
October 1994. He agreed in cross-examination that no one else had ever worked
in the storeroom, and that there
were then some boxes in the room, although most
of the boxes were brought to the room to assist Ms Wu as they contained the
on which she was working. He described the room as having
“plenty of light”, but he provided Ms Wu with a table light
asked for more light.
Mr Cohen said that Ms Wu had commenced working for him in August 1991 as a
finisher. She had worked on shift rosters over all three
shifts from time to
time. In 1993 he asked Ms Wu to work on the sample machine, but it quickly
became apparent Ms Wu was not suitable
for this work as she became confused with
colour combinations. If the colour combinations were not designed properly on
the samples
and for the computers, the error could be very costly for him and
lose him customers. Accordingly after a few weeks on the sample
machine Mr Cohen
asked Ms Wu to go back to the machine work and therefore onto a rotating
afternoon and night shift. However, he
said that Ms Wu refused to do this,
offering various excuses at different times – because she was studying,
because she had
no car, her neighbours were noisy and she could not sleep during
the day. Mr Cohen said he felt sorry for Ms Wu and did not want
to force her to
go on night shift and so did not force the issue, although he continued to
request her to do so. Mr Cohen asked
her at least four times to go on night
shift and each time she refused with a different excuse. Accordingly she
continued to work
on the sample machine but she made at least one other
expensive mistake while she was working there.
Ms Wu was injured at work in May 1994. She was off work for five weeks and
then returned to work with no restrictions. Mr Cohen
said that when she
returned to work there was no vacancy for a machine operator but he made her an
assistant machine operator on
one of the machines. Under these circumstances
she was not required to do heavy duties including lifting and bending which
cause more injury to her back, but she did injure her back again and was
off on WorkCover for another period of time. Mr Cohen said
this re-injury
occurred shortly after he had again asked her to return to night shift (in June
1994). On this occasion Ms Wu had
answered to him, “I am a doctor, I know
how to complain, this will cost you”. Mr Cohen said Ms Wu then walked
factory, kissed her friends goodbye, and left, returning subsequently
with a doctor’s certificate stating that she had a back
Mr Cohen said he was suspicious of the second injury but once he received
medical certification verifying it he accepted that the
injury was genuine. His
priority then was to get her back to her full duties as quickly as possible. It
was for this reason that
Mr Cohen made arrangements for Ms Wu to work in the
room adjacent to Mrs Cohen’s office. He said this was a privileged
where her work restrictions could be accommodated most easily, and she
could be most comfortable, thereby enabling her back to quickly
recover. Mr and
Mrs Cohen brought work to her and collected the completed garments. She was
able to sit or move round as she found
most comfortable, whereas the finishers
in the factory were required to stand. In addition, the room was carpeted and
Cohen said he provided an extra lamp and a heater when requested by
Ms Wu. Mr Cohen said Ms Wu remained in this room while she was
on her two hour a
day work restriction, but as soon as her working hours extended to four hours
per day she moved into the factory
Mr Cohen said that when Ms Wu returned to work she did so with a “very
negative attitude”. She was not interested and
rejected all proposals and
suggestions made to her. Later in 1994 he had to issue some warning notices to
Ms Wu, in particular in
relation to the wearing of ear protection which was
required by all workers. Ms Wu refused to wear the ear plugs he provided, and
after providing three different sorts of ear plugs for Ms Wu, all of which she
rejected, Ms Wu started to use her walkman. Mr Cohen
asked her not to do so and
she refused, so he gave her a warning. She still refused and he issued her a
second warning. Mr Cohen
agreed he had never issued Ms Wu with any warnings
In cross-examination Mr Cohen conceded that no one had ever worked before in
the storeroom to undertake finishing or other normal
factory work. He denied
that he told Ms Wu she was not to speak to anyone, or that he followed her or
watched her when she went
through the factory to go to the toilet. He said the
only time he had directed her not to speak to anyone was when she was wandering
through the factory chatting and wasting time. Mr Cohen said the boxes in the
storeroom had been brought into that room specifically
to hold the work that Ms
Wu was to do. He emphasised that the room was light and that he did not tell
her she could not open the
blind. Mr Cohen said that both the chairs were
available for Ms Wu when she returned to work in October 1994. He denied Ms Wu
to work on her lap and that she was given a table. He agreed Ms Wu was the
only finisher who was working alone in the factory, but
said other workers doing
different jobs worked on their own. In particular, his wife and the designer
worked in different areas
by themselves.
Mr Cohen said when Ms Wu asked him why she was working in the storeroom he
had told her that he needed her to work at a table and
to look after her to see
what she was doing so that she did not cause further injury to her back. He
denied he told her, “I’m
the boss, I can control where everyone
works”. Nor did he remember any conversation with Ms Wu where she
insisted she had
a right speak to others and he had responded, “You can
take me to court, I have millions of dollars, I can beat the Union”.
However, he did agree that the Union had caused him a lot of trouble and cost
him money. Mr Cohen believed Ms Wu only worked in
the storeroom for a few weeks
while she was on the two hour restrictions. As soon as her work hours increased
she moved into the
factory, he believed on 27 October, and that she was not in
the room when the CRS inspector provided the report.
Mr Cohen said that when Ms Wu returned to the main part of the factory in
November 1994 she was working as a finisher. The other
finishers worked at a
chest high bench standing up. In the past they had worked sitting down but this
was unsatisfactory and for
some period of time finishers had worked standing up.
Ms Wu, because of her back injury, needed to sit, and accordingly was placed
a separate table at a suitable height for a chair. Ms Wu was the only person
working at this table. In his view she was not
“isolated” in the
factory. However, because of her special requirements she was not working
immediately alongside the
other finishers although she certainly was not
separated from them by any great distance. Mr Cohen was adamant that he had
forbidden Ms Wu to speak to other workers nor forbidden others to speak to
her. However, he did not permit workers to chat among
themselves in a way that
disrupted production, and he regarded Ms Wu as a person who did so. All
finishers worked facing the wall
as the finishing tables were set up against the
wall. Ms Wu could have worked on either side of the table at which she was
although there was no room for her to sit at either end of the table.
One end abutted the other finishing table and at the other
end the space was
needed for the machinist to access her machine. Mr Cohen said he had not
directed Ms Wu to face the wall.
Mr Cohen directed Ms Wu to take her holidays in January 1995. She had been
away on sick leave in the week before Christmas and on
23 December 1994 he spoke
to her about her holidays. He intended being away in January and agreed he did
not want Ms Wu in the factory
while he was not there. January was a downtime in
the factory and there was little work so this was the time he generally required
most of his workers to take holidays.
In cross-examination Mr Cohen was insistent he accepted Ms Wu had a work
related back injury, at least once he received medical supporting
documentation.
On each occasion he gave Ms Wu work which would not aggravate her back and would
support her return to work regime
as it was in his interests to do so. He
repeated his allegation that Ms Wu had told him that she was a doctor who could
the symptoms of a back injury and that she would destroy him and his
family, but said he did not really take this seriously. He
said Ms Wu made this
comment in September 1994 and he told his workers’ compensation insurer
(QBE), that he thought Ms Wu did
not want to come back to work because she
wanted to stay home and study as she was a doctor. Ms Wu had told him prior to
she was studying English so she could pursue her medical
qualifications to practise in Victoria. Mr Cohen believed that if Ms Wu
could study, and indeed this was how it had worked
out. He believed she was
“using the whole system”. However, Mr Cohen said he accepted Ms
Wu’s injury was real
and gave her appropriate duties consistent with the
rehabilitation of the injury.
When Ms Wu returned to work after her initial injury he decided not to put
her back to work on the sample machine. He regarded this
as a good opportunity
to take her away from this work as he had been long dissatisfied with her
standard of work on machines. Mr
Cohen said he had on numerous occasions asked
Ms Wu to go on to night shift to get her away from the sample machine but she
refused with some excuse or other. While she was away Mr
Cohen’s daughter took over the work in the sample room and was able
cover all the work which Ms Wu had previously done and at a more effective
level. He did not return Ms Wu to that position, partly
because his daughter
was now doing the work, but also because Ms Wu had not been suitable for that
job. Accordingly he sent Ms Wu
to work on the machines. Initially she had done
a week of finishing work as she was on light duties, but after that she was on
unrestricted
work and she returned to work on the machines. In
cross-examination Mr Cohen said he had made Ms Wu “an assistant” on
the machine. Mr Cohen denied Ms Wu had ever suggested that working on the
machines would aggravate her pre-existing injury, and
denied that he said,
“I’ll take that risk”. At this time Ms Wu had no restrictions
on her work. Mr Cohen said
that on a number of occasions after she returned to
work in June 1994 he again asked her to go on night shift. There were always
vacancies on night shift and in any event the work as an assistant machinist on
night shift would be lighter than any of the work
that she could do during the
day, other than finishing work. Ms Wu had refused, and it was after a number of
requests she had told
him, “It will cost you. I know what to
complain”. Mr Cohen believed this was on 28 June, and after she made this
she went back into the factory and kissed her friends goodbye. She had
not reported any injury that day but the next time he heard
from Ms Wu she had a
medical certificate indicating she had aggravated her previous back injury. Mr
Cohen said he rang the doctor
who confirmed the injury.
Mr Cohen said when Ms Wu returned after this injury at the end of September
1994 her restriction was for two-hour light duties for
two hours work per day.
Mr Cohen said in cross-examination the only opportunity to do finishing work at
that time was from 11.00
pm to 1.00 am as there was no other finishing work to
be done other than at this time. He said the finishers who worked during the
day completed all the finishing work then and so there was none available
earlier. When Ms Wu did return to work she returned from
9.00 am to 11.00 am
after the intervention with the Union and Mr Cohen had her placed in the
storeroom area. He had explained this
was for her benefit.
Mr Cohen also provided the inquiry with an account of the events of 6
February 1995.
Mr Cohen said Ms Wu was working on a full time basis as a finisher with no
restrictions other than on light duties. She was working
at the lower table
next to the finishing table and she was sitting down. Mr Cohen had provided Ms
Wu with an adjustable chair and
she was facing a wall, as were the other
Mr Cohen said Ms Wu was sitting with a box under her feet with her knees up
near to her chest. He thought this would be damaging
for her back. In addition,
the box had garments in it and he was concerned they might get dirty.
Accordingly he asked Ms Wu to move
her feet from the box of clothes and she did
so, but pulled back under her feet another box of about the same size. Again Mr
asked her to take her feet from the box because sitting in this way was
bad for her back. Mr Cohen told the inquiry he was concerned
his employees in his workplace. In response Ms Wu took her feet off the box but
put them back as soon as he moved
away. He asked her for a third time to move
her feet, and she answered back to him very loudly, “don’t tell me
to do”, and put her feet off the box and on to the table in front of
her. Mr Cohen said when she did this he pulled the box
away and kicked it away
from her towards the machine area. As he kicked the box Ms Wu jumped out of her
chair and the chair, being
on casters, wheeled back and hit the boxes behind
her. He believed the chair may have ricocheted back and hit her in the back of
her ankle, but he did not see this. Mr Cohen denied he kicked Ms Wu. He agreed
he kicked the box, but in an opposite direction away
from her and was nowhere
near Ms Wu when he did this. Ms Wu however went over to the machine area and
said loudly, “he kicked
me, he kicked me”.
Mr Cohen said there were three witnesses to this incident: two finishers, Ms
Ismail and Liu-Ping Luo (Laura), and his son Eric, who
happened to be in the
vicinity. Mr Cohen obtained written statements from these three people on that
Mr Cohen said that Ms Wu went to use the phone and he assumed she intended to
ring the Union. He told her she could not use the phone
for this purpose during
work hours and she left the factory. Mr Cohen said he had no further
conversation with Ms Wu on that day
and indeed has not spoken to her since.
Mr Cohen agreed that he had received a letter on about that day from the
Union, setting out various complaints the Union had in relation,
in particular,
to his dealings with Ms Wu. However, he was not distressed by this letter or
concerned about it, and it did not affect
his behaviour on this day. He agreed
that in the course of the incident, particularly after Ms Wu raised her voice
and told him “don’t
tell me what to do”, he was angry. He
said when Ms Wu said, “you kicked me, you kicked me”, she did not
to him, but rather shouted it to the whole factory.
Immediately after Ms Wu left the factory he had an account of the event typed
out and asked Ms Ismail, Laura and his son Eric to sign
it. They all agreed it
was an accurate account of the events and that they had seen that he had not
kicked Ms Wu. He did not force
anyone to make the statement. He never heard
from the police although he understood Ms Wu had been to the police.
Later that day, Union officers (Ms McKeown and Harry Gercke) came to the
factory and spoke to him about the incident. He told them
he had witnesses and
all three witnesses spoke to them. He understood that later Ms Ismail denied
the story but he did not know
why she had done so.
Mr Cohen also gave evidence concerning the incidents of sexual harassment
alleged by Ms Wu. He said there had been no complaints
until mid 1995. He denied Ms Wu’s allegation of the incident on 21 or 22
December 1992 after the Christmas
party. He said this “didn’t
occur”. Mr Cohen agreed he had asked Ms Wu to dinner, but said this was
on one occasion
only when they had been working late in the factory and he and
his wife intended to eat out. Mr Cohen thought Ms Wu might like to
join them and
he would then drop her home. Ms Wu had declined. He said he had driven Ms Wu
asked him for a lift, and when he did
so generally they were alone in the vehicle. Mr Cohen said one evening Ms Wu
had asked him
to come to her home for dinner, saying she would “open wine
and light a candle”. Mr Cohen declined.
Mr Cohen also denied the allegations made about sexual innuendos and sexual
jokes. He described the allegation of the “screw”
innuendo as
“sick”. Mr Cohen went into great detail as to whether it would ever
be necessary for him to tighten a bobbin
screw, but denied he had ever said
that. In relation to an allegation that he said “with a leer”,
“I like zero”
(and mannerisms indicating oral sex), Mr Cohen denied
this, and said he did not know what it could have meant. Mr Cohen also denied
he had ever sexually harassed Amy, and described the allegation as a
“fabrication” between her and Ms Wu. He said he
did not usually
touch his employees other than to pat them on the back or shoulder if he thought
they were doing a particularly good
job. He also denied making any unwelcome
sexual advances, or any sexual advances at all, towards Yenna. Mr Cohen
explained he was
still in contact with Yenna and in fact did business with her.
She now has a garment fabrication business in Indonesia. Yenna sent
him and his
wife Christmas cards and invited them to her wedding in Indonesia.
In relation to Ms Wu’s allegation he had pointed to his crotch and
asked her if she wished him to open his fly, he responded
that this was
“sick, it never happened”. Mr Cohen said he drove Ms Wu home on a
number of occasions after this event
was alleged to have occurred in October
1993. He said that he had a high respect for Ms Wu both personally and because
doctor. He denied he had ever squeezed Ms Wu’s bottom, or that
he had mimed masturbation-like movements with his fist in her
Mr Cohen also responded to Ms Wu’s allegations that he had sexually
harassed a Maori woman who had then left as a consequence.
Mr Cohen said there
had been no allegation of sexual harassment, but the woman had only worked one
day and did not return to work
on the following day. He agreed he shown
everyone in the factory the Christmas card Yenna had sent to him because he
thought they
might be interested as they all knew her. However he did not
describe the card as coming “from my girlfriend in Indonesia”.
Mr Cohen also denied Ms Wu’s allegation that he had disparagingly
referred to her as “Doctor Wu” in the presence
of others, or
suggested that although she was a doctor in China this work was all she could
obtain in Australia. He also denied
making any comments to any other person
concerning Ms Wu’s family and in particular her son who still at that time
China. He said he never made any comments about Ms Wu’s family
or her status or quality as a mother.
3.2.2 Ziva Cohen
Mrs Cohen had been a director of Express Embroidery since 1989. She gave
sworn evidence.
Mrs Cohen said she attended at the factory every day and would generally come
to work at about 9.00 am or 9.30 am and would leave
the factory at about 3.30
pm. She mainly worked in the office doing filing and general office work and
seeing customers but also
undertook finishing work in the factory and worked in
the design room. Her children also assisted in the business as it was a family
business. She described the atmosphere in the factory as good and friendly and
mostly happy. She was aware her husband on occasion
drove Ms Wu home and on one
occasion she was present when he did so.
Mrs Cohen told the inquiry that on one occasion Ms Wu came to her home. Her
husband had difficulties with his back and Ms Wu had
a friend trained as a
chiropractor who might be able to assist him. They came to the Cohen home one
evening after work and Mrs Cohen
made toasted sandwiches and she, Mr Cohen, Ms
Wu and her friend ate them together. They went up Mr Cohen’s bedroom
chiropractor intended to give him treatment and Mr Cohen asked Ms Wu
to leave because he felt embarrassed as he had to strip to his
However, Ms Wu would not leave saying, “I don’t need to leave,
I’m a doctor”.
Mrs Cohen said Ms Wu was working in the sample room for some period of time
prior to her initial back injury. However, she was not
a very successful sample
worker as she often put the wrong codes in and this led to some expense and
difficulty with the customers.
She said that she understood that within two or
three months of Ms Wu starting in the sample room Mr Cohen asked Ms Wu to return
to night shift to work on the machines as he did not want her working any longer
in the sample room. However Ms Wu always had some
excuse not to go to night
shift and in fact did not ever return to night shift.
Mrs Cohen said that after Ms Wu returned from her back injury in June of 1994
she was “very negative” and in particular
was not inclined to take
instructions from anyone. Mrs Cohen described Ms Wu as a very talkative person
in the workplace and this
had created difficulties as it meant work was not
being done. Mr Cohen often asked Ms Wu and other workers to stop talking and
When Ms Wu returned from work in October 1994 after the second injury, she
was located in an office adjacent to Mrs Cohen’s
own office. There was a
window, a blind and light in the room, with a table and a chair, and a cardboard
box on the table so Ms
Wu could work either sitting down or standing up. Mrs
Cohen denied it was “a dusty storeroom filled with clothes and
although there might have been boxes there. She agreed Ms Wu was
not happy in the storeroom. In the period after her return to work
second injury, Ms Wu needed to do light duties which meant she had to do
finishing work. There was no finishing work available
during the day and
accordingly a 2 hour timeslot from 11.00 pm was offered to her. The workers on
day shift doing finishing work
were fulltime and could not be asked to move to
another shift to accommodate Ms Wu.
Mrs Cohen said that on 6 February 1995 she was present at the factory but was
working in the office and did not see the incident of
which Ms Wu complained.
However, she heard “screaming” from the factory and came to
investigate and saw Ms Wu leaving,
saying “he kicked me, he kicked
me”. Ms Wu was clearly very angry. Mrs Cohen said she had not been
involved in the
preparation of the statements signed by her son, Ms Ismail and
Mrs Cohen did not believe there was any “sexually charged”
atmosphere at the factory, and nor did she believe her husband
had sexually
harassed any of the workers. She believed Ms Wu had been located in the
storeroom because this was a more comfortable
and appropriate environment for
her on light duties and it was easier for her and Mr Cohen to assist Ms Wu. It
was not for the purposes
of isolation, and she had not heard her husband telling
Ms Wu she was not to speak to anyone, or that others could not speak to her.
The only circumstances where Mrs Cohen had heard such comments made by her
husband had been where Ms Wu was chatting to others and
distracting them from
their work. Ms Wu did not have to work on her lap. She was not aware her
husband followed Ms Wu to the toilet
or watched her when she moved from the
3.2.3 Eric Cohen
Eric Cohen is the son of Eli and Ziva Cohen and gave sworn evidence at the
inquiry. At the time of these events in 1994 and 1995 Mr
Cohen was aged 16 or
17. He was still at school completing his final year in 1995. He told the
inquiry that he worked at the factory
as part of the family business while he
was at school and university, doing sample and design work, finishing and
Mr Cohen said he had been at the factory on 6 February 1995 working full
time. At about lunchtime he had been standing near the machine
area and heard
screaming between his father and Ms Wu. The machines were on but he could hear
the screaming over the noise of the
machines. He went to look and saw his father
and Ms Wu “struggling over a box”. He said “they were both
to get it”. He was not sure exactly what happened but he saw his
father get control of the box and kick it away from Ms Wu.
The box went a
couple of metres away from her. He believed that if his father had run after Ms
Wu and kicked her he would have
seen it but he didn’t see anything like
this at all. He then saw Ms Wu walking around the factory speaking to people.
said that she “may have been a bit stressed and uptight” but she
did not to him seem to be in pain.
Mr Cohen said Laura and Ms Ismail were working at the finishing table nearby
and had both also witnessed the altercation. He heard
Ms Wu “scream out a
few times” ‘he kicked me, he kicked me’” pointing to her
Mr Cohen said Ms Wu had been on her own sitting at a table facing towards the
centre of the factory, not up against any other table
or the wall. Ms Wu could
have walked around the table. He did not see Ms Wu seated at any time or with
her feet on the table, but
saw her and his father struggling over the box for
“a couple of minutes”. He saw his father take the box, Ms Wu pull
back, and then a further struggle. He did not see his father kick the box when
Ms Wu’s feet were on the table, and did not
see her jump out of her chair
nor did he recall his father saying “I have a witness”. He was
his father and Ms Wu at the time.
Mr Cohen said after this incident, when Ms Wu had left the factory, his
father asked him to be a witness to the facts and sign the
statement. He did
3.2.4 Mei-Lan Qiu
Mrs Qiu gave sworn evidence, and the Commission had the assistance of an
interpreter in the Mandarin language.
Mrs Qui arrived in Australia from China in 1994. She had qualified as a
medical doctor in China but worked for Express Embroidery
from 1994 to 1995 as a
machine operator. It was apparent to her that Ms Wu and Mr Cohen were “at
odds” but she did not
know why. Her intention had been to become a
qualified medical practitioner in Australia and she therefore was required to
English studies and then exams for qualifications. She had found the
examinations far too difficult and had not completed them,
and was now studying
microbiology and working as a medical researcher.
Mrs Qiu described Mr Cohen as “the boss” and said she had a
“normal relationship” with him as worker. On
one occasion she had
seen Ms Wu come from Mr Cohen’s office in a very angry state. She assumed
Ms Wu had a dispute with Mr
Cohen and she was muttering to herself,
“he’ll lose business, he’ll lose customers”. Mrs Qiu
was muttering this to herself in an angry way, rather than saying it
to Mrs Qui. Mrs Qui described this as “normal”.
She said when
people get angry they might say things like that. She only heard this on one
occasion. Mrs Qui did not know very
much about Ms Wu’s work circumstances
at the factory but was aware the Union had been to the factory and there had
disputes in which Ms Wu had some involvement. She was aware that Ms
Wu sat to undertake her finishing work and understood this was
because of a back
injury. Mrs Qiu said that she stood when she worked.
Mrs Qui said that not many people in the factory spoke to Ms Wu although she
did speak to her from time to time. Mr Cohen did not
ever ask her what she
spoke to Ms Wu about, and she did not see Mr Cohen following Ms Wu around the
factory. She did not ever see
Mr Cohen speak to Ms Wu.
3.2.5 Arthur Klepfisz
Mr Klepfisz is a consultant psychiatrist and gave sworn evidence.
He told the inquiry he had a consultation with Ms Wu on 15 March 1995 in
relation to the workers compensation claim. Prior to the
consultation he had
received some preliminary papers but his general practice is to see a patient
and form his own view and then
read the background materials. He prepared a
report dated 17 March 1995 which was before the inquiry.
Mr Klepfisz said that Ms Wu told him she had been a “production
manager” for Express Embroidery for two years, but it
seemed she suffered
a loss of face and humiliation following a back injury and a period off work.
She considered she had been “demoted”
to a machinist position. In
particular she told Mr Klepfisz she had been put to work in an isolated room
which she described as
a “gaol”. Mr Klepfisz’ view was Ms Wu
identified very closely with her mother’s circumstances who had been
gaoled during the cultural revolution. During this one hour consultation Ms Wu
had not made any reference to any sexual harassment
or any similar complaint
against Mr Cohen. Ms Wu had presented the kicking incident of 6 February 1995
not as the principal incident,
but rather as a final straw, where she was
already angry and troubled in her work circumstances.
Mr Klepfisz said Ms Wu’s psychological condition resulted from her work
in the sense of work stress within the requirements
of workers compensation
legislation. He believed she was already traumatised by her personal
circumstances in that she was isolated
from her family, in a strange country,
and had undergone a significant change of status from a position of being a
doctor. Subsequently,
specific events had led to circumstances which she
regarded as humiliating and which she interpreted as punishment for putting in
workers compensation claim. Ms Wu exhibited a good deal of anger and resentment,
but he did not believe this should have stopped
her from working. He was also
aware from this consultation of her personal conflict with Mr Cohen. Ms Wu spoke
significantly of
her identification of her mother’s circumstances,
particularly in relation to her isolation in a separate room in the factory.
Klepfisz regarded this as genuine anxiety on Ms Wu’s part but regarded it
nevertheless as a distortion of the reality of
her work circumstances.
Mr Klepfisz understood Ms Wu was now a registered medical practitioner
working as a resident in a major teaching hospital in Victoria.
He believed
these circumstances would have removed a great deal of the stress affecting Ms
Wu’s psychological health at the
time of her consultation. He believed if
there had been some resolution of her family circumstances this would make her a
deal better emotionally.
In cross-examination Dr Klepfisz said he believed Ms Wu’s anger did not
amount to a psychological illness but was simply part
of her personality
response to her circumstances. He accepted Ms Wu’s account of her
perception she had been kicked but formed
no view as to whether this was true.
He said this was not relevant to the issue of any psychiatric disorder.
In cross-examination Dr Klepfisz denied he had acted on any
“instructions” from the insurer which had referred Ms Wu to
a psychiatric assessment. He said as a professional person well experienced in
his area of practice he was not influenced
by background information provided
with the patient, and in any event believed he had not read this prior to his
consultation with
Ms Wu. He believed it was not his role to decide whether or
not an incident had occurred, but rather to consider the effect on a
the circumstances of her employment as she perceived them. His diagnosis of Ms
Wu’s circumstances was based on his
own professional and medical
assessment following the consultation, and on his clinical impression of the
whole circumstances presented
to him. He had the assistance of an interpreter
at the consultation. He had not received any medical report from the insurer
Ms Wu was referred to him.
3.2.6 Dr Mervyn Cass
Dr Cass is a medical practitioner in general practice and gave affirmed
evidence at the inquiry.
Dr Cass told the inquiry he had consulted with Ms Wu on 9 March 1995. Ms Wu
had a WorkCover certificate of incapacity from Dr Chiang
for 6 and 7 February
1995. Although no interpreter was present he had had no difficulty in
understanding Ms Wu.
Dr Cass told the inquiry he thought the reference by Dr Chiang on the
certificate of incapacity referring to an “injury”
was somewhat odd
as usually a more specific reference such as a bruise, an abrasion or a fracture
whichever was appropriate, was
the norm. He considered a bruise on Ms Wu’s
ankle would not amount to an “injury”. Dr Cass said he had received
a letter from the insurer dated 21 February 1995. At the time of the
consultation he believed he probably had read the notes of any
previous treating
doctor dealing with Ms Wu’s back injury from 1994, but he had no
recollection of what might have been on
the file. He certainly had no
recollection of any suggestion on the file that Ms Wu was feigning her back
injury. He indicated
a comment in his notes as well as in his formal report
that Ms Wu had told him she intended to resign from her job quite shortly.
Cass said he made no enquiry about Ms Wu’s mental state, although he
understood she had attended a psychiatrist. Ms Wu
told him the psychiatrist had
advised there was no major problem and she did not require any ongoing
psychiatric attention. Dr Cass
said he was not a psychiatrist so he would not
have dealt with this particular issue. Dr Cass commented he did not think
to work after a back injury from 11.00 pm to 1.00 am or working in
isolation would be conducive to rehabilitation for any worker.
3.3 Other evidence
In the course of the inquiry, the parties placed a number of items of
documentary evidence before me. These included a written statement
February 1995 by Mr Eli Cohen and signed by him, Ms Ismail, Liu Ping Luo and
Eric Cohen, relating to the events of 6 February
1995. Ms Ismail has apparently
written against her signature “I declare I saw that Eli was kicking the
box not Eva”.
Eric Cohen has apparently written underneath his signature
“I clearly saw the incident and Eva was at least 1 metre behind
he kicked the box. There is no way that Eli’s foot or the box touched Eva
as it was kicked in the opposite direction”.
A report from the CRS was also put in evidence, although the author of the
report was not called to give evidence before the inquiry.
The report is dated
3 November 1994 and reports Ms Wu was undertaking “alternate duties”
and working “on her own
in a small room, seated on a non adjustable
folding chair which has a fixed timber backrest”. The report recommended
be provided with an adjustable chair, that consideration be given to
placing Ms Wu with other workers performing finishing duties
in the factory as
“reintegration of injured workers into the workforce is generally accepted
to facilitate return to work rather
than separating injured workers from
others”, and Ms Wu be encouraged to adopt certain work practices to assist
her rehabilitation.
While formal reports from Dr Cass and Mr Klepfisz were tendered and subject
to cross-examination, counsel for the complainant also
sought to tender a report
from Mr Hugh Weaver, an orthopedic surgeon, dated 24 September 1994, addressed
to the QBE Insurance Company.
Mr Weaver was not called by the complainant to
give evidence, but after extensive discussion of this matter I accepted Mr
report into evidence to provide evidence of Ms Wu’s
diagnosed back injury in 1994. Counsel for the respondent opposed this,
indicated Mr Cohen did not suggest Ms Wu did not have a genuine back injury.
On perusing this report I note Mr Weaver’s view that although initially
he was of the impression Ms Wu had “merely sustained
a fairly mild soft
tissue injury affecting her lumbar spine”, subsequent consultations and
review of evidence led him to the
view that “there is now substantial
evidence to suggest that her problem is more serious than I was at first
prepared to believe”
and Ms Wu suffered “from a genuine and quite
severe low back problem”.
The complainants also tendered documents from Dr Klepfisz’ file,
including a letter referring Ms Wu to Dr Klepfisz. Among the
documentation
provided by QBE is a general background account of Ms Wu’s employment, an
account of Ms Wu’s previous back
injuries, and of the event on 6 February
1995. I note the account provided by QBE refers to the signed statement by Eli
indicates the document was also signed by Ms Ismail and Ms Luo
(Laura). There is no reference in the QBE report to Eric Cohen being
to this incident or that he signed the statement, although I note he has dated
his signature as 6 February 1995. I did
not receive this documentation until
some time after Eric Cohen’s evidence was completed, and I drew this
omission to the attention
of counsel prior to their submissions.
A number of photographs were also tendered. I note that one photograph
tendered by the complainants of Mrs Cohen’s office was
incorrectly
identified by Eric Cohen as the room in which Ms Wu had been placed to work when
she returned to work in 1994. Another
photograph tendered by the respondents
purported to be a photograph of the room in which Ms Wu was placed to work. It
shows a double
window with an open Venetian blind with a clear view out to the
street and a round plastic table with a green plastic outdoor chair
next to it.
The chair is upholstered with a cushion and on the table is a cardboard box. At
the inquiry Mr and Mrs Cohen conceded
this photograph had been taken in early
February 2000. Their evidence was not clear as to whether the photograph was of
a reconstruction
of the room in which Ms Wu worked. Their evidence was that this
was the same table, chair and cardboard box provided when she returned
in October 1994. Mr Cohen conceded he no longer operated the premises, but had
leased them out with vacant possession in
4. SUBMISSIONS
Counsel for the parties made submissions at the close of evidence. They
indicated further evidence and submissions relating thereto
would be made on the
issue of quantum of compensation should Ms Wu’s claims against the
respondents be substantiated.
4.1 Submissions for the complainants
Mr Kenyon for the complainants told the inquiry that the issues before it
were essentially of fact rather than law.
In relation to Ms Wu’s complaint pursuant to the DDA, Mr Kenyon
submitted that Ms Wu had a disability under the DDA, and because
disability both respondents discriminated directly and indirectly against her
and subjected her to harassment.
Mr Kenyon said the central thrust of Ms Wu’s case pursuant to the DDA
was that Mr Cohen believed Ms Wu was feigning an injury
in order to cause loss
to him, and he therefore responded by making her circumstances at work so
difficult that she would be forced
to leave rather than remain there and put up
with the discrimination. Mr Kenyon submitted this exposure of Ms Wu to
difficult and
humiliating work circumstances amounted to discrimination on the
ground of her disability. He submitted that this view of Ms Wu
was established
in Mr Cohen’s mind from two circumstances: first Ms Wu’s alleged
assertion, “I am a Doctor, I know
how to complain, I will destroy you and
your family”; and secondly, her WorkCover claim. The WorkCover claim was
relevant to
Mr Cohen, in Mr Kenyon’s submissions, for two reasons: first
because the claim itself caused him disadvantage; and secondly,
followed from what he perceived as the threat from Ms Wu.
Mr Kenyon submitted Mr Cohen was motivated by a number of factors in his
discriminatory behaviour towards Ms Wu: he was responding
to her threat; he was
concerned about her trade union activities; he was concerned at the cost of her
WorkCover claim; and further
simply because she was injured and therefore was
suffering from a disability. Under these circumstances, Mr Kenyon submitted
of the DDA was relevant and even though Mr Cohen may have had a
number of reasons for discriminating against Ms Wu, if one of the
reasons for
the discrimination was her disability, whether or not it was the dominant or
substantial reason for the discrimination,
that was sufficient for the purposes
of the DDA.
Mr Kenyon submitted that the evidence before the inquiry was clear and not
controverted, that is, that Ms Wu’s injury was real
and that she was
treated less favourably. In particular she was removed from the sample room and
put onto heavier and less desirable
machine work, she was required to work for
the period 11.00 pm to 1.00 am, she was subsequently isolated in the storeroom
was subjected to the altercation and kicking on 6 February 1995. Mr
Kenyon submitted that Ms Wu was also harassed by warning notices,
and through
being forbidden to speak to others and being watched far more closely than was
necessary or appropriate, or extended
to either workers.
Mr Kenyon submitted I should reject Mr Cohen’s evidence on these
matters. Mr Cohen told the inquiry Ms Wu’s standard
of work led to costly
mistakes and loss of customers, and Mr Kenyon suggested it was highly unlikely
Mr Cohen would have tolerated
this for a period of fifteen months had it been
the case. He submitted it was absurd to suggest Mr Cohen tolerated fifteen
of poor work from Ms Wu in the sample room. Further, Mr Kenyon suggested
it was absurd to imagine Mr Cohen was correct in saying
there was no finishing
work at all available during the day or during the afternoon shift, and that
none was available till 11.00
pm. He submitted Mr Cohen was not a credible
witness and was contradictory and unimpressive in his evidence.
On the other hand, Mr Kenyon submitted I should accept Ms Wu’s clear,
consistent and calm evidence. He submitted I should accept
that she did not make
the threat alleged by Mr Cohen, but that in any event her injury was real. In
particular he submitted I should
accept the evidence there was no threat, that
Mr Cohen made no request that Ms Wu work night shift, her injury was real, there
no complaint at any time about the quality of Ms Wu’s work in the
sample room, the nature of the storeroom in which she was
placed when she
returned to work in 1994 and the nature and extent of her isolation there, and
that I should accept her account of
the events of 6 February 1995.
Mr Kenyon referred to the fact that the only direct witnesses of the
altercation were Ms Wu, Mr Cohen, Eric Cohen and Mrs Shi. Ms
Cohen’s accounts differ; Mrs Shi’s account is consistent with that
of Ms Wu as far as it went; and Eric Cohen’s
account is not consistent
with that of Mr Cohen. Further, Mr Kenyon submitted that I should reject Mr
Cohen’s evidence that
Ms Wu had her feet first up against her chest on the
basis it was not credible and that the medical evidence supported Ms Wu’s
assertion that she was kicked on the ankle. Mr Kenyon submitted I should draw an
inference from the absence of any other witnesses
in support of Mr Cohen’s
account and that from the outset of the formal proceedings in this matter the
respondents had indicated
that Ms Ismail and Liu-Ping Luo would be called to
give evidence. Witness summons were issued by the Commission and arrangements
for their evidence were made on three separate occasions. Nevertheless they did
not attend to give evidence and Mr Kenyon submitted
I should draw an adverse
inference from this and link that with the uncontroverted evidence from Ms Wu
and Ms McKeown that Ms Ismail
had withdrawn her agreement to the statement she
apparently signed.
In relation to Ms Wu’s complaints under the SDA, Mr Kenyon submitted
that her complaints alleged sexual harassment “at
the lower end of the
scale”, but submitted my findings should be made purely on the basis of
the credibility of Ms Wu over
Mr Cohen. Mr Kenyon submitted all the evidence
indicated that Mr Cohen had opportunities to engage in the sexual harassment as
and the evidence from Mrs Shi that he had also harassed her, supported
that of Ms Wu. Mr Kenyon submitted I should accept the explanation
for the lack
of earlier report by Ms Wu and that she had failed to make an earlier report
partly because she did not realise the
unlawfulness of Mr Cohen’s actions,
but also because she was embarrassed and because of the nature of her
personality. Mr
Kenyon submitted the evidence indicated Mr Cohen’s
behaviour was inappropriate and offensive in the context of a workplace,
clearly came within the definition of sexual harassment contained in section 28B
of the SDA.
Mr Kenyon also submitted there was discrimination contrary to the provisions
of the SDA against Ms Wu on the basis of her family responsibilities.
submitted she had been subjected to a humiliating comment relating to the
separation from her son.
Mr Kenyon submitted the discrimination under the DDA was both direct and
indirect. He submitted the direct discrimination against
Ms Wu was her primary
cause of action on the basis that other workers who were not injured were not
subjected to such treatment.
His submission in relation to indirect
discrimination was that Ms Wu had been subjected to requirements that were not
having regard to the circumstances of the case.
Mr Kenyon directed my attention to some specific aspects of the DDA and in
which makes it unlawful to discriminate against a person
on the ground of disability in relation to employment. He suggested that
was relevant and that Ms Wu’s return to work in June 1994
constituted a new offer of employment, and that the terms upon which
offered to her that she return to work on the machines rather than in the sample
room, were discriminatory terms and under
these circumstances
section 15(1)(a)
should be taken into account. However, he then conceded that
sections 15(2)(a)
and (d) were the most obviously relevant. These provisions make it unlawful to
discriminate against an employee in the terms or condition
of employment
afforded to the employee, or by subjecting the employee “to any other
detriment”.
In the course of his submissions Mr Kenyon had also referred to
“harassment” against Ms Wu on the ground of her disability,
referred to
of the DDA. This makes it unlawful for a person to
harass an employee with a disability “in relation to the
disability”.
Mr Kenyon submitted I should regard the expression in
section 35(1)
“in relation to the disability”, as meaning the same
thing as the expressions used in
of the DDA, being
“because of” the disability, and “on the ground of a
disability”, respectively.
Mr Kenyon submitted that
section 123(2)
and (3) operated to make the second
respondent vicariously liable for the acts of Mr Cohen as one of its directors,
and section 106
of the SDA operated directly to make the second respondent
vicariously liable for Mr Cohen’s unlawful acts.
He submitted
of the SDA is relevant to this matter, on the basis
that the sexual harassment alleged by Ms Wu amounted to sex discrimination, and
that the respondents were also in breach of this section of the SDA.
He submitted further the second complainant, the Union, was appropriately a
party to the matter the subject of this inquiry. He referred
me to section
50(1)(d) of the SDA, and submitted that the Union was a party under the DDA
because of the Union’s right as a
principal to protect the
interests of
its workers in the workplace.
4.2 Submissions of the respondents
Mr McDermott, counsel for both respondents, prefaced his submissions by
indicating the respondents accepted at all times that Ms Wu’s
back injury
was genuine, but nevertheless there were significant “bookends”
relevant to the circumstances of her complaint.
These “bookends”
related to the dates of May 1994 and May 1995. In May 1994 Ms Wu was studying
English, both for general
purposes but in particular to facilitate her
registration as a medical practitioner in Victoria. In May 1995 she attained
this registration,
having achieved sufficient proficiency in English.
Mr McDermott emphasised that
of the DDA required that
discrimination be “because of” the complainant’s disability.
His fundamental submission
was that the facts before this inquiry did not
establish there was any less favourable treatment towards Ms Wu “because
her disability. He indicated that the primary thrust of the
complainants case had been that Mr Cohen never believed Ms Wu had a genuine
injury and wanted to punish her as retribution for her false but successful
WorkCover claim in relation to a feigned back injury
which he never believed was
real, that Mr Cohen wanted to get rid of her from his employ because he regarded
her as a disruptive
influence in the workplace and because of her behaviour, and
in particular because she had involved the Union in the workplace, and
was acting in response to a threat made by Ms Wu towards him.
In relation to the allegations Ms Wu made under the SDA, Mr McDermott
referred to Ms Wu’s evidence which indicated that the
alleged episodes of
sexual harassment had commenced on 22 December 1992 and continued until about
December 1993. Nevertheless Ms
Wu remained in the employ of Express Embroidery
and continued to work closely with Mr Cohen and made no report until 28 February
1995. Mr McDermott submitted this was surprising given Ms Wu’s ongoing
Union contacts at least from September 1994 when the
Union first intervened on
her behalf, again in November and December 1994, and in January and February
1995. In January 1995 Ms
Wu had complained she was subjected to discrimination
by the respondents as a consequence of her union activity. Further, Mr
referred to the evidence which indicated numerous medical
consultations relating to matters which had arisen in the course of her
employment, certainly since May 1994, and her contact with the police on 6
February 1995. In none of these contacts was there any
evidence of any
indication of complaints or concerns about sexual harassment. Further Mr
McDermott referred to the insurance investigation
interview which occurred with
Ms Wu (accompanied by Ms McKeown) on 28 February 1995. In that interview Ms Wu
told the insurance
company representative she had been happy in her employment.
Mr McDermott submitted that the evidence and Ms Wu’s demeanour
indicated she was an experienced and intelligent worker, familiar
with the role
of the Union, and able to advise a fellow worker (the Maori woman) concerning
sexual harassment during the period in
which she subsequently alleged she was
being subjected to sexual harassment. Despite this and her ongoing union and
medical and
other contacts, there was no mention by Ms Wu that she had been
subjected to sexual harassment or that there was any issue of a sexualised
place on the factory floor or in the course of her employment. Mr McDermott
submitted this was surprising considering that
Ms Wu’s complaint indicated
that she was scared and fearful of Mr Cohen following the episodes of sexual
harassment, in particular
the episode she alleged on 22 December 1992, and that
she had been humiliated, disgusted and distressed by his behaviour.
Mr McDermott further referred to the fact that the first formulation of the
sexual harassment complaint made by Ms McKeown, but not
lodged with this
Commission, was not consistent with the evidence given by Ms Wu at the inquiry
particularly in relation to the allegations
of a sexualised workplace.
Mr McDermott submitted the whole of the complaint pursuant to the SDA ought
be regarded as a matter of recent invention. There is
no corroborative evidence
other than that of Mrs Shi, and this was very limited. The lack of
corroborative evidence was particularly
damaging, Mr McDermott submitted, as Ms
Wu constantly referred to “we” in her own evidence, referring to the
sexual harassment and the response of other workers to Mr
Cohen’s alleged behaviour.
Mr McDermott also referred to Ms Wu’s continuing contact with Mr Cohen
after the alleged events of 22 December 1992 which she
said made her feel
“scared and fearful” as well as humiliated, disgusted and
distressed. Ms Wu remained in employment,
she was driven home at least once on
her own evidence by Mr Cohen (and Mr Cohen said on a number of occasions), she
visited his home
in 1993 on a personal or social matter, and at least on her
evidence spent considerable time in his kitchen with Mrs Cohen, and on
Mrs Cohen’s evidence spent time in his bedroom and ate a meal with them,
and subsequent to the alleged events of 22
December 1992 and in the course of
the alleged harassment in 1993, gave a gift to Mr Cohen’s daughter.
Mr McDermott referred to Mr Cohen’s evidence denying her allegations in
all respects in relation to sexual harassment or a sexualised
workplace, and
submitted his evidence ought be accepted. Further, Mr McDermott submitted there
was no medical report or evidence
of Ms Wu’s humiliation or mental
distress in this respect.
In relation to the DDA, Mr McDermott also submitted the complaint by Ms Wu
should be dismissed.
In relation to Ms Wu’s complaint of discrimination which occurred in
June 1994 when she initially returned to work after her
first injury and was put
to work on the machines, Mr McDermott indicated that at that time Ms Wu had no
disability. At the time
she was working on the machines in June 1994 she was
certified as able to return to work with no restrictions at all. Mr McDermott
submitted Ms Wu was irritated because she had been removed from work in the
sample room which she saw as work of a higher status,
and she saw her assignment
to machinist work as a punishment. Mr McDermott submitted Ms Wu subsequently
made the threat to Mr Cohen
that she would destroy him and his family, and he
submitted this was as a consequence of her disgruntlement at being assigned to
machinist work. Following this threat, Ms Wu made a new claim in relation to
the exacerbation of her injury.
The second element of disability discrimination alleged by Ms Wu was the
requirement, when she sought to return to work in September
1994, that she work
from 11.00 pm to 1.00 am. Mr McDermott submitted this could not amount to
discrimination against Ms Wu on any
basis as she never did return to work on
this shift. The Union intervened and different arrangements were made and she
returned to
work at a later time on an agreed shift.
In relation to Ms Wu’s actual return to work in October 1994 when she
was placed in the “storeroom”, Mr McDermott
submitted this amounted
to preferential and privileged treatment, rather than discrimination. He
submitted Ms McKeown agreed it
was a more comfortable, quieter, warmer and
suitable environment for Ms Wu, particularly given the nature of her injury.
was carpeted and she was able to work at her own place and sit or stand
as she wished, and the placement in the storeroom complied
with medical
guidelines. He submitted that the direction Ms Wu was not to talk to other
workers, and was watched when she went to
the toilet through the factory in
order to ensure that she did not waste time, was not unreasonable, and did not
amount to discrimination.
He submitted the CRS report did not indicate the
treatment was less favourable, and when she returned to less restricted hours
again worked on the factory floor she was provided with a chair and a lower
table more appropriate for her to complete her work while
sitting. Mr McDermott
submitted the warnings were reasonable examples of ordinary industrial
expectations and practice and did not
amount to discrimination.
In relation to the incident on 6 February 1995, Mr McDermott submitted the
evidence was ambivalent on the issue of whether Mr Cohen
kicked her.
Nevertheless he directed my attention to the evidence given by Mr Cohen in which
he absolutely denied kicking Ms Wu.
Ms Wu’s evidence was contrary to this
but there was no significant corroborative evidence of either. Nevertheless Mr
submitted this was essentially irrelevant to Ms Wu’s complaint
any kicking and Ms
Wu’s disability - whatever happened did not relate to the issue of
disability. Mr McDermott submitted the
onus was on the complainant to
demonstrate the underpinning aspects of the case, that is, that she received
less favourable treatment
at least in part resulting from her disability. He
submitted she had been unable to do this.
Mr McDermott also made submissions on the position of the Union as a
complainant. He submitted that the Union was not properly a party,
and that the
Union had no participation in the inquiry at all other than one of its officials
acting as a witness for the complainant.
Further, Mr McDermott submitted there
was no basis pursuant to the DDA which could permit the Union to be a party to
that complaint.
Mr McDermott also submitted there were no facts which could enable the
establishment of discrimination on the ground of family responsibility
to the SDA. He submitted there was no evidence at all as to the status of Ms
Wu’s family relations other than her
own evidence that in 1990 she had
left her family in China and came to Australia. However the only evidence
presented in support
of this aspect of Ms Wu’s complaint was an allegation
(denied by Mr Cohen) of a disparaging remark made to another person not
to give evidence. Mr McDermott submitted there was no evidence of any
discrimination associated with the remark alleged.
Mr McDermott submitted there was no basis upon which to suggest there was any
indirect discrimination on the basis of Ms Wu’s
disability.
5. FINDINGS
5.1 Findings of fact
There was little dispute concerning the basic facts of Ms Wu’s personal
circumstances and her employment relationship with the
respondents. Ms Wu
arrived in Australia from China in 1990 while her husband and young son remained
in China. Ms Wu was a qualified
medical practitioner in China with eight years
experience in medical practice. She commenced employment with the respondents
August of 1991 and worked in the respondents’ factory as a machinist, a
finisher and a sample machine operator. She suffered
a back injury in May 1994
and returned to work in June 1994. Subsequently in June 1994 she further
exacerbated her back injury and
had more time off work. Both periods off work
were pursuant to successful claims for workers compensation. Ms Wu was declared
to return to work for two hours a day on restricted duties in late September
1994, and Mr Cohen offered her light duties (finishing
work) between the hours
of 11.00 pm and 1.00 am. The Union intervened and this arrangement was never
put in place. Ms Wu returned
to work for two hours a day on light duties from 5
October 1994.
When Ms Wu returned to work she was placed in a separate room and was
isolated from the shop floor. This room has been variously
referred to as a
storeroom or an office and was adjacent to the office used by Mrs Cohen. In mid
November 1994 Ms Wu was relocated
to the shop floor where she undertook
finishing work at a separate table. Ms Wu had some time off work due to an
unrelated illness
in late December 1994 and was directed to take her annual
recreation leave in January 1995. She returned to work following leave
January 1995. She was involved in an altercation with Mr Cohen on the shop
floor on 6 February 1995 and she left the workplace
on that day. She did not
stress injury which she
said arose from the altercation on 6 February 1995.
There was greater dispute about various details concerning Ms Wu’s work
arrangements, especially her work in the sample room,
the nature of the work she
undertook in June 1994 when she returned to work after her first injury, the
proposed arrangements for
her to return to work in June 1994, the nature of the
conditions of her work from October 1994, and the details of the incident on
February 1995. I make the following findings about those matters:
Ms Wu worked in
the sample room for fifteen months up to the time of her injury in May 1994.
I do not accept
Mr Cohen’s allegation that Ms Wu was a poor worker in the sample room whom
he wanted to move because she was
making a number of costly errors. I am
satisfied there were no complaints about the quality of Ms Wu’s sample
work of any
significance and there was no request to shift her from the sample
room to night shift based on the adequacy or quality of her work
in the sample
I do not accept
Mr Cohen’s evidence that his daughter took over the job in the sample room
in Ms Wu’s absence in May and
June 1994 or that the work in the sample
room was unavailable for her when she returned to work in June 1994.
I do not accept
Mr Cohen’s evidence that when Ms Wu returned to work in June 1994 she was
given a position as “assistant
machinist” in order to assist and
support her return to work in a rehabilitative way.
Ms Wu was not
happy to return to machinist work, and work on the sample machine was less
heavy, more skilled and higher status work
in the factory.
Working on the
machines was considerably heavier and more stressful work than working on the
sample machine.
At the time Ms
Wu returned to work on the machines in 1994 she had no disability but had been
certified as fit for full time full
I do not accept
Mr Cohen’s evidence that there was no other opportunity for Ms Wu to
undertake finishing work in September 1994
other than from 11.00 pm to 1.00
returned to work in October 1994 she was isolated in an office/storeroom which
had never previously been used for finishing
or other factory related work and
where she was isolated from the shop floor and from all other workers apart from
Mr and Mrs Cohen
who worked nearby.
While Ms Wu
worked in the office/storeroom she was subjected to close and constant
supervision directly by Mr Cohen different in nature,
quality and circumstance
to the supervision he provided to any other worker.
The room in
which Ms Wu was placed had a window which was covered by a closed blind. The
room was carpeted.
provided with a plastic chair but initially was given no table on which to work.
Subsequently she
was provided with a small round plastic table with a cardboard box on it.
I am satisfied
Ms Wu’s placement in this room in October 1994 subjected her to less
favourable treatment than that which was
available to other workers in the
I am satisfied
Ms Wu was directed by Mr Cohen that she was not to speak to other workers on the
factory floor and that her movements
around the factory including to and from
the toilet were closely monitored by Mr Cohen in a way which was not extended to
the movements
of other workers.
Ms Wu returned
to work on the factory floor in November 1994.
Ms Wu worked at
a separate table at the factory from that time but was not isolated from workers
in the same way.
Ms Wu was not
isolated on the factory floor as she was working in close proximity to other
workers. Other finishers worked at an
adjacent table but Ms Wu’s
placement was at a separate table so she could sit as she undertook her
finishing work.
finishers worked standing up at a chest high bench.
The other major
aspect of the evidence concerning the allegations of disability discrimination
related to the events of 6 February
1995 when there was a significant
altercation between Ms Wu and Mr Cohen at the factory, following which Ms Wu
left the factory and
subsequently made a claim for a stress related injury
caused by the incident. I am satisfied that on 6 February 1995 Ms Wu was
with an adjustable chair for the first time. Ms Wu was doing finishing
work sitting at a trestle table on her adjustable chair.
She was the only
worker at the trestle table as the other finishers worked standing up at a
separate higher bench. The general
practice was for finishers to work standing
at a bench. Ms Wu was resting her feet on a box and Mr Cohen asked her to take
off the box as there were garments in the box which might become
soiled. Ms Wu complied with this request but put her feet on another
There then followed an altercation. I accept Ms Wu’s evidence that,
however it occurred in the course of that altercation,
Mr Cohen kicked her above
the back of her left ankle. I do not accept Mr Cohen or Eric Cohen’s
evidence on this matter. While
I accept that Ms Ismail and Liu-Ping Luo signed
an account of the event prepared and presented to them by Mr Cohen, I do not
that the document represents the truth of the matter. I am not prepared
to make any finding as to whether Mr Cohen deliberately
kicked Ms Wu but I am
satisfied this incident occurred, and further, that Ms Wu was very distressed
as a result. There was no dispute
that Ms Wu immediately sought to make a phone
call to the Union but was not permitted to do so, and shortly thereafter left
the factory
and reported the incident to the police. She discussed the matter
with the Union and subsequently consulted Dr Chiang.
Although there was considerable argument in the course of the hearing on the
issue of the genuineness of Ms Wu’s back injury,
in particular, in June
1994, as I have indicated above it appears in the end this was not contested. I
am satisfied her back injury
was genuine, but I am also satisfied she made some
form of threat to Mr Cohen in June 1994 along the lines alleged by him, that is,
that she suggested as a doctor she would be able to describe symptoms if she
wished which could lead to a successful claim against
him which would cause him
damage. I am also satisfied Mr Cohen was resentful and suspicious about the
veracity of Ms Wu’s
claim, and angry in relation to her WorkCover claims,
and in particular at her actions in involving the Union in the workplace of
The other contentious evidence is in respect of Ms Wu’s allegations of
sexual harassment and discrimination on the grounds of
family responsibilities.
Mr Cohen denied Ms Wu’s allegations in relation to these claims in every
respect. I did not find
Mr Cohen to be a very credible witness concerning these
matters, but I am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities Ms Wu has
established these claims. In particular I am not satisfied Mr Cohen engaged in
ongoing harassment of Ms Wu during the course of
1993, in particular, by
pinching her bottom in the factory. I am satisfied Mr Cohen on a number of
occasions stood close to Mrs
Shi and put his arm around her in a way which she
found distasteful and offensive, but I note this could not amount to sexual
of Ms Wu as the attention was directed to Mrs Shi. I am not
satisfied Mr Cohen engaged in persistent attention or invitations to
during the course of 1993, and I am not satisfied there was a generally
sexualised workplace atmosphere on the factory floor.
I accept the evidence of
Ms Wu and Mrs Shi that there were a number of vulgar, distasteful and rude
comments made by Mr Cohen on
the factory floor in front of various workers
including Ms Wu. I note Mr Cohen denied these but I do not accept these
The other particular incident of sexual harassment alleged by Ms Wu was the
incident she alleged occurred after the Christmas party
on 22 December 1992. It
is my view Ms Wu has not satisfied the onus of proof she bears in establishing
that the acts alleged by
her occurred in such a way as to constitute sexual
harassment within the meaning of the SDA. I shall refer to this further
In relation to the sexual comments allegedly made by Mr Cohen, I think it
likely such comments probably did occur on the factory floor,
but I am not
satisfied Ms Wu has established that these comments were other than distasteful
and vulgar. There is no evidence that
the comments were unwelcome or that in
all the circumstances a reasonable person would have anticipated that Ms Wu
would have been
offended humiliated or intimidated. Ms Wu’s evidence was
that she was offended, humiliated and intimidated, but there appears
been nothing to indicate this from her or other workers at that time or for a
very long time afterwards.
Nor am I satisfied Ms Wu has established on the balance of probabilities that
the incident in the sample room, when she alleged Mr
Cohen offered to open his
fly, occurred. Further I am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that
Mr Cohen made the comment
alleged by Ms Wu that she was a “bad
mother” having left her child in China.
On the whole I found Mr Cohen to be an unimpressive witness. He presented in
a somewhat evasive way, rarely answering questions in
a direct or
straightforward way, and his voluble expressions of detail frequently gave the
impression of fabrication. Neither Mrs
Cohen nor Eric Cohen were impressive
witnesses either. Mrs Cohen’s evidence often accorded almost uncannily
with the expressions
used by her husband, and Eric Cohen was not confident with
many of his answers, and frequently did not appear frank. In the central
of his evidence, his account of the incident on 6 February 1995, his evidence
did not accord with that given by either Mr
Cohen or Ms Wu. It was more
difficult to make an assessment of Ms Wu’s evidence as much of it was
given with the assistant
of an interpreter. However, her evidence was largely
consistent and has been over a long period, and other than in respect of
circumstances
where I have not been satisfied on the balance of probabilities, I
have preferred her evidence over that of Mr Cohen where they conflict.
other witnesses, Mrs Qiu who gave evidence for the respondent, was a
straightforward and clear witness; Dr Klepfisz and Dr
Cass were impressive,
calm, direct and professional witnesses who seemed clearly aware of the limits
of their own roles and dealings
with the first complainant. On the other hand,
Dr Chiang, who gave much more limited evidence as a witness for the
complainants,
appeared very much more unsure and unclear in his evidence. Ms
McKeown was a most impressive witness, as was Ms Leong, who was candid
in her recollections. I have accepted the evidence Ms McKeown gave in full. Mrs
Zhou (Lisa) was a contradictory and evasive
witness who was relatively
unimpressive. Mrs Shi (Amy) was a much clearer and consistent witness whose
evidence by and large I accept.
5.2 SDA complaints – Application of the law
Ms Wu made complaints pursuant to the SDA in relation to sexual harassment,
sex discrimination, and discrimination on the grounds
responsibilities.
I note these complaints have been referred for a public inquiry pursuant to
section 57(1)(b)
of the SDA by the Sex Discrimination Commissioner. I note the
complaints were made to the Equal Opportunity Commission of Victoria
for the Sex Discrimination Commissioner, in a complaint dated 26 June 1995. I
further note the matters complained of by
Ms Wu in relation to the SDA were
matters which on the evidence occurred between December 1992 and December 1993.
Ms Wu was quite
precise in her evidence as to the period in which she alleged
the sexual harassment occurred which was also the period in which she
the other matters which she complained of under the SDA occurred. I note
section 52(2)(c)
of the SDA provides the Commissioner may decide not to enquire
into an act if “a period of more than 12 months has elapsed
since the act
was done”. The Commissioner is not bound to decide not to enquire into an
act where the complaint relates to
acts or circumstances which occurred more
than 12 months prior to the complaint, but I note the general purpose of such a
is at least in part to support and enable the onus of proof required
under the SDA to be satisfied, as well as to address the social
purposes of the
legislation, that is, to assist in bringing to an end the behaviour complained
of, should the complaint be substantiated.
In this matter there is nothing to indicate the Commissioner turned her mind
to the issue of the time limit referred to in
section 52(2)(c)
, but in any event
she referred this matter for a public inquiry and I am required to deal with the
complaint as referred. Accordingly,
despite this issue of the effluxion of time
I will deal with the matter as referred. However, I note that in this case, and
in particular
in relation to the complaints made pursuant to the SDA, it has
been difficult for Ms Wu to satisfy the onus of proof imposed on her,
because there were no witnesses or only reluctant witnesses, but also because of
the effluxion of time. In addition, the
delay in making the complaint in these
circumstances reflects on the first complainant’s credibility. The lack of
at an earlier stage also affects the capacity of the first complainant
to satisfy the onus of proof because of the lack of sufficient
detail available
after such a period of time in relation to issues such as dates and
corroboration.
5.2.1 Sexual harassment – section 28A SDA
The terms of section 28A are set out above in this determination. Sexual
harassment occurs if there is an unwelcome sexual advance
or an unwelcome
request for sexual favours, or if a person engages in other unwelcome conduct of
a sexual nature in relation to another
“in circumstances in which a
reasonable person, having regard to all the circumstances, would have
anticipated that the person
harassed would be offended, humiliated or
intimidated”. Section 28A(2) identifies “conduct of a sexual
as including making statements of a sexual nature.
There were a number of actions and statements by Mr Cohen which Ms Wu alleged
amounted to sexual harassment. They were:
The incident
after the Christmas party on 22 December 1992;
The incident
later in 1993 where Mr Cohen is alleged to have suggested opening his fly in the
sample room;
A number of
occasions in the course of 1993 where Mr Cohen is alleged to have pinched or
squeezed Ms Wu’s bottom;
A number of
occasions where Ms Wu and Ms Shi were inappropriately touched or Mr Cohen put
his arm around Mrs Shi;
A number of
comments made in the workplace of a sexual nature or with sexual
implications.
I am not satisfied that any actions which occurred in
the evening of 22 December 1992 after the Christmas party amounted to sexual
harassment. I was not able to form a view as to whether the incident alleged by
Ms Wu did occur, but even if it had I would not
be satisfied this amounted to
sexual harassment as defined in section 28A of the SDA. The surrounding
evidence, including Ms Wu’s
lack of complaint for some lengthy period of
time, as well as her continued relatively close association with Mr Cohen over
12 or 18 months, including visiting his home and accepting at least one
lift home alone with him, suggests to me that if any advance
of a sexual nature
was made to Ms Wu (if this occurred, it is clear she rejected it completely), it
was not such conduct as came
within section 28A of the Act.
In relation to the allegation that Mr Cohen offered to open his fly while he
and Ms Wu and another worker were in the sample room,
I am not satisfied that
this occurred.
Nor am I satisfied Ms Wu’s allegations of bottom pinching by Mr Cohen
have been made out.
I do accept Ms Shi’s evidence that Mr Cohen inappropriately touched her
and put his arm around her. However, if such behaviour
amounted to sexual
harassment it was not sexual harassment of Ms Wu, and Ms Shi does not have a
complaint before this Commission.
The last matters complained of by Ms Wu related to sexual comments or
comments with sexual implications being made in the workplace.
I am inclined to
accept Ms Wu’s evidence that such comments were made, but I am not
satisfied they amount to “conduct
of a sexual nature” in the sense
referred to in section 28A of the SDA. I am not satisfied they were statements
made in circumstances
in which a reasonable person, having regard to all the
circumstances, would have anticipated Ms Wu would be offended, humiliated
intimidated. Ms Wu’s evidence was that she was offended and humiliated by
these comments, but it seems clear that insofar
as such comments were made no
objection was taken to them, either at the time, or for a relatively
considerable time (three years)
thereafter, by either Ms Wu or indeed any other
worker. Under these circumstances I am not satisfied such comments were other
distasteful and vulgar, as there is no evidence they were unwelcome or in
circumstances where a reasonable person would anticipate
offence (given the
absence of objection in any form) or that any of the workers would be humiliated
or intimidated.
Nor am I satisfied Mr Cohen engaged in sexual harassment of Ms Wu by way of
ongoing social invitations which might have been taken
to be of a sexual nature.
I am not satisfied such ongoing invitations occurred in the sense complained of
5.2.2 Sex discrimination
Ms Wu also made a general complaint of sex discrimination. I take this
complaint to be one which includes a complaint of sexual harassment
as a form of
sex discrimination. I am satisfied none of the complaints of sexual harassment
made by Ms Wu have been substantiated.
The other respect in which the issue of
sex discrimination generally may be relevant (although this was not made clear
in counsel’s
submissions) was that there was a sexualisation of the
workplace by the sexual comments made by Mr Cohen. I am not satisfied this
the case for the reasons I have given above. Although I think it more than
likely many of the comments referred to by Ms Wu
were made, her own evidence was
that these comments were not common. Although in her original complaint she
suggested they were
common, in her evidence at this inquiry it became clear she
was referring to only isolated and single occasions. I am not satisfied
amounts to a sexualisation of the workplace, particularly in circumstances where
there was no objection by any worker over a
very lengthy period of time in which
Ms Wu worked in that workplace.
5.2.3 Discrimination on the ground of family responsibilities
Ms Wu complained she had been subjected to discrimination on the ground of
her family responsibilities. Her complaint focused on
her allegation Mr Cohen
had described her to a new manager in a way which implied she was a bad mother
as she had left her young
child to come to Australia.
I am not satisfied this can amount to discrimination on the ground of family
responsibilities, but in any event I was not satisfied
on the balance of
probabilities such comment was even made. Mr Cohen denied making this
Section 4A of the Act defines “family responsibilities”.
(1) In this Act,
family responsibilities
, in relation to an
employee, means responsibilities of the employee to care for or support:
(a) a dependent child of the employee; or
(b) any other immediate family member who is in need of care and
Section 4A(2) defines “dependent child” as “a child who is
wholly or substantially dependent on the employee”.
There was no evidence at all as to any extent to which Ms Wu’s child,
who at that time was still in China, was “a dependent
child” within
the meaning of the SDA.
Moreover, even were I satisfied the statement alleged had been made by Mr
Cohen, Ms Wu did not demonstrate any sense in which this
comment constituted
discrimination against her. If the comment had been made at most it was
hurtful, rude and ill judged. There
is no evidence which can support Ms
Wu’s allegation that it constituted discrimination on the ground of family
responsibilities.
None of these issues were addressed in counsel’s
submissions at the inquiry.
Under these circumstances I am not satisfied any of Ms Wu’s complaints
pursuant to the SDA are substantiated, and I propose
to dismiss these complaints
the subject of this inquiry, pursuant to section 81(1)(a) of the SDA.
5.3 DDA complaints – Application of the law
From the evidence presented at the inquiry it appears to me there were four
separate incidents of alleged discrimination in relation
to disability. The
disability in question was Ms Wu’s back injury, which she initially
suffered in May 1994 through a work
injury. Her back injury was significantly
exacerbated after she returned to work in June 1994. Ms Wu complained she was
to discrimination contrary to the DDA as a consequence of this
disability and that she was also subjected to harassment because of
disability. In the course of his submissions, counsel for the complainants
submitted Ms Wu was subjected to both direct and
indirect discrimination under
the DDA. I am not satisfied there was any indirect discrimination as defined in
of the DDA. The respondent conceded Ms Wu had a disability as defined
under the DDA in
section 4(1)
, and I am satisfied Ms Wu did have a disability
within the meaning of the DDA. I note the definition of disability includes a
that “previously existed but no longer exists”.
The central section with which the complaint of disability discrimination is
concerned is
which relates to discrimination in employment. In my
view Mr Kenyon’s submission that there was discrimination in the terms
conditions on which employment was offered to Ms Wu cannot be substantiated.
Indeed I am satisfied it was not even suggested
in the evidence or indeed in Ms
Wu’s complaint. My understanding of Ms Wu’s complaint is that the
respondents discriminated
against her on the ground of her disability in the
terms or conditions of employment afforded to her in the course of her
section 15(2)(a))
, or by subjecting her to some “other
detriment” (see
section 15(2)(d)).
The four separate incidents in relation to which discrimination in this
context was alleged are the circumstances of Ms Wu’s
June 1994; the circumstances in which proposals were made for her to return to
work in September 1994; the circumstances
of her actual return to work on 5
October 1994 and thereafter; and the incident of 6 February 1995.
5.3.1 The return to work in June 1994
I am satisfied that prior to her injury in May 1994 Ms Wu had been working
for some 15 months on the sample machine. I am satisfied
the sample machine
work was less physically onerous and seen as a higher status work within the
factory, certainly by Ms Wu. I do
not accept Mr Cohen’s assertion that on
numerous occasions he tried to get Ms Wu to leave the sample work and return to
shift because her work in the sample room was of an inadequate standard.
I am quite satisfied Ms Wu’s work with the samples
was adequate and was
not subject to any significant complaint by Mr Cohen or anyone else.
When Ms Wu returned to work after her back injury she was not returned to her
usual job in the sample room but was put on a late shift
as machinist. I do not
accept Mr Cohen’s evidence that his daughter had taken over the work in
sample room and there was no
capacity for Ms Wu to work there, and nor do I
accept Ms Wu was given work as an “assistant machinist”: there
to have been no such position existing in the factory. I do not accept
Mr Cohen’s evidence Ms Wu was a poor worker who had
made a number of
costly mistakes which had cost him money and customers over a period of 15
months. Nor do I accept he had asked
her on numerous occasions over this
lengthy period to stop working in the sample room and move to night shift.
There was no corroborative
evidence of significance to support this assertion by
Mr Cohen, and it is inconsistent with his own evidence (which is supported
almost all witnesses) that he was “the boss” who had “a
duty” to use workers in the most productive way
and a right to deploy any
workers where he saw fit. Accepting fairly lame excuses from a worker as a
reason for not going on night
shift where that worker was the cause of costly
and embarrassing mistakes is not consistent with the type of employer Mr Cohen
When Ms Wu returned to work after her first back injury she was given a new
job different from that which she had had prior to the
injury, on a different
shift and entailing, certainly in her view, a different status. I am satisfied
this amounted to less favourable
treatment, and further that it was subjecting
her to a “detriment”.
The issue that arises in considering whether this amounts to unlawful
discrimination is whether this less favourable treatment or
detriment was
imposed on Ms Wu on the ground of her disability.
I am satisfied Mr Cohen’s major concern at this time was irritation and
anger at Ms Wu for having made her WorkCover claim.
Imposing a detriment or
subjecting a worker to less favourable treatment because the worker has made a
WorkCover claim is not necessarily
the same thing as subjecting the worker to
less favourable treatment on the ground of a worker’s disability. It is
difficult to disentangle the two, but I am satisfied in this case that
part of Mr Cohen’s motivation arose because of Ms Wu’s
back injury.
I note that at the time Ms Wu was subjected to this less favourable treatment
she no longer had a disability she was
fit for work on an unrestricted basis.
It was on this basis Mr Cohen was able to require her to work on night shift on
the machines.
section 4(1)
of the DDA in defining
“disability” also refers to “past disability”.
I am satisfied that when Ms Wu returned to work in June 1994 and was required
to work at a different job on a different shift, she
was subjected to less
favourable treatment at least in part on the ground of the disability which she
had suffered with her back
injury in relation to which she had made a WorkCover
of the DDA provides that if an act is done for two or more
reasons, and one of those was the disability of the person, even if that
not the dominant or substantial reason for doing the act, then that is
sufficient to establish that the act was done for the
proscribed reason.
Under these circumstances I am satisfied this behaviour amounted to unlawful
discrimination against Ms Wu in the course of her employment
on the ground of
her disability.
5.3.2 The proposed return to work in September 1994
Ms Wu suffered either a further back injury or an exacerbation of her
original back injury in June 1994 and again took time off work
successful WorkCover claim. Her doctor approved her return to work in September
1994 on a restricted basis for a maximum
of two hours per day. When she advised
Mr Cohen, he instructed her to return to work on light duties for the hours of
11.00 pm to
I do not accept Mr Cohen’s evidence this was the only time when
finishing duties (appropriate light duties) were available for
Ms Wu. It is my
view Mr Cohen deliberately chose the most inconvenient hours for Ms Wu’s
and inconvenience her, and thereby treat her
less favourably.
As it happened Ms Wu did not ever return to work on this basis as the Union
intervened and different arrangements were made. However,
I am satisfied that
imposing this requirement on Ms Wu’s proposed return to work nevertheless
subjected her to a “detriment”
within the meaning of
of the DDA. Again, it is my view Mr Cohen was motivated by a number of
reasons in subjecting Ms Wu to this detriment. However,
I am satisfied at least
one of those reasons, whatever the others may have been, was on the ground of
her disability which had led
to her WorkCover claim and her absence from
Under these circumstances I am satisfied this behaviour amounted to unlawful
discrimination against Ms Wu in the course of her employment
on the ground of
her disability.
5.3.3 Ms Wu’s return to work on 5 October 1994
When Ms Wu returned to work on 5 October 1994 she was provided with her work
in a small room separated from the factory floor and
adjacent to Mrs
Cohen’s office. Although this room may have constituted relatively
comfortable physical working surroundings
for Ms Wu, nevertheless I am satisfied
she was put to work in circumstances of almost complete isolation from her
co-workers and
subjected to close and constant supervision of a sort unnecessary
to the nature of the finishing work she was undertaking, and which
provided to any other workers. Nor was it necessary to provide them to Ms Wu,
an experienced worker. I am quite satisfied
the regime imposed on Ms Wu,
including the close supervision, the isolation, and the significant restrictions
on her capacity to
communicate and interact with her co-workers, amounted to
less favourable treatment and a detriment in her employment. I do not
Cohen’s evidence, which I regarded as completely disingenuous, that this
was beneficial privileged treatment. Moreover,
even were it the case that Mr
Cohen subjectively believed this was privileged and beneficial treatment, it is
my view it was objectively
detrimental and less favourable treatment.
I am also of the view the treatment of Ms Wu when she returned to work (and
continuing for about four weeks until she returned to
the factory floor in
November 1994) was done at least in part because of her disability. Indeed, Mr
Cohen’s own evidence was
that he made these arrangements because of Ms
Wu’s disability, in that in his view it would be easier and more
appropriate
to have her working in the office/storeroom because of her
disability. I do not accept this disingenuous explanation provided by
but it is my view Ms Wu’s back injury and her successful WorkCover claim
was one of the reasons for Mr Cohen’s
less favourable treatment of Ms
I am satisfied that the conditions in which Ms Wu was required to work when
she returned to work on 5 October 1994 and for a period
of time thereafter,
constituted unlawful discrimination against her in the course of her employment
on the ground of, at least in
part, her disability.
I have reached this conclusion in some respects despite the primary thrust of
the presentation of the case for the complainants.
The main argument of the
case was that Mr Cohen did not believe that Ms Wu had a disability, and his
purpose was to punish her for
her successful feigning (in his view) of a back
injury, her union involvement, and her threat against Mr Cohen that she was able
to feign an injury and thereby destroy him, his family and his business. The
complainants’ argument was that Mr Cohen’s
discriminatory behaviour
sprung from his belief that she did not have a disability. I found
counsel’s argument and submissions
on this matter somewhat curious, as it
is not an argument which supports the complaint presented by Ms Wu.
Nevertheless in my view
the evidence is clear. I am satisfied Mr Cohen was
aware Ms Wu had a disability, although I am also satisfied he was angry with
for her successful WorkCover claim and for the threat which she had made against
him, his business and his family. He was also
angry because she had involved
the Union in his workplace, and (perhaps as a consequence of all these matters)
because they had fallen
out on a personal basis. However,
provides that even if the person’s disability is not a dominant or
substantial reason for undertaking a proscribed
discriminatory action that is
sufficient for the purposes of the DDA.
5.3.4 The incident on 6 February 1995
On 6 February 1995 there was an altercation between Ms Wu and Mr Cohen on the
factory floor. I am satisfied that during the course
of this altercation Mr
Cohen kicked Ms Wu in the back of her ankle on her left leg. A very significant
amount of time in this inquiry
was given over to attempting to prove whether Mr
Cohen kicked Ms Wu. In my view, whether or not this kick occurred, is not a
substantial
matter. Of more significance is the uncontested evidence that there
was a significant altercation on the floor of the factory between
the employer
and his employee. But did this altercation, culminating in Ms Wu being kicked
(deliberately or otherwise), amount to
unlawful discrimination in employment,
contrary to
of the DDA?
Mr Cohen’s evidence was that he required Ms Wu to move her feet from
the box, in part because he believed the way she was sitting
with her feet on
the box was bad for her back and might exacerbate her back injury and cause
further difficulties for her (and indeed
for him). He was also concerned the
clothes in the box might get dirty. Ms Wu acknowledged this latter concern. Ms
Wu would not
have had her feet on the box if it had not been for her disability.
If she had not been working on light duties because of her back
injury, she
would either have been working on the machines or in the sample room, or if she
were doing finishing work she would have
been standing with the other finishers.
I do not accept Mr Cohen’s evidence as to his motivation, which again
appears to me
quite disingenuous. However, I am satisfied he had Ms Wu’s
disability – that is her back injury – in his mind,
contributed to his state of mind and behaviour when he and Ms Wu became engaged
in an argument and then an altercation.
Under these circumstances I am
satisfied that
of the DDA can apply in this case, and as Mr
Cohen’s act was done at least in part on the basis of Ms Wu’s
disability,
that is sufficient for the purposes of the DDA. Furthermore, I am
satisfied Ms Wu was subjected to a detriment as a consequence
of her disability.
She was subjected to less favourable treatment than other employees, as no other
employees (without disabilities)
were subjected to Mr Cohen’s insistence
as to how they sat, raised voices, and involvement in a physical altercation.
5.3.5 Disability harassment
of the DDA makes it unlawful for an employer to harass an employee
who has a disability “in relation to the disability”.
submitted by Mr Kenyon that Ms Wu had been subjected to harassment in employment
by reason of her disability by Mr Cohen.
He did not refer me to any specific
aspects of harassment, but I understood was referring generally to the ongoing
deteriorating
relationship between Ms Wu and Mr Cohen from the time of her
initial return to work after her first injury in June 1994. It seems
difficult to make an additional finding of harassment in relation to behaviour
which I found constitutes direct discrimination
contrary to the DDA. I refer to
comments by Commissioner Charlesworth in the matter of
Humphries and
Humphries v Department of Education, Employment Training and Youth Affairs
(December 1997). Commissioner Charlesworth commented as follows in relation to
section 35:
“The notion of harassment is not defined in the Act and I have been
unable to find any authority on the matter. Harassment would
include behaviour
that does not otherwise fall within the definitions of direct of indirect
discrimination. It would cover, for example,
abuse or disparaging comment about
a person’s disability.”
Commissioner Charlesworth commented that alleged incidents of harassment in
that particular matter constituted direct discrimination
and were thus already
dealt with her determinations of the matter. Under those circumstances she
found no claim of harassment made
out, and I am satisfied a similar approach is
appropriate here. These specific matters of which Ms Wu has complained in this
have been dealt with above and I am satisfied they constitute direct
discrimination contrary to the DDA. There is no need to consider
the issue of
whether they amount to harassment as well.
5.4 The parties
Both Ms Wu and the Union presented as complainants in this matter. Mr
McDermott submitted the Union could not properly be a party
to this matter. I
am satisfied the Union is appropriately a party to the complaint pursuant to the
SDA. Section 50(1)(d) of the
SDA specifically provides that a complaint may be
made by a trade union of which a person aggrieved by the act is a member,
of that person. Ms Wu is a member of the Union. Ms Wu made a complaint
herself, but the Union also made a complaint pursuant
section 50(1)(d) of the
Act. Accordingly I am satisfied the Union is an appropriate party to that
complaint. However, as previously
indicated, I
have dismissed the complaints
under the SDA.
There is no equivalent of section 50(1)(d) in the DDA. Under those
circumstances it is much more difficult to determine any basis
upon which the
Union can be a complainant.
Mr Kenyon argued the Union was properly a party as
a principal which was empowered pursuant
to other legislation to represent its
own interests and to protect the interests of its members. I am not satisfied
these principles
are relevant in the context of a
complaint brought pursuant to
this legislation. Specific provisions are made for trade unions to
protect the
interests of their
members in different legislation such as the Workplace
Relations Act. Indeed, my understanding of
Mr McDermott’s objection
that it was based on his similar objection that much of the matter sought to be
put before this
inquiry should more appropriately
be put in another forum.
The respondents in this matter are both Mr Cohen and Express Embroidery Pty
Ltd. Section 123 of the DDA operates to establish that
a body corporate is
vicariously liable for the unlawful conduct of a director, servant or agent of
the body corporate. Mr Cohen is
a director of Express Embroidery Pty Ltd, and
under those circumstances section 123 imposes liability on the second
respondent.
6. CONCLUSION
to section 81(1)(a) of the SDA, I dismiss the complaints the subject of this
inquiry made pursuant to the SDA.
to section 103(1) of the DDA and for the reasons given above, I find the
complaints of unlawful discrimination in the course
of employment made by Ms Wu
against the respondents to be substantiated. In particular I am satisfied the
respondents have engaged
in unlawful conduct contrary to section 15(2)(d) of the
DDA, in that the respondents subjected her to detriment on the ground of
disability.
am satisfied Ms Wu suffered distress and humiliation as a consequence of the
respondents’ unlawful discrimination, and it
is appropriate the
respondents should pay to her damages by way of compensation in relation to this
humiliation and injury to feelings.
I note the parties have agreed
to present further evidence to this Commission in support of Ms Wu’s claim
in relation to damages.
I therefore direct that a telephone directions
conference be conducted within seven days of the date of this decision in order
additional hearings days to be listed.
I certify that this and the preceding seventy five pages (75) pages are a
true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Inquiry Commissioner
Hearing Solicitor:
Date: 12 September 2000
RTF format (207 KB)
Signed PDF/A format