Burgess v Unique Support Services (No 3) [2025] FedCFamC2G 1867 (12 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Burgess v Unique Support Services (No 3)
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1867
File number:
PEG 223 of 2021
Judgment of:
JUDGE LADHAMS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW
– contravention of
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) – determination of the
appropriate penalty.
Legislation:
Crimes Act 1914
Fair Work Act 2009
Cases cited:
Australian Building and Construction
Commissioner v Pattinson & Anor
(2022) 274 CLR 450
[2022] HCA 13
Burgess v Unique Support Services Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2024] FedCFamC2G
Fair Work Ombudsman v Maclean Bay Pty Ltd (No 2)
Fair Work Ombudsman v NSN Pty Ltd (t/as New Shanghai Charlestown)
(2017) 275 IR 148
[2017] FCA 1301
Fair Work Ombudsman v Yogurberry World Square Pty Ltd
Hill v St Anthony’s Tennis Club (No 2)
[2023] FedCFamC2G
Kelly v Fitzpatrick
(2007) 166 IR 14
[2007] FCA 1080
Ponzio v B & P Caelli Constructions Pty Ltd
(2007) 158 FCR 543
[2007] FCAFC 65
Sayed v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2016] FCAFC 4
Trade Practices Commission v CSR Ltd
(1991) ATPR 41-076
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The applicant appeared in person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr D Maurice
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Rebus Legal
PEG 223 of 2021
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
KRISTY BURGESS
UNIQUE SUPPORT SERVICES PTY
JUDGE LADHAMS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (Fair Work Act), the
respondent pay a pecuniary penalty in the sum of $5,000 for its contravention of
Fair Work Act
referred to in the declaration made on 10 October
s 546(3)(c)
Fair Work Act
, the respondent pay the pecuniary penalty
referred to in order 1 to the applicant.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or
order to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
or to record a variation to the order pursuant to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2)
(General Federal Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE LADHAMS:
INTRODUCTION
Burgess was formerly employed by Unique Support Services Pty Ltd as a disability
support worker on a casual basis. In
Burgess v Unique Support Services Pty
[2024] FedCFamC2G 1010
), I made a declaration
that Unique Support Services contravened
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (Fair Work Act) by taking adverse action against Ms Burgess by
removing her from a shift she was scheduled to work and dismissing
her from her
employment. The findings I made and the reasons for those findings are set out
and are not repeated here.
matter comes before me again for the determination of the appropriate penalty to
be imposed on Unique Support Services for the
contraventions of
Fair Work Act
APPROACH TO DETERMINING AN APPROPRIATE PENALTY
Fair Work Act
allows the Court to order that a person pay a
pecuniary penalty that the Court considers to be appropriate if the Court is
that the person has contravened a civil remedy provision.
Fair Work Act
is a civil remedy provision: see item 11 of the
Fair Work Act
. The primary purpose of imposing a
penalty is deterrence:
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v
Pattinson & Anor
(2022) 274 CLR 450
[2022] HCA 13
steps that the Court will ordinarily take in determining an appropriate penalty
were summarised in
Fair Work Ombudsman v NSN Pty Ltd (t/as New Shanghai
Charlestown)
(2017) 275 IR 148
[2017] FCA 1301.
The five steps summarised
at [36] of that judgment are:
(a) identify the separate contraventions;
(b) consider whether each separate contravention should be dealt with
independently or with some degree of aggregation for contraventions
arising out
of the same course of conduct;
(c) consider whether there should be further adjustment to ensure that, to the
extent of any overlap between groups of contravention,
there is no double
penalty imposed;
(d) consider the appropriate penalty for each final individual group of
contraventions; and
(e) consider the overall penalties arrived at and apply the totality principle,
making adjustments as necessary.
consider these steps to the extent that they are relevant in this
proceeding.
DETERMINATION OF THE APPROPRIATE PENALTY IN THIS CASE
Identification of the contravention(s) and, if there are more
than one, whether they arose out of the same course of conduct
declaration I made on 10 October 2024 was in the following terms:
The respondent contravened
Fair Work Act 2009
taking adverse action against the applicant for a prohibited reason by:
(a) removing the applicant from a shift she was scheduled to work on 9 August
(b) dismissing the applicant.
is some dispute between the parties in relation to whether this is properly
considered to be one contravention or two contraventions.
Ms Burgess submitted
that there were two distinct contraventions which did not arise out of the same
course of conduct and Unique
Support Services submitted that there was a single
contravention.
my view, there were two contraventions. On the facts as I found them in
(a) Unique Support Services took adverse action against Ms Burgess on 4 August
2021 by removing her from a shift she was scheduled
to work on 9 August 2021,
which altered her position to her prejudice; and
(b) Unique Support Services took adverse action against Ms Burgess on 10 August
2021 by dismissing her from her employment.
that these were separate actions, which amount to ‘adverse action’
under separate paragraphs within
Fair Work Act
, taken on separate
days, it is appropriate to view them as separate contraventions.
in my view, it is appropriate to view the two actions as arising out of the same
course of conduct. I have formed this view
having regard to the contemporaneity
of the two actions, the investigation into Ms Burgess’ conduct that
occurred at the time
and that Ms Burgess did not establish that she
sustained any specific loss arising from her dismissal beyond the loss she
from being removed from the shift.
this case, it is appropriate to treat the contraventions as aggregated and
impose a penalty as though there was a single contravention
Fair Work Act
The need to consider further adjustment does not arise
that there is only one course of conduct to consider, there is no need to
consider further adjustments in this matter to avoid
imposing a double penalty.
The appropriate penalty
approach that a court should take when determining the appropriate penalty was
considered by the High Court in
. In that case, the High Court
held that the power conferred by
Fair Work Act
constrained by the criminal law notion of proportionality and there is nothing
in the text, context or purpose of
which requires that the maximum penalty
be reserved for the most serious cases:
at [10], [49], [50].
The task of the Court remains to determine the ‘appropriate’ penalty
in the circumstances of the
particular case:
at [19]. An
‘appropriate’ penalty is one that ‘strikes a reasonable
balance between oppressive severity and the
need for deterrence in respect of
the particular case’:
appropriate penalty, as set out in
Kelly v Fitzpatrick
(2007) 166 IR 14
[2007] FCA 1080
The nature and
extent of the conduct which led to the breaches.
circumstances in which that conduct took place.
The nature and
extent of any loss or damage sustained as a result of the breaches.
Whether there
had been similar previous conduct by the respondent.
Whether the
breaches were properly distinct or arose out of the one course of conduct.
The size of the
business enterprise involved.
Whether or not
the breaches were deliberate.
Whether senior
management was involved in the breaches.
Whether the
party committing the breach had exhibited contrition.
Whether the
party committing the breach had taken corrective action.
Whether the
party committing the breach had cooperated with the enforcement
authorities.
The need to
ensure compliance with minimum standards by provision of an effective means for
investigation and enforcement of employee
entitlements and
The need for
specific and general deterrence.
factors are not to be treated as a checklist and the Court’s task remains
to determine the appropriate penalty:
at [19]. I have addressed
these factors below to the extent that they are the subject of evidence or
relevant to the present application.
Maximum penalties
turning to the various factors that inform the determination of the appropriate
penalty, it is appropriate to identify the
maximum penalty that can be applied
in this matter.
Fair Work Act
, the maximum penalty that can be
applied in respect of a contravention of
by Unique Support Services is
300 penalty units. ‘Penalty unit’ has the meaning given by
Crimes Act 1914
Fair Work Act
. At the time of
the contravention, a penalty unit was valued at $222. The maximum penalty that
can be applied in this matter is therefore
The nature and extent of the conduct which led to the
contravention of
Fair Work Act
contravention in the present matter arose from a single course of conduct. As
indicated above, Unique Support Services contravened
by removing Ms Burgess from a single shift and then terminating her
casual employment.
The circumstances in which the conduct took
largely adopt the submissions advanced by Unique Support Services in relation to
the circumstances in which the conduct took place,
which are consistent with the
evidence given by the parties at the hearing on liability and with my findings
. Those circumstances are:
(a) Unique Support Services is a disability support provider who provides
support and accommodation to participants in the disability
(b) Ms Burgess was employed by Unique Support Service from February 2021 to
August 2021 as a disability support worker;
(c) at all material times, Unique Support Services employed Ms Burgess on a
casual basis;
(d) between 7 July 2021 and 29 July 2021, Ms Burgess made complaints and
inquiries in relation to her employment;
(e) Unique Support Services investigated the complaints and inquiries raised by
Ms Burgess and took action in response, including
by removing Ms Burgess
from further shifts with a particular client (referred to as J in
) at the request of Ms Burgess;
(f) Unique Support Services also commenced an internal investigation into Ms
Burgess and reflected on an incident where Ms Burgess
left a client unattended
in the shower for 30 minutes on or about 21 June 2021, as well as reviewing
video footage from a shift with
J and receiving a statement from J’s
(g) Unique Support Services considered whether Ms Burgess could be allocated to
work with other clients, but struggled to provide
casual hours to her;
(h) Unique Support Services decided to terminate Ms Burgess’
employment;
(i) on 4 August 2021 Unique Support Services advised Ms Burgess via text message
that she had been removed from her remaining shifts
for that week, which
relevantly comprised of one shift scheduled for 9 August 2021; and
(j) on 10 August 2021 Unique Support Services advised Ms Burgess by email that
her employment with Unique Support Services would
be terminated.
The nature and extent of any loss or damage sustained as a
result of the contravention of
Fair Work Act
, I found that Ms Burgess had demonstrated loss of $169.74, being
the wages she would have received if she had performed the shift
on 9 August
2021, plus the superannuation that would have been paid to her in respect of
that shift.
accept the submission by Unique Support Services that there is no evidence to
support a finding of any greater loss or damage that
Ms Burgess has sustained as
a result of the contravention of
Fair Work Act
Whether there had been similar previous conduct by Unique
Support Services
is no evidence before the Court to suggest that Unique Support Services has
previously contravened
Fair Work Act
Whether the contraventions were properly distinct or arose
out of the one course of conduct
discussed above, I consider that Unique Support Services’ contraventions
Fair Work Act
by removing Ms Burgess from a shift she was
scheduled to work on 9 August 2021 and then dismissing her from her employment
out of the one course of conduct.
The size of Unique Support Services
Collette Knox, in an affidavit filed on 21 July 2025, deposed that Unique
Support Services employs approximately 85 employees,
of which 15 are full time,
20 are part time and 50 are casual employees. This is confirmed by the 2024
Annual Information Statement
for Unique Support Services annexed to Ms
Knox’s affidavit, which describes Unique Support Services as a large
charity and
calculates the number of full time equivalent staff as 37.
Ms Knox further deposed that Unique Support Services has been operating
since 2016 and only operates within Western Australia. This evidence has not
been challenged and I accept it.
Knox annexed to her affidavit the financial statements of Unique Support
Services for the past four years (some of these statements
were also annexed to
the affidavit of Ms Burgess filed on 21 July 2025). These statements show the
following net income and equity
for the financial years ended 30 June 2021 to 30
Whether or not the contravention of
was deliberate
Support Services submitted that while its actions of removing Ms Burgess from a
shift and dismissing her from her employment
were deliberate, the contravention
Fair Work Act
was not deliberate. Unique Support Services submitted that
it removed Ms Burgess from her shift and dismissed her from her employment
without knowing whether the conduct amounted to a contravention of the
and without turning its mind to the issue of whether the conduct was
contrary to the
Fair Work Act
. Unique Support Services characterised the
contravention as reckless or careless. Ms Burgess in her submissions adopted the
characterisation
of the contravention as reckless.
is no evidence before the Court to support Unique Support Services’
submission that the action was taken without the human
actors knowing that the
conduct amounted to a contravention of the
Fair Work Act
and without turning
their minds to whether the conduct was contrary to the
Fair Work Act
acknowledge that there is also no evidence before the Court from which I would
positively find or infer that Unique Support Services
deliberately contravened
Fair Work Act
I also acknowledge the observations of Judge Manousaridis in
Anthony’s Tennis Club (No 2)
[2023] FedCFamC2G 269
in response
to a submission that a contravention of
Fair Work Act
intentional or flagrant:
This submission ignores the nature of the conduct that constitutes a
contravention of s 340(1) of the FW Act. That subsection proscribes
that is engaged in for a particular proscribed reason, or for reasons that
include as a substantial reason the proscribed
reason. In those circumstances,
it makes no sense to say that a person who engaged in contravening conduct for a
proscribed reason
did so unintentionally.
Whether senior management was involved in the contravention
Fair Work Act
I expressed concern in
that I was unable to ascertain with
precision who were the relevant decision-makers within Unique Support Services,
it is not disputed
that members of the senior management team of Unique Support
Services were involved in the contravention.
Whether Unique Support Services had exhibited
party made any submissions or adduced any evidence in relation to this issue.
Whether Unique Support Services had taken corrective
is limited evidence before the Court of any corrective action taken by Unique
Support Services.
Knox and Ms Burgess both gave evidence that Unique Support Services paid to Ms
Burgess the damages I awarded on 10 October 2024,
albeit the payment was not
made until 21 July 2025.
Whether Unique Support Services had cooperated with the
enforcement authorities
consideration does not arise in this matter.
The need to ensure compliance with minimum standards by
provision of an effective means for investigation and enforcement of employee
entitlements
consideration does not arise in this matter.
The need for specific and general deterrence
this case, I take into account the need for general and specific deterrence. In
circumstances where there is a single course of
conduct and there is no evidence
before the Court to suggest that Unique Support Services has engaged in similar
conduct with other
employees, the need for specific deterrence is relatively
deterrence must serve a purpose that the penalty is not seen by others as
‘the cost of doing business’:
Fair Work Ombudsman v Yogurberry
World Square Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 1290
. A penalty should be
sufficiently high to be ‘likely to act as a deterrent in preventing
similar contraventions by like-minded
persons or organisations’:
v B & P Caelli Constructions Pty Ltd
(2007) 158 FCR 543
[2007] FCAFC 65
Marshall emphasised the importance of general deterrence in
Ombudsman v Maclean Bay Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2012] FCA 557
... It is important to ensure that the protections provided by the Act to
employees are real and effective and properly enforced.
The need for general
deterrence cannot be understated. Rights are a mere shell unless they are
respected...
consider that there is a need for general deterrence to prevent similar
contraventions of
Fair Work Act
by other organisations in a
similar position to Unique Support Services.
The appropriate penalty in this case
Support Services submitted that any penalty that the Court imposes in this case
should be nominal. On the other hand, Ms Burgess
submitted that an appropriate
penalty would be $33,300 for each contravention (this submission was advanced
prior to my finding above
that the contraventions arose from a single course of
do not accept either party’s submission.
contravention of
was serious. It is appropriate that more than a
nominal penalty be imposed. However, taking into account all of the matters
above, a penalty of $33,300 is too high. An appropriate penalty should
act as a deterrent without being severely oppressive. Taking
into account the
size and the financial position of Unique Support Services, a penalty of $33,000
would be severely oppressive.
my view, the appropriate penalty in this case is $5,000. That amount is not
insubstantial, taking into account the poor financial
position of Unique Support
Services, and will serve as a deterrent for Unique Support Services and for
other similar organisations.
However, the amount is not too severe. It takes
into account that the contravention was serious and involved the actions of
management, as well as that the contravention appears to be isolated and
the established loss suffered by Ms Burgess was low.
There is no need to address the totality principle in the
present case
I have considered the contraventions as arising out of a single course of
conduct and determined the penalty on that basis,
there is no need to consider
the totality principle in the present case.
The penalty should be paid to Ms Burgess
Burgess seeks that the penalty be payable to her. Unique Support Services
expresses no view on this.
allows the Court to order that the penalty be paid to a particular
person. In circumstances where Ms Burgess is the person affected
contravention and the person who commenced and maintained this enforcement
proceeding under the
Fair Work Act
, it is appropriate that the penalty be paid
to her: see
Sayed v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(2016) 239 FCR 336
[2016] FCAFC 4
OTHER MATTERS RAISED IN MS BURGESS’ SUBMISSIONS
were a number of other matters raised in Ms Burgess’ submissions which I
have not taken into account in the above analysis.
I now explain why several of
the matters raised by Ms Burgess were not relevant to the determination of the
appropriate penalty in
of the submissions made by Ms Burgess relate to the complaints that she made in
relation to her employment, which formed the
exercise of her workplace rights.
The penalty that I impose on Unique Support Services is for removing Ms Burgess
from a shift and
dismissing her from her employment, in contravention of
Fair Work Act
. This does not require me to assess or consider any
other response by Unique Support Services to Ms Burgess’ complaints
relation to her employment. It also does not require me to comment on
evidence given at the hearing in relation to the availability
of personal
protective equipment, which was the subject matter of some of the complaints.
her written submissions, Ms Burgess alleged that witnesses for Unique Support
Services gave evidence that annexures to their affidavits
were falsified. She
submitted that the evidence of witnesses for Unique Support Services could be
considered to be perjurious, collusive
and indicative that Unique Support
Services attempted to pervert the course of justice and expressed the view that
I shared this
sentiment in
. This is not factually accurate. I
raised concerns in
of Ms Knox and Mr Wyatt, substantial parts of which adopted almost identical
but did not otherwise express any view that witnesses had fabricated
evidence or attempted to pervert the course of justice. My assessment
evidence of Ms Knox and Mr Wyatt was relevant to my finding that Unique Support
Services had not discharged its reverse onus,
but is not something that
otherwise impacts the determination of the appropriate penalty.
of the submissions made by Ms Burgess asserted factual matters relevant to the
findings I made in
but which were not in evidence before me at
the time I delivered that judgment. Ms Burgess also made submissions which
seek to reopen the case in relation to liability to allege that there
were additional contraventions of provisions of the
Fair Work Act
various individuals should be held responsible for the contraventions. In this
judgment, I have considered the appropriate
penalty for the contravention that I
. A penalty hearing is not an opportunity for an
applicant to reopen their case in respect of liability.
the reasons given, I impose a penalty on Unique Support Services of $5,000 in
respect of the contravention of
Fair Work Act
. The penalty should be paid to Ms Burgess.
I certify that the preceding fifty (50)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 12 November 2025
Trade Practices
Commission v CSR Ltd
(1991) ATPR 41-076
[1990] FCA 521
similar, albeit not identical, list of relevant factors is set out.
Figures in brackets represent
a negative number.
RTF format (382 KB)
Signed PDF/A format