2008607 (Refugee) [2024] AATA 4173 (11 October 2024)
2008607 (Refugee)
[2024] AATA 4173
(11 October 2024)
DECISION RECORD
Migration & Refugee Division
REPRESENTATIVE:
Danielle Munro
CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the
direction that the applicant satisfies s 36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Statement made on 11 October 2024 at 3:25pm
– protection visa – Uganda – political opinion –
opposition to the government – Forum for Democratic
particular social group – people with HIV/AIDS – detention –
presumption of homosexuality –
denial of medical services – East
African Community – decision under review remitted
LEGISLATION
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations
, Schedule 2
SZRTC v Minister for Immigration and Broder
[2014] FCAFC 43
Any references appearing in square brackets
indicate that information has been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431
Migration Act 1958
and replaced with generic information
which does not allow the identification of an applicant, or their relative or
other dependants.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR
This is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the
Minister for Home Affairs on 5 May 2020 to refuse to grant
the applicant a
protection visa under
Migration Act 1958
The applicant who claims to be a citizen of Uganda, applied for the visa on 5
October 2015. The delegate refused to grant the visa
on the basis that the
applicant did not meet the legal requires for the grant of a protection visa.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 17 September 2024 to give
evidence and present arguments.
The applicant was represented in relation to the review.
CRITERIA FOR A PROTECTION VISA
The criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and
Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) (the Regulations). An
applicant for the visa must meet one of the alternative criteria in
s 36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That
is, he or she is either a person in
respect of whom Australia has protection obligations under the
‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other ‘complementary
protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same family unit as such a
person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same class.
Section 36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the
applicant for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the
Minister is satisfied Australia has protection obligations because the person is
A person is a refugee if, in the case of a person who has a nationality, they
are outside the country of their nationality and,
owing to a well-founded fear
of persecution, are unable or unwilling to avail themselves of the protection of
that country: s 5H(1)(a).
In the case of a person without a nationality,
they are a refugee if they are outside the country of their former habitual
and, owing to a well-founded fear of persecution, are unable or
unwilling to return to that country: s 5H(1)(b).
Under s 5J(1), a person has a well-founded fear of persecution if they
fear being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality,
membership of
a particular social group or political opinion, there is a real chance they
would be persecuted for one or more of
those reasons, and the real chance of
persecution relates to all areas of the relevant country. Additional
requirements relating
to a ‘well-founded fear of persecution’ and
circumstances in which a person will be taken not to have such a fear are
out in ss 5J(2)-(6) and ss 5K-LA, which are extracted in the
attachment to this decision.
If a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s 36(2)(a), he
or she may nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant
of the visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations
because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of being
removed from
Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that he or
she will suffer significant harm: s 36(2)(aa) (‘the complementary
protection criterion’). The meaning of significant harm, and the
circumstances in which a person will be taken not to face
a real risk of
significant harm, are set out in ss 36(2A) and (2B), which are extracted in
the attachment to this decision.
Mandatory considerations
In accordance with Ministerial Direction No.84, made under s 499 of the
Act, the Tribunal has taken account of the ‘Refugee
Law Guidelines’
and ‘Complementary Protection Guidelines’ prepared by the Department
of Home Affairs, and country
information assessments prepared by the Department
of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) expressly for protection status
determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision
under consideration.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
The issue in this case is whether the applicant is a person in respect of whom
Australia has protection obligations as outlined
in s 36(2)(a) or s 36(2)(aa) of
the Act. For the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the decision
under review should
be remitted for reconsideration with the direction that the
applicant meets the requirements of s 36(2)(a) of the Act.
Section 5AAA of the Act
Pursuant to s 5AAA of the Act, it is the responsibility of the applicant to
specify all particulars of their claim to be a person
in respect of whom
Australia has protection obligations, and to provide sufficient evidence to
establish the claim. The Tribunal
has no responsibility or obligation to specify
or assist the applicant in specifying particulars of their claim, nor does the
have any responsibility or obligation to establish, or assist in
establishing, the claim. The Tribunal applied this provision when
reviewing the
merit of the applicant’s claims and evidence.
applicant’s background - country of reference
The applicant was born in Uganda on [date]. In establishing his identity, the
applicant placed reliance on a certified copy of the
biodata page of a passport
apparently issued by the responsible authority in the Republic of Uganda in the
name of the applicant.
The Department did not challenge the authenticity of this
document, his passport, or his identity. The personal data in the copy
document is consistent with other information the applicant provided in the
protection visa application, and his evidence
at hearing about his identity,
nationality, and citizenship.
In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the Tribunal accepts the evidence
is sufficient to establish the applicant’ identity,
and that he is a
national and citizen of the Republic of Uganda. There is no evidence that
indicates the applicant is a citizen of
any other country.
The Tribunal finds the applicant is a citizen of the Republic of Uganda
(Uganda) , with a right to enter and reside in Uganda.
The Tribunal also finds
Uganda is the country of reference against which to assess his protection
The applicant’s ethnicity is Bantu.
The East African Community
The Tribunal also finds that the Uganda is a member of the East African
Community (EAC) and that the other member states of EAC
are Burundi, Kenya,
Rwanda, South Sudan, Uganda, and the United Republic of Tanzania.
The EAC was established by treaty which grants to the citizens of each member
country freedom of movement between member countries,
and a right of residence
in each member country for up to 6 months.
In pre-hearing written submissions, the applicant’s legal representative
correctly acknowledged the right to enter and reside
in EAC countries for up to
6 months constitutes a ‘right to enter and stay’ that is
comprehended by s 36(3) of the Act.
In support of this submission the
applicants’ legal representative referred the Tribunal to the Federal
Court decision of Justices
Tracey, Flick and Griffiths in the case of
SZRTC v Minister for Immigration and Broder
[2014] FCAFC 43
(11 April 2014).
The Tribunal is satisfied the EAC treaty bestows on the applicant a right to
enter and reside temporarily outside Uganda for up
to 6 months in any EAC member
The court in
provided guidance in the application of s 36(3) in
circumstances where the Tribunal has determined an applicant for a protection
visa has a right to enter and reside temporarily in a country other than their
Before applying s 36(3) of the Act, it is necessary to determine whether one or
more of the criteria for a protection visa prescribed
in s 36(2) of the Act is
Therefore, it is necessary to first decide that in the event of the removal of
the applicant to Uganda now or in the reasonably
foreseeable future, whether the
applicant would be subjected to:
a real chance of
serious harm (the refugee criterion); or,
a real risk of
significant harm (the complementary protection criterion),
If either question is answered in the affirmative, the Tribunal is required to
decide whether one or more of the qualifications
contained in s 36(3) applies to
the applicant.
Having determined that s.36(3) applies in this case, it is necessary for the
Tribunal to determine whether one or more of the qualifications
contained in
Sub-sections (4), (5) and (5A) apply to close the ‘gateway’ to a
permanent protection visa, if the Tribunal
finds the applicant is owed
protection in Australia because he meets the refugee criterion prescribed in s
36(2)(a) of the Act,
or the complementary protection criterion prescribed in s
36(2)(aa) of the Act.
Section 36(3) of the Act relevantly provides that:
(3) Australia
is taken not to have protection obligations in respect of a
non - citizen who has not taken all possible steps to avail
herself of a right to enter and reside in, whether temporarily or permanently
and however that right arose or is expressed,
any country apart from Australia,
including countries of which the non - citizen is a national.
(4) However,
does not apply in relation to a country in respect of which:
(a) the non - citizen
has a well - founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race,
religion, nationality, membership of a
particular social group or political
opinion; or
(b) the Minister has substantial grounds for believing
that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the non - citizen
himself or herself of a right mentioned in
there would be a real risk that the non - citizen will suffer
significant harm in relation to the country.
does not apply in relation to a country if the non - citizen has a
well - founded fear that:
(a) the country will return the non - citizen
to another country; and
non - citizen will be persecuted in that other country for reasons of
race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular
social group or
political opinion.
does not apply in relation to a country if:
(a) the non - citizen has a
well - founded fear that the country will return the
non - citizen to another country; and
(b) the Minister has substantial grounds for believing
that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the non - citizen
himself or herself of a right mentioned in
there would be a real risk that the non - citizen will suffer
significant harm in relation to the other country
The Tribunal will return to the forgoing matters later in these reasons.
Nevertheless, in addition to assessing the applicant’s
protection claims
against Uganda, it is necessary to assess the claims against the other member
countries of the EAC.
Education history
The applicant successfully completed secondary school in [specified year]. In
[year] he completed a [Qualification 1] in Uganda.
In 2011 the applicant completed the [Qualification 2], a course provided by
[Organisation 1].
The applicant can speak, read, and write English and Luganda, being the
language spoken by ethnic Bantus.
Employment history
From November 2014 to July 2015 the applicant was employed by [local sport
agency] in the position of [Position 1].
From November 2013 to July 2015, the applicant was employed by [Organisation 1]
with several areas of responsibility, namely:
[roles including
Position 1].
From November 2000 to July 2015 the applicant was employed as [an Occupation 1]
at [Agency 1].
The applicant described his occupation as [Occupation 1], and the Tribunal
accepts that the applicant was [an Occupation 1] in Uganda,
and, based on the
documentation and the applicant’s evidence at hearing, the Tribunal is
satisfied that the applicant was a
widely known to be a professional [Occupation
Migration history
On 5 August 2015 the applicant was granted a temporary GA-400 visa which
permitted him to enter Australia for the purpose of [attending
an international
[Later in] August 2015 the applicant arrived in Australia.
[In] September 2015 the GA-400 visa expired.
On 5 October 2015 the applicant lodged an application for a permanent
Protection visa.
On 6 October 2015 the applicant was granted a Bridging visa which permits him
to remain temporarily in Australia, until his application
for a permanent
Protection visa is finally determined.
Assessment of the claims
and evidence
On 5 May 2020 the delegate of the Minister refused to grant the applicant a
protection visa and gave written reasons for the decision
(the primary
decision). The Tribunal read the record of the primary decision that the
applicant provided to the Tribunal prior to
the hearing.
In summary, before the delegate of the Minister, the applicant claimed he met
the requirements for the grant of a Protection visa
because he had a
well-founded fear of persecution in Uganda for the reason of political opinion.
The applicant claimed he was adversely
known to the Government, and the state
security apparatus because he was stridently critical of the government when he
in a national broadcast]. Additionally, he claimed he was involved in
an opposition political organisation, namely the Forum for
Democratic Change
which challenged the Governing political party and politicians on the grounds of
competence, integrity, and fitness
to hold public office.
The applicant claimed he was arbitrarily detained by members of the state
security services, tortured, and threatened with death.
On 20 March 2020 the applicant was voluntarily interviewed by the Department
The delegate of the Minister was not persuaded that the applicant had a
well-founded fear of persecution in his home country and
refused his application
for a protection visa.
It is unnecessary for the Tribunal to determine the merit of the claims the
applicant relied on before the delegate of the Minister.
This is a consequence
of changes to the applicant’s circumstances which relate to his health.
The changes are relevant and
material to the determination of whether the
applicant meets the requirements for the grant of a protection visa.
The new claim
The applicant now claims to have a well-founded fear of persecution for the
reason of his membership of a particular social group,
namely, persons living
with the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) in Uganda, and in each of the other
member countries of the EAC.
[Doctor A, positions specified] provided 2 medical reports to the Tribunal. The
Tribunal accepts [Doctor A] is an expert in infectious
diseases, including HIV
infection and the management of patients with HIV infection, and accepts the
opinions of [Doctor A] about
the applicant’s health as they are stated in
2 medical reports which form part of the evidence this
[Doctor A’s] report dated 16 September 2024, is referred to in these
reasons as the first report, and [Doctor A’s] post
hearing report which
was provided to the Tribunal on 20 September 2024, is referred as the second
The first report established that the applicant was diagnosed with HIV and AIDS
when he was admitted to [Hospital 1] in September
2019. The diagnosis was
incidental to the reason the applicant was hospitalised.
The applicant was hospitalised and initially diagnosed with [two specified
conditions], both conditions were found to be serious.
While being assessed the
applicant he was diagnosed with HIV/AIDS and epilepsy. The applicant had been
unaware that he was HIV positive
and epileptic.
Three months after the original presentation, a chest x-ray disclosed what
appeared to be a lung abnormality. The abnormality was
biopsied, but no specific
diagnosis was able to be made. Clinicians at [Hospital 1] continue to monitor
the abnormality.
Against this background, on 20 March 2020 the applicant underwent a Department
interview relevant to his protection claims and the
evidence upon which he was
relying to substantiate his claims. The applicant did not disclose his diagnosis
during the interview,
or before the primary decision was made.
In the first report [Doctor A] observes that the applicant’s treatment
plan includes the ongoing assistance he receives from
the social work unit of
the hospital, and community nursing staff. [Doctor A] states that these services
are vital for the applicant’s
psychological and physical wellbeing.
In the opinion of the Tribunal, in the ordinary course of human experience, it
is common knowledge that a diagnosis of HIV/AIDS
would be likely to engender in
an individual with that diagnosis a rational fear of consequential societal
stigmatisation, discrimination,
the health deficits of HIV/AIDS, and, in this
case, a compounding rational fear that the epileptic fit he suffered in public
led to his first hospitalisation could recur in public. This opinion is
supported by [Doctor A], who authoritatively opines in his
first report that
stigma related to HIV and the attitudes towards and discrimination against those
with HIV are issues in
particularly
acute in many sub-Saharan African countries such as Uganda and
have a huge impact on a patient’s physical and mental
The Tribunal finds that
[Doctor A’s] opinion was derived from his training and experience as a
infectious disease physician
and his experience in the management of HIV
infection, and finds that his opinion is within the scope of his expertise.
In reaching the foregoing finding the Tribunal is reassured, if reassurance is
necessary, by the senior positions held by [this
His [positions] to which
he has been appointed, demonstrate that [Doctor A] is regarded by his medical
peers to be an expert in the
diagnosis, treatment and management of HIV/AIDS and
related conditions, and global trends in that respect.
In evidence the applicant contended that he has struggled to come to terms with
the diagnosis, he is receiving counselling support
in this respect, and for that
reason he did not disclose his various medical conditions during the Department
interview and before
the primary decision was made. [Doctor A’s] first
report is consistent with and supportive of this evidence.
Timing of the assertion of the new claim and advancing
supporting evidence - no unfavourable inference
The Tribunal is satisfied the applicant has given a reasonable explanation for
not raising the new claim, and presenting supporting
evidence before the primary
decision was made. On balance, the Tribunal draws no inference unfavourable to
the credibility of the
new claim or the supporting evidence on the basis that
the applicant failed to make the claim and advance supporting evidence before
the primary decision was made.
In April 2020, the applicant was admitted to [Hospital 1] following a seizure.
This condition was treated as a complication of the
applicant’s
pre-existing [specified condition] and was treated with an anticonvulsant
The applicant’s HIV infection requires regular specialist review, HIV
load testing, and other tests necessary to monitor the
efficacy and toxicity of
HIV therapy. Although the applicant’s medications have not been specified
in either medical report,
by necessary implication both reports imply that the
applicant’s medical therapy includes regular drug therapy. In evidence
applicant asserted, and the Tribunal accepts that he takes multiple tablets
daily to manage his HIV infection and epilepsy.
Conditions in
The legislature in Uganda enacted the Anti-Homosexuality Act 2023 (AHA), Acts
2023, Parliament of Uganda. The applicant submits
the AHA is detrimental to all
men in Uganda living with HIV and would be seriously detrimental to him if he is
removed to Uganda
now or in the reasonably foreseeable future.
It is submitted, the AHA has reduced the use of HIV health care services in
Uganda because affected individuals fear being classified
as homosexual.
Homosexuals also fear being excluded from access to accommodation and being held
at ‘arms-length’ by the
general population, public and private
service providers, and employers if they are suspected of being homosexual.
The applicant gave evidence which the Tribunal accepts that to properly manage
his HIV infection and epilepsy, he must take multiple
tablets every day. There
would be no hiding his condition from any person with whom he was living or
working daily.
Section 11 of the AHA criminalises the promotion of homosexuality and imposes a
penalty of up to 20 years imprisonment for that
offence. This offence includes
letting or sub-letting housing to persons who may commit homosexual acts on
rented premises.
The constitutional validity of the AHA was challenged in Uganda’s
Constitutional Court. The court found s 11(the accommodation
provision) to be
unconstitutional but ruled that the legislation imposed a legal obligation on
Ugandans to report acts of homosexuality.
The Court ruling has been taken to
have imposed a continuous obligation on landlords and the community generally to
report known
or suspected homosexual
activities.
In July 2024, a Supreme Court appeal was filed against the decision of the
Constitutional Court that the AHA is consistent with
Constitution
did not violate internationally accepted human
Andrew Tendo, resident medical officer in a US-funded clinic, warned that new
waves of HIV infections were forming a cohort of vulnerable
people who are not
seeking treatment because they are afraid of being identified and arrested under
the new legislation.
Matthew Kavanagh, a professor of global health at Georgetown University, states
that due to a fear of being identified as a gay
man, even if they are
heterosexual, individuals certainly will not present for HIV testing because
many Ugandans associate HIV with
Therefore, due to these
societal and cultural assumptions around HIV merely engaging in HIV prevention,
testing and treatment efforts
can implicate individuals as being gay and lead to
the imposition of punishment [under the new Anti-Homosexuality Act
Under the AHA people can be punished for providing health care, potentially
facing fines and licence
cancellation.
Section 11 (3) of
the AHA protects service providers who breach patient confidentiality by
disclosing patient/client information.
This law has been interpreted widely to
mean that service providers must report to police any patient/client they
suspect, or know
is gay. Consequently, faith in patient/client confidentiality
has collapsed in Uganda.
The UNAIDS Regional Director for Eastern and Southern Africa states that
criminalisation of a segment of the population most at
risk from HIV has
undermined public health and the overall HIV response in
In reliance on the forgoing country information, it is submitted that the
applicant is reasonably likely to be denied access to
housing as landlords would
assume the applicant is gay because he is HIV positive, and they would be at
risk being charged under
the new Anti-Homosexuality Act if they failed to report
him to the authorities. The same fear of report and exclusion from medical
assistance arises from the existence of the legislation in its current
The foregoing submission is supported by [Doctor A’s] second report in
which he opines that the applicant’s HIV infection
would get out of
control, leading to a deterioration in his health, acquisition of drug
resistance, increased risk of transmission
of the virus, and a decrease in
immune function leading to life-threatening opportunistic
infections.
Additionally, [Doctor A] opines that as a result of the applicant having
interrupted or delayed supply of ARVs, overtime he would
develop wasting and
progressive ill health leading to
Therefore, it is evident
that in the likely event of interrupted or delayed supply of antivirals, in the
right dosages for the applicant,
and regular expert monitoring of his condition,
if he is returned to Uganda or an EAC country, over time his appearance would be
reasonably likely to disclose to the community that he is HIV positive, and lead
to the assumption that he has sex with men, he is
a gay man, and he is
infectious.
On balance, the evidence is sufficient to establish to the satisfaction of the
Tribunal that the applicant would be subject to a
real chance of systematic
discriminatory conduct leading to significant physical harassment, physical
mistreatment, economic hardship,
and denial of access to basic medical services,
where the denial would threaten his capacity to subsist.
The Tribunal has considered the DFAT Country Information Brief Uganda. It
provides little assistance in relation to this review.
No specific DFAT country
information report on Uganda has been published.
The Tribunal accepts the country information about Uganda that is referenced in
the applicant’s written submissions, including
the consequential
submissions as to the risk of harm that the applicant would be subjected because
he is living with HIV, if he is
returned to Uganda now and in the reasonably
foreseeable future, to be reliable and persuasive.
– refugee criterion
Having considered the applicant’s claims individually and cumulatively,
the evidence, including the expert medical reports,
considered alone and in
conjunction with the country information about Uganda, is sufficient to
establish to the satisfaction of
the Tribunal the existence of a real chance the
applicant would be subject to serious harm for the reason of his membership of a
particular social group, namely Ugandans living with HIV, which is a reason
specified in s 5J(1)(a) of the Act, if he is removed
to Uganda now or in the
reasonably foreseeable future. Accordingly, the applicant does satisfy the
criterion in s 36(2)(a) of the
Consequently, the Tribunal is satisfied the applicant has a well-founded fear
of persecution for a reasons specified in s 5J(1)
of the Act. Accordingly, the
Tribunal is satisfied the applicant meets the definition of refugee as set out
in s 5H of the Act.
Uganda: a member state of the East African
Community sub-Saharan African states
Further to the above discussion about the operation of s 36(3) of the Act, this
provision is relevant to the determination whether
the applicant is owed
protection pursuant to the laws of Australia.
Pursuant to the EAC agreement the applicant has a right to enter and stay
temporarily in the countries that are party to the agreement.
Those countries
have been identified in these reasons at paragraph 17. That fact considered with
s 36 of the Act renders the applicant
ineligible for protection in Australia,
unless the evidence demonstrates the applicant will be persecuted in those
countries for
the reason of race, religion, nationality, membership of a
particular social group or political opinion.
It has already been observed by the Tribunal that [Doctor A] authoritatively
states in his first report that stigma related to HIV
and the attitudes towards
and discrimination against individuals living with HIV are issues in any
country, and those issues are
particularly
acute in many sub-Saharan African
countries such as Uganda and have a huge impact on a patient’s physical
and mental health.
Tribunal gives [Doctor A’s] opinion significant weight. Relevantly, the
import of the applicant’s evidence is that
he would be readily identified
as a foreigner in the EAC countries because he speaks Bantu, whereas in the
other member states different
languages are spoken.
– right to enter and stay temporarily in any EAC member state
The Tribunal is satisfied the applicant, in search of regular medical
monitoring, assessment and treatment for the sort described
by [Doctor A] in the
medical reports, would be readily identify in the EAC countries as a Bantu
speaking foreigner who is HIV positive,
and assumed to be infectious, and best
In the absence of country information and evidence to the contrary, the
Tribunal is satisfied of the existence of a real chance
the applicant would be
stigmatised and discriminated against, and that the applicant would face life
threatening denial of access
to HIV medication, consistent medical monitoring
and treatment, or interrupted access to HIV medication and medical monitoring
treatment in the EAC countries.
The Tribunal is satisfied the above-mentioned circumstances fall within the
exception in s 36 of the Act, and that the section does
not exclude the
applicant from protection in Australia, because the Tribunal is satisfied of the
existence of a real chance the applicant
will be persecuted in the ECA countries
for the reason of his membership of a particular social group, namely men living
Consequently, the finding that the applicant satisfies the provisions of s 5J
of the Act, and that he has a well-founded fear of
persecution in Uganda stands.
Furthermore, the Tribunal’s finding that the applicant satisfies the real
chance test, due to
a well-founded fear of persecution in Uganda for a reasons
specified in s 5J(1) of the Act has not been negated by s 36(3) of the
it stands. Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied the applicant meets the
definition of refugee as set out in s 5H of the
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the direction that the
applicant satisfies
Migration Act
ATTACHMENT - Extract from
Migration Act 1958
5 (1) Interpretation
cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment
means an act or
omission by which:
(a) severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally
inflicted on a person; or
(b) pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on
a person so long as, in all the circumstances, the
act or omission could
reasonably be regarded as cruel or inhuman in nature;
but does not include an act or omission:
(c) that is not inconsistent with Article 7 of the Covenant; or
(d) arising only from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions that are
not inconsistent with the Articles of the Covenant.
degrading treatment or punishment
means an act or omission that
causes, and is intended to cause, extreme humiliation which is unreasonable, but
does not include an
act or omission:
(a) that is not inconsistent with Article 7 of the Covenant; or
(b) that causes, and is intended to cause, extreme humiliation arising only
from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions
that are not inconsistent
with the Articles of the Covenant.
means an act or omission by which severe pain or
suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a
(a) for the purpose of obtaining from the person or from a third person
information or a confession; or
(b) for the purpose of punishing the person for an act which that person or a
third person has committed or is suspected of having
committed; or
(c) for the purpose of intimidating or coercing the person or a third person;
(d) for a purpose related to a purpose mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or (c);
(e) for any reason based on discrimination that is inconsistent with the
Articles of the Covenant;
but does not include an act or omission arising only from, inherent in or
incidental to, lawful sanctions that are not inconsistent
with the Articles of
the Covenant.
receiving country
, in relation to a non-citizen, means:
(a) a country of which the non-citizen is a national, to be determined solely by
reference to the law of the relevant country; or
(b) if the non-citizen has no country of nationality—a country of his or
her former habitual residence, regardless of whether
it would be possible to
return the non-citizen to the country.
5H Meaning of refugee
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person in Australia, the person is a
(a) in a case where the person has a nationality – is outside the country
of his or her nationality and, owing to a well-founded
fear of persecution, is
unable or unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that
country; or
(b) in a case where the person does not have a nationality – is outside
the country of his or her former habitual residence
and owing to a well-founded
fear of persecution, is unable or unwilling to return to it.
Note: For the meaning of
well-founded fear of persecution
section 5J.
5J Meaning of well-founded fear of persecution
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, the person has a
well-founded fear of
persecution
(a) the person fears being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group or political
(b) there is a real chance that, if the person returned to the receiving
country, the person would be persecuted for one or more
of the reasons mentioned
in paragraph (a); and
(c) the real chance of persecution relates to all areas of a receiving country.
Note: For membership of a particular social group, see sections 5K and
(2) A person does not have a
well-founded fear of persecution
if effective protection measures are available to the person in a receiving
Note: For effective protection measures, see section 5LA.
(3) A person does not have a
well-founded fear of persecution
if the person could take reasonable steps to modify his or her behaviour so as
to avoid a real chance of persecution in a receiving
country, other than a
modification that would:
(a) conflict with a characteristic that is fundamental to the person’s
identity or conscience; or
(b) conceal an innate or immutable characteristic of the person; or
(c) without limiting paragraph (a) or (b), require the person to do any of the
(i) alter his or her religious beliefs, including by renouncing a religious
conversion, or conceal his or her true religious beliefs,
or cease to be
involved in the practice of his or her faith;
(ii) conceal his or her true race, ethnicity, nationality or country of
(iii) alter his or her political beliefs or conceal his or her true political
(iv) conceal a physical, psychological or intellectual disability;
(v) enter into or remain in a marriage to which that person is opposed, or
accept the forced marriage of a child;
(vi) alter his or her sexual orientation or gender identity or conceal his or
her true sexual orientation, gender identity or intersex
(4) If a person fears persecution for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a):
(a) that reason must be the essential and significant reason, or those reasons
must be the essential and significant reasons, for
the persecution; and
(b) the persecution must involve serious harm to the person; and
(c) the persecution must involve systematic and discriminatory conduct.
(5) Without limiting what is serious harm for the purposes of
paragraph (4)(b), the following are instances of
serious harm
for the purposes of that paragraph:
(a) a threat to the person’s life or liberty;
(b) significant physical harassment of the person;
(c) significant physical ill‑treatment of the person;
(d) significant economic hardship that threatens the person’s capacity to
(e) denial of access to basic services, where the denial threatens the
person’s capacity to subsist;
(f) denial of capacity to earn a livelihood of any kind, where the denial
threatens the person’s capacity to subsist.
(6) In determining whether the person has a
well‑founded fear of
persecution
for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a), any conduct engaged in by the person in Australia is to
be disregarded
unless the person satisfies the Minister that the person engaged
in the conduct otherwise than for the purpose of strengthening the
person’s claim to be a refugee.
5K Membership of a particular social group
consisting of family
For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person (the
first person
), in determining whether the
first person has a well‑founded fear of persecution for the reason of
membership of a particular
social group that consists of the first
person’s family:
(a) disregard any fear of persecution, or any persecution, that any other member
or former member (whether alive or dead) of the
family has ever experienced,
where the reason for the fear or persecution is not a reason mentioned in
paragraph 5J(1)(a); and
(b) disregard any fear of persecution, or any persecution, that:
(i) the first person has ever experienced; or
(ii) any other member or former member (whether alive or dead) of the family has
ever experienced;
where it is reasonable to conclude that the fear or persecution would not
exist if it were assumed that the fear or persecution mentioned
paragraph (a) had never existed.
Note: Section 5G may be relevant for determining family relationships
for the purposes of this section.
5L Membership of a particular social group
other than family
For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, the person is to be treated as a member
of a particular
social group (other than the person’s family) if:
(a) a characteristic is shared by each member of the group; and
(b) the person shares, or is perceived as sharing, the characteristic; and
(c) any of the following apply:
(i) the characteristic is an innate or immutable characteristic;
(ii) the characteristic is so fundamental to a member’s identity or
conscience, the member should not be forced to renounce
(iii) the characteristic distinguishes the group from society; and
(d) the characteristic is not a fear of persecution.
5LA Effective protection measures
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, effective protection measures are
available to the person in
a receiving country if:
(a) protection against persecution could be provided to the person by:
(i) the relevant State; or
(ii) a party or organisation, including an international organisation, that
controls the relevant State or a substantial part of
the territory of the
relevant State; and
(b) the relevant State, party or organisation mentioned in paragraph (a) is
willing and able to offer such protection.
(2) A relevant State, party or organisation mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a) is taken to be able to offer protection against
persecution
to a person if:
(a) the person can access the protection; and
(b) the protection is durable; and
(c) in the case of protection provided by the relevant State—the
protection consists of an appropriate criminal law, a reasonably
police force and an impartial judicial system.
36 Protection visas – criteria provided for by this Act
(2) A criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant for the visa
(a) a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations because the person
is a refugee; or
(aa) a non-citizen in Australia (other than a non-citizen mentioned in paragraph
(a)) in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as
a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the non-citizen being removed from
Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that the non-citizen will
suffer significant harm; or
(b) a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (a); and
(ii) holds a protection visa of the same class as that applied for by the
applicant; or
(c) a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (aa); and
(ii) holds a protection visa of the same class as that applied for by the
(2A) A non‑citizen will suffer
significant harm
(a) the non‑citizen will be arbitrarily deprived of his or her life; or
(b) the death penalty will be carried out on the non‑citizen; or
(c) the non‑citizen will be subjected to torture; or
(d) the non‑citizen will be subjected to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment; or
(e) the non‑citizen will be subjected to degrading treatment or
punishment.
(2B) However, there is taken not to be a real risk that a non‑citizen
will suffer significant harm in a country if the Minister
is satisfied that:
(a) it would be reasonable for the non‑citizen to relocate to an area of
the country where there would not be a real risk that
the non‑citizen will
suffer significant harm; or
(b) the non‑citizen could obtain, from an authority of the country,
protection such that there would not be a real risk that
the non‑citizen
will suffer significant harm; or
(c) the real risk is one faced by the population of the country generally and is
not faced by the non‑citizen personally.
Tribunal file, Doc Id 13597941
& Doc Id 13633812
Paragraph [47]
Ibid, the first
Uganda: Court Upholds
Anti-Homosexuality Act/Human Rights Watch
Uganda: rights
activists file appeal against ruling on anti-LGBTQ
law/Reuters
Reuters: HIV alarm
in Uganda as anti-gay law forces LGBT
‘lockdown.’
Vox: Uganda’s harsh anti-gay law is a public
health disaster in the
Anti Homosexuality Act
2023 s 11(3).
UNAIDS notes the
judgment of the Constitutional Court of Uganda which has struck down certain
parts of the Anti-Homosexuality Act
2023/UNAIDS
Tribunal file,
applicant’s post- hearing submissions, Doc Id
Paragraph [54]
RTF format (748 KB)
Signed PDF/A format