Cristopher & Pelleas [2025] FedCFamC1F 713 (13 October 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Cristopher & Pelleas
FedCFamC1F 713
File number(s):
MLC 9265 of 2024
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – Subpoenas – Objections to
subpoenas – Subpoena for production of trust taxation
returns and
financial statements – Subpoena for credit and loan applications,
correspondence, supporting documentation and
bank statements in respect of
mortgage secured over former matrimonial home – Objection on the basis of
lack of apparent relevance,
ulterior and/or improper purpose, abuse of process,
oppression and/or fishing – Where both parties seek alteration of
in property – Trusts controlled by wife’s family members
– Where wife is eligible object of trusts – Where
no expert evidence
that wife’s right to due consideration and administration is actually
capable of valuation and if so how
– Where no expert evidence of what
documents would be required to undertake such a valuation – Where husband
seek to increase the pool of assets available for division by any value
ascribed to the wife’s equitable choses in action –
apparent relevance of documents established – Where little difference
whether by reason of the trusts the wife has
property or financial resources for
the purposes of s 79(5)(c) – Where no contributions by the husband or the
wife to the trusts
are alleged – Consideration of
Law Act 1975
(Cth) – Consideration of the proportionality of the
course proposed by the husband in the circumstances of the case –
of Objection upheld in part – Subpoenas struck out in part
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Rules 2021
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Bill 2019
Explanatory Memorandum,
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Bill
Cases cited:
Ashton & Ashton
[1986] FamCA 20
Barrett & Winnie
(2022) FLC 94-093
[2022] FedCFamC1A
Bonnici & Bonnici
(1992) FLC 92-272
[1991] FamCA 86
Caldwell & Caldwell
[2025] FedCFamC1F 506
Carmel-Fevia v Fevia
(2010) 43 Fam LR 405
[2010] FamCA 502
Chang & Song
[2023] FedCFamC1F 387
Davidson & Davidson
(No 2) (1991) FLC 92-197;
[1990] FamCA
Farmer & Bramley
(2000) FLC 93-060
[2000] FamCA
Harris & Harris
(1991) FLC 92-254
[1991] FamCA 124
Hatton & Attorney-General (Cth) and Ors
(2000) FLC 93-038
[2000] FamCA 892
Hickey & Hickey and Attorney-General for the Commonwealth of
Australia (Intervener)
(2003) FLC 93-143
[2003] FamCA 395
Holland & Holland
(2017) FLC 93-798
[2017] FamCAFC
In re Skeats Settlement
[1889] UKLawRpCh 150
(1889) 42 Ch D 522
Kehoe & Seden (No 2)
[2022] FedCFamC1F 346
Kelton & Brady and Anor
(2017) FLC 93-799
[2017] FamCAFC
Kennon v Spry
[2008] HCA 56
(2008) 238 CLR 366
; [2008] CLR 56
Liristis v Gadelrabb
[2009] NSWSC 441
Martin & Newton
(2011) FLC 93-490
[2011] FamCAFC
Shaw & Shaw
(1989) FLC 92-030
[1989] FamCA 29
Stanford v Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108;
[2012] HCA 52
Stein & Stein
(1986) FLC 91-779
[1986] FamCA 27
Tibben & Tibben
[2013] FamCAFC 145
UBS AG v Scott Francis Tyne as Trustee of the Argot Trust
[2018] HCA 45
[1980] FamCA 63
(1980) FLC 90-872
[1980] FLC 90-872
Ward & Ward
(Unreported, Full Court of the Family Court of
Australia, 16 July 1980)
White & Tulloch v White
(1995) FLC 92-640
[1995] FamCA
Woodcock & Woodcock
(2021) 64 Fam LR 489
[2021] FedCFamC1F
Woodcock & Woodcock (No 6)
[2024] FedCFamC1F 333
Zaruba & Zaruba
(2017) FLC 93-776
[2017] FamCAFC 91
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
6-7 March 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr Dickson KC and Mr Springthorpe
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Barkus Doolan Winning
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms Vohra SC and Ms Renwick and Mr Sweeny
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Lander and Rogers
Counsel for Subpoena Objectors:
Mr Glick KC and Mr Barbayannis
Solicitor for Subpoena Objectors:
Taussig Cherrie Fildes
MLC 9265 of 2024
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
MR CRISTOPHER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
3 of the schedule in Part C of each of the subpoenas filed on behalf of the
applicant husband on 13 August 2024 to:
(a) B Global Pty Ltd as trustee for the B Global Trust;
(b) B Pty Ltd as trustee for the Pelleas C Family Trust;
(c) D Pty Ltd as trustee for the Pelleas Family Trust 1; and
(d) E Holdings Pty Ltd as trustee for the E Trust –
be struck out.
Notice of Objection filed on behalf of the respondent wife on 12 September 2024
to the subpoena to F Bank, Australia Branch, filed
on behalf of the applicant
husband on 3 September 2024 be dismissed.
proceedings be listed for mention before the Honourable Justice Strum on
23 October 2025 at 9.30am.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
Initiating Application filed on 29 July 2024, the applicant husband seeks, by
way of final relief, an alteration of interests in
property pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“Act”). By Response to
Initiating Application filed on 5 September 2024, the respondent wife similarly
by way of final relief, an alteration of interests in property. However,
unsurprisingly, they differ as to what that alteration should
husband was born in 1967. The wife was born in 1980. They commenced cohabitation
in 2004; they were married in 2005; and they
separated on 15 December 2023.
There are three children of their marriage, aged 18, 16 and 12 years, and, by
agreement, they live
and spend time with each of their parents.
is common ground that the wife is a scion of a very wealthy family and that she
has benefitted from the wealth of her family, as
have the husband and their
children by reason of her being a member of that family. That wealth has its
genesis in a group of
companies and trusts
established by her late father, Mr G, who died in 2009, and her uncle, Mr H,
referred to broadly as the “J
Group” (albeit that there is some
disagreement at this stage in relation to the proper composition of that group).
not agreed, in these proceedings, is any proprietary interest, or the
extent of any financial resource, the wife may have in those
companies and
trusts, or any of them.
wife is one of three children of the marriage of her late father and her mother,
Ms K; she has two brothers, Mr Land Mr M.
respect of his financial circumstances, the husband, in his Financial Statement
filed contemporaneously with his Initiating Application,
non-superannuation property totalling $850,012; superannuation interests
totalling $762,781; and no liabilities.
respect of her financial circumstances, the wife, in her Financial Statement
contemporaneously with her Response to
Initiating Application, deposes to non‑superannuation property totalling
$29,271,318;
superannuation interests totalling $4,094,436; liabilities to
trusts totalling $7,550,000; and financial resources in trusts totalling
husband caused to be issued two subpoenas to F Bank, Australia Branch filed on
3 September 2024 and 17 February 2025 respectively,
in respect of which
only the former subpoena (“[F Bank] subpoena”) was pressed.
Relevantly,
a Notice of Objection to the F Bank subpoena was filed by the wife on
12 September 2024 (“[F Bank] objection”).
husband also caused to be issued
subpoenas to J
Holdings Pty Ltd filed on 3 September 2024 and 16 October 2024, in respect of
which only the latter subpoena (“[J
Holdings Pty Ltd] subpoena”) was
initially pressed.
Relevantly,
a Notice of Objection to the J Holdings Pty Ltd subpoena was filed by J Holdings
Pty Ltd on 1 November 2024 (“[J
Holdings Pty Ltd] objection”).
the husband caused to be issued the following subpoenas on 13 August 2024:
subpoena to B
Global Pty Ltd as trustee for the B Global Trust;
subpoena to B
Pty Ltd as trustee of the Pelleas C Family Trust;
subpoena to D
Pty Ltd as trustee for the Pelleas Family Trust 1; and
subpoena to E
Holdings Pty Ltd as trustee for the E Trust –
(collectively the “trust subpoenas”).
of Objection to the trust subpoenas were filed by the recipients thereof
(collectively the “subpoenaed trusts”)
on 13 September 2024, which
were amended by them on 29 October 2024, as well as by the wife on 12 September
Additionally,
the husband filed an
Application in a Proceeding on
31 October 2024 seeking,
, relevantly for present purposes:
at paragraph 1 -
the appointment of a single expert “to undertake a valuation of the [J
Group] (and fiduciaries/subsidiaries)
[sic] as at 30 June 2024”; and
at paragraph 4 -
disclosure by the wife of various documents (“disclosure
application”).
her Response to Application in a Proceeding filed on 20 December 2024, the wife
sought the dismissal, simpliciter, of the husband’s
Application in a
Proceeding, including therefore the disclosure application.
the return of the husband’s Application in a Proceeding and the
wife’s Response thereto, as well as the various subpoenas
and objections
thereto, Senior Counsel for the husband advised that he did not then press for
an order for the valuation of the “[J
Group]”, but would await the
outcome of those other matters first.
prior to, and during the course of, the hearing of the various subpoena
objections and the disclosure application, over two days,
a number of the
documents or categories of documents sought by the husband were resolved between
the husband, the wife and the other
subpoena objectors, because they were no
longer the subject either of pursuit or of objection. Thus, for example, Senior
for the wife advised, without demurral on behalf of the husband, that
the documents sought in the disclosure application, and any
objections to the
disclosure thereof, were no longer in issue for determination by the Court.
Senior Counsel for the wife advised that another Application in a Proceeding, in
this instance filed by the wife on 28 October
2024 (in respect of which the
husband filed a Response to Application in a Proceeding on 29 November 2024) was
no longer pursued
reason of the various concessions, at the conclusion of the hearing, I ordered
the husband, the wife and the other subpoena objectors
to provide an agreed
schedule of which documents in which subpoenas, continued to be pressed by the
husband and which of the grounds
of objection thereto continue to be pressed by
the wife and/or the other objectors (“agreed schedule”). The agreed
was subsequently provided under cover of an email to my chambers dated
17 March 2025 which advised that the remaining “matters
determination” are as
Paragraph of
B Global Pty Limited ATF B Global Trust – subpoena filed 13 August
3: All trust taxation returns and trust financial statements for any trust of
which B Global Pty Limited is the Trustee for the financial
years ended 30 June
2007 to 30 June 2023
Objection maintained
. Husband presses for period 2013-2023 only.
B Pty Limited ATF Pelleas C Family Trust – subpoena filed 13 August
3: All trust taxation returns and trust financial statements for any trust of
which B Pty Limited is the Trustee for the financial
years ended 30 June 2007 to
Objection maintained
. Husband presses for period 2013-2023 only.
D Pty Limited ATF Pelleas Family Trust 1 - subpoena filed 13 August
3: All trust taxation returns and trust financial statements for any trust of
which D Pty Limited is the Trustee for the financial
years ended 30 June 2007 to
Objection maintained
. Husband presses for period 2013-2023 only.
E Holdings Pty Limited ATF E Trust – subpoena filed 13 August
3: All trust taxation returns and trust financial statements for any trust of
which E Holdings Pty Limited is the Trustee for the
financial years ended 30
June 2007 to 30 June 2023
Objection maintained
. Husband presses for period 2013-2023 only.
F Bank, Australia Branch – subpoena filed 3 September 2024
Objection maintained
to production of remaining documents, being
financial records of objecting third parties. Husband presses subpoena.
Accordingly,
the J Holdings Pty Ltd subpoena and the J Holdings Pty Ltd objection are no
longer live issues for determination.
respect of the F Bank subpoena, production of all of the documents specified
therein remains pressed by the husband and opposed
by the wife.
relation to the trust subpoenas, in respect of which only
the documents specified in paragraph 3 of the
schedule in
remain in issue, it is nevertheless salient to observe that
the other categories of documents, in relation to which it is no longer
necessary to rule, comprised:
all company
taxation returns and annual accounts for the company for the financial years
ended 30 June 2007 to 30 June 2023;
all trust deeds
and any deed of variation of any trust of which any of that company is the
all resolution
of directors and/or minute books relating to the meeting of the members and
directors of any of the company including
minutes of meetings required to be
kept by it (in its own capacity and/or in its capacity as trustee of a trust) in
relation to distributions,
advances, drawings on loan accounts with respect to
the wife, the Pelleas Family Trust 2 and/or the N Trust for the period 1 January
2007 to date;
all loan account
ledgers in the name of the wife, the Pelleas Family Trust 2; and/or the N Trust
for the period 1 January 2007 to
it is not the case that the husband has not been provided by the wife with any
of the documents sought by him in the disclosure
application or by the
subpoenaed trusts with any of the documents sought in the relevant subpoenas.
Some documents have been provided
by the wife or the subpoenaed trusts, whilst
other documents are not pressed by the husband.
grounds of objection to production of the documents specified in paragraph 3 of
the schedule in
of the trust subpoenas, by the recipients thereof,
include that production of the document is oppressive; that there is no
forensic purpose for seeking the documents; and that the subpoenas
are an abuse of process in that they were filed on an improper
the case of the wife, her grounds of objection are on the basis of lack of
apparent relevance of the documents sought to the proceedings;
that the trust
subpoenas were issued for an ulterior and/or improper purpose; and that they are
an abuse of process, are oppressive
and/or constitute fishing.
relation to the F Bank subpoena, she objects on the same bases as she does to
the trust subpoenas.
DOCUMENTS RELIED UPON
addition to the various subpoenas and Notices of Objection; the husband’s
Application in a Proceeding and the wife’s
Response thereto; and their
respective affidavits in support thereof (namely, that of the husband filed on 4
November 2024 and that
of the wife filed on 20 December 2024), reliance was
placed upon the following other documents:
Affidavit of Ms
O, filed 28 October 2024, in support of the subpoenaed trusts’ objections.
She is the head of group taxation
and finance at J Holdings Pty Ltd;
Exhibits marked
H1–H8 tendered on behalf of the husband; exhibit marked W1 tendered on
behalf of the wife; and exhibits marked
SP1- SP10, tendered on behalf of the
subpoenaed trusts;
amended Points of Claim filed 19 February 2025;
amended Response to Points of Claim filed 26 February 2025;
case outline filed 3 March 2025;
written submissions filed 3 March 2025;
submissions on behalf of the subpoenaed trusts filed on 4 March
have read and had regard to those documents.
latter five documents alone comprise over 100 pages of pleadings and submissions
for what, upon consideration and analysis of
the matters remaining in dispute,
transpired to be a somewhat more straightforward point than they contend.
Possibly by reason of
sensible concessions made during the course of the hearing
by counsel on behalf of the husband, the wife and the subpoenaed trusts
respectively, much in the written submissions and the pleadings was of little
relevance to, or assistance in, the resolution of the
remaining, more confined
Pleadings and Evidence
order to consider the documents sought by the husband pursuant to the F Bank
subpoena and the trust subpoenas, and the corresponding
objections to
production, in particular, that the documents sought lack apparent relevance and
serve no legitimate forensic purpose,
it is necessary to have regard to the
affidavits and their pleadings.
Hatton & Attorney-General (Cth) and Ors
[2000] FamCA 892
(2000) FLC 93-038
, the plurality of the Full Court said that “given that there are at
the present time no pleadings in this Court, the only way
in which apparent
relevance of the subpoenaed material to the main property settlement proceedings
could be established was by reference
to the affidavit material filed in those
proceedings”. In this case, the Court has the benefit of pleadings;
however, the affidavits
of the husband and the wife are of limited utility.
husband’s evidence and pleadings are largely silent in relation to any
contributions by him, or, the wife, to the J Group
or, indeed, to their
undisputed property generally. In his affidavit, he merely deposes that, during
the marriage, he attended board
meetings and received, from the wife or her
brother, financial statements and financial reports relating to the J Group.
Farmer & Bramley
[2000] FamCA 1615
(2000) FLC 93-060
–[66], Kay J
65. ... an assessment of contributions made under
, (b) and (c) [of
Family Law Act 1975
] does not have to bear a direct relationship to
the assets as they presently exist. The court is asked to determine what is an
appropriate
and just and equitable order, bearing in mind not only the
contributions made directly to the existing assets, but contributions
generally during the course of the relationship between the parties both to the
acquisition, conservation and improvement of
assets (which may or may not still
exist) and to the welfare of the family in the role of homemaker and parent.
66. This is not to say that the Court should be blind to the circumstances in
which any assets were acquired post separation. Clearly
contributions made
towards the acquisition of such an asset by one party and the lack of
contributions made towards its acquisition
by the other party may weigh heavily
in the exercise of discretion. However it is quite wrong to say that
contributions made under
, (b) or (c) before an existing asset was
acquired could have no bearing on the outcome of the proceedings.
J continued at [68] that: “... the Court’s task is to evaluate all
of the contributions from the time of the commencement
of the parties’
relationship until the time of the hearing and give such weight to such
contributions as the court think is
appropriate in the
circumstances”.
is not to say that the absence of any contributions by one party to any
particular property of the other will nevertheless give
rise to a claim, or
result in, an alteration of interests in that property. See, for example,
Bonnici & Bonnici
[1991] FamCA 86
(1992) FLC 92-272
at p.79,020, albeit in
relation to inheritances received late in, or after, a relationship. However,
the point remains generally
relevant in this case.
F BANK SUBPOENA
F Bank subpoena is in separate category to the trust subpoenas. It requires
production of the following categories of documents:
of all credit and loan applications held by you in respect the mortgage number
[...] secured over the property situated at
[P Street, Suburb Q] in the State of
Victoria, [...], in the name of [Ms Pelleas] born [in 1980] ("
the [Suburb Q]
") whether such mortgage was obtained solely or jointly with any
other person or entity, or by anyone of [Ms Pelleas] behalf including
supporting documentation submitted as part of the application(s) to secure
of all correspondence, including written correspondence, emails, and file notes
of telephone conversations with [Ms Pelleas]
born [in 1980] and/or any third
party on her behalf concerning the [Suburb Q] mortgage and/or any extension of
any loan facility
secured by the [Ms Pelleas] [sic] since the date of the
inception of any relevant loan to date.
supporting documentation submitted by [Ms Pelleas] born [in 1980] in respect to
the [Suburb Q] Mortgage together with any further
documents associated with the
extension of any loan facility and/or any refinance of any loan facility in the
period since the inception
of the loan to date that is secured by the [Suburb Q]
of all bank statements in respect of all loan facilities secured by the [Suburb
Q] mortgage from the date of the inceptions
of such loans to
(Emphasis in original).
her F Bank objection, the wife objects to the production of those documents on
the grounds that the subpoena:
(a) seeks the production of documents that are not apparently relevant to the
proceedings in the Federal Circuit and Family Court
of Australia;
(b) has been issued for an ulterior and/or improper purpose;
(c) is an abuse of process;
(d) is oppressive; and/or
(e) is fishing.
relation to the F Bank subpoena, the husband relevantly deposes to the following
effect. The former matrimonial home at P Street,
Suburb Q in the State of
Victoria, (“[P Street] property”) was purchased and is registered in
the sole name of the wife.
The P Street property was acquired with borrowings
from R Bank (now F Bank), secured by mortgage thereover, which borrowings he
asserts were in the name of the wife at that time. The dwelling at the P Street
property has since been rebuilt.
husband relevantly deposes, at paragraph 7.6 that:
... Following separation I was “cut out” of decisions relating to
the rebuild of the property and no clarity as to the
funding of the build. No
say in the amount that was drawn down on loan facility [sic]. The total build
spend has exceeded the budget
by at least $3.8m. I did not consent to the
increase of such costs and have not been consulted in respect of such expenses.
no clarity on the status of loan balance [sic], and how it has increased
during the period from the inception of the loan to date.
[Ms Pelleas] has
objected to disclosure of this loan facility secured against what
[Ms Pelleas] would contend is the largest asset
in our pool but then seeks
that the loan balance be included as a liability on the balance sheet. I seek
the documents so I can
understand how the loan facility was secured in the first
place. I have not sighted any documents that verifies [sic] that [Ms Pelleas]
is paying for the mortgage facility. ...
response, the wife relevantly deposes, at paragraph 12:
At my request and to enable the purchase of and renovations at the [P Street]
property, the [Pelleas Family Trust 1] borrowed funds
from [F Bank] in order to
fund same. The loan is secured against the title of [P Street], and I have
provided a personal guarantee
for it. The [Pelleas Family Trust 1] drew down on
its [F Bank] loan facility to finance same, and then lent those moneys to me.
Although I am not the direct borrower of the loan from [F Bank], the funds
borrowed from [F Bank] are on lent to me by the [Pelleas
Family Trust 1], and I
am responsible for that debt. The [Pelleas Family Trust 1] also makes all
periodic payments due to [F Bank]
in relation to the loan, on my behalf, and
those payments are also recorded against the balance of funds which I owe the
Family Trust 1]. I am obliged to and make necessary repayments to the
[Pelleas Family Trust 1] in relation to the funds lent to be
[sic] on account of
the [F Bank] loan.
her Financial Statement, in Part G (personal expenses), at item no. 21, under
the rubric of “mortgage payments/rent”,
the wife specifies:
“[F Bank] ([R Bank]) interest only payments”, and, as to the amount
thereof, she refers to Part O.
Part K (liabilities), at item no. 46, under the rubric of “home
mortgage”, she again refers to Part O, both in relation
to the borrower
and the amount thereof.
Part O, she refers to items no. 21 and 46 jointly, deposing as
The [Pelleas Family Trust 1] has facilitated a loan from [F Bank] for the
purposes of constructions [sic] at the [P Street] property.
The wife is a
personal guarantor of the loan and [P Street] is security for same. The borrower
of this loan is the [Pelleas Family
Trust 1]. To date, the sum of approximately
$15.8 million has been advanced by [F Bank], through the [Pelleas Family
Trust 1], and
applied towards the construction at the [P Street] property.
Although the loan is not in the wife's personal name, she is personally
nowhere does the wife condescend to particularise,
, the amount
of the loan “facilitated” by the Pelleas Family Trust 1 from F Bank
for the purposes of the construction
at the P Street property (as opposed to the
balance of such loan as at the date of her Financial Statement), which is
secured over
that property and which she concedes forms part of the assets
available for division between the husband and her.
the hearing on 2 October 2024, Senior Counsel for the wife said:
Your Honour, my learned friend put to you the assets of the husband and wife in
the round, 50 million. ... My client would say it’s
closer to about 21
million. There’s substantial debts which the husband doesn’t take
into account, and there’s
a significant difference in the value of [P
Street], the husband putting it at around 50 million, and my client at around
(Transcript, 2 October 2024, p 14, lines 41–46)
P Street property secures the borrowings by the Pelleas Family Trust 1
(implicitly, by its corporate trustee, D Pty Ltd), in respect
of which the wife
personal guarantor” (emphasis added), from which it is
implicit there are other guarantors, personal or otherwise.
in Part O of her Financial Statement, the wife deposes, in respect of items no.
21 and 46, that the Pelleas Family Trust 1
has “facilitated
from [F Bank]” (emphasis added) for construction purposes, at paragraph 12
of her affidavit, she instead deposes that the Pelleas
Family Trust 1
“drew down on its [F Bank] loan facility” to finance the
construction at the P Street property, and then
on-lent those moneys to
her. On their face, those two assertions by the wife are contradictory. Is
there, in this regard, a stand-alone
loan from F Bank to the Pelleas Family
Trust 1 or did the trust draw down on an existing facility? Is the P Street
property stand-alone
security for a stand-alone loan, or has it been subsumed
into, and/or cross-collateralised with, the securities for the Pelleas Family
Trust 1’s F Bank loan facility more generally? At this stage, the Court
and the husband are left to wonder.
insofar as the wife deposes that, although “the loan” is not in her
personal name, she is personally liable for
it, presumably that is by reason of
her being a guarantor for it, in which case the Pelleas Family Trust 1 (by its
trustee) is primarily
liable for it. If, rather than a stand-alone loan, there
was a drawing on an existing F Bank facility of the Pelleas Family Trust
is difficult to understand how the wife could only be liable to that financial
institution for only a portion thereof.
are but some of the questions raised by the prima facie inconsistencies in the
wife’s evidence to date.
the circumstances, on the basis of the wife’s own case, her objection to
production of the documents sought in the F Bank
subpoena is difficult, if not
impossible, to comprehend. The documents clearly have relevance, and not even
mere apparent relevance,
to the parties’ competing
applications; no
ulterior and/or improper purpose has been demonstrated by her or is otherwise
discernible; and it is not at all
clear how the documents are, or could possibly
be, asserted to be an abuse of process or oppressive or to constitute fishing,
those bases for objection are properly understood.
the circumstances, the wife’s F Bank subpoena objection will be dismissed
and any documents produced by F Bank will be released
for inspection and
TRUST SUBPOENAS
trust subpoenas that remain the subject of objections, only as to the documents
in paragraph 3 of the schedule in
thereof, are:
subpoena to D
Pty Ltd as trustee for the Pelleas Family Trust 1;
subpoena to E
Holdings Pty Ltd as trustee for the E Trust;
subpoena to B
Global Pty Ltd as trustee for the B Global Trust; and
subpoena to B
Pty Ltd as trustee for the Pelleas C Trust.
Relevantly,
what is now sought by each of those subpoenas are trust taxation returns and
trust financial statements for each of those
trusts for the financial years
ended 30 June 2013–30 June 2023. In order to consider the objections
thereto, it is necessary
to have regard to the constituent documents of each of
those trusts. A summary, including of each of those trusts, was tendered on
behalf of the wife, without objection, and marked W1.
D Pty Ltd Subpoena
to the documents remaining pressed in the subpoena directed to D Pty Ltd
(“[D]”), I note as follows:
(a) D is the trustee of
the Pelleas Family Trust 1.
(b) The wife is not a director of D.
(c) The shareholders are S Pty Ltd (2/4 shares), T Pty Ltd (1/4 shares), and U
Pty Ltd (1/4 shares). U Pty Ltd, of which the wife
is the sole director and
shareholder, is the trustee of the Pelleas Trust 2, of which she is the sole
appointor. The wife is not
a controlling shareholder of D.
(d) Ms V deposes that the trust(s) of which D is trustee have numerous eligible
objects, including the wife’s mother and lineal
descendants of Mr G and Mr
H, to whom distributions were made during the 17 years between 2007–2023,
being the period covered
by that subpoena. No trusts other than the Pelleas
Family Trust 1 have been identified as having D as their trustee.
trust deed in respect of the Pelleas Family Trust 1 was tendered and marked
exhibit SP5. That trust was settled on 12 September
1972, with a vesting date of
11 September 2052. It is a discretionary trust. The appointor was the
wife’s father, but that
office is now held jointly by the wife’s
mother, the wife’s brother Mr L and the wife (Exhibit W1). Therefore, the
as one of three appointors, does not and cannot relevantly control the
Pelleas Family Trust 1 by its trustee.
were three specified beneficiaries: one Ms W, the wife’s father and the
wife’s mother, of whom the wife’s
mother is the sole survivor
(Exhibit W1).
class of general beneficiaries is relevantly defined to mean:
(a) the Specified Beneficiary or the Specified Beneficiaries (as the case may
(b) the brothers sisters spouses widows widowers children grandchildren nieces
and nephews of the Specified Beneficiary or Specified
Beneficiaries and the
spouses widows widowers children and grandchildren of such brothers and sisters
spouses children grandchildren,
nieces and nephews;
(c) any corporation wherever incorporated or resident any share in which is
beneficially owned or held by any General Beneficiaries
or by the trustees of
any trust or settlement under which any General Beneficiary has any interest
whether absolute or contingent
and whether liable to be defeated by the exercise
of any power of appointment or revocation or to be diminished by the increase of
the class to which he belongs and the trustees of any trust or settlement which
the Trustees may (subject to clause 11 hereof) at
any time and from time to time
nominate in writing as a General Beneficiary and whether or not any such
corporation or settlement
is in existence at the date of this Settlement; and
(d) such additional beneficiaries if any as are named described or defined in
the Schedule as members of the class of General Beneficiaries;
relation to income, cl 4(1) of the Pelleas Family Trust 1 deed provides
(1) THE Trustee may at any time prior to the expiration of any Accounting Period
which ends before or upon the Vesting Day determine
with respect to all or any
part or parts of the net income of the Trust Fund for such Accounting Period
(a) to pay apply or set aside the same for such charitable purposes as the
Trustees may think fit;
(b) to pay apply or set aside the same for any one or more of the General
Beneficiaries living or in existence at the time of the
determination;
(c) to accumulate the same;
relation to capital, cl 7 provides:
Trustees in their absolute discretion notwithstanding anything to the contrary
herein contained or provided –
(1) subject to clause 11 hereof at any time or times and from time to time
before the Vesting Day out of the capital of the Trust
Fund raise any sum or
sums and pay the same (either in addition to or in substitution for share of
income) to any beneficiary for
his own use and benefit or apply the same to or
for the benefit of such beneficiary in such manner as they shall think fit;
(2) subject to clause 11 hereof at any time or times and from time to time
before the Vesting Day lend any sum to any beneficiary
either with or without
security and upon such terms and conditions as to repayment and with or without
interest as they shall think
(3) at any time or times and from time to time pay or apply to or for the
benefit of any beneficiary the whole of any part of the
capital or income to
which he is either absolutely or contingently entitled (and notwithstanding that
his interest is liable to be
defeated by the exercise of any power of
appointment or revocation or to be diminished by the increase of the class to
which he belongs)
in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions as
they shall think fit and without limiting the generality of the foregoing
the maintenance education advancement or benefit of such beneficiary and may in
the exercise of such power pay the same to any
parent or guardian of any infant
beneficiary without being bound to see to the application thereof.
11 provides:
always to any express provisions to the contrary herein contained every
discretion vested in the Trustees shall be absolute
and uncontrolled and every
power vest in them shall be exercisable in their absolute or uncontrolled
that notwithstanding anything contained in this Deed
(a) the Trustees may before exercising any discretion or power vested in them or
making any determination hereunder consult the wishes
of the Guardian (if any)
(b) where a guardian is named in the Schedule –
(i) the Trustees shall not make a nomination or declaration of exclusion
pursuant to clause 1(2)(d) hereof nor exercise any power
contained in clauses
7(1), 7(2), 8(w), 8(aa) and 19 hereof except with the consent of the
(ii) if at any time there is no Guardian then the Trustees shall not have power
to make any nomination or declaration of exclusion
pursuant to clause 1(3)(d)
hereof nor shall the Trustees exercise the powers referred to in the last
preceding sub-paragraph so as
to impair or diminish the expectations of any
Specified Beneficiary or any person or persons upon whom pursuant to any
appointment
validly made with the consent of the Guardian pursuant to clause 5
hereof the Trust Fund is to devolve upon the Vesting Day;
(c) the Guardian may at any time by instrument in writing declare that
thenceforth the Trustees shall not be obliged to obtain his
consent as a
condition precedent to the exercise of any power or powers.
(Emphasis in original)
16 provides for the power of the “appointor and on the death of the last
surviving appointor such other person as he
shall have appointed to act as
appointor” of the Pelleas Family Trust 1. It is not disputed that the wife
is not the sole appointor
of the trust, such as to control it and bring it
within the line of authorities such as, for example,
Stein & Stein
[1986] FamCA 27
(1986) FLC 91-779
Ashton & Ashton
[1986] FamCA 20
(1986) FLC 91-777
Harris & Harris
[1991] FamCA 124
(1991) FLC 92-254
(No 2) (1991) FLC 92-197.
E Holdings Pty Ltd Subpoena
to the documents remaining pressed in the subpoena directed to E Holdings Pty
Ltd (“[E]”), I note as follows:
(a) E is the trustee of the E Trust.
(b) The wife is not a director of that E. She holds the shares therein jointly
with her mother and brother Mr L
(c) Ms V deposes that, during the 17 years between 2007–2023, being the
period initially covered by the relevant subpoena,
E only filed trust taxation
returns showing a nil return.
trust deed in respect of the E Trust was tendered and marked exhibit SP6. That
trust was settled on 6 December 2007, with a vesting
date 79 years thereafter.
It is a discretionary trust. The wife’s father was the appointor and the
sole specified beneficiary.
The wife is now one of four appointors, together
with her mother and brothers (Exhibit W1). Therefore, the wife does not and
relevantly control the E Trust by its trustee.
class of general beneficiaries is defined to include, relevantly:
General Beneficiaries:
(a) the Specified Beneficiary or Specified Beneficiaries (as the case may
(c) the parents and parents-in-law of any Specified Beneficiary, the siblings
and first cousins of any Specified Beneficiary, the
children, grand children and
great grand child of any parent, parent-in-law, sibling, first cousin or
Specified Beneficiary, as the
case may be;
(d) any person who shall at any time be or have been a spouse of any person
described in any of the preceding paragraphs;
relation to income, cl 4.3.3 of the E Trust deed relevantly provides that, until
the vesting day:
subject to Clause 10, the Trustee may at any time and from time to time pay or
apply or set aside the whole or any part or parts
(if any) within an Accounting
Period for such of the General Beneficiaries in such proportion and for one to
the exclusion of the
other or others in existence at the date of such payment,
or application or setting aside in such manner as the Trustee in its absolute
discretion thinks fit (without being bound to assign a reason therefor);
relation to capital, cl 5 provides:
Subject to Clause 10 and until the Vesting Day the Trustee may at any time and
from time to time pay or apply or set aside the whole
or any part or parts of
the Trust Fund or the capital of the Trust Fund for such of the General
Beneficiaries in such proportions
and for one to the exclusion of the other or
others in existence at the date of such payment, or application or setting aside
such manner as the Trustee in its absolute discretion thinks fit (without
being bound to assign a reason therefor).
10 relevantly provides that, subject always to any express provision to the
contrary contained in that deed, “every discretion
vested in the Trustee
shall be absolute and uncontrolled and every power vested in it shall be
exercisable at its absolute and uncontrolled
discretion”.
relation to the office of appointor, cl 16.4(b) provides relevantly that
“if at any time there is no one entitled to exercise
hereinbefore conferred, the statutory and other rights of removing and
appointing the Trustee may be exercised by”,
trustee or the legal personal representatives of the last surviving appointor.
It is not disputed that the wife is not the sole
appointor of the E Trust, such
as to control it and
bring it within the relevant
line of authorities referred to above.
B Global Pty Ltd Subpoena
to the documents remaining pressed in the subpoena to B Global Pty Ltd
(“[B Global]”), I note as follows:
(a) B Global is the trustee of the B Global Trust.
(b) The wife is not a director of that company. She holds the shares therein
jointly with her mother and brother Mr L .
(c) Ms V deposes that, during the 17 years between 2007–2023, being the
period initially covered by the relevant subpoena,
B Global only filed trust
taxation returns showing a nil return.
trust deed in respect of the B Global Trust was tendered and marked exhibit SP7.
That trust was settled on 9 April 2016, with
a vesting date 79 years and 374
days thereafter. It is a discretionary trust. The appointors are the wife, her
mother and her brother
Mr L , acting jointly. The specified beneficiaries named
in the trust deed are the wife, her mother and her brothers Mr L and Mr
class of general beneficiaries is defined to include, relevantly:
(a) the Specified Beneficiary or Specified Beneficiaries (as the case may
(c) the parents and parents-in-law of any Specified Beneficiary, the siblings
and first cousins of any Specified Beneficiary, the
children, grandchildren and
great grandchildren of any parent, parent-in-law, sibling or first cousin of any
Specified Beneficiary,
as the case may be;
(d) any person who shall at any time be or have been a spouse of any person
described in any of the preceding clauses;
relation to income, cl 4.3.3 of the B Global Trust deed relevantly provides
that, until the vesting day:
subject to clauses 4.2 and 10, the Trustee may at any time and from time to time
pay or apply or set aside the whole or any part
or parts (if any) within an
Accounting Period for such of the Beneficiaries in such proportion and for one
to the exclusion of the
other or others in existence at the date of such
payment, or application or setting aside in such manner as the Trustee in its
discretion thinks fit (without being bound to assign a reason
relation to capital, cl 5 provides:
Subject to Clause 10 and until the Vesting Day the Trustee may at any time and
from time to time pay or apply or set aside the whole
or any part or parts of
the Trust Fund or the capital of the Trust Fund for such of the General
Beneficiaries in such proportions
and for one to the exclusion of the other or
others in existence at the date of such payment, or application or setting aside
such manner as the Trustee in its absolute discretion thinks fit (without
being bound to assign a reason therefor).
in this trust, the wife is a specified beneficiary, it is relevant to record
that, as and from the vesting date (in 2096), the
trustee shall stand possessed
of the trust fund and the income from it, as provided by cl 6.1.
6.1 provides,
(a) any revocable appointment made with the consent of the Guardian shall be
revocable with the consent of the same or any subsequent
Guardian but not
(b) any revocable appointment shall be revocable as aforesaid only until the end
of the day preceding the Vesting Day when it shall
become irrevocable;
10 relevantly provides that, subject always to any express provision to the
contrary contained in that deed, “every discretion
vested in the Trustee
shall be absolute and uncontrolled and every power vested in it shall be
exercisable at its absolute and uncontrolled
discretion”.
16.1 specifies the powers of the appointors who, in relation to the B Global
Trust, are the wife, her mother and her brother
Mr L , acting jointly.
Accordingly,
the wife cannot solely control that
trust such as to bring it within the relevant line of authorities referred to
B Pty Ltd Subpoena
to the documents remaining pressed in the subpoena to B Pty Ltd
(“[B]”), I note as follows:
(a) B is the trustee of the Pelleas C Family Trust.
(b) The wife is not a director of B.
(c) She holds the shares therein jointly with her mother and brother Mr L.
(d) Ms V deposes that the trusts of which B is trustee have numerous eligible
objects, including the wife’s mother and lineal
descendants of Mr G and
Mr H, to whom distributions were made during the 17 years between
2007–2023, being the period covered
by that subpoena.
trust deed in respect of the Pelleas C Family Trust was tendered and marked
exhibit SP8. That trust was settled on 7 October 2008.
It is a discretionary
trust. The vesting day is defined to mean –
... the first date to occur of the following dates:
(a) 80 years less one day from the Commencement Date;
(b) where the rule of law commonly known as the rule against perpetuities would
render void any of the dispositions of trusts of
this Deed relating to any
property comprising part or the whole of the Trust Fund, the date of expiration
of any such perpetuity
(c) the date the Trustee appoints in writing.
appointor was the wife’s father and he was the sole primary beneficiary.
Clause 17 provides that “[t]he Trustee, for
the time being, may at any
time and from time to time by deed, with the written consent of the Appointor
) revoke, add to or vary all or any of the provisions of this Deed
...” (emphasis added). However, as the wife is not even a
of B, and is a shareholder thereof jointly with her mother and her brother
Mr L, she cannot solely control that trust such
as to bring it within the
relevant line of authorities referred to above.
class of general beneficiaries is defined to include, relevantly:
(a) the Primary Beneficiary or the Primary Beneficiaries (as the case may be)
(b) the parents, grandparents, brothers, sisters, Spouses, uncles, aunts and
Children of the Primary Beneficiary or the Primary Beneficiaries,
the Spouses,
Children and grandchildren of such parents, grandparents, brothers and sisters,
the Spouses, Children, grandchildren
and great-grandchildren of the Children of
the Primary Beneficiary or the Primary Beneficiaries and the Children and
grandchildren
of the Spouses of the Primary Beneficiary or Primary
Beneficiaries;
(c) any corporation wherever incorporated or resident of which any General
Beneficiary is a member and whether or not such corporation
is in existence at
the Commencement Date.
(d) a trustee (in that trustee’s capacity as such trustee) of any trust or
settlement in which any General Beneficiary has
an interest, whether absolute or
contingent or by way of expectancy and whether liable to be defeated by the
exercise of any power
of appointment or revocation or to be diminished by the
increase of the numbers of members of the class to which that General
Beneficiary
belongs, whether or not such trust or settlement is in existence at
the Commencement Date;
(e) any relative by blood or marriage of the Appointor;
(f) any corporation, a share in which is beneficially owned or held by the
trustee or trustees for the time being of any trust or
settlement under which
any General Beneficiary has an interest, whether absolute or contingent, and
whether liable to be defeated
by the exercise of any power of appointment or
revocation or to be diminished by the increase of the number in the class to
that General Beneficiary belongs, whether or not such trust or settlement
is in existence at the Commencement Date;
(h) any institution, body or organisation from time to time having objects which
are charitable at law;
(i) the trustees of any superannuation fund in or under which a General
Beneficiary is a member or is entitled to benefit, whether
vested or contingent;
(j) any executor or trustee of a will of a General Beneficiary in their capacity
as executor or trustee of the will;
(k) any employee or former employee of the Trustee or any General Beneficiary;
relation to income, cll 4.1, 4.3 and 4.5 of the Pelleas C Family Trust deed
relevantly provide:
4.1 Distribution of income
The Trustee may, in each Accounting Period pay, apply or Set Aside the whole or
such part (if any), as the Trustee deems fit, of
the income of the Trust Fund of
that Accounting Period for such charitable purposes and/or for the benefit of
all or any one or more
exclusive of the other or others of the General
Beneficiaries living from time to time in such proportions and in such manner as
the Trustee deems fit without being bound to assign or disclose any reason.
4.3 Default distributions
Immediately prior to the end of each Accounting Period, the Trustee shall be
deemed to hold so much of the income of the Trust Fund
for each Accounting
Period as has not been the subject of an effective determination in relation to
that Accounting Period in trust
successively for the same persons and in the
same proportions as the Trustee would hold the Trust Fund pursuant to clause 5
last day of that Accounting Period were the Vesting Day.
4.5 Accumulation
Notwithstanding the provisions of clauses 4.1 to 4.4, the Trustee may, at any
time or times prior to the Vesting Day, so long as
permitted by law, accumulate
the whole or any part of the income of the Trust Fund, and add such income to
the capital of the Trust
Fund but so that the Trustee may at any time or times
prior to the Vesting Day resort to such accumulations and pay or apply the
or any part or parts for such charitable purposes and/or for the benefit of any
or any one or more exclusive of the other or
others of the General Beneficiaries
living from time to time in such proportions and in such manner as the Trustee
deems fit and
without being bound to assign any reason.
relation to capital, cl 4.6 of the trust deed provides that the trustee shall
have the powers in relation to capital of the trust
fund conferred upon it by
8 relevantly provides that the trustee shall, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained or otherwise provided in the
trust deed, have the power,
(a) at any time and from time to time before the Vesting Day, out of the income
or the capital of the Trust Fund, but not out of
any moneys referred to in
clause 8(d), to raise any sum or sums and pay the same to any one or more of the
General Beneficiaries
for their own use and benefit in addition to any income or
capital or share of income or capital to which they may from time to time
entitled or to apply the aforementioned sum or sums to or for the benefit of
such General Beneficiary or General Beneficiaries
in such manner as the Trustee
(i) to discriminate and act partially between General Beneficiaries and
different classes of General Beneficiaries without any obligation
whatsoever to
assign or disclose any reason;
15.1 provides:
Subject always to any express provision to the contrary herein contained, every
discretion vested in the Trustee shall be absolute
and uncontrolled and every
power vested in the Trustee shall be exercisable at the Trustee’s absolute
and uncontrolled discretion
and the Trustee shall have the like discretion in
deciding whether or not to exercise any such power.
19.1 provides:
The Appointor of such other person or persons as shall have been appointed to
act as Appointor shall be entitled by instrument in
writing at any time and from
time to time:
(a) to remove any Trustee;
(b) to appoint any additional Trustee or Trustees; and
(c) to appoint a new Trustee or Trustees in the place of any Trustee removed
pursuant to this clause or who resigns the trusteeship
or ceases to be Trustee
by operation of law, provided that if there is no person holding the office of
appointor or if the Appointor
for the time being is under any legal disability,
the statutory and other rights of removing and appointing a trustee shall, to
exclusion of any other person or persons, be exercised by the person or
persons granted power to do so by the
Trustee Act 1958
20.1 provides:
Any Appointor, including a successor Appointor, may, by deed in writing:
(a) from time to time, with the unanimous consent of all other persons acting as
Appointor (if any), revocably or irrevocably, nominate
any person or persons to
be the successor or successors to the position of Appointer upon, in the case of
an individual, their death
or resignation, and in the case of a corporation, the
corporation resigning or entering into liquidation whether compulsorily or
voluntarily (not being merely a voluntary liquidation for the purposes of
amalgamation or reconstruction); and
(b) resign from the position of Appointor.
OTHER CONSTITUENT DOCUMENTS
(a) Deed of Wishes
Deed of Wishes was executed by the wife’s father on 17 March 2009
(“Deed of Wishes”) (exhibit H1) addressed,
wife and three children, as the executors and trustees of his will, as well as
THE DIRECTORS AND SHAREHOLDERS
of any company and
THE TRUSTEES
any trust, the
OFFICE BEARERS
of any entity of whatsoever nature whether
created by Deed of Settlement or Incorporation and any
Trust in which [he] has or is entitled to have any direct or indirect interest
(whether as a director, shareholder, beneficiary,
appointor or howsoever
otherwise (
the Entities
(Emphasis in original)
Deed of Wishes referred,
, to the wife’s father having an
interest in various companies, trusts and partnerships in respect of which
discretionary trusts
established for the benefit of his family (defined to
comprise his wife and children) and him hold interests, together with
discretionary
trusts established for the benefit of his brother,
Mr H and his family.
Wife’s father declared that it was his –
direction and wish (without binding or fettering any discretion or power that
that you and each of you as the case may be as Executors aforesaid
and you and each of you as directors and shareholders and trustees
bearers and Appointors aforesaid of the Entities shall severally upon my death
do the following ...
(Emphasis added)
summary, which will suffice, the wife’s father expressed a wish for the
equalisation,
, of distributions of capital and income from
trusts between his wife and children, both directly and indirectly, as well as,
the happening of certain events, an equalisation of loans between his
children, prior to being forgiven and extinguished. In each
case, the direction
was expressed as a wish, earlier predicated upon it not binding or fettering any
discretion or power. The letter
of wishes is, therefore, merely precatory in
(b) Pelleas and H Family Charter
document styled Pelleas and H Family Charter (“Family Charter”) was
tendered within a bundle of documents marked Exhibit
Family Charter is expressed (
thereof to be
“an overarching document designed to capture the guiding principles and
values of our family and how the jointly
owned business is governed for the
benefit of current and future generations”; to have “been prepared
in order to serve
as a guide for family members”; and “designed to
be read in conjunction with the ‘[Pelleas] and [H] Family
Agreement’”.
relation to the family group structure, it is recorded in Part 4 of the Family
Charter that “it is important to note that
most of the assets of the J
Group are owned via trusts,
which have specific laws for determining how they
are owned, controlled and can distribute capital and profits
(emphasis added).
(c) Pelleas and H Family Agreement
unexecuted copy of the current version of the Pelleas and H Family Agreement
(“Family Agreement”), was also tendered,
without objection, within
the bundle of documents marked Exhibit H2. It is agreed that the current version
was executed on or about
28 April 2023. It is also agreed that a previous
version was executed in or about 2013/2014.
parties to the Family Agreement are
J Holdings Pty
Ltd and 11 trusts, by their corporate trustees, collectively defined as
“Stakeholder Trusts”, including
U Pty Ltd as trustee for the Pelleas
Trust 2, which then held a 12.5 per cent proportionate share of J Holdings Pty
Ltd, and is solely
controlled by the wife. It is agreed that shareholding
increased to 16.65 per cent on 9 August 2023. The husband places great
in the Family Agreement.
cl 1.5 of the Family Agreement provides:
Each Part declares, acknowledges and, as applicable, agrees with each and every
Party that is, or by virtue of clause 1.4, becomes
a Party that:
to the extent that the terms of this Agreement conflict or are at odds
with the discretions conferred on any one or more of the trustees
Stakeholder Trusts, a [H Intermediary Trust], a [Pelleas Intermediary Trust],
any joint venture trust or Group entity that
is a trust for the time being (in
this clause 1.5.1,
) under their respective trust deeds (in this
clause 1.5.1,
Trust Deeds
), the terms of this Agreement are to be read
down and rendered subordinate to the discretions conferred on the Trustees under
Trust Deeds. Those discretions are not to be fettered or affected by the
terms of the Trust Deeds, save that in exercising their
discretions the Trustees
agree and undertake to have regard to the terms of this Agreement and the Family
Charter as expressions
of the wishes of the other Parties
1.5.2 for the avoidance of doubt, and notwithstanding that the Trustees are not
bound by the terms of this Agreement, to the extent
that the terms of this
Agreement conflict or are at odds with the Trustee’s discretions under
their respective Trust Deeds,
each Party that is, or by virtue of clause 1.4
becomes, a Party otherwise than in the capacity of trustee, is and remains fully
by this Agreement and may face disciplinary action pursuant to clause
2.5.5 for breaching the terms of this Agreement; and
1.5.3 without limiting the generality of clause 1.5.1, the Trustees are to have
regard to the statements and wishes of the Family
Council (including by
referring to the Distribution Policy) and any approval given by the Family
Council when exercising their powers
and discretions and discharging their
(Emphasis added)
1.8 of the Family Agreement stipulates that Stakeholder Trusts may only transfer
or otherwise dispose of all or part of the
Group Interest in accordance with cl
nature of Group Interests is specified in cl 4.2.1 of the Family Agreement,
which provides:
4.2.1 This clause 4 sets out the arrangements (which the Parties have agreed to
use best endeavours to implement) that relate to
the provision of financial
support to [Corporate Body AA]s who do not wish to be involved in the control
and management of the Group
Entities. The provisions of this clause 4 recognise
that the shares in [J Holdings Pty Ltd] have nil or negligible market value,
that the [Corporate Body AA]s do not have any interest in the Group Entities and
that the Group Entities have no obligation to pay
any income or capital of the
Group to all or any [Corporate Body AA]. The Parties agree to procure funds
(whether Groups Funds or
otherwise) pursuant to this clause 4, subject to the
Group Entities’ absolute discretion to apply the income and capital of
Group for the Group Entities’ own purposes, and every provision of this
clause 4 is to be construed accordingly.
4.4.1 of the Family Agreement relevantly provides that:
4.4.1 A Stakeholder Trust may only transfer (with or without consideration) all
or part of its Group Interest (
Transferring Interest
) in accordance with
this clause 4.4, by:
(a) transferring it to one or more Stakeholder Trusts (including a new
Stakeholder Trust), subject to [J Holdings Pty Ltd] Board
consent, with such
consent not to be unreasonably withheld;
(c) in accordance with clause 4.4.4.
(Emphasis in original)
4.4.4 provides for
Group Funded Exits, in which case
... [J Holdings Pty Ltd] will use its
best endeavours
to procure the
notional acquisition
of the Undisposed Interest in exchange for the full
release of the Stakeholder Trust’s Undisposed Interest ... for an amount
to be determined by the [J Holdings Pty Ltd] Board and the Stakeholder Trust who
holds the Transferring Interest, or Fair Market
Value is determined by the
valuation mechanism set out in clause 4.4.6 (
Exit Payment
), provided the
[J Holdings Pty Ltd] Board, acting reasonably, determines by Special Majority
Vote that the Group Funded Exit will
not have a Material Adverse Effect on the
(Italicised emphasis added) (Bold emphasis in
4.4.5 provides for Group Funded Transfers and cl 4.4.6 provides a valuation
mechanism “[f]or the purpose of determining
the consideration to be given
to a Transferring Interest”. However, it must be recalled that:
pursuant to cl. 4.4.1 is subject to J Holdings Pty Ltd Board consent (with such
consent not to be unreasonably withheld);
a Group Funded
Exit pursuant to cl. 4.4.4 is subject to J Holdings Pty Ltd both:
using its best
endeavours; and
reasonably, determining by Special Majority Vote that the Group Funded Exit will
not have a Material Adverse Effect on the
is therefore apparent that there is no legally enforceable right to a transfer.
Further, to the extent that the terms of the Family
Agreement conflict are at
odds with the discretions conferred on various trustees of trusts under their
respective trust deeds, the
terms of the Family Agreement are to be read down
and rendered subordinate to the discretions conferred on the trustees under the
trust deeds, which are not to be fettered or affected, save that, in exercising
their discretions, the trustees are to have regard
to the terms of the Family
Agreement and the Family Charter as expressions of wishes of the other parties
to the family agreement.
the circumstances, for present purposes, the provisions of the Deed of Wishes,
the Family Charter and the Family Agreement, are
merely precatory, and
aspirational in nature, and do not in any way derogate from, or fetter, the
discretions of the trustees of
the Pelleas Family Trust 1, the E Trust, the B
Global Trust or the Pelleas C Family Trust. Similarly, they do not in any way
or enlarge the wife’s mere dual rights to due administration and
due consideration, which I consider below.
insofar as the husband has an application pending, which he does not presently
press, for a valuation of “the [J Group]
fiduciaries/subsidiaries)” (sic), it is not at all apparent how, or why,
the particular documents sought in paragraph
3 of the schedule in Part C of each
of the four trust subpoenas, in relation only to those particular trusts, would
have, at least,
apparent relevance to that undertaking. Whilst it may be that
there have been representations, including to the predecessor of F
Bank (namely,
R Bank), that the wife “personally controls trusts that have an effective
ownership to 1/4
of the [Pelleas] Family Interests in the
[J] Group”, such that the “trusts that the wife controls
effectively have a
ownership in the Group” (exhibit H2),
that is not to the point in considering the subpoena objections to the four
trust subpoenas.
HUSBAND’S AMENDED POINTS OF CLAIM
husband’s amended Points of Claim focus, more broadly, on the “[J
Group]”, which he contends is comprised of
“[t]he business and
investments now jointly owned and/or controlled by the [Pelleas] and [H]
families [and] include the [J
business], the [BB business], the
[CC business], the [DD business] and various real property and financial
investments” (paragraph
10), albeit that the wife denies that definition
corresponds with the definition in the Family Agreement or that it has any legal
husband contends that the assets held by the J Group are “Group
Assets”, which are “controlled and managed by
trusts and companies
which have been formed over a number of years to meet the objectives of the
[Pelleas] and [H] families”,
which he defines as “Group
Entities” (paragraphs 10–12).
husband further contends that J Holdings Pty Ltd was incorporated in 2005
“as the first step in implementing a structured
approach to supporting
estate and succession planning for the “Family Group”, being
“the individual members of
the [Pelleas] and [H] families and the Group
entities collectively”, and is “the sole shareholder of the
companies which
control the Group Entities and the guardian and/or appointor of
most of the trusts that own the Group Assets” (paragraphs
is important to recall that the objections to the J Holdings Pty Ltd subpoena
are no longer pressed and to note that J Holdings
Pty Ltd is not a shareholder
of the corporate trustees, nor the guardian or appointor, of any of the
subpoenaed trusts.
17 specifies some of the Group Entities in the J Group of which J Holdings Pty
Ltd is the 100 per cent shareholder. None
of the eight companies listed therein
are the corporate trustees of any of the subpoenaed trusts.
30 lists 24 companies and trusts which are alleged to be “part of the [J
Group]”, amongst which are included
the four subpoenaed trusts.
32 lists 10 trusts, including the four subpoenaed trusts, of which the wife is a
co‑appointor and beneficiary, although
the nature of her alleged
beneficial interest is not specified. In
Tibben & Tibben
FamCAFC 145
, Thackray J said:
... The only “entitlement” of the beneficiaries under the Deed of
Settlement was a right to consideration and due administration
Gartside v Inland Revenue Commissioners
[1967] UKHL
[1968] AC 553
ASIC v Carey (No 6)
(2006) 153 FCR 509
Indeed, as was pointed out by Gummow and Hayne JJ in
(supra at [125]) the use of the term “beneficiaries”
in the context of a discretionary trust, is inapt insofar as it
suggests the
existence of a beneficial interest, since those referred to as
“beneficiaries” are no more than eligible
objects of the trust.
is entirely unclear why, of those 10 trusts, only the four subpoenaed trusts are
contended to be relevant. That is not illuminated
by paragraph 33 which lists
four companies of which the wife is a joint shareholder with her mother and her
brother Mr L, in circumstances
where only three of those companies are trustees
of the subpoenaed trusts.
husband’s amended Points of Claim then address what is contended to be the
“structure of the [J Group]” (at
paragraphs 38–71), including
by reason of the Family Charter and the Family Agreement, but, again, without
addressing the particular
relevance of the four subpoenaed trusts thereto, and
without addressing the fact, referred to above, that those two documents do
fetter the discretion of the trustees of those trusts and are subordinate
as the husband refers (at paragraphs 68–70) to the “Distribution
Policy” of the J Group, nowhere does he
address the apparent relevance
thereof only to the four subpoenaed trusts. It will be recalled that, by reason
of the withdrawal
of the Notices of Objection to the J Holdings Pty Ltd
subpoena, and in relation to the documents in the four trust subpoenas other
than those in paragraph 3 of the schedule in Part C thereof, as well as the
withdrawal of the wife’s opposition to the disclosure
application, the
husband will have documents evidencing and/or relating to distributions made to
the wife, directly and indirectly.
Indeed, this is borne out by paragraph 76(a)
which contends that, “[d]uring the period of the parties’ marriage
... [d]ividends,
distributions or monies from the [J Group] financial resources
were paid directly or indirectly to or for the benefit of the Wife”,
is in part admitted by her. However, insofar as it is contended that the wife
“has not repaid any of these funds”,
one is left to wonder why,
given their nature, dividends or distributions would be repaid by the wife, and
the relevance of that
contention, at least in this respect.
husband therefore contends (and the wife denies) that:
in the premises,
the property of the wife for the purpose of s 79 of the Act includes “the
bundle of rights and/or legally sanctioned
powers she holds in relation to the
[J Group] both directly and through [U Pty Ltd]” (paragraph 77);
alternatively, the property of the wife for the purpose of s 79 of the Act
includes certain personal equities (paragraph
alternatively, the wife holds property interests in relation to the J Group
being “equitable choses in action to
the due administration of and due
consideration as a discretionary object” of at least 11 trusts, only four
of which are the
subpoenaed trusts (paragraph 79);
interest in the J Group is able to be valued (paragraph 80); and
the value of the
wife’s interest in the J Group is a function of the value of the Group
Assets so that the value of her interest
may be calculated only by calculating
the value of the Group Assets (paragraph 81).
as discussed herein, these reasons for judgment deal only with the remainder of
the Notices of Objection to the four trusts
SUBPOENA OBJECTIONS: RELEVANT APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES
Kehoe & Seden (No 2)
[2022] FedCFamC1F 346
, [15]–[19],
Harper J said:
principles applicable to setting aside a subpoena were comprehensively stated by
McClelland J (as he then was) in
Baumann and Ors & Rushbrooke and
[2016] FamCA 905
”). McClelland J pointed out the party
issuing an impugned subpoena must demonstrate the documents sought have
relevance” to an issue in the proceedings, although,
unlike discovery, it is not enough for a party seeking to uphold a subpoena
show that the documents might lead to “a train of inquiry” which
might assist his or her case: at [31] citing
McMillan Incorporated v
Bishopgate Investment Trust
(1993) 4 All ER 998
Marney v Manifold
[1959] HCA 23
(1959) 103 CLR 341
[2006] FamCA
. It is not legitimate to issue a subpoena on the basis of “an
outside chance” that something useful might turn up in
the documents (at
[33] citing
R v Ridgeway
[1998] SASC 6963
(1998) 72 SASR 73
at 101) or to issue a
“fishing” subpoena with a view to determining whether the issuing
party has a case at all (at [35]
Unitingcare – Unifam
Counselling & Mediation & Harkiss and Anor
[2011] FamCAFC 159
(2011) FLC 93-476
85,856; see also
Botany Bay Instrumentation and Control Pty Ltd v Stewart
[1984] 3 NSWLR 98
at 100 per Powell J).
contention that a subpoena is an abuse of process usually rests on the
underlying assertion that it has no “legitimate forensic
for example, because it is “fishing”. The question of apparent
relevance in turn often, if not usually,
underpins debates about legitimate
forensic purpose and allegations of “fishing”. The primary
contention of the third
parties was that the documents sought in the impugned
paragraphs lacked any apparent relevance to the issues in the proceedings.
concept of “apparent relevance” in relation to subpoenas is of long
standing. In
Trade Practices Commission v Arnotts Ltd (No 2)
[1989] FCA 248
at 103, Beaumont J used the expression in posing the question of whether
the material sough has “apparent relevance to the
issues in the principle
proceedings”. Numerous later cases have adopted the same or similar
phraseology:
Portal Software International Ltd v Bodsworth
[2005] NSWSC
Lowery v Insurance Australia Ltd
[2015] NSWCA 303
(2015) 90 NSWLR
at [32] and [82] (“on the cards”);
v Australian Financial Security Authority
[2017] NSWCA 50
(“sufficient apparent connection”).
Re Force Corp Pty Ltd (in
[2018] NSWSC 896
and [24] explained “apparent
relevance” as meaning something could “reasonably be expected”
light” on some of the issues in the proceedings (see most
recently in this Court
Woodcock & Woodcock
[2021] FedCFamC1F 88
(2021) 64 Fam LR 489
indeterminate boundaries of these verbal formulations are obvious, but it is
recognised they have a wide embrace and often include
documents about which the
issuing party cannot have clear knowledge as to content or actual relevance.
Recently, in
Secretary of the Department of Planning, Industry and
Environment v Blacktown City Council
[2021] NSWCA 145
in the NSW Court of
Appeal, Bell P (as he then was) observed at [57] that the apparent relevance of
documents is “one of the
reasons why medical and telephone records, for
example, are frequently the subject of subpoenas, even though it will not be
or knowable
whether or not the subpoenaed material, will,
or is likely to, assist the party issuing the subpoena”. He held that to
on such an added requirement is artificial because it would require an
issuing party to be able to predict the contents of potentially
documents and would “unduly constrain the ability of litigants to
investigate the facts”, citing the decision
of Brereton J in
[2007] NSWSC 899
(2007) 212 FLR 255
at 257. Therefore, so long as a subpoena can plausibly be
seen to relate to an issue in the proceedings (or to “cast light”
such an issue), and the subpoena is not in other respects too vague or
oppressive, it should not be set aside.
P pointed out the close connection between “apparent relevance” and
a proper forensic purpose at [65]:
It is sufficient, in my view, to
justify a subpoena as having been issued for a legitimate forensic purpose if
the documents sought
are “apparently relevant” or, to use the words
of Nicholas J in [
ICAP Pty Ltd v Moebes
[2009] NSWSC 306]
instance, it can be seen that the documents sought to be produced by way of
subpoena will
materially assist on an identified issue
or there is a
reasonable basis beyond speculation that it is likely the documents subpoenaed
will so assist. Of course, if it can
be shown that the material assistance will
to the party that issued the subpoena
, the prospect of the forensic
purpose of the issuing party being impugned as illegitimate will be virtually
non-existent.
P also pointed out that even an inability to demonstrate it is “on the
cards” that documents will materially assist
a party’s case, will
not necessarily result in a subpoena being set aside. He
80. My review of the authorities in relation to the setting aside of subpoenas
and/or the refusal to permit access to documents produced
leads me to the
conclusion that, although a party will generally be able to demonstrate that it
had a legitimate forensic purpose
in issuing a subpoena where, to quote Simpson
J (as her Honour then was, and with whom Spigelman CJ and Studdert J agreed) in
[1999] NSWCCA 86]
(i) identify a
legitimate forensic purpose for which access is sought; and
(ii) establish that it is ‘on the cards’ that the documents will
materially assist his
at least in civil matters, an
inability to demonstrate that it is “on the cards” that the
documents sought will materially
assist the subpoenaing party’s case will
not automatically require either that the subpoena be set aside or that access
the documents produced be refused. It will generally be sufficient and prima
facie evidence of a legitimate forensic purpose if the
documents sought to be
produced on subpoena have an apparent relevance to the issues in the case and or
bear upon the cross examination
of witnesses expected to be called in the
proceedings.
relation to “fishing”, in
Liristis v Gadelrabb
[2009] NSWSC
, Brereton J said:
It is not fishing to seek documents when there are reasonable grounds to think
that fish of the relevant type a in the pond or, as
it has been expressed in
other cases, that it is “on the cards” that relevant documents (even
if they are relevant only
to credit) will be elicited by the subpoena.
referred to above, in
Hatton & Attorney-General (Cth) and Ors
[59], the plurality of the Full Court said that, in the absence of pleadings,
the only way in which apparent relevance can be
established is by reference to
the affidavit material filed in the proceedings. Whilst the Court has the
benefit of the amended points
of claim and amended points of response thereto,
in addition to the affidavits referred to above, the husband’s pleadings
evidence are largely silent in relation to any contributions by him or,
indeed, the wife, to the trusts the subjects of the trust
subpoenas, the J Group
or otherwise. Indeed, neither the husband’s pleadings nor his evidence
satisfactorily illuminate the
question of the apparent relevance of the
documents sought in paragraph 3 of the schedule in Part C of the four trusts
including to the foreshadowed valuation exercise.
WIFE AND THE FOUR SUBPOENAED TRUSTS
respect of each of the Pelleas Family Trust 1, the E Trust, the B Global Trust
and the Pelleas C Family Trust, it is not disputed
that, pursuant to the
respective deeds of trust thereof, the wife does not have any, or any
sufficient, degree of control thereover
such as to make the assets thereof
available in the alteration of interests in property between the husband and
her, (or, indeed,
the income thereof available to her), in accordance with the
long line of authorities in this Court, referred to above.
respect of the Pelleas Family Trust 1, the E Trust and the Pelleas C Trust, the
wife is merely within the class of general beneficiaries
(or, more correctly,
eligible objects) thereof. In respect of the B Global Trust, the wife is a
specified beneficiary, together with
her mother and brothers, as well as within
the class of so-called general beneficiaries. However, even then, as and from
the vesting
date (in 2096), the wife may only have an entitlement to the trust
fund if the trustee has not made an appointment before that date
(see cl. 6.1.1
and 6.1.2). Accordingly, all the wife has in those four trusts are rights to due
consideration and due administration,
which French CJ said, in
Kennon v Spry
[2008] HCA 56
(2008) 238 CLR 366
“are in the nature of equitable choses in action”.
CJ continued at [77]:
The beneficiary of a non-exhaustive discretionary trust who does not control the
trustee directly or indirectly has a right to due
consideration and to due
administration of the trust but it is difficult to value those rights when the
beneficiary has no present
entitlement and may never have any entitlement to any
part of the income or capital of the trust.
at [78], French CJ continued that “it is difficult to put a value on
either of these rights though
a valuation might
not be beyond the actuarial arts
in relation to the right to due
consideration” (emphasis added).
it must be observed that those rights are rights
in personam
against the
trustees of the relevant trusts, rather than rights
against the
corpus of those trusts. The corresponding obligations, namely, of due
consideration and due administration fall upon
the trustees of the trusts,
albeit that it might be that the trustees may have a right of indemnity from the
corpus. Thus, for example,
cl 31 of the trust deed for the E trust provides
Without affecting anything contained in this Deed, the Trustee shall be entitled
to be indemnified out of the assets of the time
being comprising the Trust Fund
against liabilities incurred by it in the execution or attempted execution or as
a consequence of
the failure to exercise any of the trusts, authorities, powers
and discretions hereof or by virtue of being the Trustee hereof.
is a right of the trustee; however, it does not create a right, directly or
indirectly, of an eligible object (i.e. general beneficiary)
in relation to the
trust fund. See
Shaw & Shaw
[1989] FamCA 29
(1989) FLC 92-030
at p.77,416.
Counsel for the husband was unable to point to any authorities, whether in this
Court, at first instance or on appeal, or in
any other court, where there has
been a valuation of (at least) the right to due consideration, let alone
acceptance of such a valuation.
It will be observed that, at [78], French CJ did
not suggest that a valuation might not be beyond the actuarial arts in relation
to the right to due administration.
is trite to observe that the Court does not require expert evidence to establish
that most property, including, for example, most
commonly in this Court, real
estate or a business, is capable of valuation. However, in
Kennon v Spry
at [78], French CJ, observing that it is difficult
to put a value on either of the dual rights, speculated that a valuation might
not be beyond the actuarial arts in relation to the right to due consideration
(without reference to the right to due administration).
the absence of evidence from an expert, whether an actuary or otherwise, that
the right, at least, to due consideration, is actually
capable of valuation and,
if so, what information is required to undertake such a valuation, it is
difficult to see what is the apparent
relevance of the documents sought in
paragraph 3 of the schedule in Part C to each of the four relevant
J subpoenas, especially in
relation to his foreshadowed valuation more
broadly of the “[J Group] (and fiduciaries/subsidiaries)”. This
is especially
so when regard is had to the fact that objection is no longer
pressed for the production and inspection of the documents sought in
5 and 6 of the schedule in Part C, namely:
all resolution
of directors and/or minute books relating to the meeting of the members and
directors of each relevant company, including
minutes of meetings required to be
kept by that company (in its own capacity and/or in its capacity as trustee of
any trust) in relation
to distributions, advances, drawings on loan accounts
with respect to the wife, the Pelleas Family Trust 2 and/or the N Trust for
financial years ended 30 June 2013–30 June 2023; and
all loan account
ledgers in the name of the wife, the Pelleas Family Trust 2 and/or the N Trust
for that period.
observe, parenthetically, that it is not disputed that the Pelleas Family Trust
2 and the N Trust are trusts controlled by one or
both of the parties to the
if there have been distributions (implicitly, of income and/or capital),
advances or drawings on loan accounts with respect
to the wife, the Pelleas
Family Trust 2 and/or the N Trust, and/or loan account ledgers in their
names, in the relevant period, by
reason of the withdrawal of the objections
thereto, such documents will have been provided to the husband in compliance
trust subpoenas. Notwithstanding the husband’s amended points of
claim, written submissions and the oral submissions of Senior
Counsel on his
behalf, the following question remains unanswered satisfactorily: why, in
circumstances where the wife is, relevantly,
only an eligible object of the four
trusts, and does not control them, are the further documents, being those sought
in paragraph
3 of the schedule in Part C of the trust subpoenas, of apparent
relevance generally and, more particularly, to any valuation of the
that the husband will have the information contained in the documents sought in
paragraphs 5 and 6 of the schedule in Part C,
there is no evidence as to how the
further documents contained in paragraph 3 of that schedule have any apparent
relevance to any
valuation of the wife’s equitable chose in action,
constituted by her right to due consideration. In the absence of such evidence,
how is it contended that those documents have apparent relevance, including to
the proposed valuation exercise which is proposed
to be undertaken in relation
to the J Group and not merely the four subpoenaed trusts?
such expert evidence, it is difficult to understand the apparent relevance of
the documents sought in paragraph 3 of the schedule
in Part C of each of the
trusts subpoenas and, weight is lent to the other inter-related grounds of
objection to those subpoenas,
in particular, fishing.
am cognisant that there is a divergence in first instance decisions in this
Court regarding rights to due consideration (and due
administration) of trusts
and the valuation thereof, and subpoenas for the purposes thereof. See, for
Woodcock & Woodcock
[2021] FedCFamC1F 88
(2021) 64 Fam LR 489
Woodcock (No 6)
[2024] FedCFamC1F 333
Chang & Song
FedCFamC1F 387.
Woodcock & Woodcock
, on a review of a decision of a registrar, Wilson
J dismissed the objections of a spouse party and various subpoena objectors,
the trustees of various trusts, and required the documents the subject of
the objections to be produced by the subpoena objectors
and released for
inspection and copying. Subsequently, in
Woodcock & Woodcock (No 6)
Wilson J ordered the production of further documents by the trustees to the
wife’s adversarial actuarial expert to complete
his valuation of the dual
choses in action. Unlike in the present case, in the latter
decision, there was some evidence from an expert retained by the wife. In this
case, there is none, which I consider to be sufficient
to distinguish this case
and, indeed, to result in a different outcome.
Notwithstanding
the decisions of Wilson J, and with respect to his Honour, in the present case,
I consider the absence of
evidence that the wife’s equitable
chose in action constituted by the right to due consideration (and, possibly,
also due administration)
, in fact, capable of valuation and, if so,
documents are required, and
, precludes the establishment
of any apparent relevance of the remaining class of documents in dispute in the
trust subpoenas. However,
that is not the end of the matter.
OTHER MATTERS
if such expert evidence had been adduced, I do not consider that would have been
a satisfactory answer, in this case, to the
objections to the trusts
a hearing on 2 October 2024, Senior Counsel for the husband said, in relation to
the “uncontroversial property” available
for division between the
husband and the wife (principally, it would appear, the P Street property),
which the husband contends to
be in the order of $50 million in value:
Does my client’s claim exceed that 50 million? ... No way. No way. So we
won’t need an order to extract the value.
We will ask for an order for a
very large part of the uncontroversial pool. ... Without needing to test the
metes and bounds of
90AE to extract what we say is the wife’s proprietary
value from her family. ... [T]he relief that’s sought will be
being satisfied from the uncontroversial pool, provided the percentage of it
reflects the other benefits. Now, the wife
will say it’s a resource, we
will say it’s property, and your Honour will determine that.
(Transcript, 2 October 2024, p.9, lines 30–45)
Counsel for the husband at no stage thereafter, at subsequent hearings, resiled
from that position.
Counsel for the wife, in response, said that day:
... my learned friend put to you the assets of the husband and wife in the
round, 50 million. ... My client would say it’s
closer to about 21
million. There’s substantial debts which the husband doesn’t take
into account, and there’s
a significant difference in the value of [the P
Street Property], the husband putting it at around 50 million, and my client at
(Transcript, 2 October 2024, p.14, lines 41–46)
Counsel for the wife also said, in relation to the J Group and her:
These are family discretionary trusts. There’s no enforceable dividend
policy or guaranteed income stream. There are distributions
it’s clear from her case that she has received and will receive very
substantial advantages and distributions from
her family, but she doesn’t
own or control that wealth.
(Transcript, 2 October 2024, p.15, lines 16–19)
submission is borne out by the analysis above of the trust deeds of the
subpoenaed trusts and the other constituent documents
upon which the husband
at a subsequent hearing on 12 November 2024, Senior Counsel for the wife
conceded that it is “uncontroversial that
[her] client has a significant
financial resource in her family” (transcript 12 November 2024, p.16,
lines 33–34).
or not, either in relation to the four subpoenaed trusts only, or the so-called
“[J Group]” more broadly, the
wife has a proprietary interest
(as the husband contends) or a financial resource (as she contends), the husband
does not seek to
enlarge the property available for division between the wife
and him; rather, he merely seeks to enlarge the share he receives of
relatively uncontroversial, but nevertheless apparently very substantial, pool
by reason of that other property or, indeed, financial
will be recalled that, by reason of s 79(4)(e) of the Act, as it previously
stood, the matters referred to in s 75(2), were imported
into s 79 insofar as
they were relevant. They included, by paragraph (b), “the income, property
and financial resources of
each of the parties”. Section 79(5)(c) now
similarly provides that the Court is to take into account those matters, insofar
as they are relevant.
insofar as s 79(3)(a)(i) now provides that, in considering what order (if any)
should be made under that section in property
settlement proceedings, the court
is to identify the existing legal and equitable rights and interests in any
property of the parties
to the marriage or either of them, there is no statutory
requirement, in each and every case, to value all of that property, certainly
that property is only sought to be taken into account pursuant to s 79(5)(c). If
property is only to be taken into account under
that provision, I consider there
may be little, if any, substantive reason to draw a distinction with financial
Hickey & Hickey and Attorney-General for the Commonwealth of Australia
(Intervener)
[2003] FamCA 395
(2003) FLC 93-143
, the Full Court said, as a
general proposition, that:
The case law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of
an application brought pursuant to the provisions
of s.79. That approach
involves four inter-related steps. Firstly, the Court should make findings as
to the identity and value
of the property, liabilities and financial resources
of the parties at the date of the hearing. Secondly, the Court should identify
and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of ss.79(4)(a),
(b) and (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements
of the parties
expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties.
Thirdly, the Court should identify and
assess the relevant matters referred to
in ss.79(4)(d), (e), (f) and (g), (“the other factors”) including,
s.79(4)(e), the matters referred to in s.75(2) so far as they are
relevant and determine the adjustment (if any) that should be made
contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two.
Fourthly, the Court should consider the effect of
those findings and
determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the
circumstances of the case: ...
that must be read in the context of the subsequent decision of the High Court in
Stanford v Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108 and decisions of the Full Court in
Zaruba & Zaruba
[2017] FamCAFC 91
(2017) FLC 93-776
[2017] FamCAFC 166
(2017) FLC 93-798.
I do not consider that
for the proposition that if, like a financial resource, property is only to be
taken into account pursuant to s 79(5)(c),
for example, because it may not be
just and equitable in some cases to alter interests therein, it is,
, necessary to value same. Rather, like a financial resource, some
evidence as to the extent thereof and the benefits derived or possibly
derived therefrom may suffice.
Shaw & Shaw
, the issued share capital of a corporate trustee
comprised two ordinary $1 shares, of which one was held by the husband and
by his father. They were the co-directors of that company, neither
having absolute control. The plurality of the Full Court said
The husband is the sole ``principal beneficiary'' of the Trust, which is a
purely discretionary trust. The other beneficiaries, or
potential beneficiaries
(called ``general beneficiaries'') are any spouse of the husband (past, present
or future), the parents of
any such spouse, the husband's brother and sisters,
his parents, his children, his grandchildren and great-grandchildren, and his
children's spouses.
The only advantage to the husband, as principal beneficiary, over the general
beneficiaries is that if, in any year, the trustee
does not make an express
distribution of trust income or capital to any beneficiary or beneficiaries
(which distribution is in the
trustee's absolute and unfettered discretion) then
all income for that year is deemed to be distributed to the principal
beneficiary,
the husband. Under the instrument creating the Trust the husband is
the ``appointor'' with power to appoint and remove trustees.
That power,
however, is not entirely unfettered, because it is a fiduciary power, to be
exercised for the benefit of the trust, not
for the benefit of any particular
beneficiary:
In re Skeats Settlement
[1889] UKLawRpCh 150
42 Ch.D. 522
esp. at p. 526. That
case is also authority for the proposition that in the exercise of that power
the husband could not appoint
himself as trustee, although he may be able to
appoint a company of which he is the majority shareholder, or some person (such
his solicitor or accountant) who might be expected, in exercising the powers
of the trustee, to act sympathetically to the husband.
note, parenthetically, that subsequently, in
Davidson & Davidson (No
at p.78,365–78,366, in relation to the decision in
In re Skeats
[1889] UKLawRpCh 150
(1889) 42 Ch D 522
, the plurality of the Full Court
It was argued that such a manipulation of the provisions of the Trust would
amount to a breach of the fiduciary duty of the husband
as appointor relying on
the decision of
[1889] UKLawRpCh 150
(1889) 42 Ch D 522.
Whatever may have been the position one
hundred years ago, Australian courts today have to look at the reality of the
situation and
the purpose which family trusts serve today. A limitation as to
the husband's power to control the assets and income of the trust
in accordance
with the provisions of the trust deed, is inconsistent with the reasoning of the
Full Court in
. Leave to appeal from that decision was refused
by the High Court on
December 1986 by a
bench composed
Whatever might be the remaining effect of
Skeats' case
, it is not
authority for the proposition that the husband is prevented from appointing a
trustee who is compliant to his wishes.
Full Court in
Shaw & Shaw
referred to the “substantial dispute
as to the value of the Trust, and of the husband’s interest
therein”, at first
instance, and said, in that regard (at
His Honour did not make a specific finding as to the value of the Trust, or of
the husband's interest therein. That failure was a
matter of complaint by the
wife on the appeal, it being raised specifically as ground 1(i) of the amended
notice of appeal which
the wife's senior counsel sought and was granted leave to
rely upon at the outset of the hearing of the appeal.
The husband's shareholding in Latimer Investments was and is property of the
husband. However, as that company is merely a trustee,
does not trade, and has
no beneficial interest in any property which it holds, that shareholding is of
purely nominal value and is
of no relevance to these proceedings.
As a potential beneficiary and therefore an object of the Trust, the husband has
a right to call upon the trustee (in this case Latimer
Investments) to deal with
the trust fund in a manner appropriate to the due administration of the Trust,
and that right is an equitable
chose in action which is itself ``property'' in
the strict sense. On the other hand, he has no interest, vested or contingent,
the trust fund itself, nor in any specific share thereof nor in any
particular asset of the Trust:
see Hardingham and Baxt, Discretionary
, 2nd ed., para. 605, 609 and 614 and cases there cited. Thus, unless
the Trust was the husband's alter ego or his ``puppet'' (
Ascot Investments
Harper and Harper
(1981) FLC 91-000
76,061-76,062;
(1981) 6 Fam. L.R. 591
at p. 602 per
[1986] FamCA 20
(1986) FLC 91-777
(1987) 11 Fam. L.R. 457
[1986] FamCA 27
(1986) FLC 91-779
(1987) 11 Fam. L.R. 353)
``property'' of the husband which was of any relevance in the proceedings before
his Honour (so far as Latimer Investments
and the Trust were concerned) was his
equitable chose in action, arising as an object of the Trust, to compel the due
administration
of the Trust. The inherent difficulties of valuing such an
intangible species of property, if not readily self-evident, become evident
reference is made to the reports of the various expert valuers who gave evidence
in the case and to the varying methods by which
they attempted to arrive at such
Full Court therefore relevantly concluded at p.77,420:
As we have previously noted his Honour made no finding as to the value of the
Trust or the husband's interest therein, nor did he
find that the Trust was the
husband's alter ego or his ``puppet''. If he was correct in not making the
latter finding, then we think
he did not err in failing to assign a value to the
husband's interest in the Trust. In the absence of such a finding, the husband's
only ``property'' in relation to the Trust was his right as a beneficiary to
enforce the due administration of the Trust, and there
is, in our view, a degree
of artificiality about attempting to assign a monetary value to such an
intangible species of property.
In that circumstance, what the parties and the
Court ought to have been concerned to ascertain was whether the Trust and,
the husband's shareholding in Edess, were significant financial
resources of the husband. If they were, there would be no need to
value them as if they were property, but only to gain an appreciation of the
extent to which the husband might reasonably
expect to receive benefits from
them in the future, this being a factor proper to be taken into account by the
Court in exercising
its wide discretion under sec. 79 by virtue of the direction
in sec. 79(4)(e) to have regard to the relevant matters referred to
sec. 75(2).
consider the comments of the Full Court in
Shaw & Shaw
applicable in the present case, which comments were more recently cited with
approval by the Full Court in
Barrett & Winnie
[2022] FedCFamC1A 99
. More generally, the Full Court said, in the latter case,
at [151]‑[159]:
151. Self-evidently, as noted by French CJ in
Kennon v Spry
reference to the decision of the Full Court of the Family Court in
and Goodwin Alpe
[1990] FamCA 147
(1991) FLC 92-192
[T]he question whether the property of the trust is, in reality, the property of
the parties or one of them ... is a matter dependent
upon the facts and
circumstances of each particular case including the terms of the relevant trust
152. In this case, as a beneficiary under the discretionary trust, the first
respondent was and is entitled to due consideration
by the trustee from time to
time acting in accordance with the trustee’s fiduciary responsibility to
all potential beneficiaries
of the trust (
Lock v Westpac Banking
Corporation
(1991) 25 NSWLR 593
at 609 per Waddell CJ in Eq).
153. The nature of the entitlement of a beneficiary to a discretionary trust, in
those circumstances, was described by the Full Court
of the Federal Court of
Australia in
Swishette Pty Ltd and Another v Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission
[2017] FCAFC 45
(2017) 249 FCR 483
in the following terms:
...an object of the discretionary trust, has no legal or beneficial interest but
only the right to due consideration and due administration
of the Trust:
Kennon v Spry
[2008] HCA 56
(2008) 238 CLR 366
Re Gulbenkian’s Settlements
[1970] AC 508;
McPhail v Doulton
[1970] UKHL 1
[1971] AC 424.The
that [the subject] may control the Trust both as appointor and as director of
the trustee company, does not give him an interest
in the trust property
amounting to ownership:
DKLR Holding Co (No 2) Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
Stamp Duties
[1980] 1 NSWLR 510
Gartside v Inland Revenue
Commissioners
[1967] UKHL 6
[1968] AC 553
at 617–178. Objects of a discretionary
trust have no beneficial interest in the property of the trust and their only
is characterised as a mere expectancy coupled with a right to due
administration of the trust. Whilst the right to due administration
right to due consideration in the exercise of the trustee’s discretionary
power to distribute capital and income,
until the exercise of the
trustee’s power in favour of [the subject], [the subject] has no
entitlement to such capital or income.
Moreover, [the subject] as trustee is not
free to exercise rights in respect of the trust property for its own benefit as
if no trust
existed. It has fiduciary and equitable obligations to administer
the Trust in accordance with its terms, which the beneficiaries
have the right
to enforce.
154. We accept, as appropriately conceded by the respondents, that the right of
a beneficiary of a discretionary trust can, depending
upon the particular facts
of the case, be an interest that falls within the particular definition of
property as defined in s 4 of
the Act. However, the acceptance of that
proposition is not determinative of the outcome. This is because of the
difficulties associated
with attempting to place a value on such an interest. In
Kennon v Spry,
French CJ noted that difficulty at [77], stating:
The beneficiary of a non-exhaustive discretionary trust who does not control the
trustee directly or indirectly has a right to due
consideration and to due
administration of the trust but it is difficult to value those rights when the
beneficiary has no present
entitlement and may never have any entitlement to any
part of the income or capital of the trust.
(Emphasis added)
155. In the present case, there was no evidence presented to the primary judge
as to what the value of such a right to “due
consideration and due
administration” would be. In the absence of evidence of any such value of
the interest held by the first
respondent, the primary judge, appropriately, in
our view, excluded the trust property from the property pool but had regard to
trust assets as being a significant financial resource available to the
first respondent. No error has been demonstrated on the part
of the primary
judge in taking that approach. In that respect, in
Shaw and Shaw
[1989] FamCA 29
at 77,420, the Full Court said there was “a degree of
artificiality about attempting to assign a monetary value” to a
resource in circumstances where it was not possible to identify future events or
decisions that would result in the financial
resource being accessed by the
party. A similar view was expressed by Aldridge J in
Raine & Creed
[2013] FamCA 362
156. For completeness, we make it clear that this case is not analogous to the
Kennon v Spry
and we caution against giving the principles
adumbrated in that case a legend beyond what were described as the
“unusual circumstances”
of that case (per Kiefel J at [237] and
French CJ at [62]). The surrounding circumstances in
Kennon v Spry
included that the purpose and intent of the trust, created by Dr Spry, was to
avoid an obligation to pay land tax. The 1983 instrument
creating the trust
“was designed to ensure that the Toorak property was not, for land
purposes, aggregated with other properties
owned personally by the
husband” (per Gummow and Hayne JJ at [107]). Moreover, the structure of
the trust was, as noted by
French CJ at [62], such that Dr Spry was
“the sole trustee of a discretionary family trust and the person with the
only interest
in those assets as well as the holder of a power, inter alia, to
appoint them entirely to his wife.”
157. Those circumstances, together with Dr Spry’s power to appoint
“the whole of the property to his wife”, lead
to the conclusion by
French CJ and, in their separate judgment, Gummow and Hayne JJ that, once the
deed removing the wife as a beneficiary
of the trust was set aside pursuant to s
106B of the Act, the primary judge had, in the unique circumstances of the case,
appropriately
included the assets of the relevant trust in the matrimonial
property pool as being the property of “the parties to the marriage
either of them” (Gummow and Hayne JJ at [128]).
158. In the present case, the setting aside of the Deed would have resulted in
the first respondent remaining as the appointor with
the power to appoint the
trustee pursuant to the terms of the trust deed of the Winnie Family Trust.
However, unlike the situation
Kennon v Spry,
she would not have had
the power of distribution of trust assets, nor would she have had legal title to
those trust assets. Moreover,
any person or entity that she appointed as trustee
would have been bound by their fiduciary duty owed to all other beneficiaries.
Accordingly, the appellant’s reliance upon the “unusual
circumstances” of
Kennon v Spry
(per French CJ at [62]) as being
analogous to the facts of this case is, with respect, misplaced. There was, in
our view, no basis
for including the property vested in the third respondent as
trustee for the Winnie Family Trust in the property pool of the parties
marriage, and no error has been demonstrated on the part of the primary judge
for not including the assets as such.
159. For these reasons, there is no need to consider issues relating to the
valuation of the property vested in the third respondent
as trustee for the
Winnie Family Trust or the disbursement of funds from that trust. This is
because to do so would equate the first
respondent’s right to due
consideration as a beneficiary as being equivalent to the value of the entire
trust property. For
reasons which we have explained, the primary judge would
have been, in our opinion, in error had he done so.
(Footnote omitted)
if the wife does have some proprietary interest in, or claim to, the trusts the
subject of the trusts subpoenas, the Court has
a discretion to exclude property
from the asset pool available for division between spouse parties. See, for
Martin & Newton
[2011] FamCAFC 233
(2011) FLC 93-490
the circumstances as analysed above, and where the husband does not seek to
alter the parties’ interests in property beyond
the uncontroversial
property (save as to value) referred to above, I consider that there is no
contradiction between the observation
of French CJ in
Kennon v Spry
at [78], that it is difficult to put a value on either of the dual rights,
albeit that a “valuation might not be beyond the
actuarial arts” in
relation to the right to due consideration, and the observation of the Full
Shaw & Shaw
that there is “a degree of artificiality
Rather, what the Court should be more concerned to ascertain is
whether the subpoenaed trusts are a significant financial resource
of the wife,
in order to gain an appreciation of the extent to which she might reasonably
expect to receive benefits from them in
the future.
relevance, and utility, of valuing an eligible object’s right to due
consideration (and, possibly, administration), which
were held by French J in
Kennon v Spry
to be “in the nature of” equitable choses in
action, was considered by Murphy J in
& Brady and Anor
[2017] FamCAFC 186
(2017) FLC 93-799.
In that case, the husband had
issued a subpoena to an accountant for the production of a number of documents
relating to a discretionary
trust, of which the wife was, along with her mother
and her sister, one of three “principal beneficiaries” and they were
the three “default beneficiaries”.
objection was taken to production of the trust deeds or any amending deeds;
however, as in the present case, objection was taken
to production of the
financial accounts, including the balance sheet and profit and loss statements,
and any associated notes for
the Trust, for the specified period.
primary judge upheld the objection and set aside the relevant paragraph of the
schedule to the subpoena on the grounds of lack
of apparent relevance and
fishing. The husband sought leave to appeal, in the course of which, by Notice
of Contention, leave was
granted to the subpoenaed person also to rely upon the
ground of oppression, “not in the sense of production being overly
but in the sense of infringing upon the privacy and rights of a
stranger to the action (the wife’s mother)” (at paragraph
J said at [38]:
38. It is not suggested that the wife has any vested interest in the trust.
However, it is contended centrally by the husband that,
within the substantive s
79 proceedings, the wife has an interest in property within the meaning of that
section (relying, as I apprehended
it, upon what was said, in particular by
French CJ in
Kennon v Spry
, or she has as an expectancy or financial
resource relevant to s 79(4)(e) of the Act).
(Footnotes omitted)
relation to the accounts of the trust, Murphy J said at [40]:
40. The accounts do not, of course, show the value of any such asserted
proprietary interest or indeed the trust itself. Counsel
asserts orally that
while that might be so, the accounts are nevertheless the “starting
point” in arriving at any such
I have observed above in relation to the present case, so too Murphy J, after
referring to the observation of French CJ in
Kennon v Spry
at [75] that a
valuation of the right to due consideration “might not be beyond the
actuarial arts”, said as follows
42. There was no evidence adduced before her Honour as to whether the
“actuarial arts” might be able to value the asserted
interest in
property (if that is what it is found to be) or the financial resource, much
less the basis or bases upon which any such
“valuation” might be
conducted or how a present value of any such “value” might be
calculated or what assumptions
or qualifications may underlie it.
Honour continued at [43]–[44]:
43. In any event, even if an actuarial “valuation” was possible, it
would axiomatically be a “valuation”
of: an indeterminate interest,
of indeterminate amount, received (if at all) at an indeterminate time, and
qualified by possible
future events (including removal of the wife as a
beneficiary) that may, or may not, occur at an indeterminate future time.
44. The relevance of any such evidence (even assuming it is obtainable; is
obtained and is admissible; including being based on relevant
expertise and
established facts giving the basis for the opinion) is, to my mind, likely to be
marginal at best within the context
of the broad range of matters which a court
must take into account by reference to each of s 79(2) and s 79(4) and, if an
to be made, the broad discretion inherent within it.
relation to the decision of the Full Court in
White & Tulloch v White
(1995) FLC 92-640
, Murphy J said at [45]–[47]:
45. ... That case, it should immediately be observed, involved the question of
future expectancies under a will where the testator
remained alive, a
distinguishing feature being of course that a testator with capacity can change
a will at any time before death
without reference to any instrument such as a
trust deed.
46. Yet, the comments made in relation to indeterminate interests that may be
received at an indeterminate time have relevance, in
my view, to the instant
case. In particular, the Full Court there said that “the ultimate
criterion is whether the evidence
is, or may be, relevant to the just and
equitable process under s. 79 [and an] expectancy of inheritance will not be
relevant in
many s. 79 proceedings”.
47. Here, that is all the more so; in my view, the s 79 process will be informed
by facts that are already known and documents which
must in any event have been
disclosed or will be disclosed.
(As in original)
to the former, Murphy J specified at [48] what was already known by the husband.
As to the latter, Murphy said at [49]:
49. In addition, in terms of any asserted present benefit being received by the
wife from the trust (in whatever form), the husband
will have access to the
wife’s taxation returns and bank accounts and the product of the
wife’s ongoing duty to make
full and frank disclosure of all matters
relevant to her financial position and affairs.
too, in the present case, from the documents to which the subpoenaed trusts no
longer press objections, as well as from the documents
required to be disclosed
by the wife, the s 79 process will be informed by similar facts.
the circumstances, the application for leave to appeal in
Kelton & Brady
was refused by Murphy J.
White & Tulloch v White
which, as Murphy J pointed out, involved the
question of future expectancies under a will where the testator remained alive,
distinguishing feature, the plurality of the Full Court nevertheless
relevantly, for present purposes, said at p.82,463 that “[t]he
criterion is whether the evidence is, or may be, relevant to the just and
equitable process under s. 79” and that
“there must be a
worthwhile connection
between a specific element of the party's case and
the suggested expectancy” (emphasis added).
Full Court continued at p.82,463:
The central point of proceedings under s. 79 remains the division of the
property of the parties to the marriage and thus the essential
concentration
should be upon the financial circumstances of those parties. This is emphasised
by the circumstance that the thrust
of almost all of the matters in ss. 79 and
75(2) is to direct the Court to consider various aspects relating to the parties
(or their children). As a matter of principle and day to day
management of trials, it would not ordinarily be appropriate to perform
exercise largely by detailed reference to the property of a third party or to
require a third party to make a detailed disclosure
of his or her testamentary
intentions and financial circumstances. It would be highly undesirable that in a
property proceeding between
husband and wife significant amounts of time should
be devoted to a detailed examination of such matters.
Full Court further said at p.82,463–82,464:
Similarly, it was pointed out by [Senior Counsel for the subpoena objectors]
that if the extent of the mother's property is to be
relevant there is a
likelihood that each party will seek to call evidence as to the values of that
property with the inevitable expansion
of time and costs involved in that. As we
understand it, the practice at trial is to actively discourage such an approach.
be noted that a trial judge may, pursuant
to s. 135(c) of the Evidence Act, refuse to admit evidence
if its probative value is substantially
outweighed by the danger that the
evidence might "cause or result in undue waste of time": see also
Family Law Act
p.82,464, the Full Court said that “cases where evidence of this type is
allowed are ‘likely to be rare’ and
should be dealt with in a broad,
general way because of the uncertainties which they entail” and continued
that it is “ultimately
a question of fact and degree”, because, in
some cases, the claim to a possible benefit “is so speculative that it
be inappropriate to contemplate it as relevant in a
determination,
it being too remote to affect the justice and equity of the case in any
worthwhile way”.
consider those observations of the Full Court in
White & Tulloch v
, although involving the question of future expectancies under a will
where the testator remained alive, unlike in the present case,
to be salient,
nevertheless.
allowing the appeal, in part, the Full Court in
White & Tulloch v
said at p.82,464:
It appears to us oppressive to [the subpoenaed person] to have to disclose
detailed financial records in circumstances where that
may prove ultimately to
be of no more than marginal relevance. It is likely to widen the scope of these
proceedings far beyond what
is legitimate or useful and is not in accordance
with a proper practice in these matters.
Accordingly,
the Full Court concluded at p.82,465:
... we consider that the detailed documents referred to in paras. 3, 4 and 5 of
the subpoena have not been shown to be sufficiently
relevant to justify
requiring ... a third party, to produce them for inspection. Such a course does
not accord with the usual practice
in this Court.
or not documents the subject of a subpoena have apparent relevance is not a
binary exercise; it is a question of degree, and
will vary from case to case,
turning on the facts of the particular case. In this case, the husband could
have adduced evidence of
any alleged contribution by him (or, indeed, the wife)
to the subpoenaed trusts and/or the J Group; however, he failed to do so.
Full Court said in
White & Tulloch v White
, there must be a
worthwhile connection
between a specific element of the husband’s
case and the four trusts, the subject of the trusts subpoenas or, more broadly,
the so-called “[J Group]”. I do not consider such a connection to
have been established in the present case.
Caldwell & Caldwell
[2025] FedCFamC1F 506
, there was an application
by the wife for a declaration that certain discretionary trusts and/or the
assets of the trusts were property
of the parties to the marriage or either of
them within the meaning of
of the Act. It was uncontentious that the
property of the husband and wife or either of them, outside the trusts, was
substantial,
with an estimated value of approximately $16 million–$22
million. The husband conceded that the trusts’ assets represented
financial resource to him, for the purposes of
of the Act, as does the wife
in the present case.
J said at [217]–[221]:
trust assets are property of a husband and/or wife within the meaning of
depends on the circumstances of case. In particular, it may depend on the terms
of any trust deed, the purpose of the trust, the
origin of the trust assets,
whether a spouse-party has control of the trust, whether that party has the
power to distribute capital
to one or other of the spouse-parties, the history
of any dealings of trust property, and whether but for the trust, the property
would unquestionably be the property of the spouse-party or spouse-parties.
However, without the control of the trustee, whether
direct or indirect, and a
power to benefit by distributions one or other of the spouse-parties, there is
little prospect, if any,
of successfully arguing the trust assets are property
for the purposes of
relied upon by the wife from selective parts of
Kennon v Spry
, which she
contends support her contention that all she has to establish is control and
power to benefit, must be seen in the context
of what was repeatedly described
in that case as the “unusual circumstances”. Those unusual
circumstances included the
creation of a trust to which the spouse-parties had
contributed throughout their long marriage, that its purpose was to provide a
tax effective means of providing the living and other expenses of the spouses
and their children, that the trust assets included
the former matrimonial home,
that the husband as the trustee held the legal title to the trust assets, that
(after the setting aside
of certain instruments) the husband had the power to
distribute the whole of the trust assets to the wife which would not have been
inconsistent with the purpose of the trust, that the trust assets (but for the
trust) would unquestionably have been property of
the parties or either of them.
Such matters inform the determination of whether the trusts and/or trust assets
are property within
the meaning of
and not, as submitted by the wife,
matters to be considered only when exercising the discretion of what property
order, if any, is
just and equitable.
contrast to
Kennon v Spry
, the Caldwell family have conducted a
[redacted] business over four generations established initially in [the early
1900s]. The assets
have grown since those early days but what exists in the
trusts reflects the efforts of a long line of direct lineal descendants
founder of the business, and in particular, Mr K.
is uncontentious that the origin of the trusts’ assets does not reflect
contributions made by the husband and/or the wife.
The husband was well
remunerated throughout his working life in the Caldwell family business and he
and the wife have amassed significant
assets outside the trusts.
this is not a case where the wife points to a long history of the husband
exercising control over trusts which have been
established and utilised by the
husband during a marriage for the benefit of the husband, wife, and their
children. Indeed, the husband
has not received any distributions from the trusts
either during the marriage or since separation.
(Footnotes omitted)
must be recalled that, in
Stanford v Stanford
at [39], in considering
of the Act, the plurality of the High Court said:
the power to make a property settlement order is not to be exercised in an
unprincipled fashion, whether it is “just
and equitable” to make the
order is not to be answered by assuming that the parties’ rights to or
interests in marital
property are or should be different from those that then
exist. All the more is that so when it is recognised that
of the Act must
be applied keeping in mind that “[c]ommunity of ownership arising from
marriage has no place in the common
law”. Questions between husband and
wife about the ownership of property that may be then, or may have been in the
past, enjoyed
in common are to be “decided according to the same scheme of
legal titles and equitable principles as govern the rights of
any two persons
who are not spouses”. The question presented by
is whether those
rights and interests should be altered.
(Footnotes omitted)
plurality of the High Court further said at [41] that Court must have “a
principled reason for interfering with the existing
legal and equitable
interests of the parties to the marriage and whatever may have been their stated
or unstated assumptions and
agreements about property interests during the
continuance of the marriage”.
as Nygh J said in
Ward & Ward
(Unreported, Full Court of the Family
Court of Australia, 16 July 1980) at p.7–8,
ss 79(4)(e)
now, are not to be utilised to effect “palm tree
justice”. Similarly, in
[1980] FamCA 63
(1980) FLC 90-872
p.75,528, Nygh J made similar observation in relation to
mere fact that the husband was married to the scion of a very wealthy family who
is an eligible object of various trusts does
, provide a
principled reason for interfering with the existing legal and equitable
interests. Rather, it may be an invitation to
effect palm tree justice,
impermissibly. This is especially so in circumstances where, as in
, there is no suggestion, let alone evidence, that the assets
of the subpoenaed trusts and, indeed, the J Group, represent the labours
contributions of either the husband or the wife and, on each party’s case,
there appears to be sufficient assets in the
uncontentious pool from which a
just and equitable settlement may be achieved; the relevant question is what
that settlement should
be, taking into account, in a general sense, the benefits
received (and possibly to continue to be received) by the wife.
must also be had to
of the Act (formerly
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
(“FCFCOA Act”), which are in similar terms to
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
95(1) specifies the “overarching purpose of the family law practice and
procedure provisions”, which are defined
in s 95(4) to
constitute:
so far as they apply in relation to proceedings under this Act:
(a) the applicable Rules of Court;
(b) any other provision made by or under this Act, or any other Act, with
respect to the practice and procedure of the Federal Circuit
and Family Court of
Australia or any other court
duty of disclosure now arises under both the Act (s 71B) and the
Circuit and Family Court of Australia Rules 2021
(Chapter 6).
95(1)(c)–(d) relevantly provides that the overarching purpose of the
family law practice and procedure provisions
is to facilitate the just
resolution of disputes according to law and as quickly, inexpensively and
efficiently as possible. Those
requirements are conjunctive, not disjunctive,
and, as a matter of statutory interpretation, neither takes precedence over the
95(2) provides:
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the overarching purpose includes the
following objectives in relation to proceedings under this
(a) the just determination of all such proceedings;
(b) the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for
the purposes of courts exercising jurisdiction in
such proceedings;
(c) the efficient disposal of the overall caseload of courts exercising
(d) the disposal of all such proceedings in a timely manner;
(e) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance
and complexity of the matters in dispute.
95(3) provides:
(3) The family law practice and procedure provisions must be interpreted and
applied, and any power conferred or duty imposed by
them (including the power to
make applicable Rules of Court) must be exercised or carried out, in the way
that best promotes the
overarching purpose.
96(1)–(2) provide:
Duty of parties
(1) The parties to proceedings under this Act must conduct the proceedings
(including negotiations for settlement of the dispute
to which the proceedings
relate) in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose of the family
law practice and procedure
provisions.
Duty of lawyers
(2) A party’s lawyer must, in the conduct of proceedings under this Act on
the party’s behalf (including in the conduct
of negotiations for
settlement of the dispute to which the proceedings relate):
(a) take account of the duty imposed on the party by subsection (1);
(b) assist the party to comply with the duty.
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
, said as follows, in relation to s 67 of the FCFCOA Act:
Division 4 – Case management
443. These case management provisions introduce an overarching obligation upon
the Court, the parties to litigation and legal practitioners
to facilitate the
just resolution of disputes according to law and as quickly, inexpensively and
efficiently as possible. They also
clarify the kinds of directions the Court can
make to control the progress and conduct of proceedings. This would provide
clear legislative
direction and support to Judges so that they can confidently
employ active case management powers which have been effective for the
Clause 67 – Overarching purpose of family law practice and procedure
244. Clause 67 provides the overarching purpose of the family law practice and
procedure provisions. It generally mirrors section
37M of the Federal Court Act
which was the centre-piece of the case management reforms of the Federal Court
247. Clause 67 will apply to both the Court and parties to the proceedings in
recognition of the fact that it would not be possible
for either the Court or
the parties to achieve the overarching purpose without the assistance of the
249. This provision is intended to be a reminder to litigants that costs
should be proportionate to the matter in dispute. It is
not only the cost to the
parties that is relevant. The efficient use of the Court’s resources needs
to be taken into account.
However, at the same time, due process would be
observed so that justice may be done in the individual case. These objectives
support the intention that both the Court’s and the litigant’s
resources are spent efficiently.
relation to s 68(2), the Explanatory Memorandum said:
254. If, for example, a party wishes to prolong the litigation as a strategy
to increase the costs of the other party, their lawyer
would be obliged to
explain that this behaviour is contrary to the overarching purpose and may have
adverse cost consequences. Also,
if a party is refusing to accept a reasonable
offer of settlement, a lawyer would have to explain that it is in their interest
accept the offer and that failing to do so may be regarded by the Court as
acting inconsistently with the overarching purpose.
UBS AG v Scott Francis Tyne as Trustee of the Argot Trust
[2018] HCA 45
(2018) 265 CLR
, the plurality of the High Court considered the similar provisions in
Federal Court of Australia Act
. At [38], the
plurality said:
38 The timely, cost effective and efficient conduct of modern civil litigation
takes into account wider public interests than those
of the parties to the
dispute. These wider interests are reflected in
of the FCA. As the
joint reasons in
Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian National
explain, the “just resolution” of a dispute is to be
understood in light of the purposes and objectives of provisions
of the FCA. Integral to a “just resolution” is the minimisation of
delay and expense. These considerations inform the
rejection in
the claimed “right” of a party to amend its pleading at a late stage
in the litigation in order to raise an arguable
(Footnotes omitted).
plurality continued at [45]:
45 The courts must be astute to protect litigants and the system of justice
itself against abuse of process. It is to hark back
to a time before this
Court's decisions in Aon and Tomlinson and the enactment of
of the FCA to
expect that the courts will indulge parties who engage in tactical manoeuvring
that impedes the "just, quick and efficient"
resolution of litigation. ...
need for proportionality and, indeed, common sense, in determining questions of
financial disclosure, within which broad rubric
I would include questions of
subpoenas and objections thereto, was referred to by Cronin J in
Carmel-Fevia
[2010] FamCA 502
(2010) 43 Fam LR 405.
The husband estimated the value of his total
net assets to be $264 million. Cronin J noted (at [7]) that “[d]espite, or
because of, the husband’s assertion as to his wealth, the wife
applied for an order for comprehensive disclosure from him which
in due course
would lead to a valuation of his wealth”. After recording (at [3]) that
the disclosure requirement is treated
very seriously, his Honour nevertheless
said (at [4]) that “all of these requirements are shadowed by the
over-arching principle
of relevance” and (at 5]) that “if there is
any dispute about disclosure, the fundamental issue is that of relevance
J recorded at [21]:
[21] Having acknowledged his significant wealth and the financial disparity
between the parties, the husband said that while he
disputed the wife's
entitlement could be anywhere near $35 million, he could meet whatever was
ordered. He objected to expending
time, energy and costs on what he perceived to
be an unnecessary exercise. He said there was no relevance in establishing his
precisely by the provision of many documents and also undertaking a
complex valuation exercise.
several factual differences, but notwithstanding certain similarities, the
husband’s claim in the present case is confined
to the relatively
uncontroversial pool and does not extend beyond the boundaries thereof such as,
for example, to a claim under s
90AE in respect of any interest that the wife
might have in the subpoenaed trusts or the J Group. On one view, it might be
the wife in
Carmel-Fevia v Fevia
had a stronger claim than does
the husband in this case, being married to an undisputed controller of the
wealth, to which each of
them had made direct and indirect contributions, albeit
differently in nature and possibly quantity.
[72]–[74], Cronin J said:
[72] While there is a distinct dissimilarity between the Australian provision
and its English counterpart, some assistance can
be gained from
Thyssen-Bornemisza v Thyssen-Bornemisza (No 2)
[1985] FLR 1069.
[73] Thyssen-Bornemisza was a decision of the English court of Appeal. There,
the trial judge had to deal with a very wealthy man.
Sir John Arnold P observed
that if the court came to the conclusion that there was sufficient admission in
the evidence to justify
the making of the largest order in favour of the wife
which the court could reasonably make, was there any point in exercising the
discretion to order further information which would render more exact the
material before the court to measure the parties’
fortune. Griffiths LJ
(perhaps contextually from a different time historically) said:
When the average marriage breaks up there is just not enough money for both
parties to the marriage to continue their lives on the
same scale as they were
before. It is a sterile exercise to try and get a quart out of a pint pot. In
this litigation the court is
faced with a very different exercise. To use the
same analogy it might be said that its task here is to extract a full barrel
a vat. There is no doubt here that there is ample wealth available in the
hands of the husband to make a provision for the wife to
continue to live in the
most luxurious style beyond the imagination of most ordinary mortals.
[74] Griffiths LJ asked rhetorically what possible purpose there was in
mounting a very costly exercise to probe into the precise
dimensions of the
husband’s fortune and the precise legal rights which the wife might
possess over the disposition of the fortune.
[75], Cronin J said:
[75] Although I am only dealing with an interlocutory issue, its resolution is
guided by the fact that the wife’s case as
expressed in her affidavit
relates mostly to her non-financial contributions. Those, to use the words of
Murphy J are not “readily
susceptible to expression in dollar
terms”. Be that as it may, the assessment of a contribution and the weight
given it as
well as the adjustment for s 75(2) factors are tasks which
ultimately have to be delivered in dollar terms. Traditionally, the assessment
and determination of weight has been done in percentage terms as described by
Murphy J but there is nothing in the Act nor in any
authority of the court that
mandatorily requires that approach.
Nevertheless,
his Honour continued at [76]–[78]:
[76] Proportionality is still important. The parties and the court have to
have some idea of the size of the asset pool because
otherwise the determination
could be drawn into the “needs”-type approach for the s 75(2)
factors or some form of “compensation”
for contribution as a
yardstick rather than an assessment of entitlement. Having said that, I do not
accept that proportionality
requires preciseness in a case of wealth of this
[77] In discussion, it was said by the wife’s counsel that if she
ascertained that the husband’s wealth was greater
than that which she
understood, she might consider asking for more. There is no reason why she
cannot do that but it still does not
mean that the approach to the determination
of her entitlement would be any different nor cannot be done in dollar rather
than percentage
[78] Ultimately, the approach of the court is a discretionary one: see Norbis
[1986] HCA 17
(1986) 161 CLR 513
10 Fam LR 819
Thus, provided a trial judge can explain why an approach was
taken, the discretion may be seen to have been properly exercised.
(As per the original)
too, in the present case, in considering the question of the apparent relevance
of the remaining documents sought by the husband
in the trusts subpoenas, I
consider that, in the circumstances of this case, proportionality is important,
but has been overlooked
or disregarded by the husband and/or his legal advisers.
As Cronin J said, the parties and the Court have to have “some idea”
of the size of the asset pool, but that does mean that proportionality requires
preciseness in a case of wealth of this magnitude.
In this regard, I take into
account the absence of any:
expert evidence
that the wife’s equitable chose in action, constituted by her right to due
consideration is actually capable
of valuation and if so, how, and what
documents would be required to undertake same; and
evidence of the
husband’s (or, indeed, the wife’s) contributions beyond the
relatively uncontroversial pool and, in particular,
to the subpoenaed trusts
and/or the J Group.
J also relevantly said at [84], in relation to disclosure, that the Court
“has a responsibility to ensure that the exercise
is not only
cost-effective but that it does not have a significant impact upon the parties
personally” and, further, that “the
Court should also consider its
own resources”.
Harper J explained in
Kehoe & Seden (No 2)
[2022] FedCFamC1F 346
, the grounds of lack of forensic purpose, lack of relevance, abuse of
process and fishing overlap, which grounds are variously raised
subpoenaed trusts and the wife and which, for the reasons aforesaid, I find to
be made out insofar as the documents specified
in paragraph 3 of the schedule in
of each of the subpoenas are concerned. This is particularly so by reason
of lack of apparent relevance, underpinning the objections
on the grounds of
lack of legitimate forensic purpose and fishing, as that latter concept was
explained by Brereton J in
Liristis v Gadelrabb
the reasons herein, in the circumstances, orders will be made for paragraph 3 of
the schedule in
of each of the four trusts subpoenas to be struck out,
but for the Notice of Objection filed on behalf of the wife on 12 September
to the subpoena to F Bank filed on behalf of the husband on 3 September 2024 to
be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding two hundred (200)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 13 October 2025
RTF format (933 KB)
Signed PDF/A format