Government of the Russian Federation v Commonwealth of Australia [2025] HCA 44 (12 November 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, STEWARD, GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH‑JONES JJ
GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN
FEDERATION PLAINTIFF
COMMONWEALTH OF
AUSTRALIA DEFENDANT
Government of the Russian Federation v Commonwealth of
[2025] HCA 44
Date of Hearing: 6 August
Date of Judgment: 12 November
The questions stated for the opinion of the Full Court in the special case
filed on 16 October 2024 be answered as follows:
Question 1: Is the
(Cth) invalid in its
entirety on the ground that it is not supported by a head of Commonwealth
Answer: No.
Question 2: If the answer to Question 1 is "no", does the operation of
(Cth) result in the acquisition of property
from the plaintiff to which
Constitution
Answer: Yes.
Question 3: If the answer to Question 2 is "yes", is the Commonwealth
liable to pay to the plaintiff a reasonable amount of compensation
pursuant to
Answer: Yes.
Question 4: Who should pay the costs of the special case?
Answer: The Commonwealth.
Representation
Walker SC with E A J Hyde for the plaintiff (instructed by Adero Law)
Donaghue KC, Solicitor-General of the Commonwealth, with
E H I Smith and C M R Ernst for the defendant (instructed by
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
Government of the Russian Federation v
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitutional law (Cth) –
Legislative power – Acquisition of property on just terms – Where
Government of Russian
Federation granted lease in 2008 by Commonwealth of
Australia for land in Australian Capital Territory – Where land to be used
for diplomatic, consular or official purposes by Russian Federation –
Where land was 300 metres from Parliament House –
Where lease terminated
by operation of
(Cth) – Whether
Affairs Act
supported by
Constitution
Whether termination of lease constituted acquisition of property within meaning
and scope of
Constitution
Constitution
limited to empowering acquisition of
property for purpose related to need for or proposed use or application of
property to be acquired
– Whether provision of just terms for termination
of lease incongruous notion.
Words and phrases – "abstract",
"acquisition", "acquisition of property", "acquisition power", "carved out",
"compensation",
"discretion as to costs", "fair dealing", "for the government of
any territory", "foreign state", "head of power", "incidental power",
"incongruous", "just terms", "land", "lease", "national security", "nexus",
"Parliament House", "peace, order and good government",
"power to make laws",
"property", "proposed use", "protect", "purpose", "qualifies", "reversionary
interest", "risk", "scope", "source
of legislative power", "Takings Clause",
"territories power".
Constitution
ss 51(xxxi)
GAGELER CJ,
GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH-JONES JJ. This proceeding has been brought in
the original jurisdiction of the High Court by
the Government of the Russian
Federation against the Commonwealth of Australia. It concerns the validity and
operation of the
(Cth) ("the
") which operated
upon commencement to terminate a lease from the Commonwealth to the Russian
Federation ("the Lease") of land located
in the Australian Capital Territory
("the Land") and to render the Commonwealth liable to pay compensation to the
Russian Federation
if that operation would otherwise have resulted in an
acquisition of property from the Russian Federation within the meaning and
Constitution
a special case in the proceeding, the parties have agreed in stating questions
of law for the opinion of the Full Court. Those
questions and the answers to
them are set out at the conclusion of these reasons.
those answers is the conclusion that termination of the Lease by operation of
constituted an acquisition of property from the Russian Federation
within the meaning and scope of
Constitution
acquisition was for a purpose for which the Commonwealth Parliament has power to
make laws under
Constitution
is therefore valid and
the Commonwealth is therefore liable to pay compensation to the Russian
Federation under the
Land is Block 26, Section 44 in the Division of Yarralumla as delineated on
Deposited Plan No 10486 in the Office of the Registrar
of Titles in the
Australian Capital Territory. It comprises approximately 11,526 square metres.
Its south-eastern boundary borders
State Circle approximately 300 metres
north-west of Parliament House.
Land had formed part of a larger portion of land known as the "Duntroon Estate",
the "legal estate" in which vested in the Commonwealth
by force of the
Acquisition Act 1906
(Cth) on 27 July
after surrender by New
South Wales
and acceptance
by the Commonwealth
Australian Capital Territory under
Constitution
or about 21 December 1990, the Land was specified as a "Designated
known as "The Central
National Area" in the National Capital Plan prepared by the National Capital
Planning Authority under the
Australian Capital Territory (Planning and Land
Management) Act 1988
By amendments which
commenced on 3 August 2007, the National Capital Plan was amended to change the
permitted use of the Land from
"Open Space land use" to "Diplomatic Mission land
16 April 2008, the Land was included within an area declared by instrument under
Australian Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act
"National Land".
of that declaration was to render the Land subject to the
National Land
Ordinance 1989
Leases (Special Purposes) Ordinance 1925
(Cth) as applied
National Land
By the same
instrument, the Land was designated to be "required for the special purposes of
Canberra as the National Capital" under
National Land
approved to be managed by the National Capital Authority (the continuation of
the National Capital Planning Authority under a
) on behalf of the
Commonwealth.
the same day, 16 April 2008, the National Capital Authority on behalf of the
Commonwealth made a written offer to lease the Land
to the Russian Federation on
terms which included payment to be either by a once only payment of a "land
premium" of $2,750,000 or
annual rent equal to 5% of the unimproved value of the
site, in addition to the payment of a "survey/deposited plan fee". The Russian
Federation accepted that offer and paid the agreed amounts of land premium and
survey/deposited plan fee to the National Capital
Authority on or about 23
December 2008.
Lease was then granted by the Commonwealth, as lessor, to the Russian
Federation, as lessee, under the
Leases (Special Purposes) Ordinance
applied by the
National Land Ordinance
on 24 December 2008. The Lease as
so granted was for a term of 99 years for purposes identified as "only for any
diplomatic consular
or official purpose of the Government of the Russian
Federation or for the purpose of an official residence for any accredited agent
of that Government or for all or any number of those purposes". Upon the repeal
National Land Ordinance
on 1 April 2022, the Lease was continued
in effect as if it had been granted under the
Australian Capital Territory
National Land (Leased) Ordinance 2022
the term of the Lease, the Russian Federation commenced but had not before the
commencement of the
completed construction work on the Land including in
relation to a building and a fence.
Bill for the
was introduced into the Commonwealth Parliament on 15 June
2023 and was enacted and commenced on the same day.
defines "relevant lease" to encompass the
"A relevant lease, and any legal or equitable right, title, interest, trust,
restriction, obligation, mortgage, encumbrance, contract,
licence or charge,
granted or arising under or pursuant to a relevant lease, or in dependence on a
relevant lease, is terminated
by force of this section on the commencement of
this section."
"(1) If the operation of this
would result in an acquisition of
property to which paragraph 51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
applies from a
person otherwise than on just terms, the Commonwealth is liable to pay a
reasonable amount of compensation to the
(2) If the Commonwealth and the person do not agree on the amount of
the compensation, the person may institute proceedings in
the High Court of
Australia or the Federal Court of Australia for the recovery from the
Commonwealth of such reasonable amount
of compensation as the court
determines."
The term "person" includes a "body
and therefore
includes the Russian Federation.
7 provides that the
has effect despite any other law, and applies despite
any rights, duties, obligations, powers, limitations, offences, privileges
immunities which would otherwise apply under any other law, but that the
does not affect the status of the Land as National Land under the
Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act
. The continuing status
of the Land as National Land means that the Land continues to be subject to the
Australian Capital Territory National Land (Leased) Ordinance
which, in consequence of termination of the Lease, the Land remains available to
be the subject of a lease granted by the Commonwealth
including a lease for
"diplomatic
Explanatory Memorandum for the
explained the object of the
as being "to
protect Australia's national security interests with regard to land within the
area adjacent to Parliament
In the Second
Reading Speech in each of the House of
Representatives
the responsible
Minister referred to its enactment as "necessary to protect Australia's national
security interests".
special case records as an agreed fact that the purpose of the Government of the
Commonwealth in seeking to terminate the Lease
through the introduction of the
Bill for the
was "not related to [the Commonwealth] having a need for, or
proposed use or application of, the Land".
agreed fact and the references in the extrinsic material to protection of
Australia's national security interests are given
context by statements made by
the Prime Minister during a press conference at Parliament House in the morning
of 15 June 2023 in
which he announced the intention of the Government to
introduce legislation to terminate the Lease that day. The Prime Minister
that the Government had "received very clear security advice as to the
risk presented by a new Russian presence so close to Parliament
House" and that
the proposed legislation was "based upon very specific advice ... about the
nature of the construction that's proposed
for this site, about the location of
the site, and about the capability that that would present in terms of potential
interference
with activity that occurs in this Parliament House". The special
case records that the advice to which the Prime Minister referred
is said by the
Commonwealth to have been informed by information provided by the Australian
Security Intelligence Organisation ("ASIO"),
constituted under the
Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(Cth), and that the assessment
of ASIO was that disclosure of that information "would be expected to cause
serious damage to the
national interest".
Understandably,
the special case contains no agreement between the parties as to the risk to
which the Prime Minister referred in
the press conference. On the hearing of the
special case, the Commonwealth disavowed any argument that the existence of any
risk ought to be found as a constitutional fact.
Constitution
Constitution
confers power on the Commonwealth Parliament
to make laws "with respect to ... the acquisition of property on just terms from
State or person for any purpose in respect of which the Parliament has power
to make laws".
Section 122
confers power on the Parliament to make laws "for the
government of any territory".
Court recently held in
The Commonwealth v
power conferred on the Commonwealth Parliament by
Constitution
to make laws for the government of a territory does not
extend to making a law with respect to an acquisition of property otherwise
on just terms within the meaning of
Constitution
basis of that holding was that
is "the sole source of power to
make any law which has the character of a law with respect to an acquisition of
property for any
purpose in respect of which the Parliament has power to make
"[a]bstracted from, or 'carve[d] out' of every other legislative power is
accordingly power to make any law that is properly
characterised as a law with
respect to an acquisition of property within the meaning of
legislative power conferred by
was held to be no
plurality in
explained there to be no difficulty construing the
reference in
to an acquisition of property "for any purpose in
respect of which the Parliament has power to make laws" to encompass the purpose
of "the government of any territory" in respect of which the Commonwealth
Parliament has power to make laws under
Constitution
explanation proceeded on the implicit understanding that the words "for any
purpose in respect of which the Parliament has power
to make laws" indicate that
a law within the exclusive scope of
is a law which would be
supported by another source of Commonwealth legislative power absent the
abstraction from power effected
s 51(xxxi).
issue was raised on the hearing of the special case as to whether the
properly be characterised as a law for the government of any territory, so as to
be supported by
Constitution
, if not properly characterised
as a law with respect to an acquisition of property within the meaning of
The issue is readily resolved: plainly it is properly so
characterised.
Constitution
, and relevantly to
, the power conferred on
the Commonwealth Parliament by
to make laws "for the government of any
territory" is "a complete power to make laws for the peace, order and good
government of
territory",
large and universal a power of legislation as can be
extends to "the entire legal situation of the territory, both internally and in
relation to all parts of the
Commonwealth"
permit laws for the "direct administration" of a territory as well as for "the
establishment of a territory as a self-governing
more is required for a law to warrant characterisation as a law "for the
government of any territory" within the meaning and scope
Constitution
than demonstration of the existence of "a sufficient nexus
or connexion between the law and the
[t]erritory".
law otherwise demonstrated to have a sufficient nexus with a territory might
well operate to create or extinguish rights
or obligations outside the
geographic limits of that
there can be
no doubt that the operation of a law to create or extinguish rights or
obligations within the geographic limits of a
territory in and of itself
constitutes a sufficient nexus with that territory to warrant the description of
that law as for the government
A nexus with
the Australian Capital Territory sufficient to characterise the
as a law for
the government of that Territory within the meaning and scope
Constitution
, if it is not a law with respect to an acquisition of
property within the meaning and scope of
, is therefore furnished
by nothing more than the fact that the Land the subject of the Lease terminated
by operation of
is located within that Territory.
availability of
Constitution
as a source of legislative
power sufficient to support the
, if it is not within the exclusive operation
of the power conferred by s 51(xxxi), makes unnecessary any consideration of
other potential
sources of Commonwealth legislative power, such as s
s 51(xxxix),
and s 52(i).
determinative issue is accordingly whether termination of the Lease by operation
is properly characterised as having resulted in an acquisition
of property within the meaning and scope of
Constitution
. If so, the
is a valid exercise of the legislative power
conferred by s 51(xxxi) to enact a law with respect to the acquisition of
property on
just terms for a purpose in respect of which the Parliament has
power to make laws under
Constitution
Commonwealth is liable to pay compensation to the Russian Federation under
. If not, the
is a valid exercise of the legislative power
conferred by s 122 and the statutory entitlement to compensation is not
the Commonwealth advanced no argument that termination of the Lease by operation
did not meet the threshold condition of an acquisition of
property within the meaning of
Constitution
interest in the nature of property is taken from one person and that an interest
in the nature of property is conferred
on the Commonwealth or another
Termination of
the Lease extinguished the leasehold estate of the Russian Federation in
the Land and thereby, and to that extent,
enlarged the reversionary interest of
the Commonwealth in the Land. By the termination, the Commonwealth's legal
estate in the Land
was wholly freed of the encumbrance of the Lease.
argument advanced by the Commonwealth was that the acquisition of property
constituted by the termination of the Lease by operation
nevertheless not properly characterised as an acquisition of property within the
meaning and scope of
Constitution
for either or both of
two reasons. The first reason was said to be that
is limited to
empowering an acquisition of property for a purpose related to a need for or
proposed use or application of the property
to be acquired. That limitation was
said by the Commonwealth to have been exceeded in light of the agreed fact that
the Commonwealth
had not proposed any future use or application of the Land at
the time of the enactment of the
. The second reason was said to be that
provision of "just terms" to the Russian Federation for termination of the Lease
"incongruous", given that the object of the
was to protect from a
risk to national security which arose from the Russian Federation's continuing
occupation and use of the Land
pursuant to the Lease. Neither argument can be
Absence of proposed use or application of the Land
Clunies-Ross v The
Commonwealth
Commonwealth argued that
Constitution
construed as including the power to acquire property not for a purpose related
to any need for or desired use of the property
but for the purpose of depriving
the owner of it and thereby indirectly achieving some purpose in respect of
which the Parliament
has power to make
The argument was
accepted by Murphy J in
The majority
did not need to consider the
The majority
relevantly observed only that there were to be found in previous decisions
"statements of high authority which would
seem to be framed on the assumption
that the legislative power conferred by [s 51(xxxi)] should be confined to the
making of laws
with respect to acquisition of property for some purpose related
to a need for or proposed use or application of the property to
first of the arguments advanced by the Commonwealth was framed by reference to
that observation of the majority in
Clunies-Ross
contradiction that this argument was in direct opposition to the argument
earlier advanced by the Commonwealth in
Clunies-Ross
and left unresolved
in that case was compounded by the peculiarity of the same argument being
advanced on the hearing of the special
case by the Russian Federation. The
Commonwealth and the Russian Federation each advanced the argument, each in
support of the conclusion
that the termination of the Lease by operation of
was not an acquisition of property within the meaning and scope of
Constitution
. They differed only as to the
consequence of that conclusion: the Russian Federation asserting that the
consequence was a hiatus
in legislative power to support the
Commonwealth maintaining that the inapplicability of s 51(xxxi) left
Constitution
as a source of legislative power.
in that way, the parties each developed the argument that
Constitution
is confined to empowering an acquisition of property for a
purpose related to a need for or proposed use or application of the property
be acquired by reference to observations made by Dixon CJ in
Attorney-General
(Cth) v Schmidt
observations were to the effect that "[p]rima facie"
Constitution
"is pointed at the acquisition of property by the
Commonwealth for use by it in the execution of the functions, administrative and
the like, arising under its laws" and that "[t]he expression 'for any purpose'
... refers to the use or application of the property
in or towards carrying out
or furthering a purpose comprised in some other legislative
parties each sought further support for the argument from passages in the
reasoning in
W H Blakeley & Co Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth,
led ultimately to the rejection in that case of a submission that
Constitution
did not support an acquisition under the
Acquisition Act 1906
(Cth) for a "public purpose" identified as "[p]urposes
of providing office accommodation for Departments of the Commonwealth". This
in circumstances claimed in that case to be that "the Commonwealth neither
required nor intended to use the said land for any
such purpose either forthwith
or within any fixed or determinate or reasonable time or at
passages in the reasoning in
on which the Commonwealth and the
Russian Federation relied were in the context of the statutory definition of
"public purpose" in
that case having been noted earlier in the reasoning to have
followed the language of s
It was said in
that context that the word "purpose" did "not refer to any power or powers
defined in the various paragraphs of
Constitution
elsewhere conferred" but rather "to the object for which the land is acquired"
being required to be "one falling within the Commonwealth's
power to make
It was immediately
added, however, that "[t]he expression 'acquisition of property ... for any
purpose' of the defined kind seem[ed]
rather to demand that the acquisition must
be relevant to one or more of the subjects of Federal legislative power than to
on the necessity as a condition of the power of a specific intent in the
Executive Government or other acquiring
authority".
the Commonwealth acknowledged the argument to be in tension with more recent
decisions, beginning with
Georgiadis v Australian and Overseas
Telecommunications
Corporation
have emphasised that an interest in the nature of property taken from one person
need not coincide with an interest in the
nature of property conferred on
another in order to constitute an acquisition of property. The Commonwealth
sought to reconcile the
argument with those decisions by proffering, as a
refinement of the asserted limitation on the scope of the power conferred by
Constitution
framed by reference to the observation in
Clunies-Ross
, that the taking of the interest in the nature of property
must be for a purpose related to a need for or proposed use or application
the interest in the nature of property that is acquired. As applied to the
circumstances of the present case, the asserted limitation
accordingly linked
the need for or proposed use or application of an interest in the nature of
property not to the leasehold estate
taken from the Russian Federation but
rather to the unencumbered legal interest in the Land acquired by the
Commonwealth.
difficulty with the argument as so refined by the Commonwealth is that it has
repeatedly been held in the same decisions, beginning
, that the interest in the nature of property that is
acquired need be identified with no more precision than it be "an identifiable
and measurable advantage of a proprietary
The "direct
benefit or financial gain" recognised in
to have resulted from a statutory deprivation of a right to bring a common
law cause of action is a prime example of an interest of
To proceed on the
understanding proffered by the Commonwealth would be to stretch the concepts of
"use" or "application" of such
an indeterminate interest in the nature of
property to an extent that would rob those concepts of meaningful content.
is, moreover, a more fundamental reason why the argument (that an acquisition of
property within the scope of
Constitution
limited to an acquisition of property for a purpose related to a need for or
proposed use or application of the interest in the
nature of property that is
acquired) must be rejected. The reason lies in the overarching principle that,
"[a]s a grant of legislative
power, no less than as a guarantee of just terms",
must be construed "with all the generality which the words used
Interpreted with
the generality that the words admit, the connection postulated by the
requirement that an "acquisition of property"
be for a purpose in respect of
which the Parliament has power to make laws is not that the "property" acquired
must be for a proposed
use or application for a purpose within Commonwealth
legislative power. The postulated connection is instead that the "acquisition
property" must be for a purpose within Commonwealth legislative power.
is to say no more than was implicit in the explanation given by the plurality in
to which attention has already been
within the meaning
and scope of
Constitution
, an "acquisition of property"
is "for any purpose in respect of which the [Commonwealth] Parliament has power
to make laws" if the
law providing for that acquisition of property would be
supported by another source of Commonwealth legislative power absent
s 51(xxxi).
point is not that a proposal to use or apply property to be acquired cannot be
sufficient to demonstrate that a particular acquisition
of property is for a
purpose within Commonwealth legislative power. Examples of circumstances where a
proposed use or application
of the property to be acquired will furnish the
requisite connection between the acquisition of property and Commonwealth
legislative
power include an acquisition of a proprietary interest in land in
order to construct and operate a post office within
or a lighthouse
or of a proprietary interest in
or a printing
to be used for a
defence purpose within
The point is that a proposed use or application
of the property that is to be acquired is not required where the acquisition of
is otherwise established to be for a purpose within Commonwealth
legislative power.
the extent that statements in
contrary, those statements cannot be treated as having laid down principles of
general and enduring application. Both
as Stephen J noted in
Trade Practices Commission v Tooth & Co
"concern[ing] the validity of legislation the declared purpose of which was to
pass property from one person to another". The
"preferable view", as his Honour
there suggested, "is to regard what was said in these cases as necessarily
restricted to the particular
factual setting ... there confronted".
first of the arguments advanced by the Commonwealth for concluding that the
acquisition of property constituted by the termination
of the Lease was outside
the scope of the legislative power conferred by
Constitution
must accordingly be rejected on its major premise: an
acquisition of property within the scope of the power need not be for a purpose
related to any need for or proposed use or application of the property acquired.
The argument originally advanced by the Commonwealth
Clunies-Ross
of the major premise means that there is no occasion to consider whether, were
that premise to have been accepted, the
agreed fact that the Commonwealth's
purpose for terminating the Lease was not related to it having a need for or
proposed use or
application of the Land would have been enough to establish that
the acquisition of property constituted by the termination of the
outside the scope of the power
conferred by
Constitution
. Nothing in these reasons should be taken to endorse the
view that it would.
Just terms not incongruent
second of the arguments advanced by the Commonwealth was based on the
proposition, stated by Deane and Gaudron JJ in
Re Director of Public
Prosecutions; Ex parte
referred to by the plurality in
Theophanous v The Commonwealth
"applies only to acquisitions of a kind that permit of just terms" and
"is not concerned with laws in connection with which 'just
terms' is an
inconsistent or incongruous notion".
Commonwealth developed the argument by recalling that "[t]he standard of justice
postulated by the expression 'just terms' is
one of fair dealing between the
Australian nation and an Australian State or individual in relation to the
acquisition of property
for a purpose within the national legislative
competence"
"what is just as between the Commonwealth and a State, two Governments, may
depend on special considerations not applicable
individual".
The argument
was that the constitutional conception of "just terms" as "fair dealing" does
not extend to requiring a foreign state
to be compensated for an acquisition of
its property in circumstances where the sole object of that acquisition is to
eliminate a
legislatively perceived albeit unproven risk that the foreign state
might use that property to interfere with the national security
of Australia and
in particular with the security of Parliament House. Put rhetorically: how could
it be consistent or congruent with
fair dealing between the Australian nation
and the Russian Federation for the Australian taxpayer to be required to
compensate the
Russian Federation for preventing it from using National Land in
a way that the Commonwealth Parliament was satisfied posed a risk
national security of Australia?
force of the argument is diminished when it is borne in mind that the Lease was
granted by the Commonwealth and paid for by the
Russian Federation in accordance
with Australian domestic law and that use or potential use of the Land by the
Russian Federation
has not been suggested to involve breach of any term of the
Lease or contravention of any domestic legal norm. As senior counsel
Russian Federation aptly submitted, the legal position of the Russian Federation
for the purposes of
Constitution
is in those
circumstances no different in principle from the legal position of an Australian
citizen whose lawful occupation of land
is terminated by operation of a
Commonwealth law the object of which is to create a security zone around a
defence establishment.
conceptual error in the Commonwealth's argument lies in its stretching of the
constitutional conception of "just terms" as "fair
dealing" beyond the true
import of that description. In the language of Brennan J in
provision of "just terms" "does not attempt a balancing of the interests of the
dispossessed owner against the interests of the
community at large". Instead,
"[t]he purpose of the guarantee of just terms is to ensure that the owners of
property compulsorily
acquired by government presumably in the interests of the
community at large are not required to sacrifice their property for less
its worth". To equate "just terms" with "fair dealing" is not to open up for
debate whether the constitutional conditioning
of an acquisition of property on
the provision of just terms operates fairly in respect of a particular
acquisition. The point of
the equation is rather to posit the question of
whether the law which effects the acquisition makes provision for just terms as
inquiry into "whether the law amounts to a true attempt to provide fair and
just standards of compensating or rehabilitating the
... owner of property, fair
and just as between [the owner] and the government of the
is no doubt that application of considerations of inconsistency and incongruity
in the context of
Constitution
have the potential to
give rise to contestable questions of judgment, as the plurality noted in
Theophanous
Nevertheless, as Brennan J pointed out in
Mutual Pools & Staff Pty
Commonwealth
each of the cases in which laws for the acquisition of property without the
provision of just terms have been held valid, such
an acquisition has been a
necessary or characteristic feature of the means selected to achieve an
objective within power, the means
selected being appropriate and adapted to that
end". Thus, as Brennan J later explained in
forfeiture of property imposed as a sanction for breach of a prescribed rule of
conduct does not admit of the provision
of just terms because to do so would be
"to weaken, if not destroy, the normative effect of the prescription of the rule
of conduct".
Likewise, to adopt the explanation given by Mason CJ in
which provided for the application of enemy property as war
reparations "was a subsidiary provision in a general scheme for the disposition
of enemy property and had to be characterized against the common law subjection
of the property of enemy aliens to seizure and forfeiture
by the Crown".
Theophanous
that deprivation of parliamentary superannuation
benefits in consequence of conviction of a former parliamentarian of a
"corruption
offence" did not amount to an acquisition of property within the
meaning and scope of
fits within the same category. As spelt out by
consistently
with the conclusion expressed by the plurality in terms of
incongruity,
placed the law effecting that deprivation within
so as to have
conditioned the validity of the law on the provision of just terms would have
weakened or destroyed the normative effect
of the principle of probity which the
deprivation imposed by the law was intended to vindicate.
the means selected by the Commonwealth Parliament to protect Australia's
national security interests went no further than to
terminate the Lease and
thereby to eliminate the risk perceived to arise from the continuing lawful
occupation and use of the Land
by the Russian Federation. To compensate the
Russian Federation for the acquisition of its property constituted by that
termination
would do nothing to undermine the legal or practical operation of
to achieve that object.
provide just terms to the Russian Federation for the acquisition of its property
in those circumstances is not an inconsistent
or incongruous notion. To the
contrary, it is what the
Constitution
questions stated by the parties for the opinion of the Full Court and the
answers to those questions are as follows:
Question 1: Is the
(Cth) invalid in its entirety on the ground that
it is not supported by a head of Commonwealth power?
Answer: No.
Question 2: If the answer to Question 1 is "no", does the operation of the
(Cth) result in the acquisition of property from
the plaintiff to which
Constitution
Answer: Yes.
Question 3: If the answer to Question 2 is "yes", is the defendant liable to
pay the plaintiff a reasonable amount of compensation
pursuant to
Answer: Yes.
Question 4: Who should pay the costs of the special case?
Answer: The defendant.
AND STEWARD JJ. We agree with the answers given by Gageler CJ, Gleeson,
Jagot and Beech‑Jones JJ to the questions of
law stated by the
parties for the opinion of the Full Court. We write separately to explain why we
join in those answers.
provisions of the lease ("the Lease") from the Commonwealth to
the Government of the Russian Federation of land in the Australian
Territory ("the Land"), being an internal territory of the Commonwealth
("the Territory"),
as well as the terms and legislative history of the
(Cth) ("the
") and the parties' agreed facts, are set out in the reasons
of Gageler CJ, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones
which we gratefully
are two issues raised by the questions of law stated in the special case:
supported by a head of power under the
Constitution
and (2) if so, is just terms compensation required by
? The answer to both questions is "yes".
supported by
Constitution
task of characterising whether the
is supported by a head of Commonwealth
legislative power involves examining the legal and practical operation of the
and assessing whether there is a sufficient connection between that
operation and the relevant head of
Constitution
confers on the Commonwealth Parliament a
"complete power to make laws for the peace, order and good government of
[a] territory –
an expression condensed in
to 'for the
government of
the Territory'".
is "as large and universal a power of legislation as can be
A law will be
supported by
where there is "a sufficient nexus or connexion between
the law and the
Territory".
other head of power,
should be construed "with all the generality
which the words used
The territories
power under
includes the power to enact a law that provides for the
"direct administration" of a
includes a power to regulate the ownership and occupancy of territory
and the carrying out
of operations on such
is supported by the territories power. The
terminates the Lease in
respect of the Land, which is located in the Territory. The
administers the Territory by regulating the occupancy of land in the Territory.
There is therefore a direct connection between
the subject matter of the
the Territory. It is a law "for the government of" the Territory. Given that
conclusion, it is unnecessary to consider the Commonwealth's
alternative
argument that the
is supported by the external affairs power in
Constitution
Constitution
gives the Commonwealth Parliament power to
make laws with respect to "the acquisition of property on just terms from any
person for any purpose in respect of which the Parliament has power to
make laws". It serves a "double purpose": it is both a source
legislative power and a guarantee of property
Section 51(xxxi)
confers a power and, at the same time, "abstracts", in the sense of
removes, that power from the Commonwealth's other heads of
That is, the other
powers conferred by
Constitution
, as well as the power
conferred by
do not extend to making a law with respect to the acquisition of property
otherwise than on just terms.
a law may be characterised as a law with respect to the acquisition of property
does not preclude it from being characterised
as a law that is also supported by
Constitution
. That is so for three reasons. First, many laws
made by the Parliament of the Commonwealth can be and are supported by several
if a law supported by
is a law with respect to the acquisition of
property, then the law must satisfy the safeguard provided by
the provision of just
"abstracted" the power to make laws with respect to the
acquisition of property on just terms from
, a real question would
arise as to whether the Commonwealth Parliament could pass a law conferring
power on a territorial legislature
to legislate with respect to the acquisition
of property on just terms, where
does not itself confer a power to enable a
territorial parliament to make laws with respect to various subject
The result is
limits the power conferred by
in the sense that it
operates as a guarantee of just terms for laws made under
Commonwealth required to pay just terms compensation in
accordance with
provides that, if the operation of the
would result in an
acquisition of property to which
Constitution
applies from a person otherwise than on just terms, the Commonwealth is liable
to pay a reasonable amount of compensation to the
person. Accordingly, it
is necessary to determine whether the
effects an acquisition of property to
which s 51(xxxi) applies. As will be explained, s 51(xxxi) also
supports the
and, by reason of that fact, the Commonwealth is liable to pay
compensation in accordance with
law properly characterised as a law for the "acquisition" of "property" from any
State or person for any purpose in respect of
which the Parliament has power to
make laws must be authorised by s 51(xxxi) and, to be so authorised, it
must be an acquisition
The status of s
51(xxxi) as a "constitutional
significant. The provision is given a "liberal construction appropriate to such
a constitutional
provision",
by giving a
liberal construction to the concepts of
"acquisition"
51(xxxi). Further, the court looks to the practical operation – the
substance, rather than form – of the
there to be an "acquisition" within the meaning of s 51(xxxi), there must
be the obtaining of at least "some identifiable benefit
or advantage relating to
the ownership or use of
identifiable benefit or advantage relating to the ownership or use of property
does not need to correspond precisely to what
"acquisition of property" is not to be confined by reference to traditional
conveyancing principles.
On the other hand, s 51(xxxi) "is directed to 'acquisition' as distinct
from deprivation".
result, "[t]he extinguishment, modification or deprivation of rights in relation
to property does not of itself constitute an
acquisition of
There must be
"an acquisition whereby the Commonwealth or another acquires an interest in
property, however slight or insubstantial
"Acquisition"
includes "the assumption and indefinite continuance of exclusive possession and
control for the purposes of the Commonwealth
of any subject of
It includes
"[a] law of the Commonwealth requiring one person to grant a lease to
includes the taking possession of land by the
Commonwealth.
this case, the legal estate in the Land was vested in the Commonwealth.
On extinguishment of the Lease, the Russian Federation
was deprived of its
leasehold interest. But the relevant interest in property was not merely
extinguished or reduced without any
correlative acquisition. On the termination
of the Lease, the Commonwealth acquired the right to exclusive possession of
unencumbered by the Lease. The Commonwealth therefore "acquired"
property within the meaning of s 51(xxxi).
property "for any purpose in respect of which the Parliament has power to make
51(xxxi) does not confer an unconfined power to acquire property. To be
authorised by s 51(xxxi), the acquisition of property
must be "for any purpose
in respect of which the Parliament has power to make laws" – that is,
one of the other heads of Commonwealth
legislative power.
parties contended that the
does not effect an acquisition of property "for
any purpose in respect of which the Parliament has power to make laws". The
for that contention was the agreed fact that the Commonwealth's purpose
for terminating the Lease was not related to it having a
need for or proposed
use or application of the Land. The Russian Federation submitted that, as a
result, the
is not supported by
Constitution
The Commonwealth contended that, the
not being a law within the meaning
of s 51(xxxi), s 51(xxxi) does not abstract from the heads of power
that the Commonwealth submitted
do support the
, so that just terms
compensation is not required. As Hayne and Bell JJ observed in
JT International SA v The Commonwealth
, s 51(xxxi) "does not
abstract any more widely or differently expressed
Trade Practices Commission v Tooth & Co Ltd
, Mason J observed that
the requirement that the acquisition be "for any purpose in respect of which
the Parliament has power to make
laws" simply reflects that "a law made
with respect to the acquisition of property on just terms is also a law made
with respect
to some other head or heads of
Or, as Barwick
CJ observed, "the very terms of s 51(xxxi) contemplate that a law with
respect to acquisition of property will involve
a purpose relevant to some other
head of power".
and Toohey JJ in
Mutual Pools & Staff Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
expressed it as a requirement that the acquisition be "for a purpose in respect
of which the Parliament has power to make
In this case,
contrary to the agreed position of the parties, the
does effect an
acquisition of property "for any purpose in respect of which the Parliament has
power to make laws", at least in respect
of the Parliament's power under
s 122 to make laws for the government of the Territory.
Clunies-Ross v The Commonwealth
, six judges observed, in obiter
question whether s 51(xxxi) "should be construed as including the power to
acquire property not for a purpose related to
any need for or desired use of the
property but for the purpose of depriving the owner of it and thereby indirectly
achieving some
purpose in respect of which the Parliament has power to make
laws" was "not without
difficulty".
argument arose in the context of construing a statutory power to acquire land
"for a public purpose". Although it was unnecessary
for their Honours to express
any concluded view on the issue, they noted that earlier cases had suggested
that s 51(xxxi) was "confined
to the making of laws with respect to
acquisition of property for some purpose related to
a need for or proposed
use or application of the property to be
narrow view of s 51(xxxi) should be rejected for three reasons.
there is no basis for the restriction in the text of s 51(xxxi).
The paragraph refers to the "
acquisition
of property ...
in respect of which the Parliament has power to make laws" (emphasis
added). The
acquisition
must be for the relevant purpose. However,
there is no reference in s 51(xxxi) to the acquired property needing to be
used or applied
in a particular manner, let alone to the property being
required to be used or applied
by the Commonwealth
. Given that any
requirement for property to be used or applied (by the Commonwealth) is not
securely based in the text of s 51(xxxi),
imposing such a requirement
would deny the status of s 51(xxxi) as a constitutional guarantee that
should be liberally
to the extent that the narrow view relies on some distinction between the
acquisition of property which is to be left unused
pursuit of some Commonwealth purpose, as compared to property that is to be used
for some Commonwealth purpose, it prioritises form over
there is some tension between the narrow view of s 51(xxxi) and the
accepted proposition that a law may fall within the terms
of s 51(xxxi)
where property is acquired by a person
Commonwealth.
property is acquired by a person
the Commonwealth, it would
not then necessarily be used or applied
by the Commonwealth
, several judges cast doubt on the correctness of the narrow view of
s 51(xxxi) expressed by Dixon CJ in the earlier
observed that there was "nothing in the wide and general language" of
s 51(xxxi) to support the view that the acquisition
of property to which it
refers "is limited to acquisition for the 'use and service of the Crown', a
conception which is in itself
by no means precise and certain in
His Honour observed that, as a matter of policy, it would make "very little
sense" to say that the Commonwealth can pass a law for
the acquisition of
property without giving just terms provided that the property is acquired by a
person other than the
Commonwealth.
point could be made about any distinction that depends on any particular use to
which the Commonwealth proposes to put property
which it has acquired. Gibbs J
also doubted the correctness of Dixon CJ's view that "anything which lies
outside the very general
conception expressed by the phrase 'use and service of
the Crown'" falls outside of
s 51(xxxi).
Stephen J concluded that it seemed "clear" that s 51(xxxi) extended "some
distance beyond" the "acquisition of property by the Commonwealth
Mutual Pools
, Dawson and Toohey JJ acknowledged the tension between
Dixon CJ's narrow view and the Court's acceptance that s 51(xxxi) captures
acquisitions of property by persons other than the Commonwealth. Their Honours
accepted that the phrase "for any purpose" does "appear
primarily to refer to
the acquisition of real or personal property which itself is intended to be
used by the government in administering
laws made by the Parliament in the
exercise of its legislative
However, their
Honours then observed that Dixon CJ's view cannot be taken too far since it is
now settled that s 51(xxxi) applies
where property is acquired by a person other
Commonwealth.
as has been explained, the identifiable benefit relating to the ownership or use
of property which is taken from one person
need not correspond precisely with
that which is conferred on
interest which is acquired must only be "an identifiable and measurable
advantage of a proprietary
Georgiadis v Australian and Overseas Telecommunications Corporation
an advantage was gained as a result of an
that deprived the plaintiff
of a right to bring a common law cause of
evident how such an interest might be said to be "used" or "applied" within the
ordinary meaning of those words.
Would the provision of just
terms be incongruous?
circumstances in which a law properly characterised as for the acquisition
of property within the meaning of s 51(xxxi) will
nonetheless not be subject to
s 51(xxxi) are limited. Section 51(xxxi) will not apply to laws in respect of
which "just terms" is
an "inconsistent or incongruous"
To fall within
the scope of this exception, acquisition without just terms must be a "necessary
or characteristic feature" of the
means which the law selects to achieve an
objective which is within
Examples of
such laws include laws levying
imposing fines
and exacting penalties and
forfeitures,
seizing the property of enemy aliens as part of a scheme of
reparations.
In such cases, the "just terms" requirement does not apply because to
characterise these exactions as an acquisition of property
"incompatible with the very nature of
the exaction".
relation to the exaction of a tax, for example, the relationship between
s 51(ii) (the taxation power) and s 51(xxxi) "necessarily
antinomy between" the concepts of taxation and acquisition of
nature, "'taxation' presupposes the absence of the kind of direct quid pro quo"
involved in just terms
compensation.
the law is said to be with respect to forfeiture, the question is "whether the
statutory scheme can be properly characterised
as a law with respect to
forfeiture, that is, a law which exacts or imposes a penalty or sanction for
breach of provisions which
prescribe a rule of
If it can be
so characterised, it will not be a law within the meaning of
s 51(xxxi) because to place it within that category would
"weaken, if not
destroy, the normative effect of the prescription of the rule of
properly construed, is not of that character. Its operation does not hinge,
for example, on any breach of the terms of the Lease
or some other legal rule or
standard which the Russian Federation is said to have offended.
Commonwealth's contention that it would be incongruous to require a foreign
state to be compensated for actions taken to address
the risk of that foreign
state interfering with Australia's democratic institutions must be rejected. The
absence of just terms is
not a necessary or characteristic feature of the means
adopted by the
to achieve its objective, being the termination of the Lease
in order to return exclusive possession of the Land to the Commonwealth
thereby address any security risk posed by the presence of a Russian embassy on
the Land. Put another way, the termination of
the Lease would be no less
effective at achieving that purpose if just terms compensation were
is unnecessary to address the Commonwealth's submission that there may be a
broader principled basis for incongruity, namely that
it would be incongruous
for the Commonwealth to be required to pay compensation to anyone whose property
is taken in order to prevent
it from being used in a way that is harmful to
Commonwealth submitted, that more general proposition does not require
determination in this case.
Introduction
special case concerns the relationship between the acquisition power in
s 51(xxxi) and the rest of the
Constitution
Section 51(xxxi)
read with the chapeau to
, provides as follows:
"The Parliament shall, subject to this
Constitution
, have power to make laws for
the peace, order, and good government of the Commonwealth with respect to ...
(xxxi) the acquisition of property on just terms from any State or person for
any purpose in respect of which the Parliament has
power to make laws".
24 December 2008, the Commonwealth of Australia granted to the Government
of the Russian Federation ("the Russian Federation")
a lease of land near
Parliament House in Canberra ("the Lease"). The Lease was for a term of
99 years. It was given "only for any
diplomatic[,] consular or official
purpose of the Government of the Russian Federation or for the purpose of an
official residence
for any accredited agent of that Government or for all or any
number of those purposes". The Russian Federation agreed to pay a once
payment of $2,750,000 as a land premium.
15 June 2023, the Commonwealth Parliament passed the
purported to terminate the Lease.
Section 6(1)
provides that "[i]f the
operation of this
would result in an acquisition of property to which
paragraph 51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
applies from a person otherwise than
on just terms, the Commonwealth is liable to pay a reasonable amount of
compensation to the
"acquisition of property" and "just terms" as having "the same meaning as in
paragraph 51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
Russian Federation challenged the validity of the
ground that it was not supported by a head of Commonwealth power. The
consequence of that challenge (if successful) would be
that the Lease had not
been validly terminated by the
. Alternatively, the
Russian Federation asserted that if any head of power supported the
Affairs Act
then the Commonwealth was required to pay compensation
because the
had resulted in an acquisition of property
of the Russian Federation within
Constitution
Hence, the Russian Federation submitted that compensation was payable to it
Commonwealth submitted that the
was supported by heads
of power including
Constitution
. The Commonwealth also
submitted that the
did not involve any acquisition of
property within
Constitution
because the
termination of the Lease was not related to a need for, or proposed use or
application of, the land which was the subject
of the Lease, or because a
requirement to provide just terms would be incongruous.
special case stated by the parties for determination by this Court thus raised
three principal issues:
supported by a head of power in the
Constitution
, including the primary focus of the Commonwealth's
submissions which was the territories head of power in
(ii) Is the
also supported by the head of power to
acquire property on just terms in
Constitution
(iii) Would it be incongruous for just terms to be required under
for any acquisition of the Lease by the
is an issue that is anterior to these three principal issues. The anterior issue
concerns the relationship between s 51(xxxi)
and other heads of power in
Constitution
. Decisions of this Court have suggested that the power
related to an acquisition of property is impliedly removed from—"carved
out" or "abstracted" from—every head of legislative power in
Constitution
other than the express acquisition power in
s 51(xxxi).
In other words, the scope of all powers in
is cut down to
exclude any exercise of power related to an acquisition of property. More
recently that view has been extended to
cut down all powers in the
Constitution
, leaving the entirety of
Commonwealth legislative power related to an acquisition of property in the
Constitution
reserved to
s 51(xxxi).
On this view, as senior counsel
for the Russian Federation put it,
is a "shag on a rock".
one point in oral submissions the Russian Federation appeared to challenge this
view. It was right to do so. The better view is
that no constitutional power
related to acquisition of property, including authorising or supporting the
acquisition of property,
is cut down by
s 51(xxxi).
Instead, conflict is
resolved in each case between: (i) the
express power related to
acquisition of property on just terms; and (ii) another constitutional power
that relates to acquisition
of property without any express condition of "just
terms". That conflict will usually be resolved by requiring the exercise of the
other constitutional power to be subject to the "just terms" condition unless
that condition is incongruent with the purpose of the
legislation enacted under
that power.
consequence of this better answer to the anterior issue is that the three
principal issues in this case can be resolved in the
following simple manner.
First, since
extends to laws for the termination of a lease of land
in a territory, the
is supported by that head of power.
Secondly, the
is also supported by the express head of
power in s 51(xxxi): the reference in s 51(xxxi) to "any purpose in
respect of which the
Parliament has power to make laws" does not require the
existence of any specific purpose of the Commonwealth Parliament. The reference
to "purpose" is not an invitation to examine the ends of Parliament other than
to ensure that the legislation falls within a head
of power. Hence, the scope of
power in s 122 means that there is no requirement for Parliament to have a
particular need for, or
proposed use or application of, the land which is the
subject of the leasehold property right of exclusive possession. Thirdly, in
instance of the
the conflict between the application of
the general territories power to acquire property on any terms and the
application of the
specific and express power in s 51(xxxi) to acquire
property on just terms requires the territories power to be subject to the
of just terms. There is no incongruity in imposing that just terms
condition upon s 122 in the enactment of the
The anterior issue: Does s 51(xxxi) cut down other
Commonwealth heads of power?
the application of heads of power in
Constitution
, there are numerous instances where those other heads of power
might apply to the acquisition of property: "under the power to legislate
respect to lighthouses and bankruptcy, there is no doubt that the Parliament
would have been entitled to legislate for the purpose
of acquiring land for the
erection of lighthouses and bankruptcy
None of those
acquisitions would require just terms. By contrast, the power in
requires that just terms be provided for the acquisition of property for any
purpose in respect of which the Commonwealth Parliament
has power to make laws.
There is therefore potential conflict between the application of other heads of
power to the acquisition
of property and the application of the specific head of
power to the acquisition of property.
potential conflict is resolved by a rule that, unless it is "incongruous" to
require a condition of just terms, other heads of
are subject
to the condition of just terms in
s 51(xxxi).
As Dixon CJ said in
Attorney-General (Cth) v
"when you have, as you do in par (xxxi), an express power, subject to a
safeguard, restriction or qualification, to legislate on
a particular subject or
to a particular effect, it is in accordance with the soundest principles of
interpretation to treat that
as inconsistent with any construction of other
powers conferred in the context which would mean that they included the same
or produced the same effect and so authorized the same kind of
legislation but without the safeguard, restriction or qualification".
are two routes by which other heads of power in
Constitution
might be made subject to the condition of just terms in
s 51(xxxi).
The first route is to cut down any other head of power to
remove that aspect of the power related to the acquisition of property,
reserving such power only for
s 51(xxxi).
The second route is simpler,
historically justified, does less violence to the application of constitutional
heads of power, and
avoids anomalies and absurdities. It is merely to ask
whether any acquisition authorised by the other head of power should be subject
to the condition of just terms. No head of power is cut down in cases where the
just terms condition is to be applied to legislative
power under any other head
of power in
Rather, the condition of just terms is imposed on any
exercise of power related to an acquisition falling within a head of power
any other head of power is not cut down but is instead made subject
to the "safeguard, restriction or qualification, to legislate
on a particular
An early mistake in
first route became the dominant approach in this Court. The first route was
assumed to be correct, "without deciding", by Dixon
early application of it was by Latham CJ who thought that "[w]hen par xxxi
is thus construed in relation to a particular purpose
it must ... be regarded as
limiting the legislative power with respect to the acquisition of property for
that purpose". Hence, in
relation to laws that might otherwise have fallen
within the defence power in
, his Honour said that "the only power
of the Commonwealth Parliament to legislate with respect to the acquisition of
property for
defence purposes is that conferred by
s 51(xxxi)".
first route was also taken by this Court in
W H Blakeley & Co Pty
Commonwealth
apparently on the mistaken assumption that the first route was the only route by
which the just terms condition could be imposed
on acquisitions of property
under the incidental aspect of the application of other heads of power in
"the acquisition of property could not be left to the incidental powers because
it was desired to limit the power of acquisition
by imposing a condition that it
must be exercised upon just terms". The first route was again taken by
Aickin J in
Trade Practices Commission v Tooth & Co
is possible that at one stage Dixon J contemplated the possibility of the
second, and simpler, route by which no power would be
cut down in its
application to acquisitions of property. Rather, unless it was incongruous to
require a condition of just terms,
powers other than
made subject to the just terms condition contained in
s 51(xxxi).
Bank of New South Wales v The
Commonwealth
Dixon J said that "[i]n requiring just terms
fetters the
legislative power by forbidding laws with respect to acquisition
on any terms
that are not just
". But more than a decade later, Dixon CJ described
his reasoning in that case as "introductory or descriptive generally of the
of the question" and added that "[t]he decisions of this Court show" that
paragraphs of
, other than
, "should be read as
depending for the acquisition of property ... upon the legislative power
conferred by par (xxxi) subject, as
it is, to the condition that the acquisition
must be on just
It has thus
become generally accepted that
cuts down other heads of power in
, sometimes described as "carv[ing]
"abstracting"
power to acquire property from those other heads of power.
this general acceptance of the first route was confined to
no damage to constitutional law. There is no practical difference whether a
power related to an acquisition of property
as an incident of any
of power is: (i) relocated to
; or (ii) made subject to
the condition of just terms in
s 51(xxxi).
But once the theory of "carving
out" or "abstracting" is extended beyond
then problems can arise and
confusion can ensue. This is such a case.
an attempt to bring clarity to this difficult area of metaphor, at one point in
oral submissions senior counsel for the Russian
Federation challenged the
metaphor of "carved out", saying instead that
is "superimposed
on every exercise of legislative power which purports to effect an acquisition
of property". A superimposition of
condition of just terms
upon other heads of power is the simpler second route to dealing with a conflict
in powers. That second route
is consistent with the proper interpretation of
express powers. It is consistent with history. And, when applied beyond
heads of power, as this case requires, the second route also avoids
anomalies and absurdities.
The second route involves the proper
interpretation of express powers
the 1898 Convention, Mr Isaacs expressed the view that for the purposes of
express powers "for everything necessary and incidental
to them [the
Commonwealth Parliament] will be unlimited in its acquisition of means to carry
out those powers".
is now well established that the powers within s 51 are to be interpreted
"with all the generality which the words used
This principle
of interpretation is not a cry for literalism at the expense of understanding
the purpose and context of the words
of the express powers in s 51. Nor
does it deny that, however generally the words are expressed, there are limits
to all powers.
But it does deny an interpretation that unnecessarily cuts down
some of the applications of express powers, including their incidental
as well as the express incidental power in s 51(xxxix).
principle of interpretation is consistent only with the second route to
reconciling s 51(xxxi) with the application of other
heads of power in
s 51 to acquisitions of property. That second route limits the other powers
in s 51 only to the extent necessary
to avoid conflict with the just terms
condition in s 51(xxxi). Hence, there is no tension with those instances
where other heads
of power in s 51 can incidentally permit the acquisition
of property without just terms. In these exceptional instances, the conflict
between: (i) the incidental aspect of any power that permits the acquisition of
property without any express condition, and (ii)
the specific power to acquire
property on the condition of just terms, is resolved without imposing a
condition upon the general
power. For instance, s 51(xxxi) "does not affect
acquisition by way of forfeiture or penalty or for the purpose of provisional
[or] by the condemnation of
Re Director of Public Prosecutions; Ex parte
Gaudron JJ said that this was because s 51(xxxi) "applies only to
acquisitions of a kind that permit of just terms" and
that it is "incongruous"
or "inconsistent" with a requirement of just terms for s 51(xxxi) to apply
to laws such as those imposing
or authorising fines, penalties, forfeitures,
seizure of the property of enemy aliens, or the condemnation of prize. In other
although these laws would otherwise be acquisitions of property, such
laws had long existed before Federation without any requirement
of just terms
and "[i]t cannot therefore have been the purpose of s 51(xxxi) to apply to
such exactions an obligation to provide
The second route is a correct application of history
said that "[t]he source of [s] 51(xxxi) is to be found in the fifth
amendment of the
Constitution
of the United States, which qualifies the power of
the United States to expropriate property by requiring that it should be done
payment of fair compensation". The Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment
prohibits private property being "taken for public use,
without just
compensation". Although there are numerous differences between the Takings
both in expression and in the development of
authority, Dixon J was right to recognise one commonality in that the
Takings Clause,
in its operation upon federal heads of power, restricts or
"qualifies" the existing powers of Congress to take property; it does
"abstract" from those powers: "[o]nce the object is within the authority of
Congress, the right to realize it through the exercise
of eminent domain is
clear. For the power of eminent domain is merely the means to the
to Australian Federation it was well established that the Takings Clause of the
Fifth Amendment to the
Constitution
of the United States
, by itself, was
"intended solely as a limitation on the exercise of power by the government of
the United States, and [was] not applicable
to the legislation of the
The power to
take property was "implied from the express grants" of power in the
Constitution
of the United States
with implied "recognition" by the
Takings Clause of that "right belonging to a
sovereignty".
words, the Fifth Amendment confirmed the natural sovereign power that otherwise
existed in other express heads of power
and extended that sovereign power
insofar as it was necessary to do so to ensure that there was no restriction
upon the acquisition
of property for any purpose in respect of which Congress
had the power to pass laws.
same view was taken at the 1898 Melbourne Convention when the progenitor clause
to s 51(xxxi) was proposed for the
Constitution
That clause was
first raised on 25 January 1898 by Mr Barton. When Mr Barton
proposed the clause, Mr Isaacs queried whether the clause
was necessary
since there was an express conferral of power upon the Commonwealth Parliament
to make laws that were incidental to
the exercise of any power. Mr Isaacs
repeatedly expressed the view that, like in the United States, the power of
eminent domain was
an inherent and implied
doubted whether the express or implied incidental aspects of express power were
sufficiently clear to authorise the acquisition
doubts were expressed by Dr Quick and
purpose of the clause that became
was not to subtract or
abstract any of the content of any express head of power. Rather it was to
remove doubt and to ensure that
just terms were provided for any acquisition. As
Quick and Garran observed in 1901, "all possible doubt as to the right of the
Commonwealth
to acquire property for federal purposes has been removed by this
sub-section".
although it was accepted that
imposed a condition of just terms
upon any Commonwealth legislation to acquire property, nobody at the 1898
Convention thought that
s 51(xxxi) had subtracted or abstracted from other
heads of power to acquire property. Indeed, Mr Barton effectively denied
a proposition when he introduced the clause. Mr Barton referred to the
express provisions which an acquisition power would complement,
including the
progenitor provision to s 52(i) (which includes a power to make laws for
"all places acquired by the Commonwealth for
purposes").
Extending the mistake beyond s 51 creates anomalies and
absurdities
it was an error for this Court to adopt the first route to reconciling the
conflict between the incidental aspect of general
powers in s 51 that permit the
acquisition of property and the specific power to acquire property on just terms
in s 51(xxxi), there
was no practical difference between the first and
second routes. On either route, a head of power within s 51 supplies the
for legislation related to the acquisition of property. On either
route, that power is subject to the condition of just terms. And
route, there are instances where a law related to the acquisition of property,
but incongruent with a requirement of just
terms, can be made under the
incidental aspect of general powers without just terms. Whichever route was
preferred, no authority
would need to be re-opened. Whichever route was
preferred, no authority would need to be reconsidered.
as soon as the different routes are sought to be applied beyond s 51,
differences can arise. For instance, it is now established
that an exercise of
power under
Constitution
is subject to the requirement
of just terms including for any law related to an acquisition of
assistance to the States cannot be provided on terms and conditions that would
permit the States to acquire property without
just terms. That result is
achieved by imposing the condition of just terms upon the exercise of power
is not cut down, with the power of financial
assistance carved out, or abstracted, from
, if the financial
assistance is related to an acquisition.
example concerns the combined operation of
former is a power to make laws for "the seat of government of the Commonwealth,
and all places acquired by the Commonwealth for
public purposes". The latter
provides a power for a State to "surrender any part of the State to the
Commonwealth" and for the Commonwealth
to accept such a surrender with the
effect that "such part of the State shall become subject to the exclusive
Commonwealth". A progenitor clause to these provisions was a
power to make laws for "[t]he government of any territory which, by
surrender of any state or states, and the acceptance of the Commonwealth,
becomes the seat of government of the Commonwealth,
and the exercise of like
authority over all places acquired by the Commonwealth, with the consent of the
state in which such places
are situate, for the public purposes of the
Commonwealth".
would be an absurdity for
to cut down, abstract, or carve out an
acquisition from the powers of the Commonwealth to acquire property surrendered
and to make laws in relation to that property under
As will be seen below, the same ought to be true of
which must be read with
first issue: Is the
supported by the head of power in
Constitution
explained above, unlike the lack of practical effect in the route chosen to
reconcile conflict between the specific terms of
and general
powers that incidentally permit acquisitions of property, there can be
significant practical effects of the route chosen
to reconcile conflict between
heads of power outside
s 51(xxxi).
The relevant head of power
in this case is
The head of power in
as follows:
"The Parliament may make laws for the government of any territory surrendered by
any State to and accepted by the Commonwealth, or
of any territory placed by the
Queen under the authority of and accepted by the Commonwealth, or otherwise
acquired by the Commonwealth,
and may allow the representation of such territory
in either House of the Parliament to the extent and on the terms which it thinks
The Commonwealth v
this Court was unanimous in concluding that a Commonwealth law made under
could not acquire property without just terms. Four members of this
Court preferred the first
submissions were made as to which of the two routes discussed above should be
preferred. Nor were any submissions made to that
effect in this case, although
the issue was raised.
significant practical difference between the two routes may be that if a law
were cut down by
so that it could not
apply to acquisitions of property, then it is doubtful whether there would be a
source of power for territorial
self-government provisions which empower the
making of laws to acquire property on just
The gap would
arise because if
did not extend to acquisitions of property on just
could not be a source of power for self-government
provisions for the acquisition of property on just terms. And it is also hard
could confer power to delegate the making of legislation
by a territorial legislature for the acquisition of property on just
P J Magennis Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
was argued that there was "an acquisition 'with respect to' which the
Commonwealth legislates when it passes a law authorizing
the execution of [an]
agreement containing the State's undertaking" to exercise its powers of
acquisition. Dixon J described Commonwealth
legislation to this effect as a
law that "could hardly be more remote from the real purpose of
s 51(xxxi)".
That real purpose was seen to be for the Commonwealth to acquire property, or to
provide for the acquisition of property, on just
In other words,
there was seen to be a world of difference between, on the one hand, a law that
acquires property or relates to the
acquisition of property and, on the other
hand, a law that provides for a State to undertake to acquire property. Even
more distant
from that view of
would be a law that provides for
a self-governing territory to have the
to acquire property.
circumstances in which there may be real practical differences for heads of
power outside
in the choice of route to reconcile conflict between
those heads of power and
, it is necessary to conclude in this
case that, for the reasons expressed in the discussion of the anterior issue
above, the correct
route is the second route, which does not cut down the power
but merely subjects its exercise to the same just terms condition
as is contained in
s 51(xxxi).
As was said in
Clunies-Ross v The
Commonwealth
of legislation that involved the acquisition of property in a
"the power to acquire property for a public purpose ... is not conferred merely
in pursuance of the legislative power contained in
s 51(xxxi).
conferred in pursuance of
Constitution
in that, in relation to
land in a Territory, the purpose for which the land may be acquired includes
'any purpose in relation to
that Territory'."
these reasons, the power in
Constitution
so as to exclude any laws relating to an acquisition of
property. Hence, the first issue in this case reduces to the denial by the
Russian Federation that the location in the Australian Capital Territory of the
land which was the subject of the Lease provides
"a sufficient nexus or
connection between the [
] and the Commonwealth's
territories power under [s] 122 of the
Constitution
head of power in
is "unlimited by reference to subject matter" and a
"complete power to make laws for the peace, order and good government of the
territory".
Section 122
extends to legislation to carry on operations on territory
The legislative
acquisitions of property to which
extends also include "a power to
acquire land by
agreement".
connection is required than a direct effect on the rights and powers of a person
in relation to land in a
The head of
must extend to the termination of a lease of land in a
territory in the terms of the
. It is therefore
unnecessary to consider the Commonwealth's contention that the
is independently supported by
Constitution
The second issue: Does an acquisition in
for a "purpose in respect of which the Parliament has power to
make laws" exclude acquisitions without any particular purpose?
is qualified by the condition in
, requiring just
terms for an acquisition of property, the second issue is directed to whether
is a law related to an acquisition of property
within s 51(xxxi). Both the Russian Federation and the Commonwealth
submitted that
was not a law related to an
acquisition of property. The Russian Federation made this submission in the
course of its claim that the
lacked a head of power. The
Commonwealth made this submission in the course of its claim that
s 51(xxxi) (and hence the condition
of just terms) did not apply to the
because the
acquisition involving any need for, or proposed use or application of, the land
which was the subject of the Lease. None
of these submissions should be
accepted. Although s 51(xxxi) is a compound concept, the components of that
concept have meaning.
The submissions involve confusion about the concepts of
"acquisition" and "property" in s 51(xxxi) and their application.
legal parlance, the word "property" is used in numerous different, sometimes
conflicting, ways. So too it is used in different
ways in cases concerning
s 51(xxxi).
Perhaps the most precise use of "property" is as a description of a legal
relationship with a
In this sense,
property refers to the
to a thing rather than the thing itself.
The concept of property in s 51(xxxi) has been applied in this sense:
rights to land
rights to chattels.
More broadly, "property" (or sometimes
"quasi-property"
be used to describe some personal rights (that is, rights against a person) such
as a debt or other cause of action or chose
in action (in the sense of a right
exigible at common
). The concept of
property in s 51(xxxi) has also been applied in this
More broadly
still, the word "property" has been used also to describe value or financial
benefit generally, even if legal rights
are strictly unaffected. So too in s
51(xxxi) has "property" been applied in this
legal parlance, an acquisition usually requires a transfer of rights. The
transferee "acquires" the right which is given up by
the transferor. But,
consistently with the broad concept of "property", an "acquisition" in
s 51(xxxi) is not limited to a transfer
of rights. The transfer might be of
value generally, although not every reduction and corresponding increase in
value will amount
to an acquisition of
can sometimes be sufficient for an acquisition to fall within s 51(xxxi)
that a right has been extinguished and the Commonwealth
has obtained a
corresponding "direct benefit or financial
which need not
"correspond precisely with what was
although it
cannot be merely a benefit to the public generally rather than a "proprietary"
benefit to the body politic of the
Commonwealth.
Moreover, "a law might leach the economic value of a plaintiff's chose in action
whilst conferring a financial benefit upon the defendant";
even if the plaintiff
remains legally free to exercise the right, the law might be proscribed by
s 51(xxxi).
was no acquisition of legal rights in this case. The Russian Federation lost its
right of exclusive possession under the Lease.
The Commonwealth's right of
reversion meant that the Commonwealth's prior right to exclusive possession was
re-enlivened. No right
was transferred. But value was transferred. The Russian
Federation lost the value of its leasehold estate in the land. The Commonwealth
acquired the corresponding value of a right to exclusive possession. An analogy
is the corresponding value lost to a plaintiff and
gained by the Commonwealth
when a right to mine for minerals from land vested in the Commonwealth is
extinguished.
it is accepted that an acquisition of property, such as that which occurred in
this case, can be the corresponding benefit to
the value lost from
extinguishment of a right, it makes little sense to require a particular purpose
for something other than the
acquired benefit. The submission that there must be
a "need for, or proposed use or application of, the property that has been
involves a confusion of concepts. The Commonwealth submitted that
s 51(xxxi) would only apply in this case if the Commonwealth had
for, or proposed use or application of, the [l]and" which was the subject of the
forfeited lease. But the "property" (or,
more accurately, the object of the
property rights) acquired was not the land that was the subject of the Lease.
Nor was the leasehold
of that land the subject of the acquisition. The
acquisition was of the
of the right to exclusive possession
obtained by the Commonwealth.
Russian Federation and the Commonwealth relied upon a passage in the decision of
six members of this Court in
Clunies-Ross
where their Honours said, without "form[ing] or express[ing] any concluded
view", that:
"one can find in cases in this Court statements of high authority which would
seem to be framed on the assumption that the legislative
power conferred by
par (xxxi) should be confined to the making of laws with respect to
acquisition of property for some purpose related
to a need for or proposed use
or application of the property to be acquired".
none of the cases and passages cited by their Honours in
Clunies-Ross
did the author,
a concluded view that an acquisition of property under s 51(xxxi) required
a need for, or proposed use or application of,
the object of the property rights
to be acquired. The closest to such a suggestion are the statements by Dixon J
in the first of
those cases that "it may be possible to maintain" that
s 51(xxxi) did not apply to cases where the Commonwealth Executive did not
desire to use the property acquired "for any governmental
Dixon CJ in the second of those cases that "[t]he expression 'for any
purpose' is doubtless indefinite. But it refers to the
use or application of the
property in or towards carrying out or furthering a purpose comprised in some
other legislative
suggestion in
Clunies-Ross
is also not established by the reasoning of
this Court in
W H Blakeley & Co Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
upon which the Commonwealth also sought to rely. In one of the matters
considered in that case, the plaintiff assumed that a "purpose
in respect of
which the Parliament has power to make laws" meant "any intended use which a
valid law of the Commonwealth could
authorise".
addressing this argument, the Court held that: (i) "the word 'purpose' [in
s 51(xxxi)] ... is referring to the object for which
the land is acquired";
and (ii) "[t]hat object ... must be one falling within the Commonwealth's
power to make laws". Hence, the
compound expression in s 51(xxxi) "seems
rather to demand that the acquisition must be relevant to one or more of the
subjects of
Federal legislative power than to insist on the necessity as a
condition of the power of a specific intent in the Executive Government
acquiring authority".
In other words, the relevance of the object for which the land is acquired is
only to establish a connection with a head of power
s 51(xxxi).
Commonwealth also relied, by rough analogy, upon pre-Federation United States
authorities that held that there was no taking
of land for public purposes by
the exercise of the police power in the regulation (including destruction) of
the object of property
But, in this
respect, there is an important distinction between the terms of
Constitution
and the terms of the Takings Clause of the Fifth
Amendment to the
Constitution
of the United States
the "purpose" is simply the purpose of Parliament—that is, the object of
the law (hence the purpose being one "in respect of
which the Parliament has
power to make laws"). By contrast, in the Takings Clause there is a requirement
that the taking be "for
public use", which has been held to be a public
but not one
for "regulation" provided that the regulation does not go "too
That distinction
is one which has not been easy to
Without any
textual or contextual basis for it in
, the distinction should not be
introduced into Australian law other than as part of the outworking of the issue
(which does not arise
in this case) of whether there has been an acquisition of
a "proprietary" benefit.
thus fell within the terms of s 51(xxxi) and
therefore, subject to any incongruity, required that, as an exercise of power
122, the acquisition of property be subject to the condition of
just terms.
The third issue: Would it be incongruous for just
terms to be required under s 51(xxxi) for any acquisition of the Lease by
third and final issue concerns whether the condition of a requirement of just
terms would be incongruous with the
as an exercise of
power under s 122. As explained above, in circumstances of incongruity the
condition of just terms in s 51(xxxi)
would not be imposed on the exercise
of power to acquire property. The best recognised examples of incongruity
include exercises
of power to impose taxes or to forfeit rights or entitlements.
an ingenious submission, senior counsel for the Russian Federation challenged
the premise of the existing approach, contending
that no incongruity or
inconsistency need ever arise in such cases because the "just terms" of such
acquisitions are that no compensation
is required. Hence, a requirement of just
terms is imposed upon acquisitions of property under any head of power in the
Constitution
with cases in which the condition of just terms was
previously regarded as incongruous treated as instances where justice does not
require the imposition of any terms, at least any terms of compensation.
submission is very attractive. Whilst in many cases it might lead to the same
result as the traditional approach to incongruity,
and whilst the test for when
no compensation is required might bear some resemblance to the present
authority, the submission removes
the tension with the
Australian Communist
Party v The
Commonwealth
which arises in the present law. Under the present law, the Commonwealth
Parliament can exclude the constitutional guarantee of just
terms by creation of
its own statutory norm by which acquisition of property without just terms is "a
necessary or characteristic
feature of the [appropriate and adapted] means which
the law selects to achieve its objective [within power and not solely or chiefly
being the acquisition of
property]".
any detailed submissions on such a significant departure from present authority,
and in circumstances in which the result
in this case would be no different, it
suffices to proceed on the prevailing approach that treats an acquisition of
property without
compensation (and possibly without other terms required by
justice) in the circumstances identified above "as authorized by the exercise
specific powers otherwise than on the basis of just
circumstance that must exist for such cases of incongruity with
is that an acquisition of property without just terms must be a necessary or
characteristic feature of the means selected by the
law to achieve its
objective of the
is described in the Explanatory
Memorandum as being "to protect Australia's national security interests with
regard to land within
the area adjacent to Parliament
Solicitor-General of the Commonwealth put the point in oral submissions, it is
incongruous to require the Commonwealth to
compensate the Russian Federation for
steps taken by the Commonwealth to defend itself against a threat to the
security of Australia
posed by the presence of the Russian Federation on land
300 m from Parliament House.
there were an agreed or proved fact that the forfeiture of the Lease was a
response for the defence of the Commonwealth to an
established threat, then the
absence of just terms could readily be seen to be a necessary or characteristic
feature of the
, just as the absence of just terms is a
necessary or characteristic feature of the forfeiture of the property of enemy
reparations.
Alternatively, if there were an agreed or proved fact that the forfeiture of the
Lease was a response to the commission of an offence,
then the absence of just
terms could readily be seen to be a necessary or characteristic feature of the
legislatively recited objective of protecting Australia's national security
interests does not establish any such
In the absence
of agreed or proved facts of such a nature, the
legislation that is in no materially different position from the forfeiture of a
lease for defence purposes, where the condition
in s 51(xxxi) of just terms
and the approach to costs of the special case
result that I reach, in common with the other members of this Court, is that the
is supported by a head of power but that the forfeiture
of the Lease requires just terms under
. This means that the answer to the first question in this special case
(as set out below) is determined in favour of the Commonwealth
and the answer to
the second question (and third question which naturally follows, and was
properly conceded by the Commonwealth
to follow, from the second) is determined
in favour of the Russian Federation.
usual exercise of discretion as to costs, that costs should follow the
does not have
easy application on a special case "where separate issues have fallen in
different ways".
Indeed, it has been held that the separate issues on a special case or case
stated are separate events with separate rationes
where separate issues are resolved in favour of different parties on a special
case or case stated this Court has sometimes
abstained from attempting to
conflate the separate issues into a confused single event, and instead has
resolved questions of costs
by reference to the result of the
or has made no
order as to the costs of some or all of the special
In apportioning
costs, the Court will usually have regard to the relief sought as well as the
question or questions with which the
bulk of argument and written submissions
were concerned.
the present case, the first question in the special case reflected the primary
relief sought by the Russian Federation in its
statement of claim, which was a
declaration of the invalidity of the
on the basis that
it was not supported by a Commonwealth head of power. The Russian Federation
thus sought to preserve its leasehold.
Nearly five of the Russian Federation's
ten-page written submissions in chief, and ten of the 12 paragraphs of the
Russian Federation's
outline of oral argument, were addressed to argument on
this head of power issue, compared with less than a page of written submissions,
and only two paragraphs of the outline of oral argument, which were
addressed to argument on the issue of just terms. Although the
Federation succeeded in what it described as its "fallback case" on
compensation, the first question was a separate issue,
and its primary case upon
which it placed a heavy focus. The Russian Federation has been unsuccessful on
that issue. If the calculation
of any compensation required by "just terms" were
ultimately determined to be minimal then the Russian Federation's success on the
issue of just terms would truly be a pyrrhic victory.
each party sought their costs in the event of success on all issues, neither
party made any submissions to the effect that
they should have their costs in
the event of success on one of the two contentious issues only. No further
submissions were sought
In all these
circumstances, it is arguable that each party should bear its own costs. On
balance, and in light of the success of
the Russian Federation's case on one of
the separate issues and in circumstances in which there is no present suggestion
success will be merely nominal, I consider that the Russian Federation
should have one half of its costs of the special case.
four questions in the special case should be answered as follows:
Question 1:
(Cth) invalid in its
entirety on the ground that it is not supported by a head of Commonwealth
Question 2:
If the answer to Question 1 is "no", does the operation
(Cth) result in the acquisition of property
from the plaintiff to which
Constitution
Question 3:
If the answer to Question 2 is "yes", is the
Commonwealth liable to pay to the plaintiff a reasonable amount of compensation
Question 4:
Who should pay the costs of the special case?
The defendant should pay half of the costs of the plaintiff.
Section 16 of the
Acquisition Act 1906
Commonwealth of Australia
, No 49, 27 July 1912 at 1316.
Government Surrender Act 1909
Government Acceptance Act 1909
Commonwealth of Australia
, No 75, 8 December 1910 at 1851
Section 10(1)
Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act 1988
Division 2 of Part III of the
Australian Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act 1988
(Cth). The National Capital Plan took effect pursuant to
publication of the Minister's approval in
Commonwealth of Australia
, No S 336,
December 1990.
National Capital Plan –
Amendment 66 – Diplomatic Mission Yarralumla
Section 27(1)
Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act 1988
Commonwealth of Australia Gazette
April 2008.
Originally made under
Seat of Government (Administration) Act 1910
Section 5 of the
National Land
Ordinance 1989
Section 4(1) of the
Land Ordinance
Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act 1988
Sections 62
Australian Capital Territory National Land (Leased) Ordinance 2022
Read together with the
definition of "land" in
Interpretation Act 1901
Australian Capital Territory National Land (Leased) Ordinance
Australia, House of
Representatives,
, Explanatory Memorandum.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 15 June 2023 at
Australia, Senate,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 15 June 2023 at 2284.
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519; 421 ALR 604.
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 536
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 617.
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 531
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 610.
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 531
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 610-611 (footnote omitted).
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 536
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 617.
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 535
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 616. See also
Newcrest Mining (WA) Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 38
; (1997) 190 CLR 513 at 597, 600.
Trade Practices Commission v
Tooth & Co Ltd
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR 397 at 427. See also
Johnston Fear
& Kingham & The Offset Printing Co Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1943] HCA 18
67 CLR 314 at 317-318.
Bennett v The
Commonwealth
[2007] HCA 18
; (2007) 231 CLR 91 at 110-111
[1965] HCA 66
; (1965) 114 CLR 226 at 241-242.
Spratt v Hermes
[1965] HCA 66
114 CLR 226 at 242.
Bennett v The
Commonwealth
[2007] HCA 18
; (2007) 231 CLR 91 at 106
Lamshed v Lake
[1958] HCA 14
; (1958) 99 CLR 132 at 154.
The Commonwealth v Yunupingu
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 532
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 612, quoting
Berwick Ltd v
[1976] HCA 12
; (1976) 133 CLR 603 at 607.
The Commonwealth v Yunupingu
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 532
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 612, quoting
Berwick Ltd v
[1976] HCA 12
; (1976) 133 CLR 603 at 607-608.
Lamshed v Lake
[1958] HCA 14
; (1958) 99 CLR 132 at 141;
New South Wales v The Commonwealth
[2006] HCA 52
; (2006) 229
CLR 1 at 156-157
, [337]. Compare
Davis v The Commonwealth
[1988] HCA 63
166 CLR 79 at 97, 117.
Northern Land Council v
The Commonwealth
[1986] HCA 18
; (1986) 161 CLR 1 at 6;
Newcrest Mining (WA) Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 38
; (1997) 190 CLR 513 at 534, 549, 560, 561, 586, 594, 643.
Bjelke-Petersen
[1982] HCA 27
; (1982) 153 CLR 168 at 223, 258;
Thomas v Mowbray
[2007] HCA 33
; (2007) 233 CLR 307 at 364
Capital Duplicators Pty
Ltd v Australian Capital Territory
[1992] HCA 51
; (1992) 177 CLR 248 at 266-267, referring
Spratt v Hermes
[1965] HCA 66
; (1965) 114 CLR 226 and
Worthing v Rowell and Muston
[1970] HCA 19
; (1970) 123 CLR 89;
Svikart v Stewart
[1994] HCA 62
; (1994) 181 CLR 548 at
The Commonwealth v Yunupingu
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 537
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 619, citing
International SA v The Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 33-34
[118], 67-68 [169], 99 [278], 130-131 [365] and
Cunningham v The
Commonwealth
[2016] HCA 39
; (2016) 259 CLR 536 at 560
(1984) 155 CLR 193.
(1984) 155 CLR 193 at 200.
(1984) 155 CLR 193 at 205.
(1984) 155 CLR 193 at
(1984) 155 CLR 193 at 200.
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105 CLR 361.
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105 CLR 361 at 372.
[1953] HCA 12
; (1953) 87 CLR 501.
[1953] HCA 12
; (1953) 87 CLR 501 at 503.
[1953] HCA 12
; (1953) 87 CLR 501 at 516.
[1953] HCA 12
; (1953) 87 CLR 501 at
[1953] HCA 12
; (1953) 87 CLR 501 at 519.
[1994] HCA 6
; (1994) 179 CLR 297.
Mutual Pools &
Staff Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179 CLR 155 at 185;
Mining (WA) Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 38
; (1997) 190 CLR 513 at 635;
Agriculture Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[2009] HCA 51
; (2009) 240 CLR 140 at 179-180
JT International SA v The
Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 57
Newcrest Mining (WA)
Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 38
; (1997) 190 CLR 513 at 634 and the cases there
[1994] HCA 6
; (1994) 179 CLR 297 at 305. See
The Commonwealth v Mewett
(1997) 191 CLR 471 at 503-505.
Smith v ANL Ltd
204 CLR 493 at 498-499 [3], 504-505 [22].
The Commonwealth v Yunupingu
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 536
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 617, quoting
Grain Pool of
Western Australia v The Commonwealth
(2000) 202 CLR 479 at 492 [16] and
R v Public Vehicles Licensing Appeal Tribunal (Tas); Ex parte Australian
National Airways Pty Ltd
[1964] HCA 15
; (1964) 113 CLR 207 at 225-226.
See [21] above.
Minister of State for the
Army v Dalziel
[1944] HCA 4
; (1944) 68 CLR 261;
Grace Brothers Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[1946] HCA 11
; (1946) 72 CLR 269.
Johnston Fear & Kingham
& The Offset Printing Co Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1943] HCA 18
; (1943) 67 CLR
Minister of State for the
[1945] HCA 6
; (1945) 70 CLR 339.
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR 397 at 423.
[1994] HCA 10
; (1994) 179 CLR 270 at 285.
[2006] HCA 18
; (2006) 225 CLR 101 at 124
Nelungaloo Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[1952] HCA 11
; (1952) 85 CLR 545 at 600.
Grace Brothers Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[1946] HCA 11
; (1946) 72 CLR 269 at 290.
(1994) 179 CLR 279 at 310-311.
Smith v ANL Ltd
(2000) 204 CLR 493 at 501 [9].
Grace Brothers Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[1946] HCA 11
; (1946) 72 CLR 269 at 290;
Smith v ANL Ltd
(2000) 204 CLR
493 at 513 [48].
[2006] HCA 18
; (2006) 225 CLR 101 at 126
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179 CLR 155 at 179. See
Airservices Australia v Canadian Airlines International Ltd
202 CLR 133 at 180 [98];
Cunningham v The Commonwealth
[2016] HCA 39
; (2016) 259 CLR 536
[1994] HCA 10
; (1994) 179 CLR 270 at 278.
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179 CLR 155 at 170.
[2006] HCA 18
; (2006) 225 CLR 101 at 115-116
[2006] HCA 18
; (2006) 225 CLR 101 at 127
Section 122
Constitution
applies in relation to an internal territory, being one
surrendered by a State to and accepted by the Commonwealth under
Constitution
so as to become "subject to the exclusive
Government Acceptance Act 1909
Reasons of Gageler CJ, Gleeson,
Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ at [4]-[18].
Grain Pool of Western
Australia v The Commonwealth
(2000) 202 CLR 479 at 492 [16];
v Queensland
[2019] HCA 15
; (2019) 268 CLR 355 at 404-409
the authorities cited; see also 456-457 [197]-[198].
Spratt v Hermes
[1965] HCA 66
114 CLR 226 at 242;
Bennett v The Commonwealth
[2007] HCA 18
; (2007) 231 CLR 91 at
Capital Duplicators Pty Ltd v Australian Capital
[1992] HCA 51
; (1992) 177 CLR 248 at 271.
[1965] HCA 66
; (1965) 114 CLR
226 at 242.
[1976] HCA 12
; (1976) 133 CLR 603 at 607-608, cited by
Commonwealth v
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 532
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 611-612; see
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 564
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 653.
202 CLR 479 at 492 [16], cited by
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 536
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 617; see also
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 564
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 653.
[1976] HCA 12
; (1976) 133 CLR
603 at 607, cited by
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 532
[2025] HCA 6
604 at 612; see also
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 564
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 653.
Clunies-Ross
Commonwealth
(1984) 155 CLR 193 at 201.
Northern Land Council v The
Commonwealth
[1986] HCA 18
; (1986) 161 CLR 1 at 6.
Bank of NSW v The
Commonwealth
Bank Nationalisation Case
[1948] HCA 7
; (1948) 76 CLR 1
Attorney-General (Cth) v Schmidt
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105 CLR 361 at
Trade Practices Commission v Tooth & Co Ltd
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142
CLR 397 at 424-425;
The Commonwealth v Tasmania (The Tasmanian Dam Case)
[1983] HCA 21
; (1983) 158 CLR 1 at 145;
Health Insurance Commission v Peverill
[1994] HCA 8
; (1994) 179 CLR 226 at 254;
ICM Agriculture Pty Ltd v
The Commonwealth
[2009] HCA 51
; (2009) 240 CLR 140 at 197
Cunningham v The
Commonwealth
[2016] HCA 39
; (2016) 259 CLR 536 at 615
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR
, 553 [127];
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 610, 640 and the authorities
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR
, 569 [202], 586 [268];
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 617, 659, 679.
Fairfax v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1965] HCA 64
; (1965) 114 CLR 1 at 7, 13;
Wurridjal v The
Commonwealth
(2009) 237 CLR 309 at 387 [187].
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105 CLR
361 at 371-372;
(2009) 237 CLR 309 at 387 [187].
Newcrest Mining (WA) Ltd v
The Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 38
; (1997) 190 CLR 513 at 542, cf 593-594;
(2009) 237 CLR 309 at 387 [186]-[187];
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 678-679. See also
Capital Duplicators
[1992] HCA 51
; (1992) 177 CLR 248 at 269.
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR
519 at 565-566
, 569 [202], 585-586 [267]‑[268];
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at
654-655, 659, 678-679.
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR
, 553 [127];
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 610‑611, 640.
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR 397
at 403. See also
(2009) 237 CLR 309 at 385 [178];
[2009] HCA 51
; (2009) 240 CLR 140 at 169
JT International SA v
The Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 95
Clunies-Ross
CLR 193 at 202;
Australian Tape Manufacturers Association Ltd v The
Commonwealth
(1993) 176 CLR 480 at 509;
Mutual Pools & Staff Pty Ltd
v The Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179 CLR 155 at 184;
[1997] HCA 38
; (1997) 190 CLR
513 at 595;
[2009] HCA 51
; (2009) 240 CLR 140 at 169
, 213 [185];
JT International
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 33
Minister of State for the
Army v Dalziel
[1944] HCA 4
; (1944) 68 CLR 261 at 276;
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179 CLR
155 at 172;
Smith v ANL Ltd
(2000) 204 CLR 493 at 533 [119];
Attorney-General (NT) v Chaffey
(2007) 231 CLR 651 at 663 [21];
Telstra Corporation Ltd v The Commonwealth
[2008] HCA 7
; (2008) 234 CLR 210 at 230
[2009] HCA 51
; (2009) 240 CLR 140 at 213
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179
CLR 155 at 184-185;
Re Director of Public Prosecutions; Ex parte Lawler
[1994] HCA 10
; (1994) 179 CLR 270 at 285;
v Australian and Overseas
Telecommunications Corporation
[1994] HCA 6
; (1994) 179 CLR 297 at 303;
204 CLR 493 at 533 [119];
[2008] HCA 7
; (2008) 234 CLR 210 at 230
[2009] HCA 51
; (2009) 240 CLR 140 at 179-180
, 213 [186].
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR 397
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179 CLR 155 at 184, 219, 223;
[1994] HCA 6
; (1994) 179 CLR 297 at 320;
[2009] HCA 51
; (2009) 240 CLR 140 at 169-170
JT International
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 67
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99
ALJR 519 at 554
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 641.
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179
CLR 155 at 185. See also
[2009] HCA 51
; (2009) 240 CLR 140 at 179-180
International
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 63-64
, 69 [173], 77-78
[1994] HCA 6
; (1994) 179
CLR 297 at 304-305. See also
[1997] HCA 38
; (1997) 190 CLR 513 at 634.
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179
CLR 155 at 185.
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179
CLR 155 at 185.
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179
CLR 155 at 185 and the authorities cited.
Tasmanian Dam Case
[1983] HCA 21
; (1983) 158 CLR 1 at 145, quoted by
Tape Manufacturers
(1993) 176 CLR 480
at 499-500.
Bank Nationalisation Case
[1948] HCA 7
; (1948) 76 CLR 1 at 349.
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR
397 at 408; see also 444.
[1944] HCA 4
; (1944) 68 CLR
261 at 290.
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 67
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105 CLR 361 at 372.
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR 397 at
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR
397 at 403.
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179 CLR 155 at
(1984) 155 CLR 193 at
(1984) 155 CLR 193 at
Clunies-Ross
155 CLR 193 at 200-201 (emphasis added), citing
Andrews v Howell
[1941] HCA 20
65 CLR 255 at 281-282,
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105 CLR 361 at 372 and
The Commonwealth
[1963] HCA 43
; (1963) 109 CLR 475 at 483. See also
W H Blakeley &
Co Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1953] HCA 12
; (1953) 87 CLR 501 at 518-519.
Clunies-Ross
155 CLR 193 at 202;
Tape Manufacturers
(1993) 176 CLR 480 at 509;
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179 CLR 155 at 184.
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142
CLR 397 at 433;
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179 CLR 155 at 184, 219, 223.
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR
397 at 403, 407-408, 423, 426, 451-452. See also
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179
CLR 155 at 189, 199;
[2009] HCA 51
; (2009) 240 CLR 140 at 169
See fn 109 above.
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR
397 at 426.
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR
397 at 426.
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR
397 at 408.
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR
397 at 423-424 (emphasis added).
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
179 CLR 155 at 198.
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
179 CLR 155 at 199.
[1994] HCA 6
; (1994) 179
CLR 297 at 304-305;
[1997] HCA 38
; (1997) 190 CLR 513 at 634.
JT International
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 57
[1994] HCA 6
; (1994) 179 CLR 297 at
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
179 CLR 155 at 187;
[1994] HCA 10
; (1994) 179 CLR 270 at 285;
Theophanous v
The Commonwealth
[2006] HCA 18
; (2006) 225 CLR 101 at 124
[2009] HCA 51
; (2009) 240 CLR
Attorney‑General (NT) v Emmerson
(2014) 253 CLR
393 at 436 [77]. See also
JT International
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 122
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 566
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 655;
Global 120E T2 Pty Ltd v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2025] HCA 39
Mutual Pools
[1994] HCA 9
179 CLR 155 at 179-181. See also
Airservices Australia v Canadian Airlines
International Ltd
(1999) 202 CLR 133 at 180 [98];
237 CLR 309 at 439 [361];
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 566-567
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 655-656;
[2025] HCA 39
Commissioner of Taxation
[1958] HCA 10
; (1958) 100 CLR 246 at 263;
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v
[1975] HCA 61
; (1975) 133 CLR 483 at 494-495;
MacCormick v Federal Commissioner
of Taxation
[1984] HCA 20
; (1984) 158 CLR 622 at 638-639;
Tape Manufacturers
(1993) 176 CLR 480 at 508-509;
[2025] HCA 39
R v Smithers; Ex parte
[1982] HCA 76
; (1982) 152 CLR 477 at 487-488;
[1994] HCA 10
; (1994) 179 CLR 270 at
(2014) 253 CLR 393 at 436 [77]. See also
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179 CLR 155 at 178;
Theophanous
[2006] HCA 18
; (2006) 225 CLR 101 at
, 126 [60];
JT International
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 122
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105
CLR 361 at 373, 377.
Theophanous
[2006] HCA 18
225 CLR 101 at 126
(2014) 253 CLR 393 at 438
Tape Manufacturers
(1993) 176 CLR 480 at 508; see also 509‑510.
Tape Manufacturers
(1993) 176 CLR 480 at 509.
CLR 393 at 437-438 [80].
[1994] HCA 10
; (1994) 179 CLR
270 at 278.
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142
CLR 397 at 405, 414-416, 427-428.
Johnston Fear &
Kingham & The Offset Printing Co Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1943] HCA 18
; (1943) 67
CLR 314 at 317.
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105 CLR 361 at
[1941] HCA 20
; (1941) 65 CLR 255 at
Johnston Fear &
Kingham & The Offset Printing Co Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1943] HCA 18
; (1943) 67
CLR 314 at 318.
[1953] HCA 12
; (1953) 87 CLR 501 at
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR 397 at
[1948] HCA 7
; (1948) 76 CLR 1 at 350
(emphasis added).
Attorney-General (Cth) v
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105 CLR 361 at 370-371.
Attorney-General (NT)
(2014) 253 CLR 393 at 445 [107];
The Commonwealth v
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 531
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 611.
Trade Practices
Commission v Tooth & Co Ltd
[1979] HCA 47
; (1979) 142 CLR 397 at 445;
Theophanous v
The Commonwealth
[2006] HCA 18
; (2006) 225 CLR 101 at 124
Re Director
of Public Prosecutions; Ex parte Lawler
[1994] HCA 10
; (1994) 179 CLR 270 at 283;
JT International SA v The Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 67
Official Record of the
Debates of the Australasian Federal Convention
(Melbourne), 28 January
1898 at 260.
R v Public Vehicles
Licensing Appeal Tribunal (Tas); Ex parte Australian National Airways Pty Ltd
[1964] HCA 15
; (1964) 113 CLR 207 at 225, quoted in
Grain Pool of Western Australia v
The Commonwealth
(2000) 202 CLR 479 at 492 [16].
Attorney-General (Cth) v
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105 CLR 361 at 372-373 (citations omitted).
[1994] HCA 10
; (1994) 179 CLR 270 at 285.
Theophanous v The
Commonwealth
[2006] HCA 18
; (2006) 225 CLR 101 at 126
[1941] HCA 20
; (1941) 65 CLR 255 at 282.
Berman v Parker
[1954] USSC 67
; (1954) 348 US 26 at 33.
Barron v The Mayor and
City Council of Baltimore
[1833] USSC 15
; (1833) 32 US 243 at 250-251.
Kohl v United States
[1875] USSC 86
; (1876) 91 US 367 at 372, 373-374.
Official Record of the
Debates of the Australasian Federal Convention
(Melbourne), 25 January
1898 at 152, 154; 28 January 1898 at 260.
Official Record of the
Debates of the Australasian Federal Convention
(Melbourne), 25 January
1898 at 151, referring to what is now s 51(xxxix).
Official Record of the
Debates of the Australasian Federal Convention
(Melbourne), 25 January
1898 at 152.
Quick and Garran,
Constitution
of the Australian Commonwealth
(1901) at 641.
Official Record of the
Debates of the Australasian Federal Convention
(Melbourne), 25 January 1898
Hornsby Shire Council v
The Commonwealth
(2023) 276 CLR 645 at 663 [13].
Official Record of the
Debates of the Australasian Federal Convention
(Melbourne), 4 March 1898 at
Svikart v Stewart
[1994] HCA 62
; (1994) 181 CLR 548 at 563.
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519; 421 ALR
The Commonwealth v
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 531
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 610-611.
Northern Territory
(Self-Government) Act 1978
Australian Capital
Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
The Commonwealth v
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 585-586
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at
[1949] HCA 66
; (1949) 80 CLR 382 at 411.
P J Magennis Pty Ltd
v The Commonwealth
[1949] HCA 66
; (1949) 80 CLR 382 at 411.
(1984) 155 CLR 193 at
Spratt v Hermes
[1965] HCA 66
; (1965) 114 CLR 226 at 242. See also
Bennett v The Commonwealth
[2007] HCA 18
231 CLR 91 at 110
Northern Land Council v
The Commonwealth
[1986] HCA 18
; (1986) 161 CLR 1 at 6.
Clunies-Ross v The
Commonwealth
(1984) 155 CLR 193 at 201.
New South Wales v The
Commonwealth (Work Choices Case)
[2006] HCA 52
; (2006) 229 CLR 1 at 157
The Commonwealth v
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 594
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 689-690.
La Perouse Local
Aboriginal Land Council v Quarry Street Pty Ltd
(2025) 99 ALJR 1285
at 1309 [99]; 424 ALR 391 at 417-418, quoting
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
201 CLR 351 at 365-366
Grace Brothers Pty Ltd v
The Commonwealth
[1946] HCA 11
; (1946) 72 CLR 269;
P J Magennis Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[1949] HCA 66
; (1949) 80 CLR 382.
Johnston Fear &
Kingham & The Offset Printing Co Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1943] HCA 18
; (1943) 67
Minister of State for the Navy v Rae
[1945] HCA 6
; (1945) 70 CLR 339;
Nelungaloo Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
(1948) 75 CLR 495.
Zhu v Treasurer of
New South Wales
[2004] HCA 56
; (2004) 218 CLR 530 at 572
Attorney-General
for NSW v Perpetual Trustee Co (Ltd)
[1952] HCA 2
; (1952) 85 CLR 237 at 294-295. See also
Zhu v Treasurer of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 56
; (2004) 218 CLR 530 at 576-577
Clayton v Bant
272 CLR 1 at 26 [67].
Georgiadis v Australian
and Overseas Telecommunications Corporation
[1994] HCA 6
; (1994) 179 CLR 297;
(2000) 204 CLR 493. See also
Australian Tape Manufacturers
Association Ltd v The Commonwealth
(1993) 176 CLR 480 at 509;
Insurance Commission v Peverill
[1994] HCA 8
; (1994) 179 CLR 226 at 245.
Minister of State for the
Army v Dalziel
[1944] HCA 4
; (1944) 68 CLR 261 at 290 where the acquisition concerned the
temporary reduction in the value of Mr Dalziel's rights to land.
For instance,
Insurance Commission v Peverill
[1994] HCA 8
; (1994) 179 CLR 226;
The Commonwealth v
[2025] HCA 6
; (2025) 99 ALJR 519 at 594-595
[2025] HCA 6
; 421 ALR 604 at 690-691.
Georgiadis v Australian
and Overseas Telecommunications Corporation
[1994] HCA 6
; (1994) 179 CLR 297 at 305;
Smith v ANL Ltd
(2000) 204 CLR 493 at 499 [3], 548-549 [173].
Georgiadis v Australian
and Overseas Telecommunications Corporation
[1994] HCA 6
; (1994) 179 CLR 297 at 305.
JT International SA v The
Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 34
, 61-64 [144]-[154], 70-73
[180]-[189]. See also
The Commonwealth v Tasmania (The Tasmanian Dam Case)
[1983] HCA 21
; (1983) 158 CLR 1 at 145-146, 181-182, 248.
Smith v ANL Ltd
(2000) 204 CLR 493 at 504 [21]. See also
Bank of New South Wales v The
Commonwealth
[1948] HCA 7
; (1948) 76 CLR 1.
Newcrest Mining
(WA) Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 38
; (1997) 190 CLR 513;
The Commonwealth v WMC
Resources Ltd
[1998] HCA 8
; (1998) 194 CLR 1.
(1984) 155 CLR 193 at
Andrews v Howell
[1941] HCA 20
; (1941) 65 CLR 255 at 281-282.
Attorney-General (Cth) v
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105 CLR 361 at 372;
Jones v The Commonwealth
[1963] HCA 43
109 CLR 475 at 483.
Andrews v Howell
[1941] HCA 20
; (1941) 65 CLR 255 at 282.
Attorney-General (Cth) v
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105 CLR 361 at 372.
[1953] HCA 12
; (1953) 87 CLR 501.
W H Blakeley & Co Pty
Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1953] HCA 12
; (1953) 87 CLR 501 at 506.
W H Blakeley & Co Pty
Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1953] HCA 12
; (1953) 87 CLR 501 at 518-519.
[1887] USSC 277
; (1887) 123 US 623 at 668-669.
Berman v Parker
[1954] USSC 67
; (1954) 348 US 26.
Lucas v South Carolina
Coastal Council
[1992] USSC 111
; (1992) 505 US 1003 at 1014, quoting
Pennsylvania Coal Co
[1922] USSC 193
; (1922) 260 US 393 at 415.
Penn Central
Transportation Co v New York City
[1978] USSC 180
; (1978) 438 US 104 at 124, discussed in
The Commonwealth v Tasmania (The Tasmanian Dam Case)
[1983] HCA 21
; (1983) 158 CLR 1 at
JT International SA v The Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43
; (2012) 250 CLR 1 at 53
[1951] HCA 5
; (1951) 83 CLR 1.
Mutual Pools & Staff
Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179 CLR 155 at 180-181. See also
Airservices Australia v Canadian Airlines International Ltd
CLR 133 at 180 [98];
Attorney-General (NT) v Emmerson
(2014) 253 CLR 393
at 448-449 [118]-[119].
Mutual Pools & Staff
Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 9
; (1994) 179 CLR 155 at 171.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
, Explanatory Memorandum, Outline.
Attorney-General (Cth) v
[1961] HCA 21
; (1961) 105 CLR 361.
Attorney-General (NT) v
(2014) 253 CLR 393.
Australian Communist
Party v The Commonwealth
[1951] HCA 5
; (1951) 83 CLR 1.
Minister of State for the
Army v Dalziel
[1944] HCA 4
; (1944) 68 CLR 261.
Oshlack v Richmond River
[1998] HCA 11
; (1998) 193 CLR 72 at 97
Plaintiff M76/2013 v
Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship
[2013] HCA 53
; (2013) 251
CLR 322 at 393
Firebird Global Master Fund II Ltd v Republic
of Nauru [No 2]
[2015] HCA 53
; (2015) 90 ALJR 270 at 271
[2015] HCA 53
; 327 ALR 192 at 193.
Yunupingu v The
Commonwealth
(2023) 298 FCR 160 at 223 [264], citing
Charles David Pty Ltd
(1990) 171 CLR 232 at 244-245, 280, 303.
Plaintiff S157/2002 v The
Commonwealth
[2003] HCA 2
; (2003) 211 CLR 476 at 514
, 538 [177], 539;
v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2007] HCA 14
; (2007) 228 CLR 651 at
Roach v Electoral Commissioner
(2007) 233 CLR 162 at 182 [26], 204
[103], 228.
Unions NSW v New South
[2023] HCA 4
; (2023) 277 CLR 627 at 663-664.
Plaintiff M76/2013 v Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs and
Citizenship
[2013] HCA 53
; (2013) 251 CLR 322 at 394
Bodruddaza v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2007] HCA 14
; (2007) 228 CLR 651 at 675
Firebird Global Master Fund II Ltd v Republic of Nauru [No 2]
[2015] HCA 53
; (2015) 90
ALJR 270 at 271
[2015] HCA 53
; 327 ALR 192 at 193.
Firebird Global
Master Fund II Ltd v Republic of Nauru [No 2]
[2015] HCA 53
; (2015) 90 ALJR 270; 327 ALR
RTF format (853 KB)
Signed PDF/A format