Meta Platforms, Inc. v Reel Star Pty Ltd [2025] ATMO 224 (31 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by Meta Platforms, Inc to
registration of trade mark application number 2381761 (Classes 9, 35, 38, 41, 42
–REELSTAR– in the name of Reel Star Pty Ltd
Bianca Irgang
REPRESENTATION:
Stephen Rebikoff, of counsel instructed by Davies Collison
Not present at the hearing
2025 ATMO 224
Trade Marks Act 1995
opposition –
grounds of opposition argued
ground of opposition established.
Star Pty Ltd (‘the Applicant’) filed trade mark application number
2381761 on 25 August 2023 in classes 9, 35, 38,
41, 42 and 45 and the current
details of the application are set out below:
REELSTAR (the ‘Trade Mark’)
application no
Filing date:
(‘Priority Date’)
Specification:
: Application software
: Compilation and provision of online directories;
Compilation of advertisements for use as web pages on the internet; Web indexing
for commercial or advertising purposes; Social media marketing
: Providing internet chat rooms; Electronic bulletin board
services (telecommunications services); Web portal services (providing
access to a global computer network); Electronic transmission (uploading,
posting or displaying) of data, information, pictures,
images, audio and/or
video via online forums; Video transmission services; Communication services for
the electronic transmission
: Electronic publication of information on a wide range of
topics, including online and over a global computer network; Entertainment
services provided in online virtual environments; Publication of multimedia
material online; Providing online videos, not downloadable;
Production of
entertainment videos; Providing online images, not downloadable
Application Service Provider (ASP) services; Hosting of
cloud based software; Hosting computer websites; Provision of online
non-downloadable
web-based software; Online provision of web-based software
(non-downloadable)
: Online social networking services
(‘Applicant’s Goods and Services’)
of the application for possible registration was advertised on 26 January 2024.
Subsequently, Meta Platforms, Inc (‘the
Opponent’) filed a Notice of
Intention to Oppose registration followed by a Statement of Grounds and
Particulars (‘SGP’).
Applicant then filed its Notice of Intention to Defend. Thereafter, the Opponent
and the Applicant filed evidence in accordance
with the provisions of the
Trade Mark Regulations 1995
(Cth) (‘the Regulations’). Once
the time allowed for filing evidence had ended the parties were given an
opportunity
to request a hearing in this matter or a decision without
hearing. The Opponent requested a hearing and paid the appropriate
As a result, the matter was set down for a hearing and I was
allocated the matter. Subsequently, the Opponent filed its written
submissions for the hearing on 31 July 2025. The Applicant did not file any
written submissions for consideration.
heard the opposition by videoconference as a delegate of the Registrar of Trade
Marks on 14 August 2025. The Opponent was represented
by Stephen Rebikoff, of
counsel instructed by Davies Collison Cave Pty. The Applicant was not present at
the hearing.
Grounds of Opposition
SGP nominated the grounds of opposition under
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) (‘the Act’) but only those
grounds under
were pursued at the hearing. Therefore, I
take the ground under
as abandoned by the Opponent. The Opponent bears the
onus of establishing at least one of the grounds of
opposition.
The standard of proof
is the ordinary civil standard of the balance of
probabilities.
The date at which
the rights of the parties are to be determined is the relevant date, which is
also the Priority Date for the purposes
evidence filed in this matter consists of the following declarations
Evidence in Support
Declaration
of Scott Minden, Associate General Counsel of Meta Platforms, Inc., made on 27
August 2024 (‘Minden’), and
its exhibits SM-1 to SM-09.
Declaration of
Cheryl Hrvoj, Senior Associate in the employ of Davies Collison Cave Pty Ltd,
made on 3 September 2024 (‘Hrvoj’),
and its exhibits CH-1 to
Evidence in Answer
Declaration
of Navdeep Sharma, Co-founder of Reel Star Pty Ltd, made on 6 December 2024
(‘Sharma’), and its exhibits NS-1
Evidence in Reply
Declaration of
Cheryl Hrvoj, made on 11 February 2025, and its exhibits CXH-1 to
have made my decision on this matter on the basis of the evidence listed above
and the following relevant material:
The Notice of
Intension to Oppose and the SGP;
The Notice of
Intention to Defend; and
Opponent’s written and oral submissions.
Section 60 - Reputation in Australia
60 is reproduced below:
Section 60 - Trade mark similar to
trade mark that has acquired a reputation in Australia
The registration of a trade mark in respect of particular goods or services
may be opposed on the ground that:
(a) another trade mark had, before the priority date for the registration of the
first-mentioned trade mark in respect of those goods
or services, acquired a
reputation in Australia; and
(b) because of the reputation of that other trade mark, the use of the
first-mentioned trade mark would be likely to deceive or cause
establish a ground of opposition under s 60, an opponent must demonstrate that
as at the relevant date there was another trade
mark which had acquired a
reputation in Australia amongst a significant or substantial number of persons
in the relevant market such
that use of the trade mark would be likely to
deceive or cause confusion.
of the relevant principles of s 60 are summarised in the recent case of
Ragopika Pty Ltd v Padmasingh Isaac trading as Aachi Spices and Foods
The first of these elements calls for a factual
inquiry into the extent and nature of the reputation that had been acquired by
existing trade mark – here, the Aachi mark – in Australia. The
second element calls for an assessment of the likelihood
of deception or
confusion arising from use of the new trade mark as a consequence of that
reputation.
The existing trade mark need not even be registered for s 60 to be engaged
Fry Consulting Pty Ltd v Sports Warehouse Inc
201 FCR 565
Fry Consulting
(Dodds-Streeton J);
Qantas Airways Ltd v Edwards
Qantas Airways
) at [144] (Yates J)). The classes of
goods and/or services in respect of which the existing trade mark has been used,
and those in
which the new trade mark is intended to be used, may be very
relevant to the likelihood of confusion (see
at [143] and
GAIN Capital UK Limited v Citigroup
[2017] FCA 519
at [148] (Markovic
J)), but the fact that the classes are not the same cannot be determinative. The
of the existing trade mark need not relate specifically to the goods
or services that are the subject of the proposed application
Rodney Jane Racing Pty Ltd v Monster Energy
[2019] FCA 923
Rodney Jane Racing
[87] (O’Bryan J)). The question is simply whether the reputation of the
existing trade mark in Australia is such that the
use of the new trade mark is
“likely” to be deceptive or cause
McCormick & Co Inc v
, Kenny J considered
what is intended by the word ‘reputation’ as used in
s 60. Her Honour consulted the
Macquarie Dictionary
the basis of the definition provided concluded that it was ‘the
recognition of the [trade mark] by the public
generally’.
Her Honour quoted
with approval the following words of Lockhart J in
Re ConAgra Inc v McCain
Foods (Aust) Pty Ltd
[R]eputation within the jurisdiction
may be proved by a variety of means including advertisements on television or
radio, or in magazines
and newspapers within the forum. It may be established by
showing constant travel of people between other countries and the forum
people within the forum, (whether residents there or persons simply visiting
there from other countries) are exposed to
the goods of the overseas owner
the subject of reputation, Kenny J also referred to
Hugo Boss AG v Jackson
International Trading Co Kurt D Bruhl GmbH & Co KG
, where the
Registrar’s delegate observed:
[I]t is true that
the assessment of the reputation of a trade mark goes far beyond mere
examination of sales or turnover of goods
sold under that trade mark and
contemplation of the advertising and promotional figures.
As regards a trade mark, its reputation derives both from the quantum of
sales under that mark and also its esteem, or image, projected
by that trade
mark. The quantum of sales, advertising and promotion contributes to the
‘recognition’ component of the
trade mark’s reputation. The
credit, image and values projected by a trade mark attaches to the
‘esteem’ component
of the reputation as do the public events and
other trader’s marks with which [the] owner of the trade marks in question
to associate the trade marks via sponsorships, cross-promotions,
‘contra deals’ and so forth.
It follows that a trade mark used in relation to goods with comparatively low
sales may have a high and strong reputation by virtue
of the high credit or
esteem in which it is held, or, conversely, that a trade mark which has very
high sales may have a strong reputation
notwithstanding the lack of esteem that
attaches to it. The particular popular images, or sets of values, that attach to
mark are also, therefore, important parts of the reputation of the
trade mark and may be as strong an associative force in the minds
of the public
as the association of the trade marks with the goods or services
themselves.
stated above, in assessing reputation under s 60, what constitutes a
significant or substantial number of persons in the
relevant market must be
considered. The case of
Le Cordon Bleu BV v Cordon Bleu
International Ltee
was decided
under s 28(a) of the (now repealed)
Trade Marks Act 1955
That provision did not refer to ‘reputation’ at all, only that use
of the impugned trade mark would be ‘likely
to deceive or cause
confusion’. Nevertheless, the words of Heerey J provide some
What is ‘significant’ or
‘substantial’ will depend on the nature of the goods or services in
question. For
some highly specialised products, awareness among a few thousand
persons, or even less, might be sufficient ... We are here concerned
foodstuffs sold in supermarkets, delicatessens, milk bars and other retail
outlets. The relevant market is virtually the entire
Australian population from
early teenage years onwards.
Opponent has particularised the ground of opposition in the SGP in the manner
set out below:
The trade mark/s had acquired
reputation before the priority date of the trade mark being opposed.
The Opponent, Meta Platforms, Inc., based in California, USA, is the owner of
well-known social networking, advertising, and video
sharing platforms including
Facebook as well as Instagram owned by Instagram, LLC (collectively
“Meta” or “Opponent”).
Meta is the owner of the well-known brand and trade mark REEL. REEL is a
user-created and edited short-form video content for sharing
on Instagram and
Facebook. Instagram is the world famous photo/video sharing and editing service
and social network with over a billion
users worldwide, and serves as an
advertising, marketing and promotional medium. Facebook is the internationally
well-known social
media platform, with 3 billion active monthly users globally.
Meta is the owner of the REEL registration in Australia and REELS
registrations globally for, inter alia, electronic transmission
user-generated videos, online social networking services, and software for the
The REEL trade mark is used in relation to the provision of digital content,
including video content, on a social networking platform
and the provision of
non-downloadable software for viewing and interacting with digital content,
including video content, on a social
networking platform and related
peer-to-peer video sharing services as well as software for the publication,
modification and sharing
of digital content, including video content, online,
including on a social networking platform and related goods ("the REEL Goods
Services").
The REEL Goods and Services provided under and by reference to the REEL trade
mark were provided in Australia prior to the priority
date of the REELSTAR
application. The REEL trade mark has been used extensively in relation to the
REEL Goods and Services in Australia
and internationally by the Opponent. Over
140 billion REEL videos play across the Facebook and Instagram platforms each
day: https://
business.instagram.com/instagram-reels.
By way of exemplar of the popularity and recognition of REEL, there are
articles that note the popularity of REELS, noting that some
REELS reach
hundreds of millions of likes. See, by example:
• “20 Most Viewed Reels on Instagram”
https://locobuzz.com/blogs/most-viewed-reel-on-instagram/; and
• “Viral Sensation: 20 most-viewed Instagram Reels of All
Time” https://www.lifestyleasia.com/hk/
entertainment/most-viewed-instagram-reels/
For example, a REEL by the Instagram account @my_aussie_gal has over 8.9
million likes: https:/ www.instagram.com/reel/CNnw0ySHfU1/
?utm_source=ig_embed&ig_rid=0101b633-7214-40f9-92ea-87bba978594e The
official Instagram account of Tourism Australia @australia
has plenty of REELs
posted with hundreds of thousands of views each. See attached
representation.
and one of its REELs having 8.5M views and 491K likes. See attached
representation.
The Trade Mark subject of the Application comprises the word REELSTAR and
wholly incorporates REEL, the trade mark of the Opponent,
and seeks protection
for identical and/or closely related goods and services, including transmission
of videos and online social
networking services. REELSTAR is likely to be
understood by consumers as “star” on Opponent’s REEL videos on
and Facebook, and is therefore deceptively and confusingly similar to
the Opponent's REEL trade mark.
Owing to the similarity of the marks and their goods and services and the
reputation of the REEL mark in Australia, the REELSTAR trade
mark by the
Applicant in relation to the goods and services specified in the Application is
likely to deceive or cause confusion.
establish the ground of opposition under s 60 the Opponent relies on its use of
and the acquired reputation in the trade mark
following registered Australin trade mark:
Trade mark registration
Filing Date:
Specification:
: Application software; computer programs
(downloadable software); computer software; computer software applications
(downloadable);
computer software downloaded from the internet; computer
software packages; computer software platforms, recorded or downloadable;
computer software products; computer software programs; downloadable
software applications (apps)downloadable mobile applications;
downloadable
software for computers; downloadable software for computers, portable
handheld digital electronic communication devices,
mobile devices, and wired and
wireless communication devices for the purpose of allowing users to capture,
record, enable transmission,
access, create, integrate, organize, and manage
videos, images, text, and instant messaging; downloadable software for
portable handheld digital electronic communication devices, mobile
devices, and wired and wireless communication devices for the
allowing users the ability to access, send, and receive information on a global
computer network; downloadable software
in the form of a mobile application
for use with computers, portable handheld digital electronic communication
devices, mobile devices,
and wired and wireless communication devices for
facilitation of communication; downloadable software in the form of a
mobile application
for social networking; downloadable software in the form
of a mobile application for delivery of videos, data, messages, location,
photographs, images, text and other data related thereto; downloadable
software in the form of a mobile application for recording
and sharing a video
will; software for sending digital media to others via the global computer
network; virtual reality headsets;
software virtual reality
presentations; software augmented reality presentations; apparatus for
artificially distorting video images;
apparatus for artificially distorting
video signals; apparatus for processing digital video signals; apparatus for
processing video
signals; video communications apparatus; video communications
instruments; none of the foregoing relating to slot or social casino
or gambling
: Telecommunications services; telecommunications
services for the electronic transmission of data, messages, graphics, images,
information,
and videos; peer-to-peer video sharing services, namely,
electronic transmission of digital video files among internet
users; providing
access to computer, electronic and online
on topics of
general interest; providing online chat rooms and electronic
bulletin boards for transmission of messages and videos among users
in the field
of general interest; broadcasting services over computer or other
communication networks, namely, uploading, posting,
displaying, tagging, and
electronically transmitting data, information, messages, graphics, and
images; telecommunications services,
namely, electronic transmission of
photos and videos; telecommunication services, namely, electronic
transmission of data, photos,
music and videos; broadcasting and streaming
of audio-visual media content; transmission of downloadable audio-visual
media content;
provision of hyperlinks to the online retail web sites of
others; telecommunications services, namely, providing online and
telecommunication
facilities for interaction between and among users of
computers, mobile and handheld computers, and wired and wireless communication
devices, enable individuals to send and receive photographs, videos, images,
text and messages via email, instant messaging or a
website on the
internet; providing online chat rooms and electronic bulletin boards for
transmission of photographs, videos, images,
text and messages among
users; providing an online community forum for users to share information,
photos, audio and video content
daily activities, to form virtual communities, and to engage in social
networking;
peer-to-peer photo and video sharing services, namely,
electronic transmission of digital photos, video and audio-visual files among
users and social networks; broadcasting services over computer or other
communication networks namely, uploading, posting, displaying,
tagging, and
electronically transmitting data, information, messages, graphics, videos, and
images; video communication services;
video transmission services; communication
services for video conferencing purposes; none of the foregoing relating to
slot or social
casino gaming or gambling
: Providing non-downloadable software for the purpose of
allowing users to capture, record, enable transmission, access, create,
organize, and manage videos, photographs, images, text and instant
messaging via a website; providing non-downloadable software for
purpose of allowing users the ability to access, send, and receive videos and
other information on a global computer network
via a website; providing
non-downloadable software for the facilitation of communication via a
website; providing non-downloadable
software for social networking via a
website; none of the foregoing relating to slot or social casino gaming or
: Legal services; legal services in relation to the
negotiation of contracts for others; legal services relating to the
negotiation
of contacts (for others); legal services relating to
wills; legal services relating to estate planning; personal legal services;
providing information, including online, about legal services; provision of
information relating to legal services; provision of
legal services; online
social networking services; online social networking services for the
purpose of allowing users to capture,
record, enable transmission, access,
create, integrate, organize, and manage photographs, videos, images, text and
instant messaging;
online social networking services for the purpose of
allowing users the ability to access, send, and receive information on a global
computer network; online social networking services for the facilitation of
communication; online social networking services for
the purpose of the
delivery of data, messages, location, photographs, images, videos, text and
other data related thereto; none of
the foregoing relating to slot or
social casino gaming or gambling (‘Opponent’s Goods and
will refer to the above two trade marks collectively as the
‘Opponent’s Mark’. This is because REELS is the plural
and the marks are both used on the Opponent’s Goods and Services. The
evidence demonstrates that consumers interchangeably
refer to watching or
creating a REEL in the singular or REELS in the plural
60 does not require that the Opponent’s Goods and Services upon which the
Opponent uses the Opponent’s Mark be
of a specified standard of similarity
with the Applicant’s Goods and Services, nor is there a requirement that
the Opponent’s
Mark be substantially identical or deceptively similar to
the Trade Mark. However, I note that the goods and services of interest
parties are the same.
considering whether the Opponent’s Mark has acquired a reputation in
Opponent’s Goods and Services, I turn to the Opponent’s
Minden states that the Opponent is the owner of Facebook and Instagram which are
world-famous photo/video sharing and editing
services, software applications,
and social networking, advertising, and photo/video sharing platforms.
August 2020, the Opponent launched its short-form video feature under the
Opponent’s Mark on Instagram as a way for users
to create and discover
short-form videos. The short-form video feature bearing the Opponent’s
Mark was subsequently made available
on Facebook, starting in September 2021,
and then globally (including in Australia) in February 2022. The
Opponent’s short-form
video feature offers downloadable and
non-downloadable software for creating, editing, viewing, sharing and
interacting with short-form
video content on its social networking platforms,
including publication, advertising, hosting, and modifying and enabling
transmission
of the user created videos under the Opponent’s Mark.
states that as of October 2022, there were 2 billion monthly active accounts on
Instagram worldwide.
Additionally, Instagram is not only used by individuals. Businesses use it as an
advertising, marketing and promotional medium and
over 25 million businesses
worldwide use Instagram to promote their business, sell products and services
and to connect with their
avers that Facebook is also one of the most popular social media platforms
By 2023, over 3
billion people were using Facebook each month. According to Minden, businesses
also utilise Facebook for a wide range
of activities. Features on the platform
like Facebook Marketplace and Shop enable direct sales, while events and live
streams provide
opportunities for real-time interaction and promotion which,
Minden asserts, makes Facebook a popular platform for businesses as
individuals.
explains that the Opponent’s Goods and Services offered under the
Opponent’s Mark are one of the most popular features
on Instagram and
Facebook. Over 140 billion short-form videos bearing the Opponent’s Mark
play across the Instagram and Facebook
platforms each day. These short-form
videos make up more than half of the content re-shared in messages between users
on Instagram
and over half of users interact with a short-form video (by liking,
commenting or sharing) at least once a week. Users of Instagram
spend 20% of
their time on Instagram viewing short-form videos. On Instagram alone, users
share these short-form videos 1 billion
times per day through direct messages.
Across Facebook and Instagram, short-form videos continue to become more social
sharing them more than 2 billion times every day and all these
short-form videos bear the Opponent’s
Even though the figures
provided are world-wide, I accept that even if only a small percentage of these
views or shares were attributable
to Australian social media users, they would
still be substantial figures.
to the evidence, the Opponent has used the Opponent’s Mark on and in
relation to the Opponent’s Goods and Services
in Australia since the
launch of the short-form video feature on Instagram in August 2020. Instagram is
regularly used by Australian
celebrities, businesses, sports figures,
politicians, and governmental agencies. These famous Australians include Anthony
Chris Hemsworth, Hugh Jackman, Rebel Wilson and Celeste Barber who use
the Opponent’s Goods and Services on their social media
accounts which
have millions of followers.
Hrvoj avers that many of the short-form videos posted by these individuals and
organisations have been viewed millions of times and
bear the Opponent’s
CH-1 accompanying Hrvoj contains a published report 'Shift to Short' based on
global and local independent studies commissioned
by the Opponent and Meta
Australia and conducted by Factworks and Hoop Group between October 2022 and
February 2023
. It states 86
percent of Australian consumers surveyed reported following a business, and 60
percent reported messaging a business,
after watching a short-form video on
Instagram. 74 percent reported having purchased a product or service as a result
short-form video on Instagram and all of this content bears the
Opponent’s Mark.
Opponent’s Goods and Services offered under the Opponent’s Mark have
also been reported and documented in the Australian
media. Exhibits CH-2 and
CH-3 accompanying Hrvoj contain copies of a number of articles dated before the
Priority Date from Australian
media providers such as The Sydney Morning Herald.
Most of the articles appear to be reporting on businesses, individuals and
celebrities
that have used the Opponent’s Goods and Services under the
Opponent’s Mark to make announcements, entertain or share
information
across the Opponent’s social media platforms. While these articles are not
persuasive in and of themselves to establish
a reputation, taken together with
the survey and numbers of views and shares the Opponent’s Goods and
Services under the Opponent’s
Mark, they do demonstrate a growing consumer
awareness and use of the Opponent’s Mark as encapsulated in
am satisfied the Opponent’s evidence demonstrates a growing and
substantial reputation in Australia as well as internationally
Opponent’s Mark in relation to Opponent’s Goods and Services before
the Priority Date. As the requirements under
s 60(a) have been satisfied, it is
necessary to consider s 60(b). I must now determine if the Opponent’s Mark
has acquired
a reputation in Australia
because of which
the use of the
Trade Mark would be likely to deceive or cause confusion. This is more than the
Opponent merely indicating prior use,
the Opponent’s Mark needs to be
‘associated in the minds of the Australian
to such a degree
that confusion is likely.
Deceive or cause confusion.
Applicant submits that it selected the Trade Mark to reflect the
Applicant’s unique identity and positioning in the market
distinct from the Opponent’s social networking services. Sharma argues
that the word
REEL is a generic way of describing a film or movie shown in a cinema and that
this term has been used for many decades
as a descriptive
the respective
trade marks look and sound different and are unlikely to be confused on that
basis and that the Applicant is unaware
of any confusion taking place between
the respective trade marks.
regards to the Applicant’s first point, it is my view the word REEL
contains an indirect reference to an old-fashioned movie
reel shown in a cinema,
however, that concept has no inherent application in the context of the online
social networking products
and services that are of interest to the Applicant
and Opponent. Therefore, it cannot be said that the words REEL or REELS are
descriptive
of the character or quality of such goods or services. I am
satisfied that the expression REEL does not have a generic or descriptive
meaning when applied to the goods and services of interest to the parties.
considering the Applicant’s second point, I turn to the Opponent’s
submissions. The Opponent has argued that a similarity
of idea, impression and
language would give rise to a real risk that Australian social media
might have cause to wonder
that the Trade Mark used on the Applicant’s Goods and Services was somehow
related to the Opponent’s
Mark and the Opponent’s Goods and
Services. The Opponent states:
The term REEL is also undoubtedly an
essential feature of the Prior REEL Mark, which is incorporated in its entirety
within the Opposed
Mark and retains its distinctive identity despite the
addition of the word STAR. Adding the word STAR does not give the Opposed Mark
an independent meaning that is sufficient to avoid confusion with the Prior REEL
Mark, since the word STAR is likely to be understood
simply as a descriptive
addition to the distinctive word REEL.
agree with the Opponent. In considering the respective trade marks, the word
REEL is the prominent and striking first element of
the Trade Mark and it is the
whole of the Opponent’s Mark. It is my view, the addition of the word
STAR to the Trade Mark
will be regarded as a descriptive qualifier to the
distinctive term REEL. I consider that Australian consumers who see the Trade
Mark are likely to focus on the striking term REEL and, given the reputation of
the Opponent’s Mark, regard goods and services
offered under the Trade
Mark as a new product offering, sub-brand or brand extension of the
Opponent’s Mark. That connection
is reinforced by the way in which the
Trade Mark reproduces the Opponent’s Mark in its entirety at the start of
the mark, as
well as by the concept conveyed by the Trade Mark, which is of
someone or something which features in and is a ‘star’
form video on social media. Additionally, the likelihood of confusion is again
reinforced by the fact that the Trade Mark
is sought to be registered in respect
of the very goods and services for which the Opponent and the Opponent’s
Mark have a
demonstrated reputation.
already discussed above in paragraph 17 of my decision, there is no requirement
that the Trade Mark be used in respect of similar
goods or services in order for
the ground of opposition under s 60 to be engaged. However, it is
well-established that the likelihood
of deception or confusion will be increased
where, as here, the goods and services in respect of which registration is
goods or services the Opponent is known to have a connection
I consider that, given the substantial reputation acquired by the
Opponent’s Mark along with the similarities between
the respective trade
marks, a significant number of Australian social media users would at the very
least experience a reasonable
as to the existence of
some sort of connection between the Opponent’s Mark and the Trade Mark if
it were used on the Applicant’s
Goods and Services.
Opponent has accordingly established its ground of opposition under
55 of the Act
(1) Unless subsection (3) applies to the proceedings, the Registrar
must, at the end, decide:
(a) to refuse to register the trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations)
in respect of the goods and/or services
then specified in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
limitations
see section 6.
find that the Opponent has met the onus upon it, in terms of the ground of
opposition under section 60. Accordingly, I refuse to
register trade mark
application no. 2381761.
Opponent has requested its costs. It is usual for costs to follow the event, and
I see no reason to depart from that principle
here. I award costs against the
Applicant under section 221 of the Act in terms of Schedule 8 of the
Regulations.
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd
v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and
Pfizer Products
Inc v Karam
[2006] FCA 1663
, [6]-[26] (Gyles J);
Telstra Corporation Ltd
v Phone Directories Co Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [132]-[133] (Besanko, Jagot
and Edelman JJ).
Cross Refrigerating Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 82
(Kitto J) (‘
Southern Cross
’), see also
Trade Marks Act
, [20]-[21] (Kennett
[2000] FCA 1335
Ibid, [81].
(1992) 33 FCR
[1999] ATMO
(1999) 47 IPR 423
, 436 (Hearing Officer
[2000] FCA 1587
(emphasis in original). Justice Heerey’s decision was
overturned on appeal to the Full Federal Court, although not
on the point
quoted. Indeed the court specifically noted that his approach
contained no error; see
Renaud Cointreau v Cordon Bleu
International Ltee
[2001] FCA 1170
[75] (Moore, Tamberlin and Goldberg
registered in a number of countries as demonstrated in Exhibit SM-9 accompanying
Exhibits CH-1 and
CH-3 accompanying Hrvoj and Exhibits SM-1, SM-2, SM-6 and SM-7 accompanying
Exhibit SM-3
accompanying Minden.
SM-4 accompanying Minden.
Exhibit SM-5 accompanying
Exhibit SM-6
accompanying Minden.
SM-7 accompanying Minden.
Hrvoj [14] to [15].
that the sample size for the survey was over 1500
Seven Up Co v OT
[1947] HCA 59
(1947) 75 CLR 203
, 211 (Williams
Sharma [32] to
In the present case,
the relevant market comprises a significant proportion of the Australian
population being social media
Industrial Co Ltd v Magic Market Corp
(1984) 3 IPR 519 (Senior
Registrar Hanlon);
Aussie Home Loans Ltd v Aussie Loans Pty Ltd
[34] (Hearing Officer Thompson).
Southern Cross
RTF format (1.16 MB)
Signed PDF/A format