Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Electrical Power Industry Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 995 (24 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(AM2009/153)
ELECTRICAL POWER INDUSTRY AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT LAWLER
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 24 DECEMBER 2009
The Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU) has applied for a variation to cll.17.1(b)(ii) and (iii) of the
Electrical Power Industry Award 2010
(modern award).
In making that modern award we adopted a CFMEU proposal for a clause in relation to apprentices and trainees. The CFMEU has now identified
a problem with the clause it proposed and we adopted. In particular, the CFMEU submits that while cl.17.1(b)(ii) ensures that an
apprentice who is less than 21 years of age on completion of their apprenticeship will not earn less than the standard rate, it could
be construed as allowing an adult apprentice to earn less than the standard rate on completion of their apprenticeship. That was
not our intention.
The CFMEU sought the addition of the word “also” in cl.17.1(b)(iii) to ensure that the operation of that provision was
independent of the requirement in cl.7.1(b)(ii).
The ‘National Employer Group’ (NEG), a large group of electrical power industry employers, opposed the application but
only on the basis that the proposed changes were unnecessary because the award as made has the effect that the CFMEU submits it ought
to have and, if anything, reduces clarity. In particular, the NEG accepts that an adult apprentice, upon completion of their apprenticeship,
should receive no less than the standard rate.
Further, the NEG accepts that the existing cl.17.1(b)(iii) means that an adult employee who commences an apprenticeship will not suffer
a reduction in pay. It submits, consistent with its earlier submissions, that this clause acts as a disincentive to offering an apprenticeship
to existing employees and that an existing employee who commences an apprenticeship should drop back to the standard rate during
the course of that apprenticeship. We did not accept that submission when we made the award. However, if cl.17.1(b) is to be varied,
we think it desirable to make it clear that cl.17.1(b)(iii) is directed at the level of pay an adult employee is entitled to receive
“under the award” immediately prior to commencing an apprenticeship.
We think that there is merit in the CFMEU application and have decided to allow it albeit that we have varied cl.17.1(b)(iii) in a
manner that is different from the variation proposed by the CFMEU. Clause 17.1(b) will be as follows:
17.1 Apprentices and trainees
(b) Apprentices
(ii) On the expiration of an apprenticeship an employee who
works in the apprenticed trade will be paid not less than the standard rate.
(iii) Further, an adult employee who is employed by an employer immediately prior to commencing an apprenticeship with that employer,
will not suffer a reduction in the pay the employee was entitled to receive under this award immediately prior to commencing such
apprenticeship.
BY THE COMMISSION:
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code A, PR992236>
No downloadable files available