DWP19 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1852 (14 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
DWP19 v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1852
File number(s):
ADG 361 of 2023
Judgment of:
JUDGE GERRARD
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
MIGRATION –
temporary protection visa
– decision of the then Immigration Assessment Authority – whether
the IAA misapplied the real
chance test – whether country information
misconstrued – jurisdictional error established – writs issued.
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Cases cited:
AIE15 v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2018] FCA 610
AMM19 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FedCFamC2G 159
AXI21 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 379 FLR 289
BSU20 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCA 642
Chan v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1989) 169 CLR
CJE16 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2019] FCA 1663
(2019) 167 ALD 89
DXM19 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2025] FedCFamC2G 765
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZQKB
[2012] FCA 1189
(2012) 133 ALD
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Guo
(1997) 191 CLR
SZMKK v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] FCA 436
(2010) 114 ALD
SZGHS v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
SZVJE v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCCA
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Chris Honnery
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Oliver Morris
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Sparke Helmore Lawyers
Second Respondent:
Submitting appearance, save as to costs
ADG 361 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
IMMIGRATION ASSESSMENT
Second Respondent
JUDGE GERRARD
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
writ of certiorari issue quashing the decision of the then Immigration
Assessment Authority made on 16 October 2023.
writ of mandamus issue directed to the Administrative Review Tribunal requiring
it to reconsider and determine the applicant’s
review according to
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or order to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 24.04(g)
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules
or to record a variation to the order pursuant to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2)
(General Federal Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE GERRARD:
INTRODUCTION
applicant seeks judicial review of a decision of the then Immigration Assessment
Authority (
) affirming an earlier decision of the first
respondent (
the Minister
) to refuse the grant of a Temporary Protection
(subclass 785) Visa (
). For the applicant to succeed in
this Court, he must establish that the IAA’s decision contains a
Court cannot undertake a review of the merits of the
decision under review.
the reasons set out below, the Court has found jurisdictional error in the
IAA’s decision. On that basis, the application
has succeeded.
21 March 2013, the applicant arrived at Christmas Island as an unauthorised
maritime arrival (Court Book (
) 51, 55). The applicant is a citizen of
Pakistan who hails from Parachinar in the Kurram District in the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa province.
He belongs to the Turi tribe and is a Shia Muslim of
Pashtun ethnicity (CB 1, 108-109).
2 May 2013, the applicant participated in an Irregular Maritime Arrival Entry
Interview (CB 7-26). In that interview, he claimed
he left Pakistan for fear of
persecution by the Taliban. He also claimed to have tragically suffered the loss
of an unborn child
as a result of the Taliban preventing him and his wife from
obtaining medical treatment in Islamabad (CB 20).
12 April 2016, the applicant was invited to apply for a Temporary Protection
Visa or a Safe Haven Enterprise (subclass 790) visa
(CB 27-28).
24 May 2016, the applicant lodged an application for a Temporary Protection Visa
with the assistance of a registered migration
agent (CB 31-70). The application
annexed supporting documents, including a statutory declaration disclosing his
fear of persecution
by the Taliban on account of sectarian violence and false
blasphemy charges (CB 71-80).
23 January 2019, the applicant was invited to attend an interview with the
Department of Home Affairs scheduled for 15 February
2019 (CB 101-103).
16 August 2019, a delegate of the Minister refused to grant the applicant the
visa (CB 104-120).
21 August 2019, the delegate’s decision was referred to the second
respondent, the IAA, for review (CB 122-123).
4 September 2019, the applicant appointed a migration agent as his authorised
representative (CB 129).
11 September 2019, the applicant’s migration agent provided further
information to the IAA in support of the review application,
submissions, a statutory declaration and other supporting documents (CB
23 September 2019, the IAA affirmed the delegate’s decision not to grant
the applicant the visa (CB 172-188).
applicant filed an application with this Court for judicial review of that
decision, which was subsequently remitted by consent
in accordance with the
orders of Judge Lucev on 28 July 2023. The Minister accepted that the IAA had
erred in not considering an
integer of the applicant’s claim, namely, that
Turis in his home region of Kurram District faced a moderate risk of sectarian
violence from militant groups (CB 189-190).
24 August 2023, the IAA granted approval to the applicant’s migration
agent to provide additional information and submissions
14 September 2023, the applicant’s migration agent provided the IAA with
further submissions in respect of new information
and the applicant’s
mental health, as well as supporting material including country information,
social media posts, photographs,
a statutory declaration, and other supporting
documents (CB 207-903).
16 October 2023, the IAA again affirmed the delegate’s decision not to
grant the applicant the visa (CB 905-961).
APPLICATION TO THIS COURT
5 November 2023, the applicant lodged an application for judicial review in this
Court. That application seeks review of the IAA’s
decision pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
applicant was unrepresented at the time of filing his application with the
Court. His application contained two broad grounds
for review:
(1) The decision of the IAA failed to consider or engage with the
applicant’s evidence.
(2) The decision of the IAA is affected by legal unreasonableness.
9 July 2025, the applicant (now represented) filed an amended application
containing three particularised grounds for review as
follows (without
alteration):
second respondent’s (Authority’s) decision is affected by
to consider harm by reference to the reasonably foreseeable future; and/or
a relative, rather than objective, assessment of whether the applicant faced a
real chance of serious harm.
Particulars
(a) The applicant referred to the “renewed capacity of the radical
anti-Shia and anti-Turi militant TTP in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa”
and submitted
he “is at risk of harm [in] the reasonably foreseeable future given the
threat of the resurgent TTP and IS-K”
as “the evidence reveals an
increasing trend in both the incidence and severity of terrorist attacks, and
that the security
situation has deteriorated beyond control. Given the ongoing
presence of the Afghan Taliban, and increasing trends of violent terrorist
attacks, the applicant’s risk profile for all of the above reasons rises
to the level of a real chance of harm”: CB 209
(b) The country information provided by the applicant documented a recent
increase in sectarian violence: see e.g. 2023 report by
the Pakistan Institute
of Peace Studies (PIPS) of “sectarian attacks across Pakistan rising for a
second consecutive year”
(CB 210) and DFAT reporting “TTP attacks
within Pakistan have increased since the Taliban seized power in Afghanistan in
2021”: DFAT Country Information Report Pakistan dated 25 January
2022 CB 240 at [2.40].
(c) The Authority purported to assess whether the applicant faced a real chance
of serious harm due to sectarian violence at CB 940
– 946 [125] –
d) Despite acknowledging
“a spike in recent sectarian violence
attributed to the Taliban”
, the Authority fixated on the present
situation without any real assessment of risk of harm in the future, reasoning
“Pakistan was much safer now than when the applicant lived
but failing to address the risk of harm with reference to the
reasonably foreseeable future, or consider whether the spike in attacks
trend that continues to escalate in the foreseeable future, and how might that
impact on the applicant’s risk of persecution:
see CB 944 [135] and 946
(e) Further and in the alternative, the Authority assessed the security
situation by adopting a relative rather than objective assessment
of the level
of sectarian violence (see CB 944 [135]), which infected its conclusion that the
applicant’s risk of harm from
the present security situation is “not
more than remote”: at CB 946 [143].
Authority’s decision is affected by jurisdictional error due to irrational
reasoning, findings lacking a proper evidentiary
basis and/or a misunderstanding
of the review material.
Particulars
(a) The applicant referred to DFAT’s report of a “heightened risk of
falsified blasphemy accusations ‘70% of which
are against Shia due to
anti-Shia sentiment in politics” and claimed to be at risk of being
imprisoned for blasphemy: see CB
209, CB 216.
(b) In purporting to consider this issue, the Authority referred to country
information (viz. the UK Home Office’s July 2021
‘Country Policy and
Information Note Pakistan: Shia Muslims’ report (UK Home Office report)
which it considered:
“indicates that while
false blasphemy charges are a real problem in Pakistan for members of the for
Shia community [sic] (and
other minorities) this tends to occur in areas where
they do not form a local majority. I have found this applicant would be
to a locality where 80% of the Population are Shia Turis like himself.
In the absence of other evidence about this issue, I consider
that he has only a
remote, and therefore not a real chance of being falsely accused of blasphemy in
Pakistan”: CB 944 at
(c) Neither the UK Home Office Report (CB 639 ff), the DFAT report (CB 236 ff)
nor any other country information indicates that the
risk minority groups face
of false blasphemy charges “tends to occur in areas where they do not form
a local majority”
or varies geographically throughout Pakistan.
d) In the premises, the Authority’s process of reasoning and fact-finding
lacked a proper evidentiary basis, was irrational,
and/or misunderstood the
review material.
Authority’s decision is affected by jurisdictional error due to a failure
to give genuine consideration to submissions and
country information which
impacted upon the applicant’s claims.
Particulars
(a) The applicant claimed to be at risk from militants as a Turi Shia in Kurram
Agency, referring to DFAT’s assessment from
its 2022 report that Turis in
Kurram District face a moderate risk of sectarian violence” and
PIPS’ report of increasing
sectarian attacks of which “64% of
terrorist attacks in Pakistan occurred in the applicant’s home
region”: CB 209
(b) The Authority ‘noted’ the applicant’s claims (see CB 941
[128], 944 [137]) and considered other integers of
his risk profile (at CB 944
– 946 [136] – [142]) but these findings did not resolve the issues
raised by the submissions
and country information regarding the risk to Turi
Shias generally.
(c) The applicant was ‘left to guess’ why, despite DFAT’s
assessment that Turis generally faced moderate risk of
sectarian violence, and
the subsequent PIPS report confirming there had been a “27 percent
increase in the incidence of terrorist
violence in 2022” (CB 690) the
majority of which were in his home region (CB 210) he did not face a real chance
a Turi Shia from Parachinar.
materials before the Court at the hearing on 30 July 2025 include:
the amended
application for judicial review filed on 9 July 2025;
the affidavit of
the applicant affirmed and filed on 5 November 2023 (taken as read and in
evidence at the hearing);
a Court Book
numbering 966 pages (marked as Exhibit 1);
submissions filed on behalf of the applicant on 9 July 2025; and
submissions filed on behalf of the Minister on 22 July 2025.
THE IAA’S DECISION
obtain assistance from this Court, the applicant must show that the IAA has
fallen into jurisdictional error. The applicant’s
grounds challenge two
key aspects of the IAA’s decision: namely, its application of the real
chance test and its findings in
respect of identified country information. The
applicant’s challenges all relate to the IAA’s consideration of the
situation in Pakistan as a Shia Turi Pashtun from Kurram District.
the applicant’s grounds are confined to this aspect of the IAA’s
reasoning, it is helpful to set out the IAA’s
findings in that respect in
full (at [125]-[143]) (citations and footnotes omitted):
[125] I have accepted that this applicant is a person of Pashtun ethnicity and a
member of the Turi Tribe who adheres to the Shia
faith. I have concluded that if
returned to Pakistan, he would return and reside in Parachinar, and live with
his family as he did
in the past. The applicant has argued that his Shia faith,
his Pashtun ethnicity, and his membership of the Turi tribe would all
him facing harm in Pakistan. He says Turis are considered to be supporters of
the West due to their past conflict with the
Sunni Taliban. The applicant says
can be identified by his National Identity Card, and his strong accent, which
identifies his region
of origin. He also says that the security situation in
Pakistan has deteriorated, and he would not be safe in Pakistan for that
[126] Parachinar is the principal city and capital of Kurram District. The
district is located in the Northwest of Pakistan, adjacent
to the Afghanistan
border. Kurram District is part of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province. It is
divided into three administrative units,
Upper Kurram, Lower Kurram and Central
[127] The Pashtuns are an ethnic group native to Afghanistan and north-western
Pakistan. They primarily live in and around the border
between the two
countries. In Pakistan, the Pashtun community is concentrated in the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Province. There are around
20-25 million Pashtuns living in Pakistan
according to DFAT. Pashtuns make up roughly 15% of the Pakistani population and
the second largest ethnic group in Pakistan.
[128] The Turi tribe is a Shia Pashtun Tribe of around 500,000 people. Most
Turis live in and around Parachinar in the Kurram District.
Turis are not
generally distinguishable from other Pashtuns by their appearance, but Turi
family names do distinguish them. Turis
tend to live in areas where other Turis
reside, such as Parachinar. Turis in Pakistan have faced significant violence in
due to their sectarian affiliation and their historic opposition to the
Pakistani Taliban and other Sunni extremist groups. Most
of the Shia in Kurram
District are members of the Turi Tribe. The applicant claims his membership of
the Turi tribe would lead to
a moderate risk of harm.
[129] According to the 2017 census, the Pakistani population was 207 million
while more recent reporting suggests that the population
is around 230 million.
Pakistan is 96% Muslim. Shia Muslims represent somewhere between 10% to 15% of
the population. There is estimated
to be around estimated 20-40 million Shia
living in Pakistan and it is the second largest Shia country in the world. The
well represented in parliament and regularly contest elections for
mainstream political parties. Shi’a are generally able to
establish places
of worship and practise their religion without overt state interference. Shia
can legally intermarry with members
of the Sunni faith. Most Shia in Pakistan
adhere to the Twelver school of Shia Islam, as does the applicant. Shia
populations can
be found throughout Pakistan, including Karachi, Lahore,
Rawalpindi, Islamabad, Peshawar, Multan, Jhang and Sargodha, but Shia do
constitute a majority in any of Pakistan’s four provinces, though they are
a majority in the Parachinar area. Kurram District
has a significant Shia
and Parachinar has been described as a Shia stronghold.
Shia are said comprise around 40 per cent of the population of Kurram District,
but the administrative unit of Upper Kurram, where Parachinar is located, is
estimated to be around 80% Shia.
[130] The Shia and Sunni communities are generally well integrated in Pakistan
and most Pakistani Shia are not physically or linguistically
distinguishable
from Pakistani Sunnis. Shia are mostly identifiable during religious events or
at places of worship. Historically
relations between the Sunni and Shia
populations of Pakistan were cordial, with ethnic, tribal and linguistic
differences being more
problematic. However, the so called
‘Islamisation’ of Pakistan, during the Presidency of Zia-ul-Haq, a
Sunni, led to
an increase in tensions between the two communities. The Shia
faith in Pakistan is not confined to specific ethnic, linguistic and
groups. DFAT assesses that there are no barriers preventing Shia from actively
participating in democratic processes in Pakistan
due to their sectarian
affiliation.
[131] I accept that this applicant could be identified as a Shia Turi due to his
National Identity Card and his accent. However,
I have found that this applicant
would return and reside in Parachinar. In the circumstances, he would be
returning to an area (Upper
Kurram) where he would be a member of the majority
ethnicity (Pashtun), the majority religion (Shia) and in which the majority of
his coreligionists are members of his tribe (Turi). There are some 500,000 Shia
Turis in the Parachinar region, including members
of his own family. Moreover,
he would also be returning to an area he knows well, having spent the first 27
years of his life living
in Parachinar, and where his mother, his wife, his
child and most of his siblings continue to reside and where the applicant has
found employment in the past. I have found that the applicant would return and
reside with his family in Parachinar as he did before
he travelled to Australia.
All of these factors would mitigate many of the challenges the applicant might
otherwise face in returning
to his home country now, over a decade after his
departure. In light of these factors, I conclude that in Parachinar the
would be able to secure shelter and assistance.
[132] Despite these mitigating factors, there are problems in Pakistan. Country
information before me, including the country information
provided by the
does indicate that Pakistan is plagued by a range of
security problems. Armed Sunni extremist groups operate in Pakistan including
the Pakistani Taliban, the Islamic State Movement, Sipah-e Sahaba and Lashkar-e
Jhangvi (LeJ), all of whom the applicant claims to
fear harm from. He describes
these groups as anti-Shia and says that they would target him. Country
information indicates that these
groups do have an anti-Shia agenda.
[133] Parachinar is not free of violence. There is a history of community
tensions in the Parachinar area leading to sectarian violence
in the past.
Around 2008 and for several years thereafter, there was a conflict between the
Pakistani Taliban, and the largely Shia
population in Northwest Kurram District.
The Pakistani Taliban was seeking to secure access to a land route from Pakistan
to Afghanistan
via the Kurram Valley. During this period there was significant
sectarian violence as the local Shia population, including Turi tribesmen,
opposed the Pakistani Taliban. In his protection visa application, the applicant
cited this period of violence as a significant factor
in his decision to leave
[134] For more than a decade, the Government of Pakistan has intervened
throughout the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province to combat Sunni
extremism and
violence. The Pakistani military have a strong presence throughout the province
and have maintained a long-term security
presence in Parachinar. The Pakistani
security forces implemented a 20-30 square kilometre security zone around the
Parachinar area,
and a smaller, tighter security zone in Parachinar city. The
intervention of security forces reduced the number of security threats
the Turi population. Government attempts to neutralise the threat posed by the
Taliban and other extremist groups are ongoing.
The applicant’s own
account of his life acknowledges the presence of Pakistani military units in
Parachinar and indicates he
interacted with the security forces before he
travelled to Australia. The applicant’s protection visa application
that in Parachinar, he and his family resided in Parachinar city, and
in his protection visa interview he said they resided close
to the main bazar.
From these explanations, it is clear that the applicant and his family lived
inside the security zone provided
by Pakistani military. The applicant’s
family still reside in this area.
[135] In the years that the applicant has lived in Australia, the level of
sectarian violence perpetrated by extremist groups in
Pakistan has fallen
considerably. The applicant has pointed to two attacks which occurred in Kurram
in 2022. However, sectarian violence
from militant groups does still occur in
the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province. Since August 2021, when the Afghani Taliban
seized control
of Afghanistan, there has been a resurgence in Pakistani Taliban
activity. This has led to a spike in recent sectarian violence attributed
Taliban. However, the level of sectarian violence is still well below previous
highs, and significantly lower that it was
when the applicant departed Pakistan.
There are fewer security incidents, fewer deaths and fewer people injured by
sectarian violence.
Pakistan is much safer now that it was when the applicant
lived there.
[136] Though the applicant has identified the Pakistani Taliban as the principal
group he fears since he arrived in Australia, during
his protection visa
interview the applicant indicated that he personally has never hand any
interactions with the Taliban. He has
never claimed to have had any direct
interactions with the Islamic State Movement, Sipah-e Sahaba, Lashkar-e Jhangvi,
or any other
Sunni extremist group in Pakistan. Though I have accepted that his
brother B1 received a threat letter from the Taliban in 2012,
this happened
after the applicant departed his home country and so that event cannot have
prompted his departure, and in any case,
B1 has lived in Pakistan for at least
four years. This suggests that whatever the threat against B1 was in 2012, that
faded. Though the applicant says he would be targeted by these groups
due to his ethnicity, his religion and his tribal affiliation,
indicated that any other member of his family has ever been targeted for these
reasons (B1 was targeted due to his previous
employment) by any Sunni extremist
group. In the circumstances, the applicant’s claim to fear harm for these
reasons is unpersuasive.
[137] The applicant argues that Shia in Kurram face a moderate risk of harm due
to their faith and has provided a range of country
information which discusses
the lives of Shia in Pakistan. I have considered this material. He says that he
could easily be identified
as a Shia and I accept that this is the case. He
cites the 2022 DFAT report to argue that as a Shia, he would face a risk of a
blasphemy accusation in Pakistan, but this has never happened to the
applicant in the past, and he has not indicated that it has
happened to anybody
he knows. Country information provided by the applicant indicates that while
false blasphemy charges are a real
problem in Pakistan for members of the for
Shia community (and other minorities) this tends to occur in areas where they do
a local majority. I have found this applicant would be returning to a
locality where 80% of the Population are Shia Turis like himself.
In the absence
of other evidence about this issue, I consider that he has only a remote, and
therefore not a real chance of being
falsely accused of blasphemy in
[138] In addition to his claims to fear harm from extremist groups in Pakistan,
in his 2023 Submission, the applicant also cited
DFAT to argue that due to
anti-Pashtun sentiment in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province Pashtuns face a moderate
risk of violence by state
security forces. The applicant asserts that the
Government of Pakistan does not protect the Shia community and that the
instead supports the Taliban. He also claims to fear harm from
Government security forces.
[139] I find these claims to be extremely unpersuasive. Many of the country
information reports before me, including those provided
by the applicant, refer
directly to the presence of Government security forces in the Parachinar area
and to the Government’s
long-term commitment to combating the Taliban and
other Sunni extremist groups. Country information cited by the delegate also
that the Government of Pakistan has made a long-term security
commitment in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province including in the Parachinar
While the Government of Pakistan has adopted various policy positions towards
Sunni extremists, these positions have all aimed
at ending extremist violence.
Many Pakistani troops have been killed fighting the Taliban and other Sunni
extremist groups and in
my view the applicant’s assertions that the
Government of Pakistan has supported the Pakistani Taliban or other Sunni
groups against the Shia community is a misrepresentation of the true
situation. Furthermore, as I have noted earlier, the applicant’s
account of his life in Pakistan makes clear that in the past, he personally had
sought protection from the security forces of
Pakistan. While they were unable
to escort him from Parachinar in 2010 while his wife was pregnant, they did
escort him from Parachinar
when he departed Pakistan in 2012 and travelled to
[140] The applicant’s account of his life in Pakistan acknowledges there
was a government security presence in the Parachinar
area and acknowledges that
he personally was able and willing to seek protection from Government forces. At
his protection visa interview,
he disclosed that in 2012, when he departed
Parachinar, he did so with assistance from the security forces, and that the
Government’s
protection was effective. While I do not wish to overstate
these events, to my mind, all of these factors cast doubt on genuineness
applicant’s claims that the Government supports the Taliban.
[141] I simply do not accept the applicant’s assertions that the
Government supported the Taliban or that there was no security
presence in
Parachinar. Furthermore, the applicant has indicated his family has lived in
Parachinar throughout the decade he has
been in Australia. He has not indicated
that any member of his family, or any Pashtun person he knows has faced problems
security forces in Parachinar, or anywhere else.
[142] At the time he departed Pakistan, the applicant was a citizen in good
standing. His police clearance certificate indicates
he had no problems with the
law in Pakistan and was not wanted for any crime. He has identity documents in
his possession which confirm
his Pakistan citizenship and his former residence
in the Parachinar area, and he had previously sought and obtained a genuine
Passport. Given these factors, it would seem that if returned to
Pakistan the applicant wood be able to resume his life there without
interference or interest from the Pakistani Government. Taking all these factors
into account, I am not satisfied that the
applicant would face a real chance of
harm from the security forces of Pakistan.
[143] Overall, even taking into account the present security situation in
Pakistan, I am not satisfied that this applicant would
face a real chance of any
harm arising from his Pashtun ethnicity, his Shia faith, or his membership of
the Turi Tribe. I am not
satisfied that this applicant was ever of interest to
the Pakistani Taliban or the Islamic State Movement, or Sipah-e Sahaba, or
Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, or any other Sunni extremist group in the past, or that he
would be of interest in the future. I am not satisfied
that he would be targeted
by these groups, or any other group in Pakistan. I am also satisfied that the
applicant would not face
anything more than a remote, and therefore not a real
chance of harm arising from the present security situation in Pakistan.
CONSIDERATION
Ground one – misapplication of the real chance
fear of persecution will be well-founded if there is a
that a person will be persecuted if returned to their country
of origin (see
Chan v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
169 CLR 379).
That does not require a person to positively prove that they will
be persecuted or even that it is probable they will be persecuted
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] FCA 436
(2010) 114 ALD 634
been observed that the chance may still be a real chance even if there is less
than a 50% chance of the persecution occurring
Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v Guo
(1997) 191 CLR 559 at 572). The real chance test is
also not a relative one and does not depend on determining whether the risk in
one place is less severe than the risk in another place (
SZVJE v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCCA 594
this matter, the IAA concluded that the applicant did not face a real chance of
any harm on the basis of his ethnicity or religion.
The IAA found that there was
no more than a remote chance of harm arising from the
“present security
situation in Pakistan”.
The applicant argued that the IAA’s
conclusion that the applicant was not at risk of harm was based on an assessment
immediate situation in Pakistan. In confining itself in this way, the
applicant argued that the IAA failed to engage in a forward-looking
assessment.
is well established that the assessment of the risk faced by an applicant in the
returning country is not confined to the present
circumstances or immediate
future, but by reference to the reasonably foreseeable future (
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] FCA 610
SZGHS v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2007] FCA 1572
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZQKB
[2012] FCA 1189
(2012) 133 ALD 495
AMM19 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2025] FedCFamC2G 159
). Further, as Judge Riley aptly
observed in
AXI21 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services
and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 379 FLR 289 at [14],
“while it may
be difficult, the Authority’s job was to ‘peer into the
future’, as best it was able”.
In written submissions, the
Minister sought to distinguish such authorities from the present case. The
underlying rationale, however,
is unassailable and the Minister did not dispute
that principle.
Court further accepts the Minister’s contention that:
Whether the Authority erred in the manner contended for by the applicant must
ultimately depend on the Court properly and fairly
construing the
Authority’s reasons and findings, such that the case law cited by either
party is only of limited assistance.
That is clearly so. The critical issue is whether the conclusions reached by the
IAA demonstrate that it engaged with the applicant’s
claim to risk harm if
returned to Pakistan. That process requires evidence that the IAA considered
that risk with a focus which extended
forward into the reasonably foreseeable
future beyond the immediacy of the current situation in that country.
can be seen from the IAA’s reasons set out above, the IAA accepted the
following matters about the situation in Pakistan:
(a) Pakistan is
“plagued by a range of security problems”
(b) Armed Sunni extremist groups operated in Pakistan, all of which held an
anti-Shia agenda.
(c) There is a history of community and sectarian violence in the Parachinar
(d) The Pakistan government had for over a decade intervened to try and combat
Sunni extremism throughout the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Province and has maintained a
strong security presence including a security zone within Parachinar city.
(e) The intervention of security forces has reduced the number of security
threats faced by the population.
(f) Government attempts to neutralise the threat posed by the Taliban and other
extremist groups are ongoing.
(g) The applicant’s evidence establishes that he was aware of the security
presence in Parachinar and that his family lives
in the security zone.
(h) The level of sectarian violence in Pakistan has fallen considerably.
(i) The applicant pointed to two attacks which occurred in Kurram in 2022.
(j) Sectarian violence still occurs in the Khyber Pakhtunkhawa Province.
(k) Since the Taliban took control of neighbouring Afghanistan in August 2021,
there was a resurgence in Pakistani Taliban activity
which has led to a spike in
recent sectarian violence. Nevertheless, the level of sectarian violence is well
below previous highs
and lower than when the applicant departed Pakistan.
(l) There are now fewer security incidents, fewer deaths and fewer people
injured by sectarian violence. Pakistan is much safer now
than it was when the
applicant lived there.
(m) The Government of Pakistan has made a long-term security commitment in the
Khyber Pakhtunkhawa Province.
(n) Taking into account the present security situation in Pakistan, the IAA was
not satisfied that the applicant would face any real
chance of harm.
applicant argues that the IAA was only focused on the immediate security
situation in Pakistan and failed to consider, in particular,
whether the spike
in sectarian violence adverted to in the country information carried
implications for the security situation in
the reasonably foreseeable
Minister correctly submitted that it would have been an error if the IAA had not
considered the present security situation in
Pakistan. That, of course, must be
accepted. Furthermore, the Minister argued that, whilst the IAA’s reasons
frequently use
the present tense in its description of security issues in
Pakistan, the following matters suggest that a fair reading of those reasons
indicate that the IAA was considering
“not only the existing situation
in Pakistan, but the likely state of affairs in the future”
(a) The IAA referred to country information indicating that the government had
“long running and ongoing military operations”
provide security to the Shia community.
(b) The government had intervened to combat Sunni extremist violence
“for more than a decade”
(c) Similarly, the IAA referred to the government’s
security commitment”
(d) The IAA found that the applicant was not of interest to Sunni extremist
groups and would not risk any harm in the foreseeable
future because of his
inability to speak Urdu.
(e) The IAA’s conclusion expressly stated (at [195]) (emphasis added):
Overall, taking into account my findings in relation to this applicant’s
ethnicity, his tribe, his religion, his engagement
with political issues, his
family profile, his health and the security situation in Pakistan, I am not
satisfied that if returned
to Pakistan that the applicant would face a real
chance of any harm due to his attempt to gain asylum in Australia, or his long
of residence in a western country, or any other factor now,
foreseeable future
the Minister’s submission has some force, the difficulty is that the
matters which the Minister draws attention to,
for the most part, address a
longstanding historical effort by the Pakistan government. Whilst that may have
a modicum of bearing
on the question of what may occur in the future, it does
not involve the kind of analytical approach the authorities require. The
is conscious of adhering to the longstanding prohibition in respect of
overzealous parsing of reasons. Nevertheless, the passages
relied upon by the
Minister do no more than say that there have been efforts by the government to
curb sectarian violence in the
past and that those efforts have led to a
reduction in that violence. The IAA’s assessment of those government
efforts is expressly
connected to the present security situation. Nowhere is
there any considered analysis as to whether that reduction has resulted in
being a risk of harm situated below a real chance. Nowhere is there any
considered analysis as to whether the IAA connects
those historical efforts to
the reasonably foreseeable future. To suggest that the reference to efforts
is demonstrative of such a considered
assessment asks too much to be read into the use of that word.
Furthermore,
the applicant is correct to say that the IAA made no attempt to reconcile the
accepted recent spike in sectarian violence
with the current government efforts
to curb such violence. This is important in the context of a galvanised Taliban
in neighbouring
Afghanistan.
DXM19 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FedCFamC2G 765
Judge Lucev made the
following findings which are apposite to this matter (at [20]-[21]):
The Authority Decision does not engage in any objective determination as to what
it considers might happen in the future in the Kurram
to which DXM19 might
return. There is a specific failure, for example, to engage with and assess:
(a) whether there might be a recurrence of the long-standing history of cyclical
violence in Kurram, resulting in further major incidents
such as those that
occurred in 2007-2011 resulting in an estimated 1500 deaths in Kurram, and in
Parachinar as recently as the first
half of 2017 (that is less than three years
before the Authority Decision) resulting in 120 deaths;
(b) the possible future threat of violence towards Shia tribes, and in
particular Turis, described in the 2019 DFAT Report as “remain[ing]
significant in Kurram” and associated with the greater presence in Kurram
of the Taliban and Al Qaeda;
(c) whether the fact that there had been no deterioration in the security
situation in Kurram in 2018 reduced the risk of harm from
2019 onwards; and
(d) whether or not, in any event, any significant reduction, or downward trend,
in the risk of harm meant that there was not a real
chance of suffering harm
later in 2019 or in the early to mid 2020s.
The Authority did not engage in the process of actual assessment of the real
chance of harm by reference to the reasonably foreseeable
future. Rather it did
so by reference only to the present situation, and possibly, at best, the
immediate future. In that regard
it fell into error.
in this matter, the IAA failed to engage in any analysis of the security
situation which extended beyond the immediate future.
Given the country
information which was before it and the specific submissions made by the
applicant, that constituted a failure
to apply the real chance test.
applicant also challenged the IAA’s decision on the basis of applying an
impermissible relative application of the real
chance test. This was based on
the IAA considering that the security situation in Pakistan had improved since
the applicant had been
in that country. This, the applicant submitted, was not
the correct question and the IAA should have determined what the actual level
was, in fact, no actual dispute between the parties on the legal position in
this respect. Indeed, the Minister expressly acknowledged
that it would be an
error if the IAA had concluded that there was not a real chance of harm simply
because the chance of harm to
the applicant is lower than it once was.
applicant relied specifically on the following observation by Anderson J in
CJE16 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2019] FCA 1663
(2019) 167 ALD 89
The test of whether there is a real chance that an applicant for protection will
suffer harm in a place is not a relative one, and
it is not determinative
whether the risk is less severe at the relevant point in time than it was
previously. It is plain that the
mere fact that a person might be safer at the
relevant point in time (B) than at an earlier point in time (A) does not entail
the person does not face a real chance of persecution at point in time B.
For example, if point in time A was very unsafe and point
in time B is
relatively safer it might still be the case that a person faces a real chance of
serious harm at point in time B.
Court is satisfied that the IAA did indeed misdirect itself in the way contended
for by the applicant. The reasons are replete
with references to the improving
situation in Pakistan. In particular, the IAA finds at [135]:
In the years that the applicant has lived in Australia, the level of sectarian
violence perpetrated by extremist groups in Pakistan
has fallen considerably.
The applicant has pointed to two attacks which occurred in Kurram in 2022.
However, sectarian violence from
militant groups does still occur in the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Province. Since August 2021, when the Afghani Taliban seized control
Afghanistan, there has been a resurgence in Pakistani Taliban activity. This
has led to a spike in recent sectarian violence attributed
to the Taliban.
However, the level of sectarian violence is still well below previous highs, and
significantly lower that it was
when the applicant departed Pakistan. There are
fewer security incidents, fewer deaths and fewer people injured by sectarian
Pakistan is much safer now that it was when the applicant lived there.
does the IAA take the further analytical step required to consider whether or
not the risk had diminished to a point where
the risk of harm faced by the
applicant might be viewed as remote. There is a temptation to surmise that that
may have been what
the IAA meant by reasoning that Pakistan is
safer. However, this is against the background of finding that there are
fewer security incidents, fewer deaths and fewer incidents
of sectarian violence
without appearing to reach a conclusion that this meant the risk was now remote.
It is true that the IAA’s
conclusion states that the risk is remote.
However, that is no more than an expression of the correct test without
evidencing it
was properly undertaken. The IAA’s finding, taken literally,
accepts that there are security incidents, sectarian violence
and related
deaths. There is no explanation as to whether, or how, a reduction in such harms
could be said to be remote. The Court
accepts it should not be overzealous in
parsing the language used by the IAA. Nevertheless, that does not mean it should
analytical step was taken where there is no basis in the decision to
find that it was.
the Court’s view, the IAA did not approach its task correctly in both of
the ways contended for by the applicant.
Court is also very clearly of the view that the error made by the IAA in this
respect was material. There is no question in the
Court’s mind that there
is a realistic possibility that a proper assessment of the potential future
security situation in Pakistan
could have led to a different outcome. That is
equally the case for an assessment of the reality of the present security
as opposed to the comparative or relative assessment which the IAA
actually undertook.
one is made out.
Ground two – the IAA’s finding on the risk of false
blasphemy charges
two challenged the IAA’s assessment of the applicant’s claim to be
at risk due to the prevalence of falsified blasphemy
accusations against Shias.
The critical part of the IAA’s reasons is set out above and repeated below
for convenience (at [137])
(emphasis added):
The applicant argues that Shia in Kurram face a moderate risk of harm due to
their faith and has provided a range of country information
which discusses the
lives of Shia in Pakistan. I have considered this material. He says that he
could easily be identified as a Shia
and I accept that this is the case. He
cites the 2022 DFAT report to argue that as a Shia, he would face a risk of a
falsified blasphemy
accusation in Pakistan, but this has never happened to the
applicant in the past, and he has not indicated that it has happened to
Country information provided by the applicant indicates that while
false blasphemy charges are a real problem in Pakistan for members
Shia community (and other minorities) this tends to occur in areas where they do
not form a local majority.
I have found this applicant would be returning to
a locality where 80% of the Population are Shia Turis like himself. In the
of other evidence about this issue, I consider that he has only a
remote, and therefore not a real chance of being falsely accused
of blasphemy in
support of its finding that false blasphemy charges tended to occur in areas
where Shias do not form a local majority, the IAA
expressly cited and relied
upon the United Kingdom Home Office ‘Country Policy and Information Note
– Pakistan: Shia
Muslims’ dated July 2021 (
). The UKHO report was before the Court.
The applicant
contended that the IAA erroneously relied on that report in circumstances where
the report did not state that the risk
varied geographically or that it was more
pronounced in areas where Shias formed a minority.
UKHO report considered Pakistan’s blasphemy laws and their application in
some detail. It is useful to set them out in full
(at CB 654-655, 657-659)
(footnotes omitted):
4.2 Blasphemy laws
4.2.1 Section 295 of the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) prescribes the blasphemy
laws. Section 295c notes that: ‘Whoever by words,
either spoken or
written, or by visible representation or by any imputation, innuendo, or
insinuation, directly or indirectly, defiles
the sacred name of the Holy Prophet
Muhammad (peace be upon him) shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for
life, and shall
also be liable to fine.’
4.2.2 Tabulated summary of the blasphemy laws and penalties for breaching them,
as prescribed in the Pakistan Penal Code:
Description
Injuring or defiling place of worship, with intent to insult the religion of any
Up to 2 years imprisonment, or fine, or both
Deliberate and malicious acts intended to outrage religious feelings of any
class by insulting its religion or religious beliefs
Up to 10 years imprisonment, or fine, or both
Defiling, etc., of Holy Quran
Life imprisonment
Use of derogatory remarks, etc., in respect of the Holy Prophet
Death or life imprisonment and a fine
Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings
One year imprisonment, or fine, or both
Use of derogatory remarks, etc., in respect of holy personages
Up to 3 years imprisonment, or fine, or both
Misuse of epithets, descriptions and titles, etc., reserved for certain holy
personages or places
Up to 3 years imprisonment or fine
Person of Quadiana [Ahmadi] group, calling himself a Muslim or preaching or
propagating his faith
Up to 3 years imprisonment and fine
4.2.3 Referring to the blasphemy laws, Christian
Solidarity Worldwide (CSW) stated in its December 2019 report on religious
in Pakistan that:
law itself is poorly defined and has low standards for evidence, as it does not
require specific proof of intent to commit
blasphemy; as a result spurious
accusations are commonplace. It is clear that the blasphemy laws are not a
deterrent – they
are indiscriminately used as a weapon of revenge against
both Muslims and non-Muslims to settle personal scores or to resolve disputes
over money, property or business, under the guise of insults to religion.’
4.2.4 An October 2019 Policy Brief by the US Commission for International
Religious Freedom (USCIRF) noted ‘While the Supreme
Court and other
Pakistani officials have recognized the growing problem of false blasphemy
accusations being used to target religious
minorities, political leaders –
under pressure from certain religious groups – have made no serious steps
to repeal the
blasphemy law.’
4.2.5 Amnesty International reported in August 2020, with regard to Pakistan,
that ‘The broad, vague and coercive nature of
the blasphemy laws violate
the rights to freedom of religion and belief and of opinion and expression. They
have been used to target
some of the most marginalized people in society,
including children, individuals with mental disabilities, members of religious
minorities,
and poorer people.’
5.3 Application of the blasphemy laws
5.3.1 Freedom House reported in its 2021 Country Report for Pakistan that
‘Members of the Shia sect, Christians, and other
religious minorities
remain at risk of blasphemy accusations that can arise from trivial disputes and
escalate to criminal prosecution
and mob violence.’
5.3.2 The USSD IRF Report 2020 noted ‘Human rights groups reported an
increase in blasphemy cases and allegations against members
of the Shia Muslim
community.’ The same source noted there were 82 persons imprisoned on
blasphemy charges as at 2019, adding
that NGOs reported an increase in blasphemy
charges in 2020 – at least 199 persons were charged, the highest number of
seen in a single year, according to the Center for Social Justice (CSJ).
Of those, 70% of cases were against Shia Muslims.
5.3.3 The USSD IRF Report 2020 noted that:
‘On January 30, police arrested two Shia men in Tando Mohammed Khan,
southern Sindh, and charged them with blasphemy. According
to police, the
content they posted on Facebook insulted the companions of Mohammed, which, they
said, infuriated Sunni Muslims.
‘... On August 30, police charged Shia cleric Taqqi Jaffar with blasphemy
for criticizing Mohammed’s companions during
a Karachi Muharram
procession. Jaffar made his remarks in Arabic, which were then aired on a
popular Karachi news station, 24 News
HD. Following complaints by some Sunni
groups, the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority temporarily suspended
24 News from
broadcasting, citing Jaffar’s comments as “hate-
inciting content.”
‘The blasphemy charges against Jaffar were followed by anti-Shia rallies
throughout the country and at least three rallies
in Karachi by Sunni groups on
September 11 and 13 attended by thousands of individuals. Speakers at these
rallies warned Shia of
dire consequences, including beheadings, if they
continued to blaspheme against the Prophet Mohammed’s companions.’
5.3.4 On 5 September 2020, the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP)
expressed concern at a surge in blasphemy cases against
religious minorities,
particularly the Shia community and the potential for ensuing sectarian
violence. According to the report,
anecdotal evidence indicated that over 40
blasphemy cases were registered against Shias in August 2020.
5.3.5 On 16 November 2020, USCIRF released a press statement on the rise in
blasphemy cases leading to mob violence in Pakistan,
stating that:
‘The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) is
troubled by the sharp rise in blasphemy cases and mob violence
in recent months
targeting Shi’a Muslims in Pakistan, particularly in Khyber Pukhtunkhwa
‘... Last week, vigilante students at Kohat University of Science and
Technology, in Kohat district, attempted to lynch an
unnamed Shi’a student
for allegedly posting blasphemous remarks on Facebook. The angry mob beat the
student and charged the
vice-chancellors office, demanding that the student be
expelled from the university or they would kill him. The accused student was
expelled, taken into police custody, and charged with blasphemy under
Pakistan’s Penal Code.’
5.3.6 The media platform Naya Daur, affiliated with the Islamabad-based non-
profit organisation Peace and Justice Network, reported
in September 2020 that,
according to data compiled by a social media user, 42 blasphemy cases were
registered over a single month,
including one against a 3 year-old child, and
that nearly 80% of those cases were against Shia activists and eulogists.
to Naya Daur, reporting in the same month, ‘Authorities have
arrested at least a dozen Shia zakirs and clerics across the country
allegedly making blasphemous statements against some companions of Prophet
Muhammad (PBUH).’
Discrimination, harassment and hate speech
5.3.7 The Guardian reported in October 2020 that over 50 Shia Muslims were
booked under blasphemy and anti-terrorism charges over
the last month.
5.3.8 According to a 2015 report by the International Commission of Jurists
(ICJ), over 80% of blasphemy cases were overturned on
appeal, ‘... with
judges expressly stating in a large majority of such cases that the complaint
was fabricated and spurred
on by personal vendettas.’ The DFAT report
indicated that around 95% of blasphemy cases ended in acquittal, though often
after lengthy periods of detention. The USSD IRF Reports for 2019 and 2020
reported some blasphemy convictions were overturned during
those years, with
others acquitted after the accused had spent years in prison.
5.3.9 Although death sentences continued to be passed for blasphemy, the
authorities have never executed anyone for this offence.
is clear to the Court that the UKHO report relied upon by the IAA did not
support its finding that false blasphemy charges occurred
only in areas where
the Shia community did not form a local majority. The Court put to counsel for
the applicant that that may not
be an error going to jurisdiction if in fact
there was such evidence before the IAA and it had simply referenced the
incorrect country
information. The applicant accepted that would be the case if
there was any such evidence but there was nothing to suggest any alternative
evidence was before the IAA.
the applicant submitted that not only did the UKHO report not support the
particular finding of the IAA, it in fact undermined
that proposition. In that
respect, the applicant pointed to the reference in the UKHO report to a
statement by the U.S. Commission
on International Religious Freedom which noted
a sharp rise in blasphemy cases targeting Shias in the applicant’s
of Khyber Pukhtunkhwa Province.
Minister argued that, whilst the UKHO report was expressly relied upon by the
IAA, that did not mean it was the sole basis for
its finding. With respect, that
submission might be accepted if there was a skerrick of evidence that there was
other such material
before the IAA. However, the Court was referred to no such
evidence and was asked instead to draw an inference.
can be accepted that the IAA was not required to set out every piece of country
information it had regard to. However, in circumstances
where the country
information it cites does not support the finding, and in fact may even
contradict the proposition underpinning
the finding, then it is difficult to
accept that there may have been some other undisclosed country information which
may have supported
the finding.
Minister asked the Court to have regard to the following matters which were said
to arise from the country information before
“Relative to the overall number of Shias in Pakistan, the risk of
being accused and charged with blasphemy is, in general, very
CB 645, [2.4.4].
“It is clear that the blasphemy laws are not a deterrent –
they are indiscriminately used as a weapon of revenge against
both Muslims and
non- Muslims to settle personal scores or to resolve disputes over money,
property or business, under the guise
of insults to religion.”
655, [4.2.3].
“While the Supreme Court and other Pakistani officials have
recognized the growing problem of false blasphemy accusations being
target religious minorities, political leaders – under pressure from
certain religious groups – have made no
serious steps to repeal the
blasphemy law”
: CB 655, [4.2.4].
“They have been used to target some of the most marginalized people
in society, including children, individuals with mental
disabilities, members of
religious minorities, and poorer people”
: CB 655, [4.2.5].
“For further information on the Tahaffuz-e-Bunyad-e-Islam bill, see
the Institute of South Asian Studies (ISAS) October 2020
‘Sectarianism and Censorship in Pakistan: The Punjab
Tahaffuz‐e‐Bunyad-e‐Islam Bill 2020’,
which also noted
‘Although the Bill was passed in the legislature, it has yet to acquire
the Governor of Punjab’s seal
to become law”
“Members of the Shia sect, Christians, and other religious
minorities remain at risk of blasphemy accusations that can arise
from trivial
disputes and escalate to criminal prosecution and mob violence”
657, [5.3.1].
“On January 30, police arrested two Shia men in Tando Mohammed
Khan, southern Sindh, and charged them with blasphemy. According
to police, the
content they posted on Facebook insulted the companions of Mohammed, which, they
said, infuriated Sunni Muslims”
: CB 657, [5.3.3].
“The blasphemy charges against Jaffar were followed by anti-Shia
rallies throughout the country and at least three rallies in
Karachi by Sunni
groups on September 11 and 13 attended by thousands of individuals. Speakers at
these rallies warned Shia of dire
consequences, including beheadings, if they
continued to blaspheme against the Prophet Mohammed’s
companions”
: CB 658, [5.3.3].
“According to a 2015 report by the International Commission of
Jurists (ICJ), over 80% of blasphemy cases were overturned on
appeal, ‘...
with judges expressly stating in a large majority of such cases that the
complaint was fabricated and spurred
on by personal vendettas”
659, [5.3.8].
“Reporting on the surge in blasphemy cases, The Guardian reported
in October 2020 noted that, ‘Bakhtawar Jaffri, a Shia
rights activist in
Punjab, said she had recently filed a police report for anti-Shia hate speech
but it had been ignored. “In
contrast, even the baseless and fake cases
from the other side are being entertained by police,” she said”
CB 663-664, [5.5.10].
this, the Minister submitted that:
The overall picture emerging from the [UK Home Office] report therefore can be
summarised as follows:
(a) False blasphemy charges are made against religious minorities, which are
really disguises of personal vendettas or property or
money disputes against
said minorities. That being the case, it is reasonably open to the Authority to
find that in Parachinar where
the Shia community forms 80% of the community,
Shias are not a minority and therefore the chance of a false blasphemy charge
remote. It can also reasonably be interpreted that in a geographical area
where Shias form the majority, any chance of mob violence
against Shias (arising
from anti-Shia sentiment) because of any false blasphemy charge was also
(b) The case studies involving false blasphemy charges were in Tando Mohammed
Khan, Karachi and Punjabi and not in Parachinar. So
far as the Minister can
tell, there was no case study of a false blasphemy charge made against a Shia
individual in Parachinar.
(c) Similarly, the protests and anti-Shia rallies were not in Parachinar but in
other areas in Pakistan. The Shia activists who were
persecuted were also not in
Parachinar.
Court does not accept that it is reasonable or rational for the IAA to have
drawn those conclusions. The Minister asked the Court
to infer that the
IAA’s reasons should be read to indicate that there was no evidence that
any false blasphemy charges had
been laid specifically in the applicant’s
an open interpretation of what the IAA said. It did not refuse to accept the
claim because there was no evidence that false blasphemy
charges had been laid
against Shias in the applicant’s hometown. It did so because it found that
they were only laid in places
where the Shia were not a majority. It reached
this conclusion on the basis of evidence it said was before it, but in fact was
The finding cannot now be re-branded as something it was not.
IAA made an error in finding that the UKHO report provided an evidentiary basis
for a finding in respect of where false blasphemy
charges against Shia were
likely to be made. There was no such support in the UKHO report. This was used
to completely discount the
applicant’s claim in respect of his risk of
being falsely accused of blasphemy. It was an error going to jurisdiction and it
was material. Had the IAA not made that error, there is a realistic possibility
that it may have accepted there was a risk that the
applicant might be falsely
accused of blasphemy.
two is also made out.
Ground three – the IAA’s consideration of the
applicant’s submissions and country information
three argues that the IAA failed to meaningfully engage with the assessment by
DFAT that Turis face a moderate risk of sectarian
violence from militant groups
arising from their Shia faith. In support of this contention, the applicant
relied upon
BSU20 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services
and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCA 642
, Greenwood J found that, whilst the IAA in that matter had
regard to country information, it had failed to take into account an important
aspect contained within that country information. A critical aspect of the
reasoning in
is that the IAA in that matter
had failed to address the specific and particular submissions put to it by
the applicant. Greenwood
J found (at [47]) (emphasis in
Whilst it is true that the IAA had regard to aspects of the document of 20
November 2019 and country information, it did not specifically
take into account
in its reasoning an important assessment made as at 20 February 2019 that
in Kurrum Agency still face a moderate risk of
sectarian violence from militant groups, because of their Shia faith
[emphasis added]. It is difficult to see how the IAA could reason to a
conclusion of no real chance of the appellant suffering
any harm from the
Taliban or other anti‑Shia Sunni extremists or anyone else now or in the
reasonably foreseeable future if
the appellant were to return to Kurrum Agency,
without addressing two things.
, the express submissions put to
the contrary to the IAA by the appellant as described in these
submissions.
, the assessment as at 20 February 2019 recited
in bold above.
as conceded by the applicant, there is a critical difference between the
circumstances of this matter and
, there was no
indication that the IAA in that matter had given any consideration to the
assessment of risk made by DFAT. Neither
did the IAA in
express submissions made by the applicant in respect of that country
information. That is evidently not the case in this
matter where the IAA
referred to both the DFAT assessment and the applicant’s submissions in
that respect.
Court accepts that the IAA considered the DFAT report and the submissions
advanced by the applicant in that respect. The applicant’s
submission that
the IAA failed to rationally challenge the country information is essentially an
invitation to the Court to substitute
its own assessment of the country
information. The Court accepts the Minister’s submission that it was open
to the IAA to reach
its own conclusion in respect of the risk of harm faced by
the applicant, provided it did so having regard to the submissions and
before it. The Court does not draw an inference that the IAA failed to consider
that material, or to properly engage with
three is not made out.
applicant has succeeded in establishing jurisdictional error.
Accordingly,
the decision will be set aside and the matter will be remitted to the
Administrative Review Tribunal for reconsideration.
I certify that the preceding fifty-nine (59)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 14 November 2025
RTF format (555 KB)
Signed PDF/A format