Own Motion Investigation v Airline [2010] PrivCmrA 12 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
Own Motion Investigation v Airline
[2010] PrivCmrA 12
Subject Heading:
Failure to keep personal information secure
National Privacy Principles 2.1 and 4.1 in Schedule 3 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
An individual booked a flight online. As part of the booking process, they
provided their full name, address, date of birth, financial
information and
flight details. The individual subsequently received an email from the airline,
which contained another traveller’s
itinerary. The details disclosed were
the other traveller’s name, address, financial information, flight details
and the full
name and address of a third individual who booked the flight.
NPP 2.1 provides that an organisation must not use or disclose personal
information about an individual for a purpose other than the
primary purpose of
collection unless one of the exceptions in NPP 2.1(a)-(h) applies.
NPP 4.1 provides that an organisation must take reasonable steps to protect
the personal information it holds from misuse and loss
and from unauthorised
access, modification and disclosure.
The Commissioner commenced an own motion investigation under
section 40(2)
The airline had already acknowledged that the disclosure had occurred and
that the airline was not compliant with NPP 2. Consequently
the Commissioner
focused the investigation on the steps the respondent had in place to prevent
disclosure under NPP 4.1.
The airline’s IT department found that due to an overload of its
server, data from one customer was populated in an itinerary
intended for
another customer.
At the time of the incident the airline had processes in place to protect
personal information from unauthorised disclosure and access.
However, as a
result of this incident the airline introduced new protections to improve IT
security including:
new servers and the regular ‘flushing’ of the database logs to
allow more space on the database
a new testing process where a test email would be sent to the IT department
every hour. The IT department would verify the contents
of the outgoing
the flight itinerary program would be reviewed on a periodic
The Commissioner was of the view that the airline’s
system was not sufficient to comply with NPP 4.1 at the time of the
However, subsequent to the incident and Commissioner’s
investigation the source of the problem had been identified and additional
processes had been put in place to prevent the problem recurring. The
Commissioner was of the view that the steps the airline had
put in place were
reasonable in accordance with NPP 4.1 and therefore ceased the own motion
investigation into the matter.
Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner
December 2010
RTF format (120 KB)
Signed PDF/A format