EHC20 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs [2021] FCCA 2049 (31 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
EHC20 v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCCA 2049
File number:
PEG 278 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE KENDALL
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Protection visa –
decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal – whether Tribunal
adequately assessed applicant’s
claims – whether applicant was
denied procedural fairness – whether Tribunal was “biased”
– no jurisdictional
error – application dismissed.
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Cases cited:
Craig v State of South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
184 CLR 163
DBX18 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCA 897
DQQ17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Haq v Minister for Immigration & Border Protection
[2018] FCCA
Minister for Immigration & Border Protection v Eden
[2016] FCAFC 28
Minister for Immigration & Border Protection v Singh
Minister for Immigration & Border Protection v SZVCH
Minister for Immigration & Citizenship v Li
[2013] HCA 18
Minister for Immigration & Citizenship v SZKRT
Minister for Immigration & Citizenship v SZMDS
Minister for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
185 CLR 259
Minister for Immigration v Jia Legeng
(2001) 178 ALR 421
MZAIB v Minister for Immigration & Border Protection
SAAP v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous
Affairs & Anor
[2005] HCA 24
SZRUI v Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs &
Citizenship
[2013] FCAFC 80
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr A Gerrard
Second Respondent:
Submitting appearance, save as to costs
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Australian Government Solicitor
PEG 278 of 2020
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS
AND CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
Second Respondent
JUDGE KENDALL
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The application be dismissed.
REASONS FOR
JUDGE KENDALL:
1 The applicant is a citizen of Malaysia (Court Book
(“CB”) 23 & 48). He arrived in Australia as the holder of an
Electronic Travel Authority (Class UD) (Subclass 601) visa in December 2015
(CB 54, 97). This visa ceased in February 2016, following
which the applicant
was deemed to be residing in Australia “unlawfully” (CB 54).
2 On 29 August 2016, the applicant applied for a Protection (Class XA)
(Subclass 866) visa (the “visa”) (CB 10-48). The
claimed, in effect, that he left Malaysia because he had significant debts owed
to loan sharks (CB 42-44). Relevantly,
the applicant claimed that he had been
“chased for the money” and the loan sharks had threatened to
“beat him or
hurt him and his family” if he did not re-pay the money
3 On 15 February 2017, a Ministerial delegate refused to grant the applicant
the visa (CB 54-67). The delegate was not satisfied that
the applicant was a
refugee and a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations.
4 On 2 March 2017, the applicant applied for review of the delegate’s
decision at the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (the “Tribunal”)
5 On 27 August 2020, the Tribunal affirmed the decision not to grant the
applicant the visa (CB 149-168).
6 On 25 September 2020, the applicant filed an application for judicial
review of the Tribunal’s decision in this Court (CB
1-6). The application
is brought pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
“Act”). To obtain assistance from this Court, the applicant must
show that the Tribunal has fallen into jurisdictional
TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
7 While this Court is generally reluctant to
“copy and paste” large portions of the Tribunal’s decision
(preferring
instead, where possible, to summarise the Tribunal’s core
findings), at times it is indeed necessary to recite a substantial
the Tribunal’s reasons in order to draw attention, in some detail, to the
Tribunal’s reasoning process and
to properly consider and address the
contentions raised against the Tribunal:
DBX18 v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCA 897
McKerracher J) at [29] to [32].
8 Here, the Tribunal’s decision is lengthy and detailed. It is 20
pages in length and spans 106 paragraphs. Three pages comprise
of relevant
legislative provisions.
9 The Tribunal began by identifying the type of visa under review and noted
that the applicant had been notified of the delegate’s
decision on 17
February 2017 (at [1]-[2]).
10 The Tribunal noted that the applicant was not represented and had appeared
before the Tribunal by telephone on 2 April 2020 and
by videoconference on 5
August 2020 (at [4]). The applicant had the assistance of an interpreter in the
English and Mandarin languages
on both occasions (at [7]). It appears the first
hearing was adjourned because the Tribunal was not satisfied with the quality of
the phone technology during the hearing (CB 121). In this regard, the Tribunal
notes that the applicant did not object to his hearings
being conducted
electronically (at [5]).
11 The Tribunal summarised the criteria relevant to the visa and noted that,
in accordance with Ministerial Direction No. 84, it had
taken account of the
Refugee Law Guidelines, the Complementary Protection Guidelines and country
information assessments (at [8]-[13]).
The Tribunal also outlined the law
relevant to credibility assessments (at [14]-[22]).
12 The Tribunal identified the issue before it to be whether the applicant
“has a well-founded fear of persecution in Malaysia
because he owes money
to loan sharks in Malaysia, or for any other reason, or whether complementary
protection provisions otherwise
apply” (at [23]).
13 The Tribunal then outlined the information before it relevant to the
applicant’s travel history, family and schooling in
Malaysia (at
[28]-[31]).
14 The Tribunal then summarised the applicant’s original claims and
evidence, as follows:
32. At the first hearing the Tribunal explained to the
applicant the documents before it. The Tribunal read to the applicant the
of claims contained in the delegate’s decision record, which are
taken from the applicant’s written application for the
visa. These claims
were as follows:
The applicant
was involved in a multi-level marketing business and a few friends joined his
network. He wanted to contribute more
money to the network and decided to borrow
money from a loan shark.
The applicant
discovered that the business was a scam and they took all the money and ran
away. The “downline” chased
the applicant for money and the
applicant could not even repay the loan sharks.
The applicant
feared he would be threatened and beaten if he could not pay their money.
If the applicant
returns to Malaysia, all the “downline” in the network would hunt
him down, and the loan sharks will
ask for their money back.
In Malaysia the
applicant was beaten by his “downline” as they wanted their money.
The loan sharks also threatened the
applicant’s family if he did not repay
The loan shark
told the applicant not to report the matter to the authorities or else they
would hurt the applicant’s family.
The loan sharks are involved in
“gangsterism” and are not afraid of the authorities.
The loan sharks
have gang members throughout the country and they would track the applicant
33. The Tribunal then noted that, in response to this summary, the applicant
told the Tribunal:
Actually before I came to
Australia a friend of mine said I can help you apply for a 3 year working visa
and he applied the visa on
my half. But I didn’t know the working visa is
a protective visa.
15 The Tribunal then asked the applicant whether he “was talking about
the application for the visa made on 26 August 2016 in
Australia” and the
applicant responded ‘yes’. Further, the applicant told the Tribunal
that “back then a
friend of a friend told him they could help him apply
for a working visa in Australia”. The applicant then borrowed money in
Malaysia and “it took a while for the person to apply for the visa for
him” (at [34]).
16 The Tribunal asked whether it had provided “a fair summary of [the
applicant’s] claims”. The applicant responded
“No I thought
the visa was a working visa.” When the Tribunal then asked if what the
Tribunal had outlined were not his
claims for protection the applicant responded
that “he didn’t know the actual visa was a protection visa”
17 The Tribunal asked the applicant if he did, in fact, have any claims for
protection. The applicant asked, if he was not successful
in his application
for the visa, whether the Tribunal could allow him ‘a little more time to
pay the money back to the people
in Malaysia’. The Tribunal clarified that
it was only able to assess if the applicant met the criteria for the visa (at
18 The Tribunal then asked why the applicant was seeking a protection visa
(at [36]). The applicant responded:
Can I put it this way, can I say the reason for the
protection visa is to avoid the debt chasings from all my friends and family in
Malaysia and it has been a while since I sent money home and it is really hard
19 The Tribunal queried whether what the applicant was saying was that he
wanted a protection visa so he didn’t have to return
friends and family in Malaysia (at [37]). The applicant replied:
I was actually thinking if it is possible stay here a
little bit longer so I can pay back the debt so if now I am going back to
they are just chasing me up for money and that will not be a good
experience for me.
20 The Tribunal queried whether the applicant intended to return to Malaysia
and the applicant responded “yes” (at [38]).
21 The Tribunal then asked the applicant if there was anything he
“needed to change in his application for protection”.
The applicant
said “yes” and explained (at [39]):
I want to make my change because I wasn’t aware it
was a protection visa, I want to make a change to the reason. What I meant
similar I just told the Tribunal, I want to stay a little bit longer and want
them to stop them chasing them from money but I
have to stay here to make the
money first.
22 The Tribunal then extracted the written submissions the applicant provided
to the Tribunal after the first hearing (at [40]).
Those submissions provided
as follows:
] from Malaysia. I hold tourist
visa came to Australia on [
The reason I came to Australia is because someone introduced me that I can apply
for an Australian work visa and can work legally
in Australia for three
The customer of the optical shop I working introduced me to a person named
] said that he has a friend named [
] who works in
Australia with a work visa. His friend can help get a work visa and introduce
] also wants to work in Australia, so he lobbied me work in
Australia together.
] friend tell us we need to pay 7000 Australian dollars (about
22,000 MYR) each person for apply Australian work visa.
Because of working in optical shop and get low salary, I respond
] came to Australia together I took out the 4,000 MYR that I had
saved, and borrowed from my relatives, and finally made up the total
MYR.(include flight ticket fee)
After that, we came to Perth, Western Australia. I took a taxi with
] to his friend's house. After meeting, [
for me to live in a house already have 16 person live inside (36 ellerby way
koondoola) rented by a Malaysian illegal farm
agent named Eagle, and
] lived elsewhere.
The second day [
] bring us to supermarket buy some daily
third day we were arranged to pick cherry tomatoes and do some maintenance jobs
on the farm
fourth day [
] talked about the work visa with us, both of us need
to pay him each person 4000 Australian dollars first, since [
feet have been twisted in Malaysia he cannot do heavy work, he want to think
Just me respond [
] want to apply Australia work visa, I pay
] 4000 dollar. [
] just give me few pages from the
form to sign and took some details from me. He never show me the complete form
even I ask.
I get work visa after my tourist visa expired and then I pay 3000 dollar to
] just stay in Australia 2.5 month and then go back to
After I pay [
] I cannot contact him again, he already move to
other place and changed mobile number.
After that, I studied the work visa I got. That is not a work visa, is a
bridging visa under visa protection. I can’t do nothing
after that,
because I already waste a lot of money to apply the wrong visa, and I just get
bridging visa c with no work rights. I
was cheat by [
I hope you can give me the opportunity to pay off my debts in Australia and
I signed up for the Australian driver’s license before and I have already
spent a lot of money to learn to drive. I can take
the road test in this
I hope sir can give me a time to take the road test and I hope you can give a
times to pay off my debts in Australia and Malaysia,
before cancel my visa.
(errors in original)
23 The Tribunal noted that it informed the applicant that all aspects of his
claim were in issue before the Tribunal, including whether
he satisfied each of
the criteria of
ss 36(2)(a)
(2)(aa) of the Act (at [41]).
24 The Tribunal then noted as follows:
42. At the second hearing the Tribunal asked the
applicant again about the claims made in the application, summarised in the
decision. The applicant confirmed that the claims as expressed
in the application were not correct. He said that ‘
the first part about
the loan shark is not correct’
. He said he had a customer in Malaysia
who introduced him to someone who said they could get a three-year working visa
in Australia.
He said he was told that to make the application for the working
visa he needed to pay $7000 AUD. He then discussed this with a friend
decided to come to Australia together. He said he then started to borrow money
from friends which he added to the about
$4000 Malaysian dollars he had in
savings which added up to the $7000 AUD he needed.
25 The Tribunal continued to summarise the applicant’s evidence, noting
that the applicant told the Tribunal that his friend
had told him that he could
work legally in Australia and it was only when he received an email regarding
his bridging visa in 2016
that he knew that it was not lawful for him to work.
Further, when he found out that “the application” was actually for
protection visa, he thought that he had to pay back the debt and had “no
choice but to work, even though illegally”
26 The Tribunal then noted that, when it put it to the applicant that it had
concerns regarding his credibility and his willingness
to disregard immigration
laws by choosing to work when his visa did not permit him to do so, the
applicant told the Tribunal that
he had looked for information and did not
27 The Tribunal continued:
48. The Tribunal explained that it is responsibility of
an applicant to specify all particulars of their claim to be a person in
of whom Australia has protection obligations and to provide sufficient evidence
to establish the claim. It is also the responsibility
of an applicant to provide
truthful and accurate information in support of a visa application. The
applicant said that he understood
and that he had made a 'big mistake'.
49. The Tribunal noted that the fact the applicant had provided information in
support of his application in the form of claims
which were not accurate may
cause a concern regarding the credibility of information he provided in support
of the visa application.
He said he understood this. The Tribunal clarified with
the applicant that he had made an application for a bridging visa with work
rights on his own and he said that he had.
50. The Tribunal asked whether the applicant planned to return to Malaysia and
he said that ‘
if I earn money and pay back debt I would love to go
’. The Tribunal asked the applicant to describe the experiences in
Malaysia that made him fear returning to where he lived before
Australia and he said
‘I cannot pay back money and those people
were chasing me all the time. Other thing is I am also worried if I ever go back
economic situation is very bad
28 The Tribunal then summarised the applicant’s evidence about
“the loan”, as follows:
51. The Tribunal asked who it was the applicant had
borrowed money from. He told the Tribunal he borrowed money from his aunty,
], the sister of his father. He said she was living and working
in Singapore. The Tribunal queried whether the applicant's aunt had
pursued him
for repayment of the loan and he said, ‘
She constantly went to talk to
my mum because my mum is working in Singapore
.’ He said his aunt also
worked in Singapore. The Tribunal asked whether his aunt had threatened him or
his mother and he said
that when she talks to his mother she (his mother) tries
to help him out by paying back a little bit of the money. He said he couldn't
give an exact figure on the amount he borrowed but as he needed $7000 AUD he
thought it was about $6000 AUD. The Tribunal asked how
much of the loan his
mother had repaid and he said he thought he owed about $3000AUD.
52. The Tribunal asked again whether the applicant's aunt had made any threats
to him or his family and he said he couldn't exactly
say but that his mother
feels intimidated and bothered
’ by his aunt. The Tribunal
asked what the applicant feared his aunt may do if he returned to Malaysia and
I guess she might come to me and ask me pay the money all at
.’ The Tribunal asked whether he thought he could arrange a
payment schedule with his aunt and he said ‘
Tribunal queried what the applicant thought his aunt would do if he could not
repay the debt and he said ‘
probably say nasty things and say things in
front of the other relatives. And probably she would try and force me to pay the
’. He said she would do this by coming to his home and scolding
53. The Tribunal discussed with the applicant that while it could appreciate
this might be embarrassing and unpleasant it was difficult
to see how his aunt
scolding him in family would amount to serious or significant harm. He said he
understood and his only intention
was to be able to pay the debt.
54. The Tribunal noted the applicant's mother has been paying the debt off for
the applicant and queried if the members of his family
would be able to assist
him to pay off the loan and the applicant said that his brother and sister earn
very little money and could
not help him.
55. The Tribunal queried if the applicant had been paying off the debt himself
and the applicant said that previously he had been
able to pay of around $10000
Malay dollars (Ringgit) but at the moment he cannot pay rent or food and has to
ask his parents to pay
56. The Tribunal queried why if he is unemployed in Australia the applicant
wouldn't return to Malaysia and he said, ‘
I was just thinking to stay a
bit longer and see how the situation would be, maybe getting
29 The Tribunal then explained that it was required to put certain adverse
information to the applicant that appeared in the relevant
Departmental file (at
[57]). That information related to the applicant’s submission to the
Department that he had sought help
from a person from Malaysia to apply for the
Bridging visa and had paid this person $1200 (at [58]). The Tribunal explained
this information was relevant because the applicant had told the Tribunal
that he had paid $7000 in two instalments of $3000 and
$4000 and he had
“borrowed money in Malaysia to pay for this” (at [59]).
30 The Tribunal continued:
60. The applicant commented that the first time he
mentioned the amount he said it was $1200 AUD but ‘
at that time I
wasn’t telling the full truth of the fact to the member
said that at the time of the first hearing he was ‘a bit concerned what
would happen later on’. He said the
written submission he made following
the first hearing was ‘
all the information I want to let the member
know. All the things I want to say, included in my statement
61. The Tribunal clarified that the information it put to him was information
provided to the Department with respect to the Bridging
visa application, not
information provided at the first hearing. The Tribunal asked why the applicant
would provide different information
to the Department. The applicant said that
the purpose of that application was to obtain work rights so he didn’t
had to provide all the information. The Tribunal queried why he would
provide information that was incorrect or untruthful and the
applicant said that
he made a mistake because he didn’t know the procedures or that
everything goes on in this kind of way
62. The Tribunal queried if the applicant was saying he didn’t know he had
to provide truthful information and he said, ‘
yes I have applied for
the working rights for 4 times and I was thinking I would make some amendment
each time and try to get approved
31 The Tribunal then noted as follows:
63. The Tribunal did not accept the applicant’s
explanation for having provided an earlier inconsistent account of his
application
for the protection visa and his arrangement with [
which provided a significantly smaller figure for the amount paid to the person
who assisted him. The inconsistency and the lack
of any reasonable explanation
for it, leads the Tribunal to have concerns regarding the applicant’s
account of the debt and
the amounts paid with respect to lodging the visa
application...
32 The Tribunal then considered the relevant country information contained in
the delegate’s decision and in the latest Department
of Foreign Affairs
and Trade (“DFAT”)
Country Information Report: Malaysia
13 December 2019 (at [64]).
33 The Tribunal outlined the country information in relation to loan sharks
(at [65]-[71]).
34 In this regard, the Tribunal determined as follows:
65. However, the Tribunal notes that in evidence before
the Tribunal the applicant did not claim to have borrowed money from loan
in Malaysia or to have been in debt to anyone other than his aunt who had not
made any threats to the applicant or his family
but had been repaid in part by
the applicant’s mother. The applicant told the Tribunal he did fear his
aunt may seek repayment
from him on return to Malaysia and may seek to force him
to repay her by ‘scolding him’ in front of the family.
66. Further, the Tribunal considered the relevant country information and finds
that the country information considered against the
applicant’s
circumstances did not establish any basis on which the applicant may face harm
on return to Malaysia under the
refugee or complementary protection
35 The Tribunal then outlined the country information regarding the Malaysian
economy (at [72]-[75]). The Tribunal put it to the applicant
that the country
information suggested that the applicant would be able to obtain employment in
Malaysia to support himself and service
his debt (at [73]).
36 The Tribunal noted that the applicant gave evidence to the Tribunal that
“he agreed” but queried, if he could not “pass
this hearing
and reach a favourable decision on [his] case”, whether the Tribunal could
“consider that he still had debts
in Australia and so needed a longer time
to stay in Australia to pay those debts” (at [73]).
37 The Tribunal also noted that the applicant did not raise any claim to fear
harm on return to Malaysia with respect to an Australian
loan (at [75]).
38 The Tribunal then considered the applicant’s claims as detailed in
his original application for protection and his subsequent
application to the
Tribunal, individually and cumulatively (at [76]). Relevantly, the Tribunal
determined as follows:
77. The Tribunal expressed to the applicant credibility
difficulties with some aspects of his evidence, in particular his inconsistent
evidence regarding the amounts he had paid to [
] and the fact he
was in the country unlawfully for a period and, on his own evidence, had been
working unlawfully. While the Tribunal
found that the applicant genuinely
desires to remain in Australia for economic reasons, the Tribunal was concerned
that the delay
in seeking protection was not consistent with a genuinely held
well-founded fear of persecution on return to Malaysia or with a claim
left Malaysia to seek protection in Australia due to harm or threats of
78. Further the Tribunal found the applicant’s evidence regarding when he
discovered he was in the country unlawfully and whether
he was able to work in
Australia was inconsistent and implausible. He initially said he engaged
] to apply visa with work rights once he arrived in Australia.
However he commenced working a week after arriving while on a tourist
many months before he applied for the protection visa. He later said he
didn’t know he didn’t have work rights
until he received notice from
the Department in 2016. However, he continued working as he has ‘
choice but to work even though illegally
’. While the Tribunal is
prepared to accept the applicant may have been confused about the nature of the
protection visa application
the Tribunal finds the applicant’s claim to
have be under the impression he could work while on his tourist visa was
inconsistent
with his evidence he paid [
] to apply for a visa in
Australia so he would have the right to work.
79. On the basis of the evidence the Tribunal accepts the applicant paid money
to a third person to assist him with making an application
for a visa which
would give him work rights. The Tribunal also accepts the applicant did not
intend to apply for a protection visa
but thought he was applying for a work
visa. However, the inconsistencies in the evidence regarding the amounts paid to
] and the fact this account was not raised in the original
application, cause the Tribunal not to accept the applicant’s account
these transactions or the claim that he borrowed money from friends and family
in Malaysia.
80. The Tribunal does not accept the applicant paid $7000 AUD to
]. Giving the applicant the benefit of the doubt, the Tribunal
accepts that the applicant may have paid the a fee of $1200 AUD to
a person to
assist with his application, as indicated to the Department in 2016, the year he
says the payment was made. The Tribunal
accepts this figure as more credible on
the basis it was given at a time relatively close to the time the payment was
said to have
been made and in a context where the applicant was seeking the
right to work rather than attempting to establish a claim for protection.
considered all the information before it, the Tribunal finds that the applicant
exaggerated the amount he paid for assistance
in applying for the visa in order
to strengthen his claims for protection and to provide a rationale for the
claims that he loaned
money in Malaysia in relation to which he had outstanding
debts which placed him at risk on return.
39 The Tribunal accepted that the applicant had borrowed money from his aunt
to assist with the costs of moving to Australia but did
not accept that he
borrowed money from anyone else, including loan sharks (at [81]).
40 The Tribunal did not accept that the applicant was at any risk of serious
harm from his aunt (at [82]).
41 The Tribunal also noted the applicant’s evidence that he had not
been threatened by, and would not be harmed by, his aunt
or his family members
and the applicant indicated that he might be able to negotiate a repayment
schedule with his aunt (at [83]).
42 The Tribunal then highlighted that the applicant had not provided any
corroborative supporting evidence of any debts owed in Malaysia
serious harm he might face due to the loan from his aunt (at [84]).
43 The Tribunal was concerned that there were significant inconsistencies in
the applicant’s account of the circumstances of
having made the
application and having taken loans in Malaysia to facilitate the application.
This included having initially suggested
he had paid someone $1200 to make the
application on his behalf and later claiming he had paid $7000 to that person
44 Overall, the Tribunal formed the view that applicant had embellished
aspects of his account of the loans he claimed to have taken
in Malaysia
“in order to strengthen his claims for protection” (at [85]).
45 The Tribunal did not accept that the applicant would face a real chance of
serious harm amounting to persecution as a result of
the loan. The Tribunal gave
weight to the following factors in reaching this conclusion (at [86]):
at the Tribunal
hearings the applicant claimed only to have borrowed money from his aunt and
said his claims to have borrowed from
a loan shark were not true;
the applicant
left Malaysia more than four years ago;
neither he nor
his family members have been harmed or threatened by his aunt;
the applicant
did not articulate any fear harm on return to Malaysia from his aunt or anyone
else with respect to loans taken out
in Malaysia or Australia, other than being
asked to repay the loan by his aunt and being scolded in front of his family if
the applicant
agreed he could work out a payment plan with his aunt and his mother is working
in Singapore and has been making payments
on the loan on his
46 The Tribunal accepted that, if the applicant returns to Malaysia, it is
plausible that his aunt may request repayment of the loan.
However, the Tribunal
did not accept the applicant’s claims that there is a real chance that he
will face serious harm from
his creditors on his return to Malaysia. Overall,
the Tribunal determined that the applicant came to Australia to seek employment,
not because he feared serious harm from a loan shark, his aunt or any other
person (at [87]).
47 The Tribunal continued:
88. Having considered all the circumstances of the
applicant’s claims regarding debts, his delay in seeking protection and
credibility
concerns regarding his claimed payments for visa assistance in
Australia (as the reason for seeking the loan), the Tribunal finds
the applicant
does not have a subjectively held well-founded fear of persecution on his return
to Malaysia.
89. In any event, even if the applicant held such a fear, were the
applicant’s aunt to seek to enforce the debt, the Tribunal
consider that the applicant’s fear of persecution is well-founded. The
Tribunal has considered relevant country information
and while it accepts that
the country information reflects that predatory lending practices in Malaysia
can be associated with violence
and crime, it also finds that the Malaysian
police and government authorities have taken, and continue to take,
prosecutorial action
against such practices and violence, arresting large
numbers of illegal and or violent money lenders in actions across the country.
Further, the Tribunal accepts there are organisations such as the MCA who offer
assistance to individuals and businesspeople in circumstances
such as the
applicant has described and that such services may be available to assist the
applicant on return to Malaysia.
90. Moreover, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant would be able to
access effective protection measures should he return
and receive threats in
relation to loans in Malaysia. While the Tribunal acknowledges that the 2019
DFAT report identifies some problems
with corruption in the Royal Malaysian
Police (RMP) force, it is generally described as professional, and there is no
that assistance from the RMP would be withheld from the applicant if
reported incidents of threats or harm to the police. The DFAT
report refers to
the fact that the RMP have in fact taken action against loan sharks, including
fining and prosecuting them. The
Tribunal considers that this meets the
requirements in relation to
regarding effective state protection being
taken to be available where a person can access protection, that protection is
and in the case of protection provided by the relevant state, that
protection consists of an appropriate criminal law (specifically,
legislation
addressing the activities of loan sharks), and a reasonably effective police
48 Overall, the Tribunal did not accept that the applicant had established
that there was any basis on which it could be satisfied
that the applicant faced
a real chance of suffering serious harm in Malaysia from a loan shark, his aunt
or any other person now
or in the reasonably foreseeable future (at [91]).
49 The Tribunal also considered the applicant’s claims that he would
suffer economic hardship if he returned to Malaysia and
determined as
92. The Tribunal has also considered the
applicant’s claim that he will suffer economic hardship if returned to
Malaysia. The
Tribunal notes that the applicant was previously able to find work
before coming to Australia. While it acknowledges that work in
Malaysia may pay
lower wages than he could earn in Australia were he employed here, the Tribunal
notes that the applicant has family
support in Malaysia and has been receiving
support from his mother in paying the loan. The Tribunal finds the applicant
family support on return to Malaysia.
93. Seeking economic benefits in another country in and of themselves do not
give rise to a well-founded fear of harm for the purposes
of the refugee
criteria. The Tribunal finds based on credible country information discussed at
the hearing that the economic circumstances
in Malaysia are generally not such
as would constitute serious harm. Further, the applicant provided no evidence of
any particular
circumstance applying to him which would lead him to face a real
chance of serious harm on this basis on account of his race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion. The
applicant did not claim to fear harm on any of those
bases. There is no
information before the Tribunal to suggest that the applicant will be subjected
to harm on his return to Malaysia
for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
paragraph 5J(1)(a) of the Act. In particular he has not raised any basis on
economic hardship he claimed he will suffer arises by reason of race,
religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group
or political
94. In any event, the Tribunal finds that poor economic circumstances in
Malaysia do not, in the absence of other considerations,
give rise to a
cognisable, well-founded fear of harm, for the purposes of the refugee criteria.
In this respect, the Tribunal refers
specifically to
of the Act, relating
to a well-founded fear of persecution in a country. In particular, the
requirement that persecution must involve
systematic and discriminatory conduct.
Generalised economic circumstances in a country do not meet the requirement of
and discriminatory conduct as required by
of the Act, in
the absence of other considerations. The Tribunals find that the applicant has
not provided any evidence that the
economic circumstances which he referred to
in his claims, amount to systematic and discriminatory conduct with respect to
him. Accordingly,
and having regard to the applicant’s individual
circumstances and the country information regarding the economic circumstances
in Malaysia, the Tribunal finds that the applicant would not face a real chance
of serious harm on return to Malaysia now or in the
reasonably foreseeable
future on this basis.
50 Having considered the applicant’s claims individually and
cumulatively, the Tribunal was not satisfied that that the applicant
a real chance of serious harm now or in the reasonably foreseeable future if he
returned to Malaysia (at [95]).
51 The Tribunal then considered complementary protection under
s 36(2)(aa)
the Act and determined as follows:
98. The test which the Tribunal must apply is a
forward-looking test, namely, whether the applicant faces a real risk of
significant
harm in the reasonably foreseeable future on return to Malaysia. The
Tribunal finds that the applicant has not been threatened or
harmed with respect
to loans owed to his aunt. He has family in Malaysia with whom he maintains
has previously provided financial support for
him when needed, including with respect to meeting loan repayments. His brother
working in Singapore and his sister is working in Malaysia. His aunt provided
him with financial support in the form of the loan
when the applicant sought
assistance from her. Further the applicant has worked in Malaysia and Australia.
He has family members
working in Malaysia and Singapore. The Tribunal finds
based on the applicant's evidence and circumstances he would have family support
and prospects for employment in Malaysia or Singapore. This combination of facts
leads the Tribunal to find that the applicant does
not face a real risk of
significant harm on return to Malaysia.
99. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal has found there is no real
chance of the applicant suffering serious harm if returned
to Malaysia. In
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZQRB
[2013] FCAFC, the Full
Federal Court held that the ‘real risk’ test imposes the same
standard as the ‘real chance’
test applicable to the assessment of
‘well- founded fear’ in the Refugee Convention definition. The
Tribunal notes that
this applies equally to the assessment of
‘well-founded fear’ for the purposes of
To the extent that
that the definitions of ‘serious harm’ and ‘significant
harm’ differ, the Tribunal is
satisfied that economic hardship falling
short of denial of the ability to subsist does not constitute ‘significant
of the kind contemplated by
100. Noting the findings the Tribunal has already detailed, relating to the
applicant’s claims, it follows that the Tribunal
is not satisfied that
there are substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the applicant
being removed from Australia to Malaysia, that
there is a real risk that he would suffer significant harm, now or in the
foreseeable future, from any person or for any
52 On the basis of the above, the Tribunal concluded that, taking the
applicant’s claims individually and cumulatively, at their
highest they do
not meet the required thresholds under either the refugee assessment criteria or
the alternative complementary protection
assessment criteria (at [102]); the
applicant is not a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under
of the Act (at [103]);
and, the applicant is not a person in respect of whom
Australia has protection obligations under
s 36(2)(aa)
of the Act (at
53 The Tribunal affirmed the delegate’s decision not to grant the
applicant a protection visa (at [106]).
PROCEEDINGS IN THIS COURT
54 The application for judicial review filed on 25
September 2020 contains nine “grounds of review” as follows:
1. I, [ECH20], applied for a protection visa on 26
August 2016.
2. On 17 February 2017, my application for a protection visa was refused by the
Delegate of the Minister.
3. I applied to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for a merits review of the
4. I appeared before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal trying to explain my
5. On 27 August 2020, the decision of the Delegate of the Minister was affirmed
and the refusal was upheld.
6. I do not think that my position, situation or circumstances have been
adequately assessed for the visa.
7. I think I am entitled to give my thoughts and reasoning for my position.
8. I have relevant matters to discuss that I hope the court will take into
consideration.
9. I feel that I have not been listened to and do not understand why my visa
was refused and would like a chance to put forward
my side of the
55 On 25 September 2020, the applicant filed an affidavit sworn on 23
September 2020. That affidavit attached a copy of the Tribunal’s
but did not raise anything that can be interpreted to be a further ground of
56 The applicant was given an opportunity to file any amended application,
supporting affidavits and written submissions. No further
materials were
57 The materials before the Court thus include the application for judicial
review filed on 25 September 2020, correspondence from
the Minister
confirming that the applicant had been sent the Court Book and the
Minister’s written submissions (marked as Exhibit
1), a Court Book
numbering 168 pages (marked as Exhibit 2) and written submissions filed by the
Minister on 11 August 2021.
58 On 20 August 2021, the applicant advised chambers that he could not attend
in person as he was suffering from dental inflammation
and was experiencing cold
symptoms. The Court granted leave for the applicant to appear electronically.
No objection or concerns
were raised in this regard. The applicant appeared
electronically on 26 August 2021. He did so without legal representation.
the applicant appeared via Microsoft Teams. That proved to be
problematic as the applicant’s screen seemed “blurred”.
applicant then reconnected and appeared via telephone. Again, no objections were
raised in this regard and the Court is satisfied
that the applicant was able to
engage with the Court and present his arguments without difficulty. The
applicant was assisted by
an interpreter in the Mandarin and English languages.
The Court confirmed with him that he had a copy of the Court Book and the
written submissions with him.
59 Noting the remarks of the Federal Court in
DQQ17 v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] FCA 784
that it is usually
appropriate for an unrepresented applicant to be given an opportunity to explain
orally the matters that are said
to give rise to an appeal (or application for
review), the Court gave the applicant an opportunity to outline orally what he
the Tribunal “did wrong”.
60 To assist the applicant, the Court explained that this Court can only turn
its attention to the issue of jurisdictional error in
the Tribunal’s
decision. The Court explained that the possible categories of jurisdictional
error are not exhaustive and sometimes
overlap. For migration decisions of this
sort, however, they most commonly include (but are not limited to) the following
categories:
(a) where the decision-maker identifies the wrong issue
or asks the wrong question:
Craig v State of South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(b) where the decision-maker ignores relevant material:
(c) where the decision-maker relies on irrelevant material:
(d) where the decision-maker fails to follow mandatory procedures:
Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs & Anor
[2005] HCA 24
(e) where the decision-maker fails to consider the entirety of an
applicant’s claims (or integers of the claims) made:
Minister for
Immigration & Citizenship v SZKRT
[2013] FCA 317
(f) where the decision-maker shows actual or apprehended bias:
Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs & Citizenship
”)at [2]; and
(g) where the decision is illogical, irrational or unreasonable:
Minister for
Immigration & Citizenship v SZMDS
[2010] HCA 16
”) at [131];
Minister for Immigration &
Citizenship v Li
[2013] HCA 18
”) at [26]-[28];
Minister for Immigration & Border Protection v Singh
[2014] FCAFC 1
61 It was also explained that this Court cannot review the merits of the
Tribunal’s decision or grant the applicant the visa
that he seeks. Rather,
the role of the Court is restricted to determining if the Tribunal made a
material error in arriving at the
decision it arrived at:
Minister for
Immigration & Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
(1996) 185 CLR 259 at
62 Against this background, the applicant outlined concerns he had with the
Tribunal’s approach and its decision. In effect,
the applicant
highlighted three areas “of concern”. First, the applicant seemed
to suggest that the Tribunal had overlooked
relevant evidence or seemed
reluctant to address some evidence. Second, the applicant suggested that the
Tribunal was “biased”
because, in effect, it appeared to him that
the Tribunal had “already made up its mind”. Third, the applicant
what is arguably a procedural fairness issue – that being that he
was not given an opportunity to speak and advance his case.
63 These oral submissions are addressed below when addressing the
applicant’s “grounds of review”.
CONSIDERATION
64 In its duty to assist self-represented litigants,
the Court has interpreted the applicant’s grounds of review as broadly
possible to ensure that, to the extent that legal error of any sort is
identified, it can be scrutinised:
MZAIB v Minister for Immigration &
Border Protection
[2015] FCA 1392
”). The Court
has also considered for itself whether any error arises in the Tribunal’s
decision (as per the decision
65 Grounds 1 to 5 are factual and outline the procedural history of the
applicant’s protection visa application. No identifiable
error arises in
this regard. These grounds of review also refer to the delegate’s
decision. This Court has no jurisdiction
to review the delegate’s
decision: the Act,
and (4). The Tribunal’s decision on review
“cures” any error in the delegate’s decision or processes:
Minister for Immigration & Border Protection v SZVCH
[2016] FCAFC 127
. Hence, no error (of a sort that this Court can address) is
identified in this regard.
66 Similarly, grounds 7 and 8 do not allege jurisdictional error. They are
statements of fact or an indication that the applicant
wishes to plead his
67 Only grounds 6 and 9 of the applicant’s “grounds of
review” can, taken at their highest, be read to allege jurisdictional
error. The Court again notes that these grounds of review provide as
6. I do not think that my position, situation or
circumstances have been adequately assessed for the visa.
9. I feel that I have not been listened to and do not understand why my visa
was refused and would like a chance to put forward
my side of the
68 In relation to grounds 6 and 9 the Minister submits as follows in written
submissions dated 11 August 2021:
33. Insofar as the applicant alleges at grounds 6 and 9
that his claims or evidence have not been adequately assessed or heard or
understood, the first respondent’s submits that the grounds must fail for
the following reasons:
33.1. It is apparent from the
Tribunal’s statement of reasons for decision that it thoroughly considered
the applicant’s
evidence. The Tribunal held 2 hearings and carefully
considered the applicant’s written submissions. The Tribunal provided
detailed account of the evidence to which it had regard: [32]-[39],
33.2. The applicant was given a real and meaningful opportunity to present
evidence and arguments. In proper compliance with
of the Act, the Tribunal
invited the applicant to give evidence and present arguments in relation to the
issues arising in relation
to the decision under review:
SZBEL v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2006] HCA 63
231 ALR 592.
33.3. The applicant was assisted by an interpreter in the English and Mandarin
languages and there is no evidence or suggestion
that the applicant was not able
to successfully give oral evidence.
33.4. The Tribunal put to the applicant adverse information for comment,
pursuant to
of the Act, to which the applicant responded at the hearing.
No error is disclosed in the Tribunal’s approach:
SZBYR v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2007] HCA 26
(2007) 235 ALR
34. It cannot be said that the applicant was not
afforded a meaningful hearing, or that the Tribunal failed to adequately assess
his claims and evidence.
69 For the reasons that follow, the Court accepts the Minister’s
submissions that no error arises in the Tribunal’s decision
as suggested
in grounds 6 and 9 or, indeed, generally.
70 Ground 6 states:
I do not think that my position, situation or
circumstances have been adequately assessed for the
71 The Court interprets this ground of review as suggesting that the Tribunal
did not properly address all of the evidence before
it or as suggesting that the
Tribunal’s decision is “unreasonable”.
72 In relation to the assessment of the evidence before it, the applicant has
not outlined what evidence, in particular, was not “assessed”
73 The Tribunal’s reasons for decision spans 20 pages and 106
paragraphs. The decision is lengthy, forensic and, indeed, a template
effective decision writing that others would do well to emulate.
74 The Tribunal carefully outlined the applicant’s claims and evidence
at paragraphs [32] to [62] of its reasons. It considered
in detail the following
evidence and the applicant’s responses to questions that were put to him
(a) the applicant’s summary of claims as per the
delegate’s decision (at [32]-[39]);
(b) the applicant’s written submissions to the Tribunal (at [40]); and
(c) the applicant evidence at both hearings before the Tribunal (at
[41]-[62]).
75 The Tribunal also put adverse information to the applicant at [57] to [63]
of the Act. The applicant was given an opportunity to respond to
this information.
76 The Tribunal also considered the relevant country information in detail
(at [64]-[75]).
77 The Tribunal then comprehensively outlined its consideration of the
applicant’s claims (even those which, on the applicant’s
evidence, he had effectively abandoned) and the basis for its findings (at
[76]-[96]).
78 There is nothing before the Court that can, in anyway, be seen as
suggesting that Tribunal overlooked relevant evidence or that
reluctant” to address all of the evidence before it.
79 In relation to whether the Tribunal’s approach and determination is
“unreasonable”, the Court notes as follows.
80 "Unreasonableness" can occur in circumstances where a decision is made
that is so devoid of plausible justification that no reasonable
person could
have taken that course:
at [28] per French J. It can also occur when a
decision has been made that lacks an "evident and intelligible justification":
at [76]. As explained by Bell and Crennan JJ in
correct approach is to ask whether it was open to the Tribunal to engage in the
process of reasoning in which it did engage
and to make the findings it did make
on the material before it (at [133]).
81 The test for unreasonableness is "stringent" and only arises in rare
Haq v Minister for Immigration & Border Protection
[2018] FCCA
Minister for Immigration & Border Protection v Eden
240 FCR 158
[2016] FCAFC 28
the Full Court of the Federal Court explained, in
connection with the principles of unreasonableness:
[65] ... The expressions that have been utilised include
decisions which are "plainly unjust", "arbitrary", "capricious", "irrational",
"lacking in evident or intelligible justification", and "obviously
disproportionate". It must be emphasised again, however, that
the task is not an
a priori definitional exercise. Nor does it involve a "checklist" exercise:
at 445 [42]. Rather, it involves the Court evaluating the decision
with a view to determining whether, having regard to the terms,
purpose of the relevant statutory power, the decision possesses one or more of
those sorts of qualities such that it falls
outside the range of lawful
83 In this matter, the Tribunal determined, overall, that the applicant had
come to Australia to seek employment – not because
he feared serious harm
from a loan shark, his aunt or indeed any other person (at [87]). That finding
was, the evidence (all of which
was forensically “unpacked” by the
Tribunal as being contradictory, inconsistent and unreliable) pointed to an
application
for protection visa that appears to have been made in “by
84 The Tribunal was not satisfied that the applicant would face a real chance
of serious harm amounting to persecution if returned
to Malaysia and, as such,
determined that the applicant did not meet the criteria for protection under
of the Act (at [95]-[96]). The Tribunal also considered complementary
protection under
s 36(2)(aa)
of the Act (at [97]) but found that there was no
real chance that the applicant would suffer serious harm if returned to Malaysia
85 It cannot be said on the evidence that any error arises in this regard. In
the circumstances of this matter, and according to the
authorities canvassed
above, there is nothing in the Tribunal’s decision that can, in any way,
be described as arbitrary, capricious,
without common sense, plainly unjust, or
lacking an evident and intelligible justification.
86 Ground 6, accordingly, fails.
87 Ground 9 states:
I feel that I have not been listened to and do not
understand why my visa was refused and would like a chance to put forward my
of the situation.
88 Arguably, although not entirely clear, the applicant’s concerns here
relate to “procedural fairness” –
, that he wasn’t given an adequate opportunity to
“present his case”.
89 The Court disagrees with the applicant’s assessment of what occurred
in this regard.
90 The applicant’s application was lodged with the Tribunal on 2 March
2017 (CB 92-93). The Tribunal’s decision was made
on 27 August 2020 (CB
149). The applicant had over three years to make any relevant submissions to the
91 The applicant attended two hearings before the Tribunal and was given an
opportunity to make both oral and written submissions
(CB 130-132). He was
assisted by a Mandarin interpreter at both hearings (CB 121 & 141).
92 The hearing record indicates that in relation to the first hearing, the
“line [was not] not clear – matter stood down
and brought back with
new interpreter” (CB 121).
93 If anything, the Tribunal’s decision to adjourn the first hearing
shows a firm commitment on the part of the Tribunal to
ensuring that the
applicant could, indeed, “speak” and participate in the hearing
without disadvantage.
94 The second hearing was held via video conference.
95 It is noted that no objection was raised to the second hearing being
conducted via video conference. As per the principles relevant
Act, it was both fair and reasonable for the Tribunal to proceed in this manner.
The Court further notes there is no evidence
that conducting the hearing via
video conference caused any prejudice.
96 It is also noted that the second hearing ran for more than two hours
(starting at 9:50am and ending at 11:54am (CB 141). This is
a significant period
of time and reflects the Tribunal’s commitment to carefully analysing the
evidence before it and allowing
the applicant to respond to any credibility
concerns. Here, the Tribunal assessed the applicant’s
“original” protection
claims and, when it was evident that the
applicant and had effectively abandoned them, allowed him to
“re-phrase” his
protection concerns. Those concerns were then
assessed, again forensically – with the applicant given ample opportunity
address the Tribunal’s conclusions about the evidence presented (as
relevant to those new concerns).
97 As noted above, adverse information was also put to the applicant pursuant
of the Act and the applicant responded to this information at the
hearing (CB 143).
98 There is no evidence before the Court that the applicant was not given the
opportunity “to present his case”. Indeed,
the Tribunal here appears
to have done everything it could have to ensure that the applicant was heard and
given an opportunity to
speak. The applicant was aware of the issues that were
to be assessed and given ample opportunity to clarify or bolster his position.
Overall, the applicant was given a real and meaningful opportunity to present
arguments and give evidence as required by
of the Act.
99 Ground 9, accordingly, fails.
Otherwise – bias
100 Before this Court, the applicant seemed to
suggest that the Tribunal was “biased” because the Tribunal
reluctant to take his case” and “appeared to have
already made up its mind”.
101 In relation to any concerns about bias, it is well settled that an
allegation of bias is one that must be distinctly made and
clearly proven. To
prove bias, it is for the applicant to establish that:
(d) the Tribunal, in the case of actual bias, was so
committed to a conclusion that regardless of the evidence or arguments presented
that conclusion was not open to persuasion and incapable of alteration:
Minister for Immigration v Jia Legeng
(2001) 178 ALR 421 at [71]-[72];
(e) the Tribunal, in the case of apprehended bias, conducted itself in a way
that a fair-minded person would reasonably believe that
the Tribunal had not
brought an impartial mind to deciding the applicant’s case:
102 The applicant has not advanced any evidence in support of his assertion
that the Tribunal “had already made up its mind”.
transcript of the hearing the Court is confined to determining from the face of
the decision record if bias arises in
relation to this matter.
103 Nothing on the face of the decision record suggests that the Tribunal
displayed actual or apprehended bias. The second Tribunal
hearing went for
approximately 2 hours. The Tribunal explored with the applicant the claims made
in his visa application, as well
as those made at the hearing. In particular,
the Court notes that at [52] the Tribunal made an attempt to explore with the
any chance of harm he might face at the hands of his aunt. This was
done comprehensively and indicates that the Tribunal was open
to exploring any
possible matters that arose in the course of the applicant’s oral evidence
and assessing them in the context
of the relevant visa criterion.
104 No error arises in this regard.
105 The applicant’s application for judicial
review filed on 25 September 2021 has failed to identify any jurisdictional
The Court is otherwise unable to identify any jurisdictional error in the
Tribunal’s decision.
106 The application is, accordingly, dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
six (106) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Dated: 31 August 2021
RTF format (479 KB)
Signed PDF/A format