P and Retail Company [2011] AICmrCN 10 (22 December 2011)
Case citation: P and Retail Company
[2011] AICmrCN 10
(22 December
Subject heading
of personal information
National Privacy Principle 1.1 and 1.2 in Schedule 3
The complainant alleged that a retail company
recorded outbound calls it made to them without providing notification that it
was recording
When the complainant became aware the retail company was recording the calls
they objected as they had not been notified or asked
for their consent to record
The retail company verbally apologised. However, it advised the complainant
that they had been notified about the recording of calls
by the interactive
voice response system when they made their first inbound call to the retail
On this basis, the retail company claimed the complainant was aware the call
was being recorded and consent to the collection of such
information could be
The complainant sought a public apology from the retail company.
NPP 1.1 states that an organisation must not collect
personal information unless the information is necessary for one or more its
functions or activities.
NPP 1.2 states that organisations must only collect information by lawful and
fair means, and not in an unreasonably intrusive way.
The Commissioner investigated the matter under
section 40(1)
The retail company outlined that its collection of information via the
recording of calls was for training, coaching and monitoring
purposes including
to process orders and action enquiries. The Commissioner took the view that the
collection of the information
by recording phone calls was necessary for one of
the retail company’s functions and the company had met the requirements of
In considering whether the collection was by fair and lawful means, the
Commissioner had regard to the relevant industry
and telecommunications
recording laws. The
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
(Cth) specifies that all parties in the telephone conversation must have
actual knowledge that the conversation will be monitored
and this notification
must occur prior to the activity taking place for both inbound and outbound
calls. Notification can be by pre-recorded
message, verbal or written
notification.
The Commissioner did not accept that the subsequent calls received by the
complainant were a continuation of the original incoming
call where notification
had been provided. The respondent claimed that it was relying on implied consent
from the complainant when
it collected personal information in subsequent
outbound calls. In particular, the retail company claimed that its privacy
outlines that as part of its terms and conditions that a customer agrees
to the collection of personal information in ways the company
appropriate including for a purpose to which an individual consents (express or
inferred consent).
The Commissioner reviewed the retail company’s privacy policy and
formed the view that it did not provide sufficient notification
collection of information via call recording would occur. The Commissioner
considered that the issue of consent was not
relevant in this case as NPP 1 does
not require organisations to obtain consent before collecting personal
information about an individual.
However it does impose a requirement that
notice about certain matters is given at or as soon as is practicable after the
As the complainant was not notified that the retail company was recording
outbound calls and, taking into consideration the company’s
other legal
obligations, the Commissioner formed the view that the collection of personal
information during such calls was unfair
and unlawful. Therefore, the
Commissioner found that the retail company had not complied with NPP 1.2.
Subsequently, the retail company changed its procedures for recording calls.
It implemented a procedure where a standard script is
read by the relevant staff
member when making outbound calls to advise the individual the call is being
monitored and recorded for
training purposes. The retail company also offered to
apologise in writing to the complainant rather than making a public apology.
However, the complainant did not pursue this offer.
The Commissioner subsequently closed the complaint under
section 41(2)(a)
on the ground that the retail company had adequately dealt with
the matter.
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
December 2011
Communications Alliance Ltd
Guideline G516:
2004 Participant Monitoring of Voice Communications
RTF format (810 KB)
Signed PDF/A format