Singh v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1849 (14 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Singh v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1849
File number:
SYG 2021 of 2021
Judgment of:
JUDGE KAUR-BAINS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– judicial review –
Student (Temporary) (Class TU) (Subclass 500) visa – genuine temporary
entrant criteria in
cl 500.212 of the
Migration Regulations 1994
– whether the Administrative Appeals Tribunal misconstrued and misapplied
cl 500.212 of the Regulations – whether
the Tribunal took into account an
irrelevant consideration for the purposes of cl 500.212(a) and applying
Direction No. 69 –
whether the Tribunal was required to consider each of
subclauses (a), (b) and (c) of cl 500.212 of the Regulations –
the Tribunal’s findings were irrational or illogical – no
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations
(Cth) cll 500.212, 500.212(a),
500.212(b) and 500.212(c) of Schedule 2
Direction No. 69 – Assessing the genuine temporary entrant criterion
for Student visa and Student Guardian visa applications
Cases cited:
BQL15 v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2018] FCAFC 104
Dait v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 25
Kouro v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2020] FCA 1861
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
(2010) 240 CLR
Neat Domestic Trading Pty Ltd v AWB Ltd
[2003] HCA 35
General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Mr R Selliah of Rasan T Selliah &
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Mr A Westenberg of Sparke Helmore Lawyers
Second Respondent:
Submitted appearance save as to costs
SYG 2021 of 2021
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
KARAMJIT SINGH
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Second Respondent
JUDGE KAUR-BAINS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
application is dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or order to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors (r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 24.04
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal
Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE KAUR-BAINS
applicant, a citizen of India, seeks judicial review of a written decision of
the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (
) dated 12 October 2021,
which written decision was provided following the Tribunal’s oral decision
made on 6 October 2021.
The Tribunal affirmed a decision of a delegate of the
Minister to refuse the applicant a Student (Temporary) (Class TU)
). This Court has jurisdiction to
determine this matter pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
applicant sought to impugn the Tribunal’s reasons and findings on the
grounds set out at [18] of this judgment. For the
reasons set out below, I find
the applicant has not demonstrated jurisdictional error and I dismiss the
application.
15 October 2019, the applicant applied for a student visa (Court Book
) 1 to 21). In his genuine temporary entrant
) statement dated 3 October 2019, the applicant stated that
he wished to study a course in General English from the Choice Business
in Sydney (CB 31 to 33).
applicant was represented by Oceania Education Solutions (
applicant’s
representative
) in making his student visa application (CB 22 to 24) and
application to the Tribunal for review of the delegate’s decision
Delegate’s decision
20 January 2020, the delegate refused the application by the applicant for a
student visa on the basis that the delegate was not
satisfied the applicant
intended genuinely to stay temporarily in Australia and thereby failed to meet
the genuine temporary entrant
criterion (
GTE criterion
cl 500.212 in Schedule 2 of the
Migration Regulations
Regulations
) (CB 42 to 46).
Application to the Tribunal
3 February 2020, the applicant applied to the Tribunal for review of the
delegate’s decision (CB 47 and 48). By letter dated
20 August 2021, the Tribunal attached a copy of Direction No. 69
– Assessing the genuine temporary entrant criterion for Student
Student Guardian visa applications (
Direction No. 69
), that was given
under s 499 of the Act, and invited the applicant to provide information
and his entry and stay in
Australia as a student, which could demonstrate he met both of the following
student visa requirements
(CB 55 to 61):
(a) enrolment in a registered course of study; and
(b) being a genuine applicant for entry and stay as a student.
response to the Tribunal’s request, the applicant provided the following
additional supporting documents to the Tribunal
(CB 62 to 101):
(a) Confirmation of Enrolment – Diploma of Leadership and Management dated
28 July 2021.
(a) Completion Certificate – General English (Pre Intermediate Level) for
the period 13 January 2020 to 11 December 2020.
(b) Completion Certificate – General English (Intermediate Level) for the
period 11 January 2021 to 25 June 2021.
(c) Identity documents.
(d) Deed of Partnership dated 18 May 2015, stating the business of the
partnership to be “financing of vehicles, household
appliances, industrial
equipment’s and financing of every kind” and Company Registration
Certificate dated 20 March 2015
for the finance company.
(e) HDFC Bank Balance Confirmation Certificate Letter dated 23 August 2021.
(f) Property Valuation Report dated 25 August 2021.
letter dated 14 September 2021, the Tribunal invited the applicant to appear
before it by telephone to give evidence and present
arguments (CB 104 to 106).
The Tribunal also requested the applicant to provide the following additional
documents at least seven
days before the hearing date:
(a) Confirmation of Enrolment in a course that the applicant was currently
enrolled in.
(b) Documents of the applicant’s past studies in Australia and documents
evidencing any work related to past or intended studies
in Australia.
(c) A written statement that addressed the issue of whether the applicant was a
genuine applicant for stay and entry as a student
by referring to Direction No.
30 September 2021, the applicant’s representative provided written
submissions on behalf of the applicant in response to
the Tribunal’s
request (CB 114 to 121).
letter dated 5 October 2021, the Tribunal sent the applicant’s
representative the applicant’s Provider Registration
and International
Student Management System (
) report, indicating that the Tribunal
may refer to the said report in the hearing and requested the applicant to be
familiar with
its contents (CB 123 to 125).
6 October 2021, the applicant appeared before the Tribunal by telephone. At the
Tribunal hearing, the applicant was assisted by
his representative, Mr Sandip
Khanal, and an interpreter in the Punjabi and English languages (CB 126 to
TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
issue before the Tribunal was whether the applicant was a genuine temporary
entrant to stay as a student in Australia ([10] of
its reasons).
Tribunal found that the applicant’s circumstances in his home country did
not constitute a strong incentive for him to return,
but instead his family ties
to Australia constituted a strong incentive for him to remain in Australia ([25]
of its reasons). The
Tribunal considered the evidence given by the applicant as
(a) The applicant’s parents, wife, daughter, son and sister resided in
India and he called them three to four times a day by
voice and video calls
([22] of its reasons). The applicant last visited his family in India in April
2019 for four months and 15
days and had not returned to India since due to
COVID-19 restrictions.
(b) The applicant’s community ties to India included his family who lived
in the local community and the Sikh temples in his
reasons). He was not concerned about military service commitments or political
and civil unrest in India.
(c) The applicant lived with his sister in Australia, who financially supported
him ([24] of its reasons). The applicant’s
community ties in Australia
consisted of him living with his sister who had been in Australia for 14 to 15
years and knowing his
sister’s circle of friends.
(d) The applicant had cash worth approximately AUD13,000 in India, property in
his father’s name worth approximately AUD87,000
that he would inherit, and
farmland in his parents’ name worth approximately AUD513,000 ([23] of its
Tribunal was also concerned that the applicant may be using the student visa
system to extend his stay in Australia ([30] of its
reasons). The Tribunal
acknowledged that the applicant decided to study in Australia when he arrived on
a visitor visa because he
wanted to improve his English after finding it
difficult to communicate with people in English ([29] of its reasons). The
placed significant weight on the fact that the applicant had been in
Australia for two years since he arrived for the second time
and was seeking to
extend his stay to finish his course, which was due for completion in January
2023 ([26] and [30] of its reasons).
Moreover, the applicant had finished the
General English course, the subject of his first student visa, and was now
proposing to
study the Diploma of Leadership and Management, which was not
related to his previous work or study that he had undertaken ([30]
the Tribunal was not satisfied of the value of the Diploma of Leadership and
Management to the applicant’s future.
The Tribunal considered the evidence
given by the applicant as to how the course would help his future business
plans, being that
the skills he gained from the course would allow him to
“deal with banks and teamwork, and would help him to expand his
as well as “earn more income” ([34] of its
reasons). The Tribunal found the applicant only provided “vague
meaningful detail” why a Diploma of Leadership and Management was
to achieve his future plans ([35] of its reasons). The Tribunal placed
significant weight on the fact that the applicant
did not have a written
business plan for his proposed business and had already completed his General
English course.
Tribunal placed little weight on the evidence that the applicant’s
expected earning income would be approximately AUD30,000
per annum upon
completion of the Diploma of Leadership and Management after returning to India
([37] of its reasons).
the hearing on 6 October 2021, the Tribunal orally affirmed the decision of the
delegate not to grant the applicant a student visa
and explained the reasons for
its decision (CB 131). The Tribunal affirmed the delegate’s decision on
the basis that it was
not satisfied the applicant intended genuinely to stay in
Australia temporarily and therefore failed to satisfy the requirements
cl 500.212(a) of the Regulations ([38] to [41] of its reasons). On
12 October 2021, the Tribunal at the applicant’s
representative’s
request provided a written statement of the decision and
reasons given orally at the hearing on 6 October 2021 (CB 138 to 145).
GROUNDS IN THE APPLICATION
was granted to the applicant to file an amended application. On 11 November
2025, the applicant filed an amended application
raising the following grounds
(as per original):
The Tribunal fell into jurisdictional error by misconstruing, misdirecting and
misapplying the cl 500.212 of the schedule 2 to
the migration Regulation
Particular One:
The Tribunal incorrectly identified the wrong issue or asked the wrong question:
This is a important manifestation of misinterpreting
the statute.
The Tribunal in placing "significant" weight on the fact that the applicant did
not have a "written business plan" for his business
was irrational, illogical
and took into account an irrelevant consideration, as it was not a requirement
under [12] of Direction
No. 69 – Assessing the genuine temporary entrant
criterion for Student visa and Student Guardian visa applications for the
applicant to have a written business plan in determining the value of the
applicant’s course.
Particular Two
The Tribunal ignored or failed to have regard relevant information that the
statue required to taken into account as a condition
of jurisdiction of power
being exercised.
The Tribunal in reaching the conclusion at [38] of its reasons that it “is
not satisfied that the applicant intends genuinely
to stay in Australia
temporarily” failed to have regard to and actively engage with the
applicant’s immigration history
and record of compliance with visa
conditions in assessing whether the applicant is a genuine temporary entrant
pursuant to cl 500.212(a)
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth). Further, the
Tribunal failed to consider the factors set out at cl 500.212(b) of the
Regulations.
Further the Tribunal failed to make finding in relation to the factors set out
at cl 500.212(b) of the Regulations.
The applicant provided evidence to the Tribunal in connection with cl 500.212(b)
The Tribunal’s error was “material” in the sense used in
LPDT v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
(2024) 98 ALJR 610
[2024] HCA 12.
The Tribunal committed jurisdictional error by arriving at a conclusion that was
legally unreasonable. The reasoning process was
illogical and irrational.
[Illogical or irrational findings made by a decision maker “on the
way” to a final conclusion may establish jurisdictional
error: SZMDS at
Particulars:
a) The Tribunal’s finding at [25] of its reasons that “the
applicant’s family ties to India do not of themselves
constitute a strong
incentive for the applicant to return to India. Similarly, the Tribunal finds
that the applicant’s family
ties to Australia do constitute a strong
incentive for the applicant to remain in Australia” was legally
unreasonable, irrational
or illogical based on the evidence before it because
the majority of the applicant’s family were in India and the
applicant’s
only family in Australia was his sister.
b) The Tribunal in placing "significant" weight on the fact that the applicant
did not have a written business plan for his business
was irrational, illogical
and took into account an irrelevant consideration, as it was not a requirement
under [12] of Direction
No. 69 – Assessing the genuine temporary entrant
criterion for Student visa and Student Guardian visa applications for the
applicant to have a written business plan in determining the value of the
applicant’s course.
c) The Tribunal in reaching the conclusion at [38] of its reasons that it
“is not satisfied that the applicant intends genuinely
Australia temporarily” failed to have regard to and actively engage with
the applicant’s immigration history
and record of compliance with visa
conditions in assessing whether the applicant is a genuine temporary entrant
pursuant to cl 500.212(a)
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth). Further, the
Tribunal failed to consider the factors set out at cl 500.212(b) of the
Regulations.
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE COURT
applicant was represented at the hearing before me by Mr Rasan Selliah (
) of Rasan T Selliah & Associates Lawyers. The Minister was
represented by Mr Anthony Westenberg of Sparke Helmore Lawyers
Mr Westenberg
evidence before the Court comprised of the Court Book tendered by the Minister,
which was marked “Exhibit R1”.
applicant relied on Mr Selliah’s written submissions accepted for filing
on 23 May 2025 and the Minister relied on his written
submissions
dated 5 June 2025. Mr Selliah and Mr Westenberg also made oral submissions
at the hearing.
RELEVANT LAW
the relevant time, being the time of the Tribunal decision in October 2021, the
following clause in Schedule 2 to the Regulations
set out the criteria for the
grant of a student visa:
The applicant is a genuine applicant for entry and stay as a student because:
(a) the applicant intends genuinely to stay in Australia temporarily, having
(i) the applicant’s circumstances; and
(ii) the applicant’s immigration history; and
(iii) if the applicant is a minor—the intentions of a parent, legal
guardian or spouse of the applicant; and
(iv) any other relevant matter; and
(b) the applicant intends to comply with any conditions subject to which the
visa is granted, having regard to:
(i) the applicant’s record of compliance with any condition of a visa
previously held by the applicant (if any); and
(ii) the applicant’s stated intention to comply with any conditions to
which the visa may be subject; and
(c) of any other relevant matter.
considering whether the applicant satisfied cl 500.212(a) of the Regulations,
the Tribunal was required to have regard to Direction
No. 69. This is because
Genuine temporary entrant criterion
” was defined in
Direction No. 69 as referring relevantly to cl 500.212(a) of the
Regulations.
No. 69 required that the Tribunal, in considering the GTE criterion (that is
whether for the purposes of cl 500.212(a)(i)
to (iv) the Tribunal was satisfied
that the applicant intended genuinely to stay in Australia temporarily), have
(a) The applicant’s circumstances in his home country, potential
circumstances in Australia and the value of the course to
his future. This
, considering reasons for not undertaking the study
in the home country, personal ties to the home country and to Australia,
circumstances of the applicant that would present a significant
incentive not to return home, evidence that the student visa programme
used to circumvent the intentions of the migration programme, whether the
student visa was being used to maintain ongoing
residence and value of the
course to the applicant’s future.
(b) The applicant’s immigration history, including previous applications
for an Australian visa or for visas to other countries
and previous travel to
Australia or other countries, the amount of time the applicant had spent in
Australia and whether the visa
may be used primarily for maintaining ongoing
(c) Any other relevant information, including information that may be either
beneficial or unfavourable to the applicant.
was specified in Part 2 of Direction No. 69 that the factors were not to be used
as a checklist, instead stating that the “listed
factors are intended only
to guide decision makers when considering the applicant’s circumstances as
a whole, in reaching a
finding about whether the applicant satisfies the genuine
temporary entrant criterion”.
CONSIDERATION
grounds set out in the amended application are somewhat repetitive. The grounds
have been organised into the following categories
for clarity.
Ground 1, particular one and Ground 2, particular (b)
applicant’s solicitor argued that the Tribunal misconstrued and misapplied
cl 500.212 of Schedule 2 to the Regulations,
and further the
Tribunal’s reasoning process was illogical and irrational when the
Tribunal at [35] of its reasons placed significant
weight on the fact that the
applicant did not have a written business plan when considering for the purposes
of [12] of Direction
No. 69, the value of the course to the
applicant’s future, for the following reasons:
(a) First, the applicant’s solicitor argued that the Tribunal misapplied
cl 500.212 and Direction No. 69 when it implicitly
found that the applicant
needed a written business plan in order to establish the value of the proposed
course to his future. It
was argued that there was no express requirement in
Direction No. 69 that the Tribunal had to consider whether an applicant had
written business plan in assessing the value of the course, or that a written
business plan was “a compulsory element of evidence”
to establish
the value of the course. Rather, it was said that the language in
Direction No. 69 indicated both oral and written submissions
applicant should be considered according to their relevance and context, and not
restricted by a specific format. The applicant
contended that the Tribunal was
irrational by improperly restraining itself in such consideration
notwithstanding the applicant’s
oral and written submissions about his
future plans, which detailed how his course would enhance his skills for the
purposes of his
future career aspirations.
(b) Second, the applicant’s solicitor contended that students who hold
student visas do not always have a written business
plan. It was said that the
Tribunal took into account an irrelevant consideration, being whether there was
a written business plan
in assessing whether the applicant was a GTE, which fell
outside the ambit of Direction No. 69 and demonstrated a lack of logical
connection in such finding.
find that it was reasonably open to the Tribunal in assessing the value of the
Diploma of Leadership and Business to the applicant’s
future to place
significant weight on the absence of a written business plan. I find that the
Tribunal did this not by any misunderstanding
as to what was required by cl
500.212 or Direction No. 69, but rather as evidence of the fact that the
applicant’s plans were
“vague”, lacked detail and did not have
any clear goals as to how the course would assist his future proposed plans.
Tribunal’s finding at [35] was against the background of the evidence
given by the applicant as set out at [34] of its
reasons, being that the course
would help him to “expand his business”, which business the
applicant had said was a financial
business he had in India. At [33] of the
Tribunal’s reasons, the Tribunal noted that it asked the applicant if he
had a written
business plan for his financial business back in India. To that
question, the applicant responded that he did not have a business
writing. I find that the Tribunal was noting that a written business plan would
be the sort of evidence that would provide
details and demonstrate the future
value of the course to his business, and absent that detail the value of the
course was vague.
to the applicant’s argument that the absence of a written business plan
was an “irrelevant consideration”
and the Tribunal by taking it into
account committed jurisdictional error. I note that it is well-established that
before it can
be said that a matter is an “irrelevant
consideration”, so as to amount to a jurisdictional error, the applicant
to demonstrate the Tribunal took into account a consideration which it was
precluded from taking into account by the Act, Regulations
or Direction No. 69:
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
and [40] and
Neat Domestic Trading Pty Ltd v AWB Ltd
[2003] HCA 35
216 CLR 277
. I find there is nothing in cl 500.212(a) of
the Regulations or Direction No. 69 which precluded the Tribunal from
considering the
lack of a written business plan in considering the value of the
course to the applicant’s future. Therefore, I find that the
Tribunal did
not misapply or misconstrue what was required for the purposes of assessing the
criteria in cl 500.212 of the Regulations
or applying Direction No. 69.
Accordingly,
no jurisdictional error is disclosed by ground 1, particular one and ground 2,
particular (b).
Ground 1, particular two and Ground 2, particular (c)
1, particular two and Ground 2, particular (c) contain two alleged
the applicant’s solicitor argued that the Tribunal in reaching the
following finding at [38] of its reasons allegedly
failed to have regard to and
actively engage with the applicant’s immigration history as stipulated in
[13] and [14] of Direction
No. 69 and his record of compliance:
...When all of the findings and evidence that I have just summarised are taken
into account, on balance the Tribunal is concerned
that a student visa may be
used primarily for maintaining an ongoing residence...
the applicant’s solicitor contended that the Tribunal failed to consider
the factors set out at cl 500.212(b) of the
Regulations, which were
mandatory factors that the Tribunal had to consider.
relation to the first alleged jurisdictional error in ground 1, particular two
and ground 2, particular (c), the applicant’s
solicitor referred me to the
decision of
Kouro v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services
and Multicultural Affairs
[2020] FCA 1861
, where the Court said at [38] to
a decision-maker is required to have regard to several mandatory considerations,
he or she must actively engage with each
of the considerations by determining
how and to what extent, if at all, each of them might feed into the deliberative
process and
ultimate decision:
Lafu v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2009] FCAFC 140
(2009) 112 ALD 1
, at [47]–[54]; Khadgi
at [63]. The consideration of the factor in the process of reaching a decision
must be genuine:
Tickner v Chapman
[1995] FCAFC 1726
(1995) 57 FCR 451
at 462 and 464 (Black CJ), 476 (Burchett J), 495 and 496 (Kiefel J);
Carrascalao v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCAFC
(2017) 252 FCR 352
; Khadgi at [57].
Tribunal was obliged to consider those claims and the evidence before it and to
actively engage with each of the factors by determining
how and to what extent,
if at all, each of them might feed into the deliberative process and the
ultimate decision:
Tribunal took into consideration the fact that the appellant had no current
enrolment in a course of study and that, despite being
onshore since 2016, he
has not successfully completed a qualification ([15]-[16]). Although the weight
to be given to the various
factors mentioned within Direction 69 is a matter for
the decision maker alone (Kumar at [85]), the Tribunal must at least bring
account in the decision-making process those factors considered to be
sufficiently material to the decision. As the High Court
observed in
The Republic of Nauru
[2018] HCA 46
(2018) 92 ALJR 1003
“there is a distinction between an omission indicating that a tribunal did
not consider evidence (or an issue raised
by it) to be material to an
applicant’s claims, and an omission indicating that a tribunal failed to
consider a matter that
is material: including one that is an essential integer
to an applicant’s claim or that would be dispositive of the
plain, unequivocal words of the Tribunal that there was no relevant evidence
the Tribunal thought fit to
mention, leads to the clear inference that the Tribunal overlooked, or chose not
to consider, any material
other than that contained in the Request for Student
Visa Information Form under s 359(2). Contrary to the conclusion reached by
primary judge, by ignoring relevant material, the Tribunal has made a
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v
[2001] HCA 30
; (2001) 206 CLR 323 at
applicant’s solicitor submitted that the Tribunal failed to consider the
factors in [13] and [14] of Direction No. 69. He
argued that the Tribunal only
recounted the applicant’s immigration history and circumstances in
Australia at [14] and [15]
of its reasons but did not actively engage with the
evidence and make a finding in relation to the applicant’s previous
application
for Australian visas and movement history. The applicant also said
the Tribunal failed to engage with the evidence that the applicant
“positive” immigration history and had complied with conditions of
his previous visa and had not had a visa cancelled
as required to be considered
under [14(b)] of Direction No. 69.
Full Federal Court in
BQL15 v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2018] FCAFC 104 (Collier
, Flick and Perry JJ) said at [9] that
the Tribunal was required to comply with Ministerial directions when making
decisions because
s 499(2A) of the Act makes clear that “[a] person or
body must comply with a direction under subsection (1)”. Therefore,
Tribunal must comply with Direction No. 69, issued under section 499 of the Act,
when deciding the GTE criterion for cl 500.212
and must actively engage with the
factors identified in that Direction.
find contrary to what was submitted by the applicant’s solicitor, the
Tribunal did in fact have regard to and did actively
engage with the
applicant’s immigration history as mandated by [13] and [14] of Direction
No. 69 for the following reasons.
at [14] and [15] of its reasons, the Tribunal noted the applicant’s
immigration history as follows:
applicant confirmed that he first arrived in Australia on 22 January 2019. The
applicant then left for four months and 15 days
in April 2019 and returned to
Australia in September 2019. That is over two years ago. The applicant confirmed
that all of the information
contained in the information form he submitted to
the Tribunal on 3 September 2021 is correct.
the applicant first arrived in Australia he was on a visitor visa that was valid
from December 2018 to December 2019. The applicant
submitted his current student
visa application on 15 October 2019 and the applicant was proposing to study a
General English course.
at [30] of the Tribunal reasons, the Tribunal did engage with the
applicant’s immigration history and found that based
applicant’s immigration history, it was concerned as to whether the
applicant was attempting to use the student visa
system as a way to remain in
Australia. This was because the Tribunal reasoned at [30] of its reasons that
the applicant first arrived
in Australia on a visitor visa, the applicant had
been in Australia for two years since he arrived in Australia for a second time
and was seeking to extend his stay in Australia to January 2023. Further, the
Tribunal’s concern expressed at [30] was one
of the reasons the Tribunal
concluded at [38] that based on all the evidence it had summarised, it was
concerned a student visa may
be used primarily for maintaining ongoing residence
in Australia. I find that the foregoing discussion of the Tribunal’s
demonstrates the Tribunal actively engaged with the applicant’s
immigration history.
the Tribunal at [18] and [19] of its reasons noted the following:
18. Since arriving in Australia the applicant has completed the following study:
a. a general English course between January 2020 and December 2020;
b. a general English course between January 2021 and June 2021; and
applicant is presently studying a Diploma of Leadership and Management that
commenced in July 2021 and is scheduled to conclude
in January 2023.
19. The applicant has not worked since he arrived in Australia.
find that the fact that the Tribunal at [12] of its reasons noted that it needed
to have regard to Direction No. 69, and specifically
at [18] and [19] of its
reasons (as noted in the preceding paragraph of this judgment) identified the
fact that the applicant since
arriving in Australia had completed his studies
and had not worked in Australia, demonstrates the Tribunal was aware that the
had complied with previous conditions of his visitor and student
Tribunal at [38] of its reasons made it clear by using the words “when all
the findings and evidence that I have summarised
are taken into account”,
that the Tribunal in finding at [38] that it was not satisfied the applicant
intended genuinely to
stay in Australia temporarily, was so finding after it
weighed up and took into account all the findings and evidence, which included
the evidence identified at [14] to [19] of its reasons and the Tribunal’s
expressed concern at [30] of its reasons, which included
the applicant’s
immigration history and whether the applicant had previously complied with
conditions of his previous Australian
I find that the Tribunal did in fact actively engage with the applicant’s
immigration history and record of compliance
with visa conditions when assessing
whether the applicant was a genuine temporary entrant pursuant to cl 500.212(a)
of the Regulations.
relation to the applicant’s second alleged jurisdictional error in ground
1, particular two and ground 2, particular (c),
being the Tribunal’s
alleged failure to consider the factors set out at cl 500.212(b) of the
Regulations, I note this issue
was determined by the Full Federal Court in
Dait v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 25
). The Full Federal
Court considered whether the decision-maker was required to consider subtle (b)
and (c) of cl 500.212 only if
the applicant satisfied subcl (a).
Honours Jagot, Bromwich and Lee JJ in
said the following:
presently relevant criterion, clause 500.212, requires satisfaction of a single
state of affairs. It contains one sentence. The
conjunction
“because” connects the chapeau with subcl (a), implying a
relationship of cause and effect: Pearce DC, Statutory
Interpretation in
Australia (9th ed, LexisNexis Australia, 2019) (at [12.11]). The conjunction
“and” also marries subcll
(a), (b) and (c), each of which is
connected back to the chapeau by the combined conjunctive effect of the terms
and “and”. Further, each of subcll
(a)(i)–(iv) and (b)(i)–(ii) is connected to its parent and, by
to the chapeau, by way of a colon or the conjunction
“and”. This creates a waterfall effect, brought to a close by the
full stop at the end of subcl (c). The combined effect of “because”,
“and” and the use of colon unites each
composite part of cl 500.212,
giving rise to “a whole idea or conception: “a genuine applicant for
entry and stay as
a student”: Eros (at [8]). This reading is supported by
the verb “is” in the chapeau, which encapsulates a single
saying this, subcll (a), (b) and (c) nonetheless demand discrete inquiries as a
matter of language and can be read and understood
in isolation. Accordingly,
satisfaction of cl 500.212 requires the cumulative satisfaction of discrete
elements. Each of subcll (a),
(b) and (c) are integral elements of the
criterion. These elements are bookended by conjunctive devices, which reflect
the need for
the decision-maker to undertake a piecemeal analysis, and for the
applicant to satisfy each step in that analysis in order to qualify
genuine applicant for entry and stay as a student”. If a decision-maker is
not satisfied that an applicant meets
subcl (a) or (b) alone, the decision-maker
need not continue their inquiry. This is because an adverse finding in relation
subcl (a) or (b) forecloses any possibility of a favourable outcome.
Full Federal Court in
found that despite the fact that subcll (a),
(b) and (c) of cl 500.212 of the Regulations combine to become a
“whole idea or
conception” for what constitutes a genuine applicant
for entry and stay as a student, by way of statutory construction each
should be read as a discrete element that requires cumulative satisfaction to
satisfy the GTE criterion. Accordingly, the
decision-maker is not obliged to
proceed its analysis to the next subclauses if either subcl (a) or (b) of
cl 500.212 is not met.
As Jagot, Bromwich and Lee JJ said at [35(4)] in
...If a decision-maker is satisfied that an applicant does not meet the
criterion in either subcl (a) or (b), they need not proceed
further. The
decision-making process is complete because the applicant has failed to
establish an essential element of the “whole
idea or conception”
contained in cl 500.212:
the applicant’s ground 1, particular two and ground 2, particular (c), to
the extent that it argued the Tribunal
erred in not proceeding to consider cl
500.212(b), cannot succeed given the Tribunal found at [39] of its reasons that
the applicant
did not meet cl 500.212(a) of the Regulations and the Full Federal
Court’s reasoning in
set out at [45] and [46] of this
Ground 2, particular (a)
applicant’s solicitor argued that the Tribunal’s finding at [25] of
its reasons, that “
the applicant’s family ties to India do not of
themselves constitute a strong incentive for the applicant to return to India.
Similarly, the Tribunal finds that the applicant's family ties to Australia do
constitute a strong incentive for the applicant to
” was legally unreasonable, irrational or illogical. The
applicant’s solicitor contended that this was so because on the
accepted by the Tribunal, that the applicant’s parents, wife, daughter,
son and sister lived in India, and the applicant’s
only relative in
Australia was his sister, it was logical on the numbers that the applicant had
stronger family ties in India. Therefore,
the applicant’s solicitor
submitted that with six family members in India and only one in Australia, the
Tribunal’s decision
at [25] — that there was no strong incentive for
the applicant to return to India — was illogical and irrational.
applicant’s solicitor relied on
Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v SZMDS
(2010) 240 CLR 611
, Crennan and Bell JJ stated the following at [132], [133] and
illogicality or irrationality may constitute a basis for judicial review in the
context of jurisdictional fact finding as
explained above, it becomes necessary
to decide whether the Tribunal's conclusion about the state of satisfaction
required by s 65
and its findings on the way to that conclusion revealed
illogicality or irrationality amounting to jurisdictional error. It is clear,
from the extracts from the Federal Court decision set out above, that the
Federal Court emphatically disagreed with the Tribunal's
finding that the first
respondent's return to Pakistan and failure to seek asylum in the United Kingdom
was conduct which was inconsistent
with the claimed fear of persecution arising
as a result of homosexuality. It also seems clear that the Federal Court, acting
the same material or evidence on which the decision was based, would have
been satisfied that the first respondent feared persecution
as alleged.
the correct approach is to ask whether it was open to the Tribunal to engage in
the process of reasoning in which it did
engage and to make the findings it did
make on the material before it...
the probative evidence before the Tribunal, a logical or rational decision maker
could have come to the same conclusion as the
Tribunal. Whilst there may be
varieties of illogicality and irrationality, a decision will not be illogical or
irrational if there
is room for a logical or rational person to reach the same
decision on the material before the decision maker. A decision might be
be illogical or irrational if only one conclusion is open on the evidence, and
the decision maker does not come to that conclusion,
or if the decision to which
the decision maker came was simply not open on the evidence or if there is no
logical connection between
the evidence and the inferences or conclusions
, “a decision will not be illogical or irrational if
there is room for a logical or rational person to reach the same decision
material before the decision maker”. The Tribunal in reaching its
conclusion at [25] of its reasons based it reasons
on “all this
evidence”, which included the reference to the evidence identified at [22]
of its reasons, being to the
effect that the applicant had not been back to
India since September 2019, and the reference to the applicant’s evidence
at [24] of the Tribunal’s reasons, that the applicant was living
with his sister who had been in Australia for 14 to 15 years
and who was
financially supporting the applicant. Therefore, in reaching the conclusion at
[25] of its reasons, the Tribunal had
regard to the evidence identified, and the
finding at [25] of its reasons was based on an analysis of all the evidence.
the Tribunal was not just counting the number of family members in
one place as compared to another place. I find it was open to
the Tribunal and
reasonable and logical for it to reach the conclusion it did at [25] of its
reasons based on all the evidence before
it. It was a matter for the Tribunal to
weight up the evidence and make a finding as to the applicant’s ties in
India and if
a finding is reasonably open it is not for this Court to engage in
a merits review:
at [132]. Accordingly, I find no jurisdictional
error is disclosed by ground 2, particular (a).
no jurisdictional error has been disclosed, the amended application must be
will hear the parties as to costs.
I certify that the preceding fifty-two (52)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 14 November 2025
RTF format (520 KB)
Signed PDF/A format