N and Law Firm [2011] AICmrCN 8 (22 December 2011)
Case citation: N and Law Firm
[2011] AICmrCN 8
(22 December 2011)
of health information
National Privacy Principles 1.2 and 10 in Schedule 3
The complainant alleged that a law firm interfered
with their privacy by improperly collecting their personal information,
their health information, using covert film surveillance. This
information was subsequently disclosed during court proceedings.
The law firm was acting for its client, an insurer, when it collected the
complainant’s personal information.
NPP 1.2 provides that an organisation must collect
personal information only by lawful and fair means and not in an unreasonably
NPP 10.1 provides that an organisation must not collect sensitive information
at NPP 10.1(a) to (e)
NPP 10.1(e) allows an organisation to collect sensitive information about an
individual if the collection is necessary for the establishment,
exercise or
defence of a legal or equitable claim.
The Commissioner generally interprets
‘fair’ in the context of NPP 1.2 to mean ‘without intimidation
or deception’.
This would usually require an organisation not to collect
personal information covertly.
However, the Commissioner was of the view that the law firm’s
collection of personal information was by fair means and not in
an unreasonably
intrusive way as it was part of defending a claim where the law firm and insurer
suspected that the individual may
have misrepresented their claim or the extent
of their injuries.
The video collected health information about the complainant therefore NPP
10.1 applied. The law firm claimed that it was permitted
to collect the
information under NPP 10.1(e) since its collection of the health information was
for its client’s defence, in
a then current court case. The Commissioner
was of the view that the collection was necessary for the defence of a legal
therefore the law firm could rely on 10.1(e).
For these reasons, the Commissioner declined to investigate the complaint
section 41(1)(a)
, on the basis that the actions of
the law firm did not constitute an interference with the complainant's privacy,
as defined in the
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
December 2011
RTF format (810 KB)
Signed PDF/A format