Mr Yiwei Lin v Hai Lao Melbourne Proprietary Limited [2025] FWCFB 241 (29 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 241
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Mr Yiwei Lin
Melbourne Proprietary Limited
(C2025/8151)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SLEVIN
COMMISSIONER CRAWFORD
COMMISSIONER
SYDNEY, 29 OCTOBER 2025
Appeal against decision
of Deputy President Bell at Melbourne on 31st July 2025 in matter number
Yiwei Lin has lodged an appeal under s 604 of the
Work Act 2009
(the Act) against a decision of Deputy President Bell
on 31 July 2025 (Decision). The Deputy President
dismissed Mr Lin’s application for an unfair dismissal remedy under s 394
of the Act. The appeal was listed before us in respect of permission to appeal
only. A Hearing was conducted before us on 7 October
2025. At that Hearing it
became clear that neither party wished to supplement their written material
with oral submissions. This
decision relies on those written materials.
For a dismissal to be unfair, the Commission must be satisfied that
it was harsh, unjust or unreasonable (s 385(b)). In considering
whether it is
so satisfied, the Commission must take into account the matters in s 387.
After considering each of the matters
in s 387, the Deputy President found the
dismissal was not unfair. The Deputy President found that the employer had a
valid reason
for dismissing Mr Lin being his repeated failure to attend for work
in accordance with the roster. That failure occurred against
the background of a
series of warnings regarding non-attendance on rostered shifts. The Deputy
President made findings in relation
to the other statutory factors and concluded
the dismissal was not unfair.
Permission to appeal
An appeal may only be brought with the permission of the Commission
under s604(1). Section 400 of the Act applies to this appeal,
because the Deputy
President’s decision was made under Part 3-2 of the Act. The provision
400 Appeal rights
(1) Despite subsection 604(2), FWA must not grant permission to appeal from a
decision made by FWA under this Part unless FWA considers
that it is in the
public interest to do so.
(2) Despite subsection 604(1), an appeal from a decision made by the FWC in
relation to a matter arising under this Part can only,
to the extent that it is
an appeal on a question of fact, be made on the ground that the decision
involved a significant error of
Coal & Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler
; 207 IR 177 at
and [43], the Full Federal Court characterised the
requirements of s.400 as “stringent”. This appeal concerns errors
fact on the part of the Deputy President, in that context we are mindful of the
observation of the Full Bench of Fair Work Australia
Dafallah v Melbourne
Section 400(2) modifies the
principles by limiting any review based on a mistake of fact to a
significant error of fact. Section 400 clearly evinces an intention
legislature that appeals in unfair dismissal matters are more limited than
appeals with respect to other matters under the
In deciding whether to grant permission to appeal, it is unnecessary
and inappropriate to conduct a detailed examination of the appeal
Trustee for the MTGI Trust v Johnston
[2016] FCAFC 140
However, it is necessary to engage with the appeal grounds to consider
whether they raise an arguable case of appealable
error. An appellant must
ordinarily demonstrate that there is such a case in order to be granted
permission to appeal, as an appeal
cannot succeed in the absence of error
Coal & Allied Operations Pty Ltd v AIRC
(2000) 203 CLR 194
However, the fact that a member at first instance may have made an error is not
necessarily a sufficient basis to grant
permission to appeal.
Grounds of appeal and public interest contentions
Mr Lin has raised 8 grounds of appeal. Most of those grounds assert
factual errors.
ground asserts the Deputy President erred in finding
that, in response to a show cause letter, Mr Lin did not give an explanation
his absences.
On 22 April 2025 the Respondent sent Mr Lin a show cause letter
proposing to terminate his employment on 30 April and requesting an
explanation.
Mr Lin asserts he did provide explanations – relying in his response on
correspondence between him and his employer
earlier in 2025 about his
availability to be rostered.
A review of the Deputy President’s reasons reveals the Deputy
President did not find that there had been no response
to the show
cause letter but found that Mr Lin did not provide an adequate explanation for
his absences. The Deputy President did
not mistake the facts or disregard the
earlier communications from Mr Lin. So much is evident from comments made by the
Deputy President
in a number of places in the
transcript.
Ground one does not reveal any error.
ground asserts that the Deputy President was wrong
to find that the Respondent only employed 45
The Applicant
maintains that the employer is much larger than the Deputy President found,
contending that the staffing complement
was in excess of 600. The Respondent
does not challenge that assertion but says the error is irrelevant.
We infer from the record of the first instance proceedings that the
figure of 45 was derived from the Form F3 response that the Respondent
the hearing, Mr Lin sought to challenge that number. The Deputy President stated
that he could have done so when he filed
his evidence, but the time for that had
President considered the size of the Respondent’s business for the
purposes of s 387(f) and
and found that
the procedures followed to effect the dismissal were appropriate for a business
with 45 employees and were a neutral
consideration in determining whether the
dismissal was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
Even were we to accept that an error of fact had been established in
this regard, we are not of the view it would constitute a significant
the sense required by s 400(2). The consideration of the size of the business
and its human resources expertise, which the
Deputy President ultimately found
to be neutral factors, do not appear to have been particularly significant to
the Deputy President’s
overall assessment.
We find the second ground discloses no significant error.
The remaining grounds can be dealt with in short order. None of them
demonstrate appealable error.
Mr Lin requested, and was provided by telephone, an interpreter at
the hearing. During the course of the hearing the interpreter’s
in and out. On those occasions when the interpreter was not on the line Mr Lin
continued to present his case. No complaint
was made by him about his ability to
understand what was going on, nor that he could not properly present his case.
Nonetheless,
Mr Lin asserts that this resulted in him being hampered in
presenting his case, effectively denying him procedural fairness. We have
reviewed the transcript of the Hearing and are not satisfied that Mr Lin’s
language skills were such as to give rise to a denial
of procedural fairness. It
is clear that he was able to follow the proceedings and there was an interpreter
available, albeit not
for the full duration of the hearing. The unavailability
of the interpreter during segments of the hearing did not give rise to a
of procedural fairness.
fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth
go to a range of factual findings made by the Deputy President none of which
were determinative of the proceeding, nor prominent
in the Deputy
President’s reasoning.
An appeal cannot succeed in the absence of error. Mr Lin’s
appeal does not raise an arguable case of appealable error. Consequently,
is no public interest in granting permission to appeal.
For the foregoing reasons permission to appeal is refused.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Mr Y Lin, the Appellant on his own behalf.
Mr S Zhang for the Respondent
Hearing details:
Via Microsoft Teams Video
See PN 801-802
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (348 KB)
Signed PDF/A format