URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/FCA/1978/50.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re Ku-Ring-Gai Co-Operative Building Society (No 12) Ltd [1978] FCA 50; (1978) 36 FLR 134 (18 December 1978)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Re KU-RING-GAI CO-OPERATIVE BUILDING SOCIETY (No. 12) LTD.
[1978] FCA 50
(1978) 36 FLR 134
Trade Practices
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GENERAL DIVISION
Bowen C.J.(1), Brennan(2) and Deane(3) JJ.
Trade Practices - Exclusive dealing - Terminating building societies -
Whether trading or financial corporations - Exemption by
State regulation -
Whether State legislative authorization specific - Whether activity "in trade
or commerce" - Nature of condition
of supply - Whether acts done in concert
against suppliers -
Trade Practices Act 1974
(1)(b), 163A (1) - The Constitution (63 & 64 Vict., c. 12), s. 51 (xx) -
Co-operation Act, 1973 (N.S.W.), s. 82 - Co-operatives Regulations,
35A - Trade Practices (Removal of Exceptions) Regulations 1975, reg. 3.
The applicants sought declaratory relief, pursuant
Trade Practices
") as to the operation and effect of the
in relation to
a practice of imposing, in respect of loans which each applicant made to its
members, a requirement that the property
mortgaged to secure repayment of the
loan be insured with a nominated insurer. The commission took the view that
the practice contravened
the exclusive dealing provisions in
and proposed to institute proceedings under the
against the applicants in
the event of it obtaining evidence of such a practice in the future.
The applicants were co-operative terminating building societies incorporated
under the Co-operation Act, 1923 (N.S.W.). The object
of each was the raising
of a fund so as to make loans to its members.
The special case in respect of each applicant raised eight different
questions. The questions raised for the consideration of the
court were: (1)
Whether upon the facts stated in this case this Court should in the exercise
of its jurisdiction under s. 163A of
Trade Practices Act 1974
make any of
the declarations hereinafter referred to; (2) Whether such society is a
trading corporation formed within the limits
of Australia as defined in
Trade Practices Act 1974
; (3) Whether such society is a financial
corporation formed within the limits of Australia as defined in
Trade Practices Act 1974
; (4) Whether such society is otherwise a
"corporation" as defined in
Trade Practices Act 1974
Whether, in so far as the provisions of
purport to apply to such
society, the same are outside the powers of the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of Australia; (6) Whether,
in so far as the provisions of the Act apply to
such society, a requirement by such society that its members who borrow money
such society on the security of real property insure the same in the
names of the society as mortgagee and the member as mortgagor
respective rights and interests with a company nominated or approved by such
society, is in contravention of the provisions
of s. 47 of the Act; (7)
Whether, if s. 47 of the Act applies to the society, the provisions of s. 51
of the Act require that regard
shall not be had to any requirement by the
society that its members who borrow money from the society on the security of
real property
insure the same in the joint names of the member as mortgagor
and the society as mortgagee for their respective rights and interests
company nominated or approved by the society in determining whether a
contravention of the said s. 47 has been committed;
(8) Whether it is within
the jurisdiction of this Court conferred by s. 163A of the said Act or any
other statutory provision to
make the declaration set forth in par.(5).
Held, as to the questions so stated: (1) Per curiam. Yes. Section 163A of
the Act enables a person to institute proceedings in the
Federal Court
seeking, in relation to a matter arising under the Act, a declaration as to
the operation or effect of s. 47 of the
Act. The question of the lawfulness of
the conduct is a matter arising under the Act in relation to the operation or
effect of s.
47. The resolution of the question is important to the applicants
in determining their method of conducting their future activities
commission in the performance of its duty to seek to ensure observance of the
provisions of the Act.
(2) Per curiam. It is unnecessary to answer this question as question (3) is
answered in the affirmative.
(3) Per curiam. Yes. Each applicant was formed to carry on a business of
dealing in finance and in fact carried on such a business,
and accordingly,
was a financial corporation within the meaning of the phrase as used in s. 51
(xx) of the Constitution and in the
definition of corporation in s. 4(1) of
The Queen v. Trade Practices Tribunal; Ex parte St. George County Council
[1974] HCA 7
(1974), 130 CLR 533
, considered.
(4) Per curiam. It is unnecessary to answer this question.
(5) Per curiam. No. Each applicant was a financial corporation within the
meaning of s. 51 (xx) of the Constitution.
(6) Per Deane J., Brennan J. concurring, Bowen C.J. dissenting. Yes. Three
separate arguments were advanced on behalf of the applicants
in respect of
this question: (i) the lending by the applicants to their members was not in
trade or commerce; (ii) the condition
or requirement that the member insure
with a particular nominated insurer was not within the scope of s. 47 of the
Act as first,
the condition was not a condition imposed by the applicant and,
secondly, in any event, was not a condition that the member "acquire
within the meaning of s. 47(6); (iii) the provisions of s. 51(2A) of the Act
were applicable to avoid any contravention
of s. 47 which might otherwise be
involved. Section 51 (2A) provides, for present purposes, that in determining
whether a contravention
of s. 47 has been committed, regard shall not be had
to any acts done, other than in the course of trade or commerce, in concert
ultimate users or consumers of services against the suppliers of those
Re (i) - The phrase "trade or commerce" cannot be restricted to ordinary
trading and commercial activities in "open" markets. The
applicants were
involved in business dealings in finance with their respective members. This
lending was, for the purposes of s.
47 of the Act, in trade or commerce. Re
(ii) - The practice of exclusive dealing involves supply upon condition. It
does not matter
whether the supply of services upon condition arises from the
rules of the applicants or from the actions of the applicants. As to
second argument, the rights of the co-insured under a joint insurance policy
constitute services for the purposes of s. 47(6)
and accordingly the condition
amounted to a condition as to the acquisition of services. Re (iii) - It is
impossible to regard the
provision in the rules as being, or constituting the
result of, an act done in concert by members of an applicant against that
or by an applicant and its members against a particular insurer or
insurers generally. Accordingly, s. 51(2A) had no application
to the present
circumstances.
Per Bowen C.J., dissenting. In order to answer question (6) it must be
determined whether the practice of supplying loans upon the
condition that
members insure with a specified insurer was "in trade or commerce" for the
purposes of s. 47 of the Act. The activities
of the applicants must be looked
at in their full context. A variety of considerations showed that the lending
of money to members,
which was the principal activity of the applicants, was
not a trading activity. The degree of mutuality excluded the commercial
which was a necessary part of trade or commerce. There was no
contravention of s. 47 of the Act and question (6) should be answered
(7) Per Deane J. (Brennan J. concurring). No. Section 82 of the Co-operation
Act provides, inter alia, that the rules of a building
society shall contain
"such other matters as may be prescribed by regulation". Regulation 35A, made
pursuant to the Co-operation
Act, prescribes that the rules of a building
society shall include: "The manner in which the insurance of any building or
the subject of a mortgage to a society is to be effected and whether
the insurance of that building or those premises is required
to be effected
with an insurance company or insurance society specified, nominated or
approved by the society or the board." The
provisions of reg. 35A do not
specifically authorize or approve any particular provision in the rules of a
registered society requiring
insurance with a nominated insurer. Nor do such
provisions specifically approve either the act of lending to members on the
that insurance must be effected with a particular nominated insurer
or the terms or content of such a condition.
(8) Per curiam. Yes. A dispute between the commission and a person as to
whether an actual or proposed course of conduct of that
person will constitute
a contravention of the provisions of a section of the Act was a "matter"
arising under the Act within the
meaning of s. 163A. Accordingly, the court
was able, pursuant to s. 163A, to grant declaratory relief embodying the
answer to the
question in par. (5).
Sydney, 1978, March 7, 8; December 15, 18. 18:12:1978
SPECIAL CASE.
The applicants, two co-operative building societies, sought declarations as
to the operation and effect of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
in relation to the
practice of imposing, in respect of loans which each applicant makes to its
members, a requirement that the property
mortgaged to secure repayment of the
loan be insured with a particular nominated insurer. The special case in
respect of each applicant
raised eight different questions.
J.C.S. Burchett Q.C. and D.G. Hill, for the applicants.
L.J. Priestley Q.C. and P.S. Hastings, for the respondent.
D.M.J. Bennett, A.R. Emmett and L. Cashion, for the Commonwealth
Attorney-General.
Cur. adv. vult.
Solicitors for the applicants: Church & Grace.
Solicitor for the respondent: Alan R. Neaves (Commonwealth Crown Solicitor).
Solicitor for the Attorney-General: Alan R. Neaves (Commonwealth Crown
Solicitor).
B.D. Lawrence
December 18.
The following written judgments were delivered.
BOWEN C.J. I agree with the summary of the facts and the answers given by
Deane J. to questions (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (h) raised in the stated
case. I agree with the reasons for judgment in relation
to those answers
prepared by Deane J. but wish to add something in relation to question (c). I
would answer questions (f) and (g)
"No". I give my reasons for doing so and
refer to the facts in so far as it is necessary to do so in stating those
reasons. (at p137)
2. Question (c) asks whether the applicant societies are financial
corporations formed within the limits of Australia. The authorities
phrase "financial corporation" in s. 51(xx) of the Constitution are meagre. We
have the authority of Isaacs J. in Huddart
Parker & Co. Pty. Ltd. v. Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
(1909) 8 CLR 330
, at pp 405-407 for the view that the power in s. 51(xx) was
granted to the Commonwealth Parliament in order to ensure there was
national authority able to control the transactions of bodies of considerable
size, wealth and influence, which might be
harmful to the public. Isaacs J.
also said (1909) 8 CLR, at p 395 that s. 51(xx) empowers the Commonwealth
Parliament to regulate
the conduct of the corporations therein described in
their dealings with the public. This, however, assumes that the object to
the power of the Commonwealth Parliament under s. 51(xx) extends has
already been ascertained. It does not assist in determining
what corporations
are included in the phrase "financial corporations" (cf. The Queen v. Trade
Practices Tribunal; Ex parte St. George
County Council(3).
[1974] HCA 7
(1974) 130 CLR 533
at p 574 ). (at p138)
3. Counsel for the applicant societies submitted that, for the purposes of s.
51(xx) of the Constitution and
Trade Practices Act 1974
financial corporation is a corporation that has a purpose of trading in money,
evinced either in its constituent documents, or
in its activities, or in a
combination of both. If that argument is sound, it would seem that no
corporation is included within
as a financial corporation, which
would not also be properly characterized as a trading corporation. Trading
includes trading in
intangibles such as money, as well as in goods. Counsel
for the applicants argued that in 1900 it may have been thought that a trading
corporation would only comprehend a corporation buying or selling goods, that
being then a current conception of trade. In order
to include within the scope
of legislative power those corporations which commercially borrowed, lent or
otherwise dealt in money,
the words "or financial" were included in
But, it was said, the commercial nature of a trading corporation should also
attach to a financial corporation. (at p138)
4. I do not consider that there is any reason for interpreting
as to subordinate the meaning of "financial" to that of "trading". In my
opinion a financial corporation is one which borrows
and lends or otherwise
deals in finance as its principal or characteristic activity or, depending on
which approach one takes, it
is a corporation formed for the purpose of
borrowing and lending or otherwise dealing in finance. If it does so in the
way of trade
it may also be a trading corporation, but that is not a necessary
feature of a financial corporation. The phrase "trading or financial
corporations" has a distributive operation, and neither adjective qualifies
the other. Furthermore, although the connotation of the
words used in
remains constant, their denotation may change (The King v. Brislan; Ex
parte Williams
[1935] HCA 78
(1935) 54 CLR 262
). (at p138)
5. Do the applicant societies fall within the words "financial corporations"?
The purpose and activities of the applicants are directed
to satisfying social
needs for housing for low income earners with dependants. Section 6(1) of the
Co-operation Act, 1923 (N.S.W.)
provides that the objects of co-operative
societies are the promotion of the economic or social interests of their
members. In this
sense the applicants are naturally described as "co-operative
societies", or (being incorporated) "co-operative corporations". On
hand the means used to attain these objects is the borrowing and lending of
money at relatively low rates of interest.
It was to do this that the
societies were incorporated. In this sense the societies are "financial
corporations". (at p139)
6. Two tests relating to categorization are suggested by the St. George
County Council case
[1974] HCA 7
(1974) 130 CLR 533
and the applicants satisfy both. The
purposes, and also the activities of each applicant are financial ones.
Accordingly, I consider
that the applicants do fall within the definition of
"corporation" in s. 4(1) of the Act, being financial corporations formed
the limits of Australia. I agree that question (c) should be answered
"Yes". (at p139)
7. In order to answer (f), it must be determined whether the practice of
supplying loans upon the condition that the members insure
with a specified
insurer is "in trade or commerce" for the purposes of s. 47 of the Act. (at
8. The terms "trade" and "commerce" are ordinary terms which describe all the
mutual communings, the negotiations verbal and by correspondence,
the bargain,
the transport and the delivery which comprise commercial arrangements (W. & A.
McArthur Ltd. v. State of Queensland
[1920] HCA 77
(1920) 28 CLR 530
, at p 547 ). The word
"trade" is used with its accepted English meaning: traffic by way of sale of
exchange or commercial dealing
(Commissioners of Taxation v. Kirk
, at p 592 per Lord Davey; W. & A. McArthur Ltd. v. State of Queensland
[1920] HCA 77
(1920) 28 CLR 530
). The commercial character of trade was mentioned more
recently by Lord Reid in Ransom v. Higgs
(1974) UKHL 5
(1974) 1 WLR 1594
. His Lordship
there said: "As an ordinary word in the English language 'trade' has or has
had a variety of meanings or shades of
meaning. Leaving aside obsolete or rare
usage it is sometimes used to denote any mercantile operation but is commonly
used to denote
operations of a commercial character by which the trader
provides to customers for reward some kind of goods or services (1974) 1
at p 1600 ". Moreover, the word covers intangibles, such as banking
transactions, as well as the movement of goods and persons,
for historically
its use has been founded upon the elements of use, regularity and course of
conduct (Bank of New South Wales v.
Commonwealth
[1948] HCA 7
(1948) 76 CLR 1
, at p 381 ).
9. Paragraphs 10 and 26 of the special case describe the activities of the
applicants. If some of these activities are isolated from
their context they
could be described as common incidents of trade. Thus the obtaining of capital
from a bank on the security of
an equitable mortgage over the borrower's
undertaking and assets, is a common part of trade. The lending of money at
interest might
also be described in that way. The obtaining of a concessions
agreement, the arranging of insurance in respect of properties mortgaged
the society by a member and particularly the receipt of commission from the
insurer in respect of premiums paid under those policies,
could all be
described as common trading activities. (at p140)
10. Indeed, it was argued on behalf of the commission that these activities
were engaged in by the applicants as part of trade or
commerce. It was said
that if a corporation borrowed and lent money, albeit to a restricted class of
borrowers, for the purpose of
making a profit it would clearly be trading.
Profit, however, although a common incident of trade is not a necessary
attribute of
it. If those same activities are conducted as a business with an
element of mutuality rather than profit, still it was said, the
business is
involved in trade. It was argued that it was not a correct description of the
applicants that they merely channelled
funds to members for the purpose of
providing welfare housing. Instead the applicants stood in legal relations to
the banks as borrowers,
and in legal relations with their members as lenders
of money at interest. (at p140)
11. However, the activities of the applicants must be looked at in their full
context. The source of the Ku-ring-gai Society's funds
is the Home Builders
Account of the State of New South Wales, established pursuant to the
Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. That
agreement provides that the funds
are to be lent by the State to, inter alia, terminating building societies,
and are to be lent
by them to borrowers to assist them to build or purchase
must fall within a class limited by cl. 24 of the agreement. (at p140)
12. There is here evident a policy to provide welfare housing and it can be
inferred that terminating building societies are contemplated
intermediate recipients of the funds, as they are appropriate vehicles through
which to implement that policy. The benefit
of those funds is intended to be
enjoyed by the members who are the ultimate borrowers, the home owners. It can
at least be said
that it is contemplated that the terminating building
societies will not use the funds to their own advantage, as might be expected
of a normal trader. It is significant that commercial lending institutions may
not receive the funds from the State for the purpose
of being lent to
borrowers. (at p140)
13. Although the Dee Why Society does not receive its funds from this source,
the agreement has significance for it, for the agreement
tends to give a
non-commercial character to terminating building socieities as a class. (at
14. The direct source from which both applicants receive their funds are
banks. Their loans are subject to conditions and are secured.
Both loans are
repayable over thirty-one years. In the case of the Ku-ring-gai Society the
rate of interest is five per cent and
in the case of the Dee Why Society, it
is nine and a half per cent. The loans to both societies are given for the
purpose of being
re-lent to members. In the case of the Ku-ring-gai Society
there is a special condition that the loans must be used for the purpose
building new homes or the purchase of new homes not previously occupied. (at
15. I do not consider that much light is thrown on the nature of the
applicants' activities by the circumstances touching their loans
banks. The loans provide the means by which the applicants are enabled to lend
money to their members. If that business
of the applicants is part of trade,
then no doubt their obtaining of finance from the banks is also a trading
activity. Equally if
their business is not trading, their obtaining of loans
will not be a trading activity either. The major relevance of the applicants'
method of obtaining funds, is that moneys are sought from only one source and
not from the public. (at p141)
16. The next question is whether the applicants' principal activity, the
lending of money to members at interest on the security
of mortgage over real
estate, is a trading activity. Put as baldly as that it could be. The lending
of money, receipt of repayments,
attending to payment of insurance premiums
and the like certainly have a regularity that enables one to say that the
applicants have
a business of lending money to members. Further, a regular
dealing in commodities is a hallmark of trade. (at p141)
17. However, this activity of the applicants is a limited one. The applicants
do not receive money on deposit from the public, nor
do they lend to the
public. They do not advertise for members. Although they are entrusted with
approving or rejecting applications
for membership, the criteria by which they
are guided in making that selection are laid down by the Commonwealth-State
Housing Agreement
or by the registrar. Not only do the applicant societies
lend to a limited class of persons, but the nature of that class is determined
by the government. Further the applicants do not make a profit. They lend to
their members at the same rate of interest as that payable
on the moneys
borrowed from the bank. The maximum amount which they can lend is fixed by the
registrar. Although they make charges
to cover administrative expenses, those
charges are limited by the registrar. The applicants, having lent the money to
their members,
are not concerned merely with receiving due instalments of
principal and interest in repayment of the loan. They insist (in the absence
of special circumstances) that the members reside in the homes purchased with
the funds from the societies. The applicants are prepared
to suspend repayment
of loans in the event that a member is in financial difficulties due to
sickness or unemployment or the like.
Figuratively they have a somewhat
paternal relationship with their members. The applicants are forbidden to
develop a trade connexion
with builders, real estate agents or the like, by
directing a disproportionate amount of their business to them. (at p141)
18. The applicants are terminating societies. They are not permitted to make
further advances to new members out of discharge moneys
and early repayments
of principal. They do not administer a "revolving" fund. There are even
restrictions upon the making of further
advances to existing members. These
limitations are laid down by Registry Circular C45 referred to in par. 8 of
the case. When the
societies have run their course they are to be wound up in
accordance with the provisions of Pt V of the Co-operation Act, 1923 (N.S.W.).
Rule 97 of the Ku-ring-gai Society's rules provides for the particular manner
in which any surplus will be distributed to members.
19. These considerations clarify the context in which the applicants carry on
their business of providing loans to members, and the
restrictions on the way
in which that can be done. In my view they show that the lending of money to
members, which is the principal
activity of the applicants, is not a trading
activity. There is involved a degree of "mutuality" on the part of the
applicants in
relation to the members (Fletcher v. Income Tax Commissioner
(1972) AC 414
, at p 421 ). The presence of that mutuality may be derived from
a whole complex of factors, not solely the absence of profit. It
excludes the
commercial element which is a necessary part of "trade or commerce". (at p142)
20. Some guidance in discovering the presence of "mutuality" is gained from a
consideration of the application of the mutuality principle
in taxation law.
That principle is based upon the simple notion that a person cannot make a
profit out of himself (Bohemians Club
v. Acting Federal Commissioner of
[1918] HCA 16
(1918) 24 CLR 334
). The principle has been held to apply to limited
companies where there is complete identity between the contributors to the
fund and the persons entitled to participate in any redundant portion
of that fund, those persons participating in the capacity of
contributors
(Municipal Mutual Insurance Ltd. v. Hills
(1930) 16 Tax Cas 430
, at p 448 ;
New York Life Insurance Co. v. Styles
(1889) 14 App Cas 381
; cf. Sydney Water
Board Employees' Credit Union Ltd. v. Commissioner of Taxation (Cth.)
[1973] HCA 47
129 CLR 446
). With regard to contributions arising from membership fees,
management fees contributed by members, fines for late instalments
discharge fees there is identity between members contributing and members
entitled to participate in a surplus. Had contributions
been obtained from
other members or associated member societies then a disparity would have
arisen, but this was not the case. It
is true that the receipt by the
applicant societies of commissions in respect of insurance were not from
members but these were relatively
small in amount. Furthermore, we are not
here considering whether some receipt is or is not of an income character. We
are considering
whether certain loan transactions between the applicant
societies and their members were "in trade or commerce". It is, in my view,
relevant to that question to have regard to the substantial degree of
mutuality involved. Even the insurance commissions received
were really in
relief of the members, enabling their contributions to management expenses to
be lower than they otherwise would have
been. (at p143)
21. The respective contributions of the lending banks to the applicants are
loans provided by non-members and go to the relationship
between the
applicants and the banks, not to the relationship governing the dealings
between the applicants and their members. Even
if, contrary to my view, they
were regarded as being transactions of the applicants in trade or commerce,
this would not necessarily
mean that the loan transactions to members were in
trade or commerce. The same might be said of contributions received by way of
insurance commission. (at p143)
22. In s. 47(1) the phrase "in trade or commerce" appears to me to qualify
the verb "engage", not the noun "corporation". It is,
therefore, possible that
a corporation might be regarded as supplying in "trade or commerce" in
relation to some loans, yet not in
relation to some other loans which
contained the element of mutuality. However, in the present case this
disparity does not appear.
It appears to me that a substantial degree of
mutuality was involved in the loans to members. In my opinion, upon the facts
stated case, neither applicant in supplying services, that is, loans to
members upon the condition as to insurance, was engaging
in that practice in
trade or commerce within the meaning of s. 47(1) or (6). (at p143)
23. Paragraph (g) of the application raises the question whether s. 51(1)(b)
requires that regard shall not be had to the practice
of the imposition of a
requirement in relation to insurance. Section 51(1)(b) directs attention to
acts that are, or are of a kind
which are specifically authorized or approved
by a State Act or regulations under a State Act, and exempts those acts from
the operation
of Pt IV of the
Trade Practices Act
. (at p143)
24. Regulation 35A prescribed pursuant to s. 82(3)(e) of the Co-operation
Act, 1923 (N.S.W.), requires that a building society set
forth in its rules
the manner in which insurance of any premises the subject of a mortgage to the
society is to be effected, and
whether it is required to be effected with an
insurance body specified by the society. This regulation was added to the
regulations being promulgated in the New South Wales Government
Gazette No. 17 of 17th January, 1975. At that time s. 47 prohibiting
dealing appeared in the
Trade Practices Act 1974
in a form which, in all
material respects, was similar to the present form of
inserted by
amendment in 1977.
Section 52(1)(b)
remains unchanged since the
Practices Act 1974
commenced. Accordingly, when reg. 35A was introduced
requiring societies to set forth in their rules whether the insurance of
was required to be effected with an insurance body specified by the
society, they were doing so in that context. They were not authorizing
approving of a procedure to be set forth in the rules of the societies, which
could not in practice be engaged in by the society
because it was contrary to
law. That would have been futile. They were, by regulation, authorizing and
approving, indeed requiring,
the inclusion in the rules of the societies of a
procedure, which in practice the societies could engage in, if it was
specifically
authorized or approved by State regulations. Inherent, therefore,
in the regulation was an authorization or approval of the practice.
25. Certainly, it was not an express or a direct authorization or approval of
the practice. In my view, it would have been much clearer
satisfactory if it had been. But
s. 51(1)(b)
does not require the
authorization to be express or direct. It requires simply that it should be
specific. It does not appear to
me that reg. 35A lacks the quality of being
specific. It refers precisely to the class of acts in question, namely, the
act of requiring
insurance of premises to be effected with an insurance body
specified by the society. It could hardly be more specific in this relevant
respect, without descending to the specification of particular cases. (at
26. It is true that the regulation requires to be set forth in the rules
whether such insurance is a requirement. A society would
have a choice whether
or not it included such a requirement in its rules. But this only means that
the regulation involves authorization
or approval to the rules either
requiring or not requiring it. (at p144)
27. It is further true that, even if the requirement be included in the
rules, the authorization or approval inherent in the regulation
will not be
availed of unless the society in fact engages in the practice. We are asked in
these proceedings to proceed upon the
basis it has been included in the rules.
Certainly, the applicant societies proceeded to engage in the practice. In the
circumstances,
it is my view, the societies in doing so engaged in a practice
which was specifically authorized or approved by the reg. 35A. (at
28. Regulation 3 of the Trade Practices (Removal of Exceptions) Regulations
1975 provides that s. 51(1)(b) is not to operate in relation
to a requirement
by a society that a borrower effect insurance with a specified insurer. The
very exception created by s. 51(1)(b)
in conjunction with reg. 35A appears to
be removed by reg. 3, a regulation made under s. 51(1)(b) itself. On that
basis the applicants
would be exposed to possible contravention of s. 47 (6)
of the Act. However, the conclusion I have come to in relation to question
precludes that result. (at p144)
29. An argument was advanced to the effect that the practice of supplying on
the condition did not enjoy the protection of s. 51(1)
(b) for the reason that
reg. 35A was not limited to "acts or things done" in New South Wales. The
operation of s. 51(1)(b) is clearly
restricted to cases where the act or thing
which would otherwise have been in contravention of Pt IV is an act or thing
a State". The act is the supply of the loan service upon the
condition that the borrower cause insurance to be effected with an insurer
specified by the lender. In the case of both applicants the members are
resident in New South Wales and all loans are secured on
land in New South
Wales. Thus the performance of the agreement and the agreement itself are
located in New South Wales. Were it not
for reg. 3 then, s. 51(1)(b) together
with reg. 35A would create an exemption from contravention of s. 47 (6). (at
30. Some difficulty was also occasioned by the placing of the words "in a
State" in reg. 3 so as to suggest that the place where
the insurance was to be
effected constituted the State nexus. If the contract of insurance were
located outside New South Wales,
which is the State in which the performance
of the loan agreement is to occur, then reg. 3 would not remove the exception
51(1)(b). However, under the loan agreements, insurance was required
to be effected with a company within New South Wales. Because
reg. 3 removes
the exception and exposes the applicants to contravention of s. 47(6), I would
answer question (g) "No". (at p145)
31. Although the applicants are not protected by s. 51(1)(b), the answer I
have given to question (f) leads me to the conclusion
that they have not acted
in contravention of s. 47(6) of the Act. (at p145)
32. I would answer the questions raised by the special case, in respect of
each of the Ku-ring-gai Society and the Dee Why Society,
as follows: (a)
Whether upon the facts stated in this case this Court should in the exercise
of its jurisdiction under s. 163A of
Trade Practices Act 1974
make any of
the declarations hereinafter referred to: "Yes". (b) Whether such society is a
trading corporation formed within the
limits of Australia as defined in
Trade Practices Act 1974
: "It is unnecessary to answer this
question". (c) Whether such society is a financial corporation formed within
the limits of Australia
as defined in
Trade Practices Act 1974
"Yes". (d) Whether such society is otherwise a "corporation" as defined in
Trade Practices Act 1974
: "It is unnecessary to answer this
question". (e) Whether in so far as the provisions of
purport to apply
to such society the same are outside the powers of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of Australia: "No". (f) Whether
in so far as the provisions of
the Act apply to such society a requirement by such society that its members
who borrow money from
such society on the security of real property insure the
same in the names of the society as mortgagee and the member as mortgagor
their respective rights and interests with a company nominated or approved by
such society is in contravention of the provisions
of s. 47(1) of the Act by
Trade Practices Act 1974
: "No". (g) Whether if s. 47
of the Act applies to the society, the provisions of s. 51 of the Act require
that regard shall not be
had to any requirement by the society that its
members who borrow money from the society on the security of real property
the same in the joint names of the member as mortgagor and the society
as mortgagee for their respective rights and interests with
nominated or approved by the society in determining whether a contravention of
the said s. 47 has been committed: "No".
(h) Whether it is within the
statutory provision to
make the declaration set forth in par. (e): "Yes".(at
I would order that the commission pay the applicants' costs of the special
case.(at p146)
BRENNAN J. The stated case and its annexures are analyzed in the judgment of
Deane J. which I have had the advantage of reading.
I agree in the answers
proposed by his Honour to the several questions raised by the case; and except
to the extent that these reasons
depart from the reasons expressed by his
Honour, I concur in his judgment. (at p146)
2. The applicants seek declaratory relief under s. 163A of the
Practices Act 1974
. They will incur the risk of prosecution if they pursue the
practice referred to in the case: that is, if the Dee Why Society requires
borrowers to insure with an insurer nominated by it, and if the Ku-ring-gai
Society requires performance by its borrowers of
their undertaking to insure
with an insurer nominated by it. The reality of the risk of prosecution, and
the certainty that the applicants
are engaging and wish to continue to engage
in a practice the lawfulness of which is challenged by an authority competent
to prosecute,
show the present case to be one where a declaration might
properly be made, and where the declaration sought should be made if the
challenged practice be lawful (Re Tooth & Co. Ltd.
[1978] FCA 10
(1978) 31 FLR 314
determining whether the challenged practice is lawful, questions of the
validity of
Trade Practices Act
or of its construction in
conformity with the Constitution may arise. There is ample jurisdiction
conferred upon this Court by s.
163A to determine those questions: see Re
Tooth & Co. Ltd. (No. 2)
[1978] FCA 36
(1978) 34 FLR 112
. (at p146)
3. Section 47 relevantly applies to trading and financial corporations as
they are defined by s. 4 (1) of the Act. That definition
- "A trading
corporation formed within the limits of Australia or . . . a financial
corporation so formed" - echoes the language
of s. 51 (xx) of the Constitution
which, being drawn upon as a source of power to support the Act, limits the
denotation of the terms
used in the definition. It is clear that the
Constitutional phrase "trading or financial corporations formed within the
the Commonwealth" denotes two classes of corporations locally
formed, and that criteria of classification are necessarily to be applied
distinguish between those corporations which fall into one or other of the
stated classes, and those which do not. The subjects
are not amenable to
classification within the natural order, for corporations are artificial
entities having no existence save to
the extent prescribed by a system of law;
yet the description of a corporation as a "trading" or "financial" corporation
a factual activity or function and imports a nexus of some kind
between the activity or function and the corporation. (at p147)
4. These matters were considered by the High Court in The Queen v. Trade
Practices Tribunal; Ex parte St. George County Council
[1974] HCA 7
(1974) 130 CLR 533
The High Court was there concerned to determine the classification of the St.
George County Council, a corporation created under
the Local Government Act,
1919 (N.S.W.), and which engaged in trading activity as it was empowered to
do. Their Honours' reasons
for judgment show varying approaches to the
criteria of classification, and no sigle ratio decidendi appears. (at p147)
5. Barwick C.J. regarded the activity of the corporation as definitive of its
character. He said: "It seems to me that the activities
of a corporation at
the time a law of the Parliament is said to operate upon it will determine
whether or not it satisfies the statutory
and therefore the constitutional
description. Thus, in my opinion, the identification of the corporation which
falls within the statutory
definition will be made principally upon a
consideration of its current activities" (1974) 130 CLR, at pp 542-543 . (at
6. McTiernan J. construed the Act as exhibiting a legislative intention to
apply to trading corporations which were engaged in a
private enterprise and
to exclude corporations which conduct a municipal trading undertaking. He
said: "It can hardly be contended
that the legislature intended any
corporation which trades. The preamble of the Restrictive Trade Practices Act
1971 (Cth.) expresses
an object with which the Act was made. The object is:
'To preserve Competition in Trade and Commerce to the extent required by the
Public Interest'. This is naturally an object directed to - that is,
pertaining to - private enterprise" (1974) 130 CLR, at p 546
. (at p147)
7. And, later in his judgment, his Honour said: 'The Council conducts a
municipal trading undertaking. This is not sufficient to
put into the category
of a 'trading corporation' - a trading company which is incorporated. The
Council does not supply electricity
or electrical goods purposely to win sums
of money as profits. If the Council's operation of the undertaking is
revenue-producing
that does not change the character of the enterprise from
public to private" (1974) 130 CLR, at p 548 . (at p148)
8. Menzies J. rejected the activities test as sufficient by itself, pointing
to the several kinds of corporations which are not trading
corporations though
they engage in some trading activities. He added: "It is not my purpose to
attempt to define all that falls within
the limits of the classification of
'trading corporation'. Rather, I am concerned to indicate that the
classification has limits
and those limits are not to be ascertained simply by
asking the question 'Does the corporation trade?' As I have indicated, many
corporations which do trade are clearly outside the limits of the
classification and one group of corporations that is not comprehended
my view, corporations of an essentially different character, namely
corporations for local government purposes" (1974) 130
CLR, at p 554 . (at
9. Gibbs J., rejecting the activities of the Council as sufficient by
themselves to determine its categorization as a trading corporation,
trading corporation is one formed for the purpose of trading.However, as I
have indicated, the mere fact that a corporation
is trading does not mean that
it is a trading corporation. It is necessary to determine the true character
of the corporation, upon
a consideration of all the circumstances that throw
light on the purpose for which it was formed. Thus there is no difficulty in
holding that the fact that a corporation carries on some trade which is merely
incidental or ancillary to the fulfilment of its main
purpose does not give it
the character of trading corporation" (1974) 130 CLR, at p 562 . The test of
purpose of formatin is to be
answered by reference not merely to the activity
which the corporation was set up to conduct but also by reference to the
constitution
of the corporation and the manner in which it is required to
fulfil its functions. Further to this Gibbs J. said: (at p148)
10. "The crucial question then is whether, because the County Council was set
up to conduct, as its sole or at least its dominant
activity, what may, for
some purposes at least, be described as a trading undertaking, it is therefore
a trading corporation. To
say that the County Council was formed for the
purpose of trade seems to me to state a half-truth and to ignore a number of
significant
circumstances that reveal its true nature. It is clear that the
County Council was formed to fulfil a function which was given by
primarily to municipal and shire councils but which it was apparently
considered might more beneficially be exercised by
an authority operating
within a wider area than that of one municipality or shire. That function is
cast upon the County Council
by action taken by the Governor under the
authority of the Act. The principal aspect of the function is the supply of
electricity
- a commodity regarded as essential for modern life - and in
fulfilling its function the County Council must exercise its powers
perform its duties for the benefit of the areas included in the County
District. The County Council is a body whose members are
delegates elected by,
and are themselves members of, the constituent councils. It must supply the
electricity and appliances as cheaply
as possible and therefore must not aim
to make a profit. Any profit that may happen to be made can only be applied in
providing for
the matters mentioned in s. 419(1) of the Act, and will not
ensure for the benefit of the members of the County Council or any other
private individuals. The County Council has power to levy rates, and its
expenses may be met by the constituent councils. It may
borrow moneys under
Treasury guarantee. When all these facts are considered, the proper conclusion
in my opinion is that the County
Council is a corporation constituted for the
purposes of local government to provide an essential service to the
inhabitants of an
aggregation of local authority areas, under conditions
thought most likely to prove beneficial to them. It is properly described
municipal corporation" (1974) 130 CLR, at p 564 . (at p149)
11. Stephen J. joined the Chief Justice in dissent. In his judgment he said:
"Again I would of course accept that every corporation
which happens to trade
is not a trading corporation, the engaging in trading activities ancillary to
some other principal activity
cannot make the corporation one properly
described as a trading corporation. But that proposition has no relevance in
the present
case since the County Council's activities, both as contemplated
by the terms of its creation and as they are in fact undertaken,
are concerned
with trading and with nothing else" (1974) 130 CLR, at p 572 . (at p149)
12. In each of these judgments the predominant activity in which the
corporation engages or which it was formed to engage in was
regarded as either
indicative or definitive of the corporation's character. But in the view of
the majority, other features showed
the subject corporation to be in a
category which is exclusive of "trading corporations", and therefore to lie
outside the ambit
of Commonwealth legislative power. The relevant category was
identified as local government or municipal corporations, and the circumstance
that the St. George County Council was formed for the purpose of conducting
what the Local Government Act described as a "trading
undertaking", and traded
accordingly did not take the Council out of that category. The minority were
not so concerned to deny the
Council the character of a municipal corporation,
but they regarded dual characterization as placing the Council within the
of "trading corporation" whether or not it was also within the
category of municipal corporation (1974) 130 CLR, at pp 543, 573 .
13. In choosing between the categories, a number of features was referred to
in the majority judgments: the public character of the
enterprise (1974) 130
CLR, at pp 548, 564 , the purpose of the Council's function (1974) 130 CLR, at
pp 551, 565 , the powers of
the Council (1974) 130 CLR, at pp 551-552, 564 and
the nature of its borrowings (1974) 130 CLR, at pp 552, 564 . These features
regarded as the relevant criteria for placing the Council within a
category of corporations which excluded trading corporations:
see per Gibbs J.
(1974) 130 CLR, at p 565 . (at p150)
14. In the present case the relevant inquiry is whether either of the
applicant corporations is a financial corporation. Unless some
feature of its
constitution, or purpose of incorporation, or management, would place it in a
category which is exclusive of the category
of financial corporation, its
predominant activity must be regarded in order to ascertain whether it answers
the relevant description.
Its predominant activity is the activity which it
was formed to undertake - the borrowing of moneys to lend to its members, the
of those moneys, the receipt of repayments and the ultimate repayment
of the moneys to the source from which they came. These are
money dealings.
The activities of borrowing in order to lend and lending at interest are
financial activities which give to each
corporation the character, and place
it within the category of a financial corporation. It is no doubt right to
describe the applicant
societies as co-operative societies or, more fully, as
co-operative terminating building societies, but that description neither
places them in, nor removes them from, the category of financial corporations.
Nor do the features of each society - its constitution,
organization and
management, the source and nature of its borrowings, its subjection to
governmental controls - identify it as falling
within some category of
corporation which excludes financial corporations. It is not now necessary to
determine whether either society
is a trading corporation, or the extent to
which the categories of trading corporations and financial corporations
coincide. The
relevant practices of each applicant society are thus amenable
to regulation under s. 47 of the Trade Practices Act. (at p150)
15. Unless an exemption is to be found elsewhere, s. 47 (1) and (6) would
prohibit each of the applicant societies from engaging
in the practice of
making loans on condition that the borrower takes out an insurance policy with
a nominated company. Section 51
(1)(b) of the Trade Practices Act was relied
on to furnish such an exemption. It provides: (at p150)
16. "(1) In determining whether a contravention of a provision of this Part
has been committed, regard shall not be had - (b) in
the case of acts or
things done in a State - except as provided by the regulations, to any act or
thing that is, or is of a kind,
specifically authorized or approved by, or by
regulations under, an Act passed by the Parliament of that State." (at p151)
17. Where an act or thing has received the specific authorization or approval
mentioned in s. 51 (1)(b), it is incapable of forming
a part of that body of
facts which must be proved to establish a contravention of s. 47. Section 51
(1)(b) operates distributively
over each of the ultimate facts (being acts or
things) which together might otherwise constitute a contravention. That is not
say that the ultimate facts are to be so analyzed into their conceptual
constituents that the relevant nature of the act or thing
disappears. The
making of a loan on condition that the borrower takes out an insurance policy
with a nominated company is not the
making of loan simpliciter, with the
imposition of the condition being separately superadded: it is the making of a
loan upon the
stated condition. The question is whether the making of such
loans has been specifically authorized or approved. (at p151)
18. The relevant provisions are s. 82 of the Co-operation Act, 1923 (N.S.W.),
and reg. 35A of the regulations made under that Act.
Regulation 35A provides:
19. "The following matter is prescribed pursuant to section 82 (3) (e) of the
Act to be set forth in the rules of a building society:
20. The manner in which the insurance of any building or premises the subject
of a mortgage to the society is to be effected and
whether the insurance of
that building or those premises is required to be effected with an insurance
company or insurance society
specified, nominated or approved by the society
or the board." (at p151)
21. It is lending upon the condition that insurance "be effected with an
insurance company . . . nominated by the society" which
attracts the operation
of s. 47 of the Trade Practices Act. Does reg. 35A "specifically authorize or
approve" the act of lending
upon that condition? The regulation purports to
limit the freedom of a building society to require insurance to be effected
a nominated insurer by prescribing the insertion of the requirement in
the rules of the society. The provision no doubt assumes that
the requirement
is lawful, for it is not to be thought that the regulation prescribes the
creation of unlawful obligations under
the rules of the society. (at p151)
22. It is one thing to assume that it is lawful for a society to impose the
requirement, and to prescribe the contents of the society's
rules accordingly,
and another thing to give specific authorization or approval to the act of
lending upon the relevant condition.
It is no doubt a commonplace that State
laws assume the lawfulness of an act which might be an ingredient of conduct
contravening
the Trade Practices Act, for Pt IV of that Act is concerned for
the most part with trading practices which would be perfectly lawful
were not for the provisions of that Part. (at p152)
23. It is a consequence of the enactment of the Trade Practices Act that
practices hitherto lawful are proscribed by Commonwealth
law. Section 51
(1)(b) limits the operation of s. 47 so that the laws of a State may define
the acts or things which do not fall
within the prohibitions of s. 47. The
boundaries of this Alsatia are to be chosen, in the first instance, by the
laws of the relevant
State. But the appropriate State legislation which
exercises the exempting power must specifically authorize or approve the act
thing; that is, it must manifest a legislative intention that the act or
thing, if done or existing, shall not be a link in the chain
of proof of a
liability, whether civil or criminal. To be sure, the laws of a State do not
usually trouble to give legislative affirmation
of the lawfulness of acts or
things which are not otherwise proscribed, but a legislative assumption of the
lawfulness of an act
or thing is not tantamount to a specific authorization or
approval of that act or thing. What is necessary is that the State law
exhibit a specific legislative intention to authorize or approve the act or
thing, even though that act or thing would not
- but for the provisions of the
Trade Practices Act - be unlawful. (at p152)
24. Regulation 35A is not so drawn as to give that specific authorization or
approval to the act of lending on condition that the
borrower effect insurance
with an insurer nominated by a building society. (at p152)
25. I would answer the questions posed in the stated case in the manner
proposed in the judgment of Deane J. (at p152)
DEANE J. This is a special case stated in proceedings by the applicants, the
Ku-ring-gai Co-operative Building Society (No. 12)
Ltd. ("the Ku-ring-gai
Society") and the Dee Why Co-operative Building Society (No. 29) Ltd. ("the
Dee Why Society"), against the
Trade Practices Commission ("the commission"),
for declaratory relief, pursuant to s. 163A of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
("the Act"), as to the operation and effect of the Act in relation to a
practice of imposing, in respect of loans which an applicant
makes to its
members, a requirement that the property mortgaged to secure repayment of the
loan be insured with a particular nominated
insurer. The commission maintains
that the practice, in respect of which the applicants enjoy no authorization,
constitutes exclusive
dealing in contravention of the provisions of s. 47 of
the Act and proposes to institute proceedings under the Act against the
for penalties in the event that it obtains evidence of their
engaging in the practice in the future. (at p152)
2. The applicants are co-operative terminating building societies. They are
registered under, and derive corporate status from, the
provisions of the
Co-operation Act, 1923 (N.S.W.), ("the Co-operation Act"). The object of each
is stated in its rules as being the
raising, by the subscriptions of members
and as otherwise authorized by the Co-operation Act, of a fund to make loans
to members.
In fact, the subscription fees paid by members are insignificant
and the fund has, in the case of each applicant, been raised by
borrowing, at
favourable rates of interest, from a bank pursuant to the provisions of an
equitable mortgage over the assets and undertaking
of the relevant applicant.
In the case of the Ku-ring-gai Society, the moneys have been borrowed from the
Rural Bank of New South
Wales and represent part of an allocation to the New
South Wales Government under the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. In the
case of the Dee Why Society, the lender is the Bank of New South Wales Savings
Bank Ltd. and the repayment of principal and the payment
of interests have
been guaranteed by the New South Wales Treasurer pursuant to the provisions of
Government Guarantees Act, 1934
(N.S.W.). The moneys made available to the
Ku-ring-gai Society were offered and accepted on the condition that the loans
by the society
be to enable the erection of new dwellings or the purchase of
new dwellings erected and not previously occupied. The moneys made
to the Dee Why Society were offered and accepted on the condition that loans
by the society be, in effect, restricted to
enable the erection or acquisition
of dwellings within the Sydney suburbs of Manly and Dee Why. The Ku-ring-gai
Society has completed
its programme of loans to members and, being a
terminating society, its future activities can be expected to be directed
receipt of the moneys due under the mortgages granted by members,
payment of principal and interest in respect of the loan from the
of New South Wales and, ultimately, voluntary liquidation. It would, however,
seem at least theoretically possible that
it could make some future loans to
members. The Dee Why Society had not, at the time of the special case,
actually commenced the
making of loans to its members. That activity has, no
doubt, now commenced and I shall refer to the Dee Why Society on the basis
that it has commenced to make loans to its members. (at p153)
3. The income of the applicants is derived from interest paid by members upon
loans made to them, management fees, fines and discharge
fees paid by members
and allowances and commissions received from insurance companies. The revenue
outgoings of the applicants consist
of interest on the principal of the bank
loan, management fees and administrative expenses. The applicants neither
receive money
or deposits from the public nor lend to the public. Each
confines its borrowing to the one overall loan from a bank to which reference
has been made. Their lending is, under their rules, restricted to lending to
their members. They do not conduct their activities
for the purpose of making
financial profits but, subject to a loading of less than one per cent per
annum charged as a contribution
to managerial and administrative expenses and
a difference between rests for calculation of interest, lend to their members
same rate as that at which they borrow from the relevant bank. In the
event that an overall financial profit is found to have resulted
activities when the occasion for their voluntary liquidation arrives, any
surplus is, under the rules of each applicant,
to be distributed among the
members proportionately to the amount of the principal of their respective
loans. Any accumulated losses
not written off at the commencement of voluntary
winding up are, under the rules, to be borne by members in the same
proportions.
4. The applicants perform an important social function of assisting in the
provision of finance to enable the acquisition and erection
of dwellings. They
perform their functions under strict governmental supervision and, in the
performance of them, participate in
the implementation of governmental
policies of encouraging both the availability of housing to family units in
what was referred
to in argument as "the lower income groups" and the erection
of new housing by the building industry. Governmental requirements and
restrictions (imposed by regulations made under the Co-operation Act or, less
formally, by direction and advice communicated through
the New South Wales
Registry of Co-operative Societies) extend, in the case of societies which,
like the Ku-ring-gai Society, receive
funds made available under the
Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement or which, like the Dee Why Society,
operate with the aid of a
New South Wales Government Guarantee, to matters
such as permissible sources of funds, the content of mortgages given by
to secure repayment of loans, the maximum amount which can be lent to
the individual member, the maximum income of a prospective
borrower and the
maximum value of improvements of the house for the purchase or erection of
which the member seeks to borrow. (at
5. There is a degree of confusion in the special case and annexed material as
to the terms of the requirement as to insurance of
the mortgaged property
which the applicants impose and, in the case of the Dee Why Society, the
special case (par. 28) incorrectly
states the effect of r. 47 of the society's
rules. The rules of each applicant (r. 47 in each case) provide that the
society itself
shall effect the relevant insurance in the joint names of the
society and the member with an insurer specified by the society and
that the member shall reimburse the society for the premium within fourteen
days of its payment by the society. The standard
form of mortgage used to
secure the repayment of moneys lent to members provides that the mortgagor
(i.e. the borrowing member) will
repay to the society in accordance with the
rules for the time being of the society all premiums for insurance effected by
the society
against loss or damage by fire, lightning, storm and tempest on
all buildings and premises the subject of the mortgage provided that
mortgagor if required by the society in accordance with the rules for the time
being of the society will insure against such
loss or damage such buildings
and premises. Since there is nothing in the rules which authorizes the society
to require that the
member effects the relevant insurance, the reference in
the form of mortgage to the society's imposing such a requirement "in
with the rules" would appear to be without content with the result
that the only operative provision of the mortgage in that regard
is that the
insurance be effected by the society on behalf of itself and the member. (at
6. On the other hand, the special case (par. 13) defines the requirement
imposed by the Ku-ring-gai Society as being a requirement
that the member
himself effect insurance on the property to be mortgaged in the joint names of
the member and the society "as owner
and mortgagee respectively and for their
respective rights and interests" with a nominated insurance company (in the
case of the
Ku-ring-gai Society the Australian General Insurance Company
Ltd.). The special case (par. 28) states that it will be the Dee Why
practice to require borrowers from it to insure with a nominated insurer. The
statement of the relevant requirement in
this form (i.e. that the insurance be
effected by the member) finds some support in the annexed material (see cl. 5
of the Ku-ring-gai
Society's Standard Conditions of Loan). When the
discrepancy between the practice as stated in the special case and the
of the rules was raised in the course of argument, the commission
insisted that the relevant practice was as stated in agreed terms
special case and no application was made or foreshadowed by the applicants for
a variation of that statement of the practice
in the special case. In all the
circumstances, I consider that the questions raised by the special case
should, at least in the first
instance, be approached on the basis that,
notwithstanding the provisions of the rules, the relevant practice is as
stated, by agreement
between the parties, in the special case and that the
requirement is that the borrowing member effect insurance of the subject
with a particular nominated insurer. (at p155)
7. Commission is paid by the nominated insurer to the relevant society in
respect of premiums paid under the policies of insurance
effected or
maintained in compliance with the requirement relating to insurance. In
monetary terms, the amount of such commission
is not great. For the year ended
31st March, 1977, the total of such commission received by the Kuring-gai
Society was less than
$400. Such commission does however, in relative terms,
make a significant contribution to payment of the applicants' management
8. The special case raises, in respect of each applicant, eight different
questions. Those questions involve consideration of certain
preliminary
matters going to jurisdiction and discretion and of four substantive issues
between the parties. It is convenient, before
going to the actual questions,
to examine those preliminary matters and, if it is appropriate that the
substantive issues be dealt
with, those four substantive issues. (at p156)
9. The four substantive issues between the parties are:(i) Whether each (or
either) of the applicants is a "corporation" for the
purposes of s. 47 of the
Act; (ii) If so, whether the provisions of s. 47 of the Act in so far as they
purport to apply to that applicant
are within the legislative competence of
the Commonwealth Parliament; (iii) If yes to (i) and (ii), whether the
condition or requirement
as to insurance or the practice of lending upon that
condition or requirement is to be disregarded in determining whether there is
any contravention of the provisions of s. 47 of the Act; (iv) If yes to (i)
and (ii) and no to (iii), whether lending upon the condition
or requirement as
to insurance constitutes, in the absence of authorization under the Act, a
contravention of the provisions of s.
47 of the Act. (at p156)
10. The preliminary matters going to jurisdiction and discretion are whether
the court has jurisdiction to grant declaratory relief
embodying the answer to
(ii) supra and whether the court should, as a matter of discretion, grant
declaratory relief embodying the
answers to all or any of (i), (ii) and (iii).
These matters going to jurisdiction and discretion arise at the threshold. It
is desirable
that a conclusion in relation to them be reached before
consideration is given to the substantive matters in issue between the
11. Section 163A (1) of the Act provides, for present purposes, that a person
may institute a proceeding in the Federal Court seeking,
in relation to a
matter arising under the Act, a declaration as to the operation or effect of
any provision (other than provisions
not presently relevant) of the Act and
that the court has jurisdiction to hear and determine such a proceeding. A
dispute between
the Trade Practices Commission and a person as to whether an
actual or proposed course of conduct of that person will constitute
contravention of the provisions of a section of the Act is, in my view, a
matter arising under the Act in relation to the operation
or effect of the
relevant provisions of the Act. The fact that the questions in issue include
the question whether the relevant provisions
of the Act are within the
legislative competence of the Parliament of the Commonwealth does not prevent
either the dispute being
a matter arising under the Act or a declaration as to
the validity or invalidity of the relevant provisions of the Act being a
declaration,
in relation to that matter, as to the operation or effect of
those provisions. It follows that this Court possesses jurisdiction,
to s. 163A (1) of the Act, to grant declaratory relief embodying the answer to
(ii) supra (see, generally, Re Tooth & Co.
Ltd. (No. 2)
[1978] FCA 36
(1978) 34 FLR 112
12. The dispute between the applicants and the Trade Practices Commission in
the present matter is an actual one. It involves the
question whether the
ordinary manner in which the applicants conduct their affairs involves a
contravention of the provisions of
the Act. The commission proposes to
institute proceedings under the Act against the applicants for penalties in
the event that it
obtains evidence of their lending upon the relevant
condition in the future. The resolution of that dispute is important to the
in determining their method of conducting their future activities
and to the commission in the performance of its duty to seek to
observance of the provisions of the Act. The circumstances, in my view,
warrant the grant of declaratory relief embodying
the court's conclusion on
the substantive issues between the parties. I proceed to the consideration of
those issues.
(1) IS EACH (OR EITHER) OF THE APPLICANTS A "CORPORATION" FOR THE PURPOSES
OF S. 47 OF THE ACT? (at p157)
13. Section 47(1) of the Act provides that, subject to the section, "a
corporation shall not, in trade or commerce, engage in the
practice of
exclusive dealing". The next nine subsections of s. 47 (s. 47(2) - (10)
inclusive) describe a number of different courses
of conduct which, if pursued
by a corporation in trade or commerce, will involve the corporation engaging
in exclusive dealing. Among
them (s. 47(6)), is supplying or offering to
supply, services (defined, in s. 4 of the Act, to include any rights under a
in relation to the lending of money) on the condition that the person
to whom the corporation supplies services will acquire services
(defined, in
s. 4, to include any right under a contract of insurance) from another person
not being a corporation related to the
supplying corporation. The act of
supplying services on such a condition will constitute a contravention of s.
47 of the Act if two
further ingredients are present. The first such
ingredient is that supply of the services be in trade or commerce. The second
that the supplier be a corporation. (at p157)
14. Section 4 of the Act defines a corporation as meaning, inter alia, a body
corporate that "is a trading corporation formed within
the limits of Australia
or is a financial corporation so formed". Each of the applicants, being
incorporated in New South Wales pursuant
to the provisions of the Co-operation
Act of that State, is a corporation formed within the limits of Australia. The
question whether
either applicant is a corporation for the purposes of s. 47
of the Act will therefore be answered conformably with whether it is
trading corporation" or "a financial corporation". Those phrases are defined,
by s. 4 of the Act, as meaning, respectively, a
"trading corporation" and a
"financial corporation" within the meaning of s. 51 (xx) of the Constitution,
subject only to the qualification
that the phrase "financial corporation" in
the definition section extends to include banking and insurance companies
which may not,
in the light of the express provisions conferring legislative
power in relation to banking and insurance which other placita of s.
Constitution contain, be encompassed in the reference to financial corporation
in placitum (xx). (See the definition of
"financial corporation" and "trading
corporation" in s. 4 of the Act; The Queen v. Trade Practices Tribunal; Ex
parte St. George
County Council (34) and Bank of New South Wales v. The
Commonwealth (35)). (at p158)
15. The words used in s. 51 (xx) of the Constitution are "trading or
financial corporation". There is no authoritative judicial statement
ambit and it is inappropriate to attempt to frame a comprehensive definition
of them in their context as the subject matter
of a constitutional grant of
legislative power. In the St. George County Council case, there was an
unresolved divergence of judicial
opinion as to whether the question whether a
corporation comes within the words should be answered primarily by reference
actual activities or by reference to the purpose for which it was
formed. The distinction between possible primary reference points
may, in some
cases, be of crucial importance. The present is not, in my view, such a case
for the reason that each of the applicants
in the present matter was formed
for the purpose of carrying on the very activities which it in fact carries
on. (at p158)
16. The phrases "trading corporation" and "financial corporation" in the
context of both s. 51 (xx) of the Constitution and the definition
"corporation" in the Act are composite ones. Each phrase refers to a
corporation which can appropriately be categorized by reference
to activity
whether actual or intended. The fact that a corporation was formed for
purposes or with objectives that might legitimately
be advanced through
trading, or that it in fact trades, will not necessarily mean that it can be
appropriately categorized as a trading
corporation. Nor will the fact that a
corporation was formed for purposes or with objectives that might legitimately
be advanced
by involvement in financial transactions or that it occasionally
has dealings in finance necessarily mean that it can appropriately
categorized as a financial corporation. Trading activity or dealing in finance
(whether actual or intended) will be decisive of
categorization only where the
overall circumstances are such that the corporation can appropriately be
categorized by reference to
such activity. (at p159)
17. It was but faintly submitted on behalf of the commission that the present
applicants are trading corporations. Even accepting,
as I do, that a much more
extended scope should be given to the concept of "trade" and "trading" than
the buying and selling of goods
(see Bank of New South Wales v. The
Commonwealth (36) and Strickland v. Rocla Concrete Pipes Ltd. (37)), I incline
to the view that
neither applicant can properly be categorized as a trading
corporation. It is, however, unnecessary that I express any concluded
that question. The primary issue is whether the applicants (or either of them)
can, for present purposes, appropriately be
categorized as financial
corporations. In my view, each applicant should, for the purposes of s. 51
(xx) of the Constitution and
the definition of "corporation" in s. 4 of the
Act, be so categorized. (at p159)
18. As has been said above, the phrase "financial corporation" is a composite
one. It does not refer to solvency. An obvious reference
point is to the
activity of commercial dealing in finance. Another possible reference point is
the provision of management or advisory
services in relation to financial
matters. I use the words "dealing in finance", for want of a better
expression, to refer to transactions
in which the subject of the transaction
is finance (such as borrowing or lending money) as distinct from transactions
(such as the
purchase or sale of particular goods for a monetary
consideration) in which finance, although involved in the payment of the
cannot properly be seen as constituting the subject of the transaction.
A common but not invariable characteristic of the relevant
is that the obligation on each side is to pay money. The borrowing and lending
which the applicants were formed
to engage in and in which they in fact engage
are dealings in finance in this sense. The essential question is whether, in
circumstances, the applicants should properly be categorized as
financial corporations by reference to those activities. (at p159)
19. There is a number of important respects in which the activities of the
applicants can be distinguished from the activities commonly
associated with
companies whose business is that of dealing in finance. The objective of the
applicants is to provide benefits to
members by making loans at a moderate
rate of interest rather than to carry on their commercial activities at a
profit from which
dividends to the members may be declared. The fact that the
applicants are terminating societies precludes the repeated turn-over
circulating capital. The fact that each of the applicants has confined its
borrowing to one loan from a bank and confines its
lending to, in ordinary
circumstances, not more than one loan to each of its members means that the
commercial activities of each
applicant are severely curtailed. The fact that
the applicants perform an important social function and that the funds which
borrow can be traced to government funds or are obtained with the help of
government guarantees may mean that they carry on their
activities with a
degree of altruism beyond that ordinarily evinced by commercial enterprises.
All these distinctions and considerations
are relevant to the categorization
of the applicants and their activities. They are not, however, conclusive of
it. (at p160)
20. Whatever may have been the motivation of borrower or lender or of those
involved in making or assisting in making the relevant
funds available, the
borrowing from the bank by each applicant was a secured borrowing at interest
and was a commercial dealing in
finance. Praiseworthy and altruistic though
the motives of those associated with the promotion and management of the
applicants may,
to no small extent, be, the lending by the applicants to
members upon security and at interest are, likewise, commercial dealings
finance. Neither the borrowing nor the lending can be seen in isolation from
one another. Neither can they be seen as merely incidental
or ancillary to
some other and predominant activity. The lending to members is the raison
d'etre of the applicants and both the purpose
and the culmination of their
operations. Their borrowing is so that they may lend. (at p160)
21. Notwithstanding the restricted scope and limited duration of their
activities, each applicant, in my view, carries on a business.
At the heart of
that business are the commercial dealings in finance constituted by the
relevant applicant's borrowing and lending
of money and the subsequent
payments and receipt of money pursuant to obligations and rights resulting
from those dealings. Each
applicant was formed to carry on that business. The
activities of each applicant are confined to carrying it on. The business
each applicant carries on and which it was formed to carry on is a
financial business. Each applicant, being formed to carry on a
business of
dealing in finance and in fact carrying on such a business, is, in my view,
properly to be categorized as a financial
corporation within the meaning of
the phrase as used in s. 51 (xx) of the Constitution and in the definition of
"corporation" contained
in s. 4 of the Act. It follows that each of the
applicants is a corporation for the purposes of s. 47 of the Act.
(2) ARE THE PROVISIONS OF S. 47 OF THE ACT, IN SO FAR AS THEY PURPORT TO
APPLY TO THE APPLICANTS, WITHIN THE LEGISLATIVE COMPETENCE
OF THE COMMONWEALTH
PARLIAMENT? (at p160)
22. Section 51 (xx) of the Constitution confers upon the Parliament of the
Commonwealth legislative power with respect to, inter
alia, financial
corporations formed within the limits of the Commonwealth. Plainly, the
provisions of s. 47 of the Act to the extent
that they prohibit such a
corporation from, in trade or commerce, engaging in the practice of exclusive
dealing are within the legislative
powers conferred upon the Commonwealth
Parliament by s. 51 (xx). Indeed, the contrary was not argued on behalf of the
applicants.
23. The argument advanced on behalf of the applicants was that neither of the
applicants is within any of the categories of corporation
specified in s. 51
(xx) of the Constitution and that the provisions of s. 47 of the Act, to the
extent that they purport to apply
to the applicants, were not, for that
reason, within the legislative power conferred by s. 51 (xx) of the
Constitution and were not
within any other head of Commonwealth legislative
power. My conclusion, that each of the applicants is, for the purposes of s.
(xx), a financial corporation formed within the limits of the Commonwealth,
effectively determines this issue against the applicants.
Section 47(1) of the
Act is applicable to the applicants and, subject to the section, prohibits the
applicants from engaging, in
trade or commerce, in the practice of exclusive
dealing as defined by the section. The provisions of s. 47 of the Act are, in
application to the applicants, within the legislative competence of the
Commonwealth Parliament.
(3) IS THE PRACTICE OF IMPOSING THE REQUIREMENT AS TO INSURANCE, OR THE
REQUIREMENT ITSELF, TO BE DISREGARDED IN DETERMINING WHETHER
ANY CONTRAVENTION
OF THE PROVISIONS OF S. 47 OF THE ACT HAS BEEN COMMITTED? (at p161)
24. Section 51(1)(b) of the Act provides that, in determining whether a
contravention of (inter alia) the provisions of s. 47 of
the Act has been
committed, "regard shall not be had . . . in the case of the acts or things
done in a State - except as provided
by the regulations, (made under the Act)
to any act or thing that is, or is of a kind, specifically authorized or
approved by, or
by regulations under, an Act passed by the Parliament of that
State". It was argued, on behalf of the applicants, that the practice
imposing the relevant requirement in relation to insurance was restricted to
acts or things done in New South Wales and was specifically
authorized or
approved by regulation under the New South Wales Co-operation Act. The
commission disputed that that practice was specifically
authorized or approved
by the relevant regulation and argued that, in any event, the regulation was
ineffective for the purposes
of s. 51(1) (b) by reason of a failure to limit
its ambit to acts or things done in New South Wales. It was also submitted on
of the commission that the practice did not enjoy the protection of s.
51 (1)(b) by reason of express provision in the Trade Practices
(Removal of
Exceptions) Regulations that a requirement by a building society that a
borrower cause insurance to be effected with
a nominated insurer shall not be
disregarded in determining whether a contravention of s. 47 of the Act has
been committed. Assessment
of the merits of these arguments involves
examination of the provisions of the relevant regulation under the
Co-operation Act in
its legislative context. (at p162)
25. Section 82(1) of the Co-operation Act provides that the rules of a
registered society shall be divided into paragraphs numbered
consecutively and
shall set forth the matters specified in twenty-nine separate sub-clauses.
Section 82(2) provides that the rules
of a society with limited liability
(such as the applicants) shall, in addition to the matters mentioned in s. 82
(1), set forth
the matters specified in a further eleven separate sub-clauses.
Section 82(3) provides that the rules of a building society shall
forth the matters specified in a further four separate subclauses. Each of the
three subsections provides that, in addition
to the matters specified, the
rules shall set forth "such other matters as may be prescribed by regulation"
(s. 82(1)(dd), s. 82
(2)(1), s. 82(3)(e)). Section 124 provides that the
Governor "may make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act, prescribing
matters which by this Act are required or permitted to be prescribed . .
.". (at p162)
26. Regulation 35A under the Co-operation Act was notified in the New South
Wales Government Gazette on 17th January, 1975. It provides
as follows: "35A.
The following matter is prescribed pursuant to section 82(3)(e) of the Act to
be set forth in the rules of a building
society: - (at p162)
27. The manner in which the insurance of any building or premises the subject
of a mortgage to the society is to be effected and
whether the insurance of
that building or those premises is required to be effected with an insurance
company or insurance society
specified, nominated or approved by the society
or the board." (at p162)
28. As has been mentioned, there is some confusion in the special case and
the annexed material as to the manner in which the insurance
on premises
mortgaged by members to the applicants is to be effected. The special case
describes the relevant requirement as being
that the member must effect the
insurance. The rules of each applicant provide that the insurance will be
effected by the relevant
applicant. It would, however, be a comparatively
minor matter for either the rules or the actual practice of the applicants to
amended to remove the discrepancy and I approach the consideration of the
question on the basis suggested on behalf of the applicants,
namely, that the
primary question is whether either the provision actually appearing in the
rules or the practice of lending upon
the condition set out in that provision
is, for the purposes of s. 51(1) (b), specifically authorized or approved by
reg. 35A. (at
29. The effect of reg. 35A is to add a further matter to the many which must,
by reason of the specific provisions of s. 82 of the
Co-operation Act, be set
forth in the rules of a registered limited building society. The regulation
does not indicate any required
or approved content of the relevant provision
in the rules. It indicates no preference as to whether the requirement that
be effected with a specified, nominated or approved insurer should
be imposed or as to the manner in which insurance is to be effected.
requires that the rules specify that manner and indicate whether insurance
with a specified, nominated or approved insurer
is or is not required. The
question which arises is whether such a requirement that the rules of a
society contain provision on a
particular subject matter can properly be seen,
for the purposes of s. 51(1)(b), as a specific authorization or approval of
any particular
provision in the rules which comes within the ambit of the
requirement. (at p163)
30. Regulation 35A adopts, in its failure to indicate any preferred content
of the required provision, the approach found in the
subclauses of s. 82(1),
(2) and (3) which prescribe specific material which the rules are required to
set forth. The prescribed material
is designated, in the case of some of those
sub-clauses, by a general reference to subject matter. Thus, for example, s.
82(1) requires
that the rules of a registered society set forth, inter alia,
the name and the objects of the society, the manner in which the funds
society are to be raised and invested and the purposes to which the funds of
the society are to be applied (s. 82 (1)(a),
(d), (f), (g) and (h)). In the
case of other sub-clauses, the material to be set forth in the rules is, by
reason of its nature,
described with greater particularity. Thus, for example,
s. 82(3) requires that the rules of a registered building society shall
forth whether or not shares may be withdrawn and whether the society is a
non-terminating society (s. 82(3)(c) and (a)). The
requirement introduced by
reg. 35A that the rules set forth the manner in which insurance is to be
effected falls within the former
category. The requirement that the rules set
forth whether insurance is required to be effected with an insurer specified,
or approved by the society falls within the latter category. (at
31. When a statement has no purpose or effect other than to convey
information as to independently existing facts or circumstances,
a requirement
that the information be stated may, if appropriately worded, constitute both
general prior authorization or approval
of some undetermined statement
conveying the information and specific authorization or approval of the
precise accurate statement
of the information. It is, for example, possible to
see a requirement or instruction that a person state his name as constituting
specific authorization or approval of a precise accurate statement satisfying
the requirement or instruction. The position is, however,
different in a case
such as the present where the purpose and effect of the required statement is
not so limited and the statement
is not a statement of independently existing
facts or circumstances. (at p164)
32. The rules of a registered society themselves constitute the compact
between the members. They will ordinarily be adopted at the
inaugural meeting
of the society. They define the rights and duties of the members of the
society. They are registered under the
Co-operation Act and have operative
effect both as regards the matters which they authorize and the matters which
they require. The
material which they set forth cannot properly be seen as
material set forth solely or primarily for the purposes of information.
statement in the registered rules of a requirement as to insurance with which
a member must comply is not only a statement of
the requirement, it is also
the source of the obligation to observe it. The prescribed statement is not
one of independently existing
fact or circumstance. The setting forth of the
relevant statement in the rules itself constitutes both the adoption and
implementation
of the particular society's actual policy on the specified
subject which the rules are required to set forth. (at p164)
33. The requirement in reg. 35A, that the rules set forth whether insurance
is required to be effected with a nominated insurer,
may properly be seen as
constituting legislative approval or authorization of the inclusion in the
rules of an unspecified statement
on that subject. In my view, however, it no
more constitutes specific authorization or approval of any particular
statement on that
subject matter which the rules of a particular society might
contain than does, for example, the common legislative requirement specifying
that particular matters be set out in the prescribed written memorandum of a
money-lending contract constitute specific legislative
authorization or
authority for the particular provisions which appear in a particular contract
(see, for example, Money-lenders and
Infants Loans Act, 1941-1948 (N.S.W.), s.
22(2)). It follows that that requirement does not, in my view, constitute
specific authorization
or approval of an express provision in the rules of
either applicant that insurance with a particular nominated insurer is
If I had been of the view that the requirement could constitute
specific approval or authorization of a particular statement which
actually set forth in the rules, a further question would arise as to whether
the ambit of the authorization or approval extended
beyond a statement that
insurance with a nominated insurer was required and covered the actual naming
of the particular insurer either
in, or in pursuance of, the relevant rule.
34. It follows that, in my view, the provisions of reg. 35A do not
specifically authorize or approve any particular provision in
the rules of a
registered society requiring insurance with a nominated insurer. Nor do such
provisions specifically approve either
the act of lending to members on the
condition that insurance must be effected with a particular nominated insurer
or the terms or
content of such a condition. In the result, it is unnecessary
to express any view on the argument advanced on behalf of the commission
the effect that the practice of supplying on the condition did not enjoy the
protection of s. 51(1)(b) for the reason that reg.
35A was not limited to
"acts or things done" in New South Wales or the argument that the effect of
the Trade Practices (Removal of
Exceptions) Regulations is that the protection
of s. 51(b) is not available in respect of the requirement that insurance be
with a nominated insurer.
(4) DOES LENDING UPON THE CONDITION OR REQUIREMENT AS TO INSURANCE IN ALL THE
CIRCUMSTANCES, CONTRAVENE THE PROVISIONS OF S. 47 OF
THE ACT? (at p165)
35. Section 47(1) and (6) of the Act provides, for present purposes, as
follows: (at p165)
36. "(1) Subject to this section, a corporation shall not, in trade or
commerce, engage in the practice of exclusive dealing. (at
37. (6) A corporation . . . engages in the practice of exclusive dealing if
the corporation - (at p165)
38. (a) supplies . . . services; . . . on the condition that the person to
whom the corporation supplies . . . the . . . services
. . . will acquire . .
. services of a particular kind or description directly or indirectly from
another person not being a body
corporate related to the corporation." (at
39. Section 4 of the Act defines "services" as including: "any rights
(including rights in relation to . . . personal property) benefits,
or facilities that are . . . provided, granted or conferred in trade or
commerce, and without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, includes the
rights, benefits, privileges or facilities that are . . . provided, granted or
conferred under - .
. . (d) any contract for or in relation to the lending of
moneys". The section defines "supply", when used as a verb, as including
relation to services - provide grant or confer" and defines "trade or
commerce" as meaning "trade or commerce within Australia
or between Australia
and places outside Australia". (at p165)
40. A corporation which lends money under a mortgage contract will, prima
facie, provide or grant rights, benefits or facilities
under a contract for or
in relation to the lending of money. Such lending will, provided it is "in
trade or commerce", prima facie,
constitute supplying services for the
purposes of s. 47(6) of the Act. In such a case, a condition or requirement
that the borrower
or mortgagee will insure the mortgaged property with a
particular nominated insurer will, prima facie, constitute a condition that
the borrower or mortgagee, being the person to whom the corporation supplies
the services, will acquire services from another person.
If that other person
is not a body corporate related to the lender, the result will be that, in
lending money in trade or commerce
on that condition or requirement, the
corporation will be engaging in exclusive dealing within s. 47 of the Act. (at
41. It was submitted on behalf of the applicants that, even if it be assumed
(as I have found to be the fact) that the applicants
are corporations for the
purposes of s. 47 of the Act, their lending on condition that the member will
insure the mortgaged property
with a particular nominated insurer did not
constitute exclusive dealing within that section. Three separate grounds of
were advanced for this submission. They were: (a) That the lending by
the applicants to their members is not in trade or commerce;
(b) That the
condition or requirement that the member insure with a particular nominated
insurer was not within the scope of s. 47(6);
and (c) That the provisions of
s. 51 (2A) of the Act were applicable to avoid any contravention of s. 47
which might otherwise be
involved. I shall consider these three grounds of
argument in the order in which they are set out above. (at p166)
42. (a) Is the lending by the applicants to their members "in trade or
commerce" for the purposes of s. 47 of the Act? The applicants
do not lend in
the market place. Their lending is restricted to their members. The rates of
interest which they charge are, no doubt,
below, and in the case of the
Ku-ring-gai Society well below, the rates of interest which the member would
be required to pay if
he borrowed the same amount for the same term and upon
the same security in the market place. (at p166)
43. As has been mentioned, the applicants perform an important social
function and, to some extent, play a part in the implementation
of government
policies. The funds which they borrow can be traced to government funds or are
obtained with the help of government
guarantee. The scope of their activities
is circumscribed by the fact that they have limited their borrowing activities
to one borrowing
from a bank and their lending activities to loans to their
members and, ordinarily, to not more than one loan to each member. The
dominant objective of trading and commercial dealings in the market place,
namely profit, is lacking from their activities.
The making of loans at low
rates of interest to their members constitutes both the culmination and the
objective of their activities.
Their motive for making such loans is to
benefit the members to whom they lend. If the scope of the phrase "trade or
commerce" in
s. 47 of the Act were restricted to ordinary trading and
commercial activities in open markets, there would plainly be a great deal
be said for the applicants' submission that their lending to their members is
not in such trade or commerce. The phrase cannot,
however, in my view properly
be regarded as so restricted. (at p166)
44. The terms "trade" and "commerce" are not terms of art. They are
expressions of fact and terms of common knowledge. While the
instances that may fall within them will depend upon the varying phrases of
development of trade, commerce and commercial
communication, the terms are
clearly of the widest import (see, generally, W. & A. McArthur Ltd. v. State
of Queensland (1920) 28
CLR, at pp 546 et seq and Bank of New South Wales v.
The Commonwealth (1948) 76 CLR, at pp 284 et seq, 381 et seq ). They are not
restricted to dealings or communications which can properly be described as
being at arm's length in the sense that they are within
open markets or
between strangers or have a dominant objective of profit-making. They are apt
to include commercial or business dealings
in finance between a company and
its members which are not within the mainstream of ordinary commercial
acitivities and which, while
being commercial in character, are marked by a
degree of altruism which is not compatible with a dominant objective of
profit-making.
I have already expressed the conclusion that, notwithstanding
the particular nature of the applicants and the particular character
activities, their lending to their members are commercial or business dealings
in finance. In my view, that lending is,
for the purposes of s. 47 of the Act,
in trade or commerce. (at p167)
45. (b) Is the condition or requirement that the member insure with a
particular nominated insurer within the scope of s. 47(6)?
The applicants
argued that the condition or requirement that the member insure with a
particular nominated insurer was not within
the scope of s. 47(6) for the
reason that the condition was not a condition imposed by the applicant and was
not, in any event, a
condition that the member "acquire services" within the
meaning of the subsection. (at p167)
46. The basis of the argument that the relevant condition was not imposed by
the applicants was that the condition was to be found
in the rules of the
relevant applicant. The obligation of a member to effect insurance came, it
was said, from the rules which represented
the compact between the members and
was not something imposed by the applicant which was a creature of that
compact. This argument
ignores the discrepancy between the practice as
specified, by agreement between the parties, in the special case and the
contained in r. 47 of the rules of each applicant. Quite apart from
that discrepancy however, the argument is, in my view, mistaken.
47. The practice of exclusive dealing does not necessarily involve the
imposition of any condition. It involves supply upon a condition.
condition may well have been suggested by the recipient of supply. It may have
been imposed by some third party. It may arise,
by implication, from all the
circumstances in which the goods or services were supplied. Even if the
relevant condition upon which
a loan was made was that contained in the rules
of the applicants, a loan by an applicant to one of its members would, if that
were applicable to it, be, for the purposes of s. 47 of the Act, a
supply of services upon that condition. The section does not look
origin of the condition upon which there is a supply of services. The section
looks to the supply of services upon that condition.
48. The argument that the relevant condition is not a condition that the
member "acquire services" within the scope of s. 47 is a
more persuasive one.
The insurance which the borrowing member is, according to the practice as
described in the special case, required
to effect is insurance of the subject
property in the joint names of the member and the society "as owner and
mortgagee respectively
and for their respective rights and interests". Both
member and society have a legitimate interest in ensuring that the interest
both in the mortgaged premises is covered by a mutually acceptable policy of
insurance. From the point of view of the member,
it is plainly desirable that
the society's indemnity under the insurance of its interest as mortgagee does
not involve consequential
rights of subrogation in the insurer against
himself. From the point of view of the society, adequate insurance of the
member's equity
in the mortgaged property enhances the value of the member's
personal convenant and permits, in the event of destruction or damage,
degree of flexibility which might otherwise be unavailable. Indeed, insurance
which is confined to the mortgagee's interests only
will, in the event of
damage, plainly be likely to raise difficult problems in quantifying the loss
actually suffered by the mortgagee.
From the point of view of both mortgagor
and mortgagee, a joint policy with one insurer prevents, in the event of
destruction or
damage, disputes between insurers as to quantum of respective
liability and eliminates the possibility of a short fall resulting
in the cover provided by separate policies. (at p168)
49. It was not contended on behalf of the commission that any contravention
of s. 47 would be involved if the condition as to insurance
was restricted to
coverage of the interest of the relevant applicant, as mortgagee, in the
mortgaged property. It would seem a condition
which was so limited would not
be within s. 47 (6) for the reason that it would relate to acquisition of the
relevant services by
the applicant itself through the member as its agent. The
issue between the parties is whether the consideration or requirement is
within s. 47 (6) to the extent that it requires insurance in respect of the
interest of the member. (at p168)
50. The condition of supply to which s. 47(6) of the Act refers is, for
present purposes, a condition that the recipient of the primary
services "will
acquire services of a particular kind or description" from a third person not
being a body corporate related to the
supplier of the primary services. The
supply to which s. 47(6) refers is supply upon such a condition. Can it
properly be said that
supply upon a condition that supplier and recipient
will, in association and in their joint names and in respect of their
rights and interests insure a mortgaged property comes within a
proscription of supply upon condition that the recipient will acquire
services? The resolution of this question is to be found within the definition
of "services" contained in s. 4 of the Act. (at p169)
51. Section 4 of the Act defines services, for present purposes, as
including, "any rights . . . benefits, privileges or facilities
that are, or
are to be, provided, granted or conferred in trade or commerce, and without
limiting the generality of the foregoing,
includes the rights, benefits,
privileges or facilities that are, or are to be provided, granted or conferred
under - . . . (b) a
contract of insurance . . ." (italics added). As a matter
of language, the phrase "any rights" is apt to include a right which is
jointly as well as a right which is held independently. The rights of a
co-insured under a joint policy of insurance come within
its purview. The
substitution of the phrase "the rights" in that part of the definition which
expressly refers to rights under a
policy of insurance is in the context of a
provision that that part of the definition shall not limit the generality of
gone before. In that context, the reference to "the rights . . .
under a contract of insurance" should be interpreted as referring
not only to
the undivided totality of rights of the independent insured but also to any
right which a co-insured or any other person
might severally or jointly
acquire under a contract of insurance. Once the conclusion is reached that the
rights of a co-insured
under a joint insurance policy constitute "services"
for the purposes of s. 47(6), a condition that the borrowing member effect
on the mortgaged property "in the joint names of the member and
Society as owner and mortgagee respectively and for their respective
and interests" can be seen as a condition as to an acquisition of services for
the purposes of the section. (at p169)
52. It follows that the fact that the condition relates to joint insurance by
the lending applicant and the borrowing member prevents
neither the condition
being, for the purposes of s. 47(6), a condition that the borrowing member
will acquire services nor the supply
upon that condition being a proscribed
supply for the purposes of that subsection. (at p169)
53. (c) Are the provisions of s. 51(2A) of the Act applicable to avoid any
contravention of s. 47 which might otherwise be involved?
Section 51 (2A)
provides, for present purposes, that in determining whether a contravention of
the provisions of s. 47 has been committed,
regard shall not be had to any
acts done, otherwise than in the course of trade or commerce, in concert by
ultimate users or consumers
of services against the suppliers of those
services. The applicants argued that the condition contained in relation to
which was contained in the rules of each applicant came within the
protection of that subsection. In my view, there is no substance
argument. (at p170)
54. Even if the discrepancy between the practice as specified in the special
case and the condition contained in the rules of each
applicant is ignored, it
is, in my view, impossible to see the provision in the rules as being, or
constituting the result of, an
act done in concert by the members of an
applicant against that applicant or by an applicant and its members against a
insurer or insurers generally. There is considerable difficulty in
identifying any relevant act as being done in concert by the members
applicant or by an applicant and its members. It was suggested in argument
that the relevant act done in concert by the members
was the formulation and
adoption of the provision as to insurance in the rules of the applicant of
which they are a member. The documents
annexed to the special case indicate,
however, that most of those who ultimately became members would have had
nothing to do with
the formulation or adoption of those rules. Even if the
difficulty of defining with precision any relevant act done in concert by
members or by an applicant and its members be surmounted, it is plain that any
such act could not properly be seen as an act done
in concert by members
against the relevant applicant or by an applicant and its members in concert
against an insurer or insurers
CONCLUSION. (at p170)
55. In the result, I have reached the conclusion that the lending of money by
the applicants to their members upon the condition
that the borrowing member
insure the mortgaged property "in the joint name of the member and the Society
as owner and mortgagee respectively
and for their respective rights and
interests" with a particular nominated insurer constitutes, for the purposes
of s. 47 of the
Act, the supply of services by a corporation, in trade or
commerce, on the condition that the person to whom the corporation supplies
the services will acquire services of a particular kind or description
directly or indirectly from a third person not being a body
corporate related
to the supplying corporation. It follows that such supply constitutes
exclusive dealing for the purposes of that
section. (at p170)
56. I have given consideration to the question whether the position would be
any different if the practice in which the applicants
engaged were the supply
upon the condition as to insurance contained in their respective rules,
namely, that the relevant applicant
would itself effect the insurance in the
joint names of the applicant and the borrowing member on the basis that the
member would
reimburse the society for the premium within fourteen days of its
payment by the society. In my view, supply upon that condition
would likewise
constitute exclusive dealing for the purposes of s. 47 of the Act. The fact
that the policy of insurance was to be
effected by the relevant applicant in
the joint names of itself and the borrowing member would, in my view, not
alter the fact that
the member was himself acquiring services, through the
applicant as his agent, for the purposes of s. 47(6) of the Act. The position
may well be different if the obligation as to insurance was restricted to
insurance of the society's interest and provision were
made to enable, as
distinct from compel, the member to join in that insurance. (at p171)
57. It should be noted that the questions raised by the special case do not
require consideration to be given to whether, in the
case of the Ku-ring-gai
Society, insistence upon the condition as to insurance in respect of loans
made prior to the commencement
of the provisions of the present s. 47 of the
Act will involve any contravention of the provisions of the Act. (at p171)
58. I would answer the questions raised by the special case, in respect of
each of Ku-ring-gai Society and the Dee Why Society, as
follows: (a) Whether
upon the facts stated in this case this Court should in the exercise of its
Trade Practices Act 1974
make any of the
declarations hereinafter referred to: "Yes". (b) Whether such society is a
trading corporation formed within the
limits of Australia as defined in
Trade Practices Act 1974
: "It is unnecessary to answer this
question". (c) Whether such society is a financial corporation formed within
the limits of Australia
as defined in
Trade Practices Act 1974
"Yes". (d) Whether such society is otherwise a "corporation" as defined in
Trade Practices Act 1974
: "It is unnecessary to answer this
question". (e) Whether in so far as the provisions of
purport to apply
to such society the same are outside the powers of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of Australia: "No". (f) Whether
in so far as the provisions of
the Act apply to such society a requirement by such society that its members
who borrow money from
such society on the security of real property insure the
same in the names of the society as mortgagee and the member as mortgagor
their respective rights and interests with a company nominated or approved by
such society is in contravention of the provisions
of s. 47(1) of the Act by
Trade Practices Act 1974
: "Yes". (g) Whether if s.
47 of the Act applies to the society, the provisions of s. 51 of the Act
require that regard shall not
be had to any requirement by the society that
its members who borrow money from the society on the security of real property
the same in the joint names of the member as mortgagor and the society
as mortgagee for their respective rights and interests with
nominated or approved by the society in determining whether a contravention of
the said s. 47 has been committed: "No".
(h) Whether it is within the
statutory provision to
make the declaration set forth in par. (e): "Yes". (at
59. I would order that the applicants pay the commission's costs of the
special case. (at p172)
Declarations and Orders accordingly.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter