B v Law Firm [2011] PrivCmrA 2 (3 May 2011)
Case Citation:
B v Law Firm
Subject Heading:
Collection and disclosure of sensitive information
National Privacy Principles 2 and 10 in Schedule 3 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner
were conferred on the Australian Information Commissioner.
The complainant initiated legal proceedings for a matter relating to their
health. The defendant in the proceedings was an insurance
company represented by
the law firm. In the proceedings, the court issued a subpoena for the
complainant's health records.
The complainant's doctor provided some documents to the court in response to
the subpoena. The law firm contacted the complainant's
doctor seeking further
information and documents in relation to the subpoena. As a result the doctor
provided further documents to
The court provided the documents it had received from the complainant's
doctor to the law firm. The complainant alleged that the law
firm improperly
collected their sensitive information.
The complainant also alleged that the law firm later improperly disclosed the
information it had collected when it provided it to
another firm that had taken
over defence of the claim.
National Privacy Principle 10.1(e) allows an organisation to collect
sensitive information about an individual, which includes an
individual's
medical information, if the collection is necessary for the establishment,
exercise or defence of a legal or equitable
NPP 2.1 provides that an organisation must not use or disclose personal
information about an individual for a purpose other than the
primary purpose of
collection, unless an exception in NPP 2.1(a)-(h) applies.
The Commissioner declined to investigate the complaint under
section 41(1)(a)
, on the basis that the actions of the law firm did not
constitute an interference with the complainant's privacy, as defined in the
NPP 10.1(e) allows for the collection of medical information to establish a
defence to a legal claim. It does not require the individual
to consent to the
collection of their sensitive information. The Commissioner considered that
where an individual makes an insurance
claim, the insurer may need to collect
sensitive information about the claimant to prepare its case. In this
case, the law firm
was acting for the insurer and was therefore entitled to
collect the sensitive information to prepare a defence on behalf of its
NPP 2.1 allows for the disclosure of personal information for the primary
purpose of collection. The Commissioner was of the view
that the complainant's
personal information was collected by the law firm for the primary purpose of
defending the complainant's
claim. As the law firm disclosed the complainant's
personal information to another law firm to allow them to defend the
complainant's
claim, it was disclosed for the same purpose for which it was
collected. It was therefore permitted under the Act.
Therefore, the Commissioner was of the view that there had not been an
interference with the complainant's privacy, as defined in
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (38.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format