Mining and Energy Union [2024] FWCD 1060 (19 December 2024)
[2024] FWCD 1060
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
—Alteration of other rules of organisation
Mining and Energy
(R2024/158)
CHRIS ENRIGHT
MELBOURNE, 19 DECEMBER 2024
Alteration of other rules of organisation.
On 21 October 2024 the Mining and Energy Union (the MEU) lodged with
the Fair Work Commission (the Commission) a notice and declaration
setting out
particulars of alterations to its rules. Further information in support of the
alterations was lodged on 15 November
and 3 December 2024.
The MEU seeks certification of the alterations under
section 159
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
The particulars set out alterations to
– New Rules and
Alteration of Rules and Rule 17– Ballot.
On the information contained in the notice, declaration and the
further information supplied, I am satisfied the alterations have
under the rules of the organisation.
During a preliminary examination of the alterations, Commission staff
identified potential issues with the proposed alteration to
the rule relating to
the remedy of a defective nomination in connection with elections for
After engaging with Commission staff, the MEU withdrew its alteration
to Rule 17(iv)(b).
I have considered the principles set out by the majority in
Food Preservers’ Union of
satisfied that the remaining alterations operate independently of the alteration
to Rule 17(iv)(b) and severance will not affect
the meaning and effect of the
remaining alterations.
Rule 16 has been altered to correct a referencing error.
The amendments to Rule 17 concern minor changes to the timelines for
processes such as the lodgement of Candidate Statements and minimum
opening and
closing periods for nominations and ballots. Further amendments to the Rule
clarify that candidates cannot appoint themselves
as scrutineers. The changes
also set out a new process to be followed where no nominations are received
(outlining the steps to be
taken and the various notification obligations).
On 15 November 2024,
Grahame Kelly, General Secretary, gave consent under subsection 159(2) of the
Act for me to make various amendments to the alterations
for the purpose of
correcting typographical, clerical or formal errors. Accordingly, in proposed
Rule 17 the following corrections
have been made:
the proposed
words ‘twenty four’ have now been changed to
‘twenty-four’ consistent with the approach used
for similar changes,
sub-rule has been renumbered to ‘xviii’.
In my opinion, the alterations comply with and are not contrary to
the Act, the
Fair Work Act 2009
, modern awards and enterprise agreements,
are not otherwise contrary to law and were made under the rules of the
organisation. I
certify accordingly under
subsection 159(1)
of the Act.
DELEGATE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
See proposed
alteration to
Rule 17(iv)(b).
(1988) 79 ALR
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (497 KB)
Signed PDF/A format