Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union [2024] FWCD 1042 (10 September 2024)
[2024] FWCD 1042
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
—Alteration of other rules of organisation
Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
CHRIS ENRIGHT
MELBOURNE, 10 SEPTEMBER 2024
Alteration of other rules of organisation.
On 21 May 2024 the Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and
Services Union (ASU) lodged with the Fair Work Commission (the
Commission) a
notice and declaration setting out particulars of alterations to its rules.
Further material in support of the alterations
was lodged on 31 July 2024.
The ASU seeks certification of the alterations under
section 159
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
The particulars set out alterations to
and VIII of the ASU
rules. The altered rules are:
Definitions; and
Delegates, Shop Committees and Regional Committees.
On the information contained in the notice and declarations, I am
satisfied the alterations have been made under the rules of the
organisation.
I note that the proposed alterations relate to the
Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes)
(Cth) (Closing
Loopholes Act) which amends provisions of the
Fair Work Act 2009
(FW Act). Among other things, these amendments include rights and protections
for workplace delegates.
The Statutory Scheme Regarding Workplace Delegates
The amendments to the FW Act introduce section 350C, which afford
workplace delegates with specific protections. Section 350C was
further amended
with effect from 26 August 2024 to extend those protections to regulated
workers. Subsection (1) currently provides
workplace delegate
is a person appointed or
elected, in accordance with the rules of an employee organisation, to be a
delegate or representative (however
described) for either or both of the
(a) members of the organisation who work in a particular enterprise;
(b) members of the organisation who perform work for, or that has been arranged
or facilitated by, a particular regulated business.”
Subsection 350C(3) of the FW Act provides that workplace delegates
are entitled to certain rights, such as representation, communication
members and other persons entitled to be members, and access to workplace
facilities.
I recently considered rules regarding workplace delegates and the
Closing Loopholes Act in a previous
decision, I determined that:
• a workplace delegate must be interpreted as a person who works in the
enterprise or regulated
• rules regarding workplace delegates must not undermine the statutory
scheme regarding workplace delegates set out in the
• rules must not purport to extend workplace delegate rights or
obligations to persons who would not be so entitled under the
Considering the factors listed above, I am required to consider
whether the alterations comply with and are not contrary to the Act,
the FW Act,
modern awards and enterprise agreements, and are not otherwise contrary to
While keeping these provisions in mind, I turn to the proposed
alterations.
Do proposed rule 3 and subrule 55(a) operate to create
delegates who do not work at the enterprise or regulated business?
National Conference Delegates and persons with delegated powers
The alterations to rule 3 insert a new definition of
“Delegate” in the ASU rulebook. The definition states that:
“Delegate” means a member elected or appointed in
accordance with rule 55. A Delegate may alternatively be descried as
“Steward” or “Workplace Representative”.
Proposed subrule 55(a) states that:
“A Delegate appointed under Rule 55 is a workplace
delegate for the purposes of
Fair Work Act 2009
As noted in my previous decision, in my opinion, the proper
interpretation of section 350C of the FW Act is that workplace delegates
provisions are confined to persons who work at the enterprise or regulated
The word ‘delegate’ appears throughout the ASU rulebook
in different contexts. For example, there are references to National
Delegates, as well as other delegates in circumstances where a power belonging
to an officer has been delegated to another
This raises
the question of whether the proposed alterations to rule 3 extends the rights
and protections afforded to workplace delegates,
by section 350C of the FW Act,
to other delegates who are not so entitled.
However, the first sentence of rule 3 provides a qualification to
the application of the definitions listed in rule 3. Rule 3 begins
as follows:
“In these rules, unless the context otherwise
This sentence demonstrates that there may be instances in the ASU
rulebook where a word, in particular the word ‘delegate’,
different meaning depending on the context of the rule. In my opinion, the
qualification asserted in this sentence provides
a sufficient limitation to
ensure that National Conference Delegates and persons with delegated powers are
not workplace delegates
as contemplated by section 350C of the FW Act. In this
respect, proposed rule 3 and subrule 55(a) do not undermine the statutory
relating to workplace delegates.
Delegates of members in any area of membership
The proposed alterations insert a new subrule 55(c), which
“A majority of members employed in any area of membership
or part thereof may nominate from amongst their number a person or
act as Delegate or Delegates. Any nominees will be notified to the Branch
Secretary and the Branch Committee of Management
who may appoint them as a
The words “in any area of membership” are quite broad
and have the potential to include areas wider than within the enterprise
regulated business. If the proposed rule were to extend the definition of
workplace delegates beyond what is provided by the FW
Act, and also extend
entitlements to persons not otherwise entitled, this would be contrary to the
However, the
proposed subrule does not mean that a delegate chosen by a group of members will
necessarily be a workplace delegate,
as defined by the FW Act. Whether the
chosen delegate becomes a workplace delegate is at the discretion of the Branch
Committee of
Management or Branch Secretary. The Branch Committee of Management
or Branch Secretary can only act within the framework of the FW
Act, that is
they can only appoint a person who works within the relevant enterprise or
regulated business as a workplace delegate.
In my view, subrule 55(c) does not
extend workplace delegate rights to persons outside the enterprise or regulated
Does proposed subrule 55(e) entitle workplace delegates to
rights outside the scope of the FW Act?
The rights of workplace delegates are prescribed in subsection
350C(2) and (3) of the FW Act.
Proposed subrule 55(e) states that:
“Delegates shall have such rights and duties as National
Conference or National Executive may from time to time determine together
additional rights and duties as are determined by the Branch Committee of
Management.”
The proposed rule raises the question as to whether the subrule can
be interpreted as providing the National Conference, National
Executive or
Branch Committee of Management, with the power to endow workplace delegates with
rights and duties outside the scope
of the FW Act statutory scheme.
It is important to note that rules cannot impose obligations and
duties on parties who are not bound by the
the rules of
an organisation are a compact between the members of the
organisation.
other words, the National Conference, National Executive or Branch Committee of
Management cannot grant ASU delegates with rights
that would impose obligations
and duties on the employer at the enterprise or regulated business. The rules of
the ASU are not a
compact with employers, they are a compact between members.
This is not to say that the National Conference, National Executive or
Committee of Management cannot endow their delegates with rights and duties
additional to those encompassed by the FW Act,
however those rights and duties
are limited to matters that regulate the delegates’ relationship with the
Therefore, the rule must be interpreted in a manner that confines
the rights and duties within the FW Act statutory scheme. In my
opinion, the
alteration does not extend the rights of delegates outside the scope of the FW
As I have determined that the alterations are not contrary to the FW
Act, I will now move on to consider whether the alterations impose
conditions,
obligations or restrictions that are oppressive, unreasonable or
Proposed subrule 55(d) and termination of delegates –
does it impose oppressive, unreasonable or unjust conditions?
The general requirements for rules of an organisation are listed in
section 142 of the Act. Subsection 142(1)(c) specifies that rules
impose conditions, obligations or restrictions that, having regard to, among
other things, Parliament’s intentions
and the objects of the Act, are
oppressive, unreasonable or
Proposed subrule 55(d) states that:
“The Branch Committee of Management may at any time
terminate the appointment of the Delegate who fails to comply with the rules
the Union, a policy of the Union, or with a direction of the Branch Committee of
Management.”
Case law has established that expulsion of members on grounds of
failing to comply with a direction of the governing body or policy
of the union
may be considered oppressive, unreasonable or unjust, as members may not be
aware of the directions or policy. As stated
...the power to punish for not complying with the decisions of
Conference or the National Council or not carrying out the policy in
cannot be conceded unless coupled with provisions for the promulgation of
details of the decisions and the policy in such
a way that a member may
reasonably ascertain what he is obliged to do or refrain from doing...
Nevertheless, proposed rule 55(d) can be differentiated from the
case law noted above as the provision deals with the termination
member’s role as a delegate, not removal from their fundamental right to
membership.
comparison to members, representatives of the union, such as delegates would be
expected to have a higher level of responsibility
and understanding of
operations of the union and therefore know policy and follow directives. In
these circumstances I am satisfied
that proposed rule 55(d) does not impose
conditions, obligations or restrictions that, having regard to
Parliament’s intentions
and the objects of the Act, are oppressive,
unreasonable or unjust.
In my opinion, the alterations comply with and are not contrary to
the Act, the FW Act, modern awards and enterprise agreements, are
not otherwise
contrary to law and were made under the rules of the organisation. I certify
accordingly under subsection 159(1) of
DELEGATE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
Re Independent
Education Union of Australia
Independent Education Union of Australia
Re Independent
Education Union of Australia
Subsection 159(1)
of the Act provides that:
(1) An alteration of the rules (other than the eligibility rules) of an
organisation does not take effect unless particulars of the
alteration have been
lodged with the FWC and the General Manager has certified that, in his or her
opinion, the alteration:
(a) complies with, and is not contrary to, this Act, the
Fair Work Act
modern awards and enterprise agreements; and
(b) is not otherwise contrary to law; and
(c) has been made under the rules of the organisation.
Re Independent
Education Union of Australia
Re Independent
Education Union of Australia
Re Minister for Workplace Relations and Small Business
[1998] AIRC 1770
, Print Q6814.
Re Fair Work
(1975) 27 FLR 129
Roots v Mutton
(1978) 32 FLR 15 at
of the Act.
of the Act provides that rules:
...must not impose on applicants for membership, or members, of the
organisation, conditions, obligations or restrictions that,
having regard to
Parliament’s intention in enacting this Act (see
objects of this Act and the
Fair Work Act
, are oppressive, unreasonable or
& Ors v MacKay
[1946] CthArbRp 206
(1945) 56 CAR 561
Hardiman v TWU
(1954) 80 CAR 1232.
& Ors v MacKay
[1946] CthArbRp 206
(1945) 56 CAR 561
of the Act provides that:
(Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
to any modern award or order of the FWC, a person who is eligible to become a
member of an organisation of employees under
the eligibility rules of the
organisation that relate to the occupations in which, or the industry or
enterprise in relation to which,
members are to be employed is, unless of
general bad character, entitled, subject to payment of any amount properly
payable in relation
to membership:
(a) to be admitted as a
member of the organisation; and
(b) to remain a member so long as the person complies with the rules of the
organisation.
RTF format (541 KB)
Signed PDF/A format