SZRUO v Minister for Immigration & Anor [2013] FMCA 203 (3 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SZRUO v MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION & ANOR
[2013] FMCA 203
MIGRATION – Review of Refugee Review
Tribunal Decision – refusal of a protection (class XA) visa – no
error – application dismissed.
Migration Act 1958
ss. 36(2)(a)
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
(Cth) r. 11.11
Migration Regulations 1994
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v
[2009] HCA 37
(2009) 238 CLR 627
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v
[2010] HCA 16
(2010) 240 CLR 611
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs; Ex parte Durairajasingham
(2000) 168 ALR 407
MZYMP v Minister
for Immigration & Anor
[2011] FMCA 884
Re Woolley; Ex parte
Applicants M276/2003
(2004) 225 CLR 1
S 1925 of 2003 v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2008] FCA 246
SZLSM v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2009] FCA 537
(2009) 176 FCR 539
SZORU v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship & Anor
[2011] FMCA 182
First Respondent:
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
Second Respondent:
REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
File Number:
SYG 2058 of 2012
Judgment of:
Lloyd-Jones FM
Hearing date:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
The Applicant appeared in person with the assistance of a Gujarati
interpreter
Solicitors for the First Respondent:
Ms M. Stone of DLA Piper Australia
The Second Respondent:
The Second Respondent filed a submitting notice of appearance
(1) The application filed on 21 September 2012 be
(2) The applicant’s litigation guardian pay the first respondent’s
costs of, and incidental to, this application.
The Applicant in these proceedings is not to be identified
pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) and has been given the
pseudonym SZRUO.
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYG 2058 of
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION &
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
accordance with the Court Orders made on 16 October 2012, the solicitors for the
first respondent, the Minister for Immigration
& Citizenship, were required
to file a folder which was to be indexed, labelled and paginated, containing all
documents which
may be relevant to the hearing. This order was complied with and
the volume of material provided is identified as the Court Book
(“CB”). On the date of the hearing, the Court Book was marked
Exhibit “A” and is the only evidence before
the First Court Date directions hearing, the applicant was granted leave to file
and serve an amended application giving complete
particulars of each ground of
review relied upon, together with any supporting affidavit material on or before
27 November 2012.
The applicant elected not to file an amended application. The
applicant was also required to file and serve a short written outline
submissions and a list of authorities 14 days before the hearing. The applicant
elected not to file any written submissions.
is an application under the
Migration Act 1958
Migration Act
”) seeking judicial review in respect of a decision of
the Refugee Review Tribunal (the “Tribunal”), affirming the
of a delegate of the first respondent, the Minister for Immigration &
Citizenship (the “Minister”) to refuse
the Applicant a Protection
(Class XA) visa. It is the decision of N. Isenberg dated 22 August 2012, RRT
Case Number 1201581, that
is the decision subject to review in the proceedings
before this Court.
setting out the following background material I have quoted directly from the
Court Book and submissions prepared by Ms Stone appearing
for the Minister. I
have not made further attribution as this would make the summary unwieldy.
Where this information is extracted
from the Court Book (“CB”), each
item contains a Court Book reference for that material.
applicant is a male citizen of India born in Australia on 1 April 2011 (CB 44).
On 4 October 2011 the applicant applied for a
Protection (Class XA) visa (CB 1
– 39). It should be noted that both the applicant’s parents have
applied for Protection
(Class XA) visas and been refused, and their applications
for judicial review have been dismissed. The applicant’s parents
applied as family members of the applicant’s family unit, but their
applications were found to be invalid pursuant to
Migration Act
(CB 47 – 49). Accordingly, the applicant’s parents were not
included on the application before the Tribunal and not
included on the
application before this Court. The applicant’s Protection visa
application form was completed on his behalf
by his father, who also appeared at
the interview with the delegate of the Minister and the hearing before the
applicant’s claims were, in effect:
applicant would be harmed as a result of his parents’ experiences, which
had formed the basis of their previous Protection
visa application. The
applicant’s father claimed that he was a supporter of the Bharatiya Janata
Party (“BJP”)
and a man named Iqbal, who was powerful and involved
Muslim Mafia
” supported by the Indian National
Congress Party, wanted to marry the applicant’s mother and had threatened
the applicant’s
father; and
applicant’s father claimed the applicant would convert to Catholicism and
be raised as a Catholic and this would continue
16 January 2012 a delegate of the Minister refused the applicant’s
application for a Protection visa (CB 59 – 66).
The applicant applied for
review of this decision in the Tribunal on 7 February 2012 (CB 67 – 70).
The applicant was invited
to attend a hearing held on 14 May 2012 where he was
represented by his father (CB 108 – 110). The Tribunal’s decision
in respect of the applicant’s parents was sent to the applicant in advance
of the hearing before the Tribunal (CB 93 –
Tribunal wrote to the applicant on 9 July 2012 and invited him to comment on, or
respond to, information that the Tribunal considered
would be the reason or part
of the reason for affirming the decision under review (CB 112 – 114). The
particulars of the information
consisted of the applicant’s father’s
oral evidence in relation to the applicant’s parents’ Protection
application on 2 September 2009, which was said to be relevant because of
its inconsistencies with the applicant’s evidence,
given on his behalf by
his father, in the present proceedings. Any comments or responses or any
request for an extension of time
to the Tribunal’s letter were to be
provided by 1 August 2012.
applicant’s father contacted the Tribunal by telephone on 1 August 2012 to
seek an extension of time, to which he was advised
that any extension of time
request needed to be put in writing (CB 116). The applicant’s father sent
a request for an extension
of time by facsimile to the Tribunal on 2 August 2012
(CB 117). The Tribunal refused this request for an extension of time by letter
dated 6 August 2012, but informed the applicant that it would delay making its
decision until 20 August 2012 and any submissions
it received before that date
would be considered (CB 119 – 120). The Tribunal did not receive any
further responses or submissions
from the applicant or his father during that
22 August 2012, the Tribunal affirmed the decision of the delegate of the
Minister to refuse the grant of a Protection (Class XA)
visa to the applicant
(CB 121 – 138). The Tribunal found:
applicant’s father expressed interest in having the applicant converted to
Christianity was not genuine and the applicant’s
parents would not
encourage the applicant to become a Christian (CB 134 – 135 at [64] and
was not satisfied that the applicant’s parents’ attendance of church
services in Australia or reading of Christian
literature was undertaken other
than for the purposes of strengthening the applicant’s claim to be a
refugee and disregarded
that evidence for the purposes of the application before
it (CB 134 at [66]);
applicant would not practice Christianity if he returned to India (CB 135 at
did not accept that the applicant’s parents had adopted Christianity and
the applicant would be persecuted on his return
to India as a result of this (CB
135 at [68] and [69]);
the applicant’s claims about Christianity were central to his claim and
the Tribunal was not satisfied the claim was
credible, this cast doubt over the
credibility of all of the applicant’s claims (CB 135 at [70]);
applicant’s father’s evidence was vague and lacking in detail, as
well as being inconsistent with his claims about
the applicant’s
parents’ own Protection visa application, which had been adopted at the
present hearing. Some key aspects
of the parents’ claim were not
mentioned in the applicant’s claim (CB 135 at [71]);
did not accept the applicant’s father was a truthful witness or that he
had given a truthful account of his experiences in
India. The Tribunal found
that the applicant’s father’s evidence was not credible after
cumulatively considering the
inconsistencies and omissions therein (CB 136 at
rejected all of the claims made by the applicant’s father regarding his
experiences in India (CB 136 at [77]); and
conclusion, there was no evidence there was a real chance the applicant would be
threatened or killed in the reasonably foreseeable
future if he were to go to
India for any of the reasons put forward by his father (CB 137 at
Tribunal was not satisfied, having considered the whole of the evidence, the
applicant had a well-founded fear of persecution
for a Convention reason if he
went to India or that the applicant was a person to whom Australia had
protection obligations. It
found the applicant did not satisfy the criterion in
ss. 36(2)(a)
(2)(aa) of the
Migration Act
. There was no suggestion the
applicant satisfied the
Migration Act
on the basis of him being a
member of the same family unit as a person who satisfied
ss. 36(2)(a)
(2)(aa) who held a protection visa. Accordingly, the Tribunal found that the
applicant did not satisfy the criterion for a protection
Current Proceedings
applicant pleads three grounds in his application filed 21 September 2012,
Tribunal had no jurisdiction to make the said decision because its
“reasonable satisfaction” was not arrived in
accordance with the
provisions of the
Migration Act
Tribunal’s decision was unjust and made without taking into account the
full gravity of applicant circumstances and
the consequence of the
applicants satisfy the Convention definition as detailed in page 2 and 3 of the
Tribunal decision. The Tribunal has not considered
this aspect and therefore
committed factual and legal error.
the hearing in this Court on 7 March 2013 the applicant was represented by his
father. There had been no written submissions filed
by the applicant or his
father and when asked if he had any submissions to make the applicant’s
father indicated he had no
oral submissions to make. It was explained to the
applicant’s father that the Federal Magistrates Court operated quite
differently
from the Tribunal where the Tribunal Member asked him questions.
The applicant’s father indicated that he still did not wish
to make any
oral submissions in support of the application.
Minister’s Submissions
Minister submits that there first ground of the application is not
particularised and too broad to be meaningfully responded to.
To the extent
that the ground intends to assert the Tribunal’s decision was unreasonable
or illogical, the Minister contends
that there is nothing in the
Tribunal’s reasoning to support such an assertion. Further, if reasonable
minds might differ
in the result, the decision cannot be set aside for
conclusion has been preferred to another;
Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v SZMDS
[2010] HCA 16
(2010) 240 CLR 611.
respect of the applicant’s second ground claiming that the Tribunal failed
to consider an integer of the applicant’s
claims, the Minister argues this
cannot be made out as the Tribunal clearly considered all of the
applicant’s claims and rejected
them. The applicant’s claims as
advanced by his father are two fold (noted at [6] above). First, it was claimed
the applicant
would be harmed due to his parents’ experiences in India,
which was rejected by the Tribunal at [77] – [78] of its Decision
(CB 136 – 137). Secondly, it was claimed the applicant would face harm
because he would be raised as a Christian, which
was rejected by the Tribunal at
[66] – [69] of its Decision Record (CB 135).
respect of the applicant’s third pleaded ground, the Minister submits that
this ground seeks impermissible merits review.
Minister submits that the Tribunal has also complied with
Migration Act
, as the only information that could have enlivened the
Tribunal’s obligations under
was the information contained in the
Tribunal’s decision made in respect of the applicant’s parents,
insofar as it recorded
evidence given by the applicant’s father in those
proceedings which was not consistent with the claims being advanced by the
applicant in respect of the current proceedings. The Tribunal’s
obligations under
were discharged by the letter dated 9 July 2012 sent
to the applicant (CB 112 – 114) as it put to the applicant the
information,
why it was relevant and sought his comments and response to the
information.
Minister submits that the Tribunal’s letter to the applicant dated 9 July
2012 provided him with the required time to respond
to the information.
provides for the amount of time given to applicants to respond to an
letter. In respect of the applicant who is currently in Australia and not
in detention the “
prescribed period
” commences when the
person receives the invitation and ends 14 days after the day on which the
invitation is received, pursuant
to reg. 4.35(3) of the
Migration Regulations
(Cth). The Minister refers the Court to the authorities in
2003 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2008] FCA 246
v Minister for Immigration & Anor
[2011] FMCA 884.
As the letter was
sent by post, the applicant is taken to have received it 7 working days after
the date the letter was sent, pursuant
Migration Act
Minister submits the applicant was taken to have received the letter on 18 July
2012 and, consequently, the prescribed period
of time ended on 1 August 2012.
Accordingly, the applicant was given the prescribed period of time to
Minister further submits that the Tribunal’s decision not to grant the
applicant an extension of time (CB 117) to respond
to its letter dated 9 July
2012 does not disclose any jurisdictional error. Under
the Tribunal
may extend time for a response but is not obliged to so. The Minister submits
the Tribunal’s discretion did not
miscarry as it clearly considered the
request for the extension of time and refused it as the applicant’s father
gave no reasons
as to why he needed the extension, meaning that other than the
request itself, there was nothing for the Tribunal to take into account
considering whether to grant the extension or not. Moreover, the Minister notes
that the Tribunal’s letter to the applicant
dated 6 August 2012 (CB 119
– 120) nevertheless advised him that any submissions he made, received
before August 20 2012, would
still be taken into account. A decision was not
made until 22 August 2012. The Minister contends that the refusal of the
to grant an extension of time did not lead to any practical injustice
or unfairness;
SZORU v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship & Anor
[2011] FMCA 182
, relying on
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v
[2009] HCA 37
(2009) 238 CLR 627.
the time of the proceedings before the Tribunal, the applicant was one year old.
The Minister contends that, although the applicant
was unable to present
evidence at the hearing before the Tribunal due to his age, he was afforded
procedural fairness pursuant to
Migration Act
as his father was
given the opportunity to present evidence on his behalf;
Re Woolley; Ex parte
Applicants M276/2003
(2004) 225 CLR 1
at [102] – [104] per McHugh J
SZLSM v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2009] FCA 537
(2009) 176 FCR 539
per Cowdroy J.
Minister submits the application should be dismissed and the applicant’s
father be ordered to pay the Minister’s costs.
Consideration
applicant in these proceedings was born in Australia on 1 April 2011. His
parents are citizens of India who had previously, unsuccessfully
applied for
Protection (Class XA) visas. The applicant’s father had completed his
son’s application, which was based
on his own claim for protection. At
the First Court Date directions hearing on 16 October 2012 I made an order that
the applicant’s
father be appointed as litigation guardian for the
applicant, pursuant to
Rule 11.11(1)
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
(Cth). At that directions hearing the applicant’s father
expressed a desire to participate in the NSW RRT Legal Advice Scheme.
Subsequently, the applicant’s father attended a conference with the
allocated panel adviser and received advice.
leave was granted to file an amended application, the applicant’s father
elected not to avail himself of this opportunity,
nor did he file and serve any
written submissions or any list of authorities for the purposes of the final
hearing. When invited
to make oral submissions the applicant’s father
indicated that he had nothing to say and indicated that the Court could ask
any questions and that he would reply. It was explained to the
applicant’s father that the proceedings in this Court were
different to
those in the Tribunal where the Tribunal Member conducted the hearing by asking
him questions. It is acknowledged that
the applicant is a self-represented
litigant, however, procedure before the Court is for the applicant to make any
submissions in
support of his application. The Court’s role is limited to
considering whether the Tribunal carried out its obligations in
respect of the
hearing and the judgment record, in accordance with the provisions of the
Migration Act
Stone, appearing for the Minister, indicated that she relied upon her written
submissions. I accept that those submissions comprehensively
and accurately
address the grounds of review raised in the application and need no further
comment or amendment.
this matter involved a self-represented litigant represented by a litigation
guardian using a Gujarati interpreter, prior to hearing
I reviewed the contents
of the Court Book and, particularly, the Tribunal’s Decision Record. The
Tribunal indicated that the
applicant’s claim, as articulated by his
father, was based on his father’s desire that the applicant would become a
Christian/Catholic
and that the father was a supporter of the BJP and would be
persecuted if he returned to India. After the details of these two claims
examined by the Tribunal, the substantial finding of the Tribunal centred on the
applicant’s father’s credibility.
The Tribunal’s adverse
credibility finding and consequent rejection of the applicant’s
father’s claims is a matter
for the Tribunal:
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Durairajasingham
(2000) 168 ALR 407
McHugh J at [67].
Tribunal detailed the vagueness, inconsistency, confusion and unreliability of
the applicant’s father’s evidence in
a number of respects. The
Tribunal’s reasons, which are the only evidence before the Court in
relation to the conduct of the
hearing, indicate the concerns that the Tribunal
had in relation to the applicant’s father’s evidence, which was
with him during the course of the hearing. The Tribunal did have regard
to the applicant’s claims. It accurately summarised
and dealt with those
claims. It cannot be said that the Tribunal did not take into account any
elements of the applicant’s
claims in a manner constituting jurisdictional
error. The applicant was unsuccessful because of a view the Tribunal took of
facts and, in particular, its findings that the applicant’s father was
not credible.
a fair reading of the material before the Court I am satisfied that no
this Court should be
dismissed with costs.
I certify that the preceding
Error! Style not defined.!Syntax Error,
Error! Style not defined.
Error! Style not defined.!Syntax Error,
twenty-seventwenty-seven (27) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for
judgment of Lloyd-Jones FM
Date: 3 April 2013
RTF format (129 KB)
Signed PDF/A format