DLA Group Pty Limited v Western Australia (Summons) [2023] ACopyT 1 (16 June 2023)
DLA Group Pty Limited v Western Australia
[2023] ACopyT 1
File number:
CT 1 of 2022
The Tribunal:
(PRESIDENT)
Date of decision:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– application
to issue summons requiring Respondent to produce documents – where
categories of production objected to
Legislation:
Cases cited:
DLA Group Pty Limited v Western Australia
(Costs of Joinder Application)
[2022] ACopyT 6
Reference by APRA AMCOS (Summonses)
[2022] ACopyT 4
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Date of hearing:
Determined on the papers
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr M Green SC, Mr J Mack and Mr B Cameron
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Harris Freidman Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms F St John
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Herbert Smith Freehills
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 1 of 2022
THE DLA GROUP PTY LIMITED (ACN 003 329
THE STATE OF WESTERN
PERRAM J (PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
parties provide a draft summons to the Tribunal reflecting these reasons.
David Lewis be granted access to the documents subject to the confidentiality
regime in these proceedings.
2 be stayed for 14 days, during which time Civica Pty Ltd and Civica Education
Pty Ltd have liberty to apply to set aside that
THE TRIBUNAL NOTES THAT:
David Lewis gave a confidentiality undertaking to the Tribunal on 18 April 2023.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
PERRAM J (PRESIDENT):
question in this application is whether the Tribunal should issue a summons to
the Respondent pursuant to
(‘the Act’) requiring it to produce certain documents in this
proceeding. The Applicant is The DLA Group Pty Ltd
(‘DLA Group’)
and the Respondent is the State of Western Australia, which encompasses the
Department of Education Western
Australia. Also relevant are two third parties,
Civica Pty Ltd (‘Civica’) and Civica Education Pty Ltd
Education’) (together, the ‘Civica Entities’),
who previously filed an interlocutory application to be joined as
this proceeding. As a result of an order made on 11 November 2022, this joinder
application was in effect discontinued.
The question of costs in relation to
that interlocutory application was determined by the Tribunal on 11 November
DLA Group Pty Limited v Western Australia (Costs of Joinder
Application)
[2022] ACopyT 6.
BACKGROUND TO THE PROCEEDING
order to understand the context to this application for the production of
documents, it is necessary to briefly recount some of
the events giving rise to
the broader proceeding.
proceedings relate to software broadly referred to as the Omnis Software, which
is made up of ‘Omnis Studio’ and
‘Omnis Runtime’. Omnis
Studio is essentially a software suite for mobile, web and desktop app
development and Omnis
Runtime is installed on systems to allow applications
created with the Omnis Software to run. This software was used to develop
another software product called ‘Integris’, which is a student
information system used for school administration, student
management,
timetabling and school finance. Integris is licensed to the Respondent by
Civica Education and is used in the Department
of Education Western Australia
and by schools across Western Australia. It does not appear to be in dispute
that the Respondent’s
use of Integris necessarily involves the use of
Omnis Runtime.
20 April 1998, OMNIS Software Ltd (‘Omnis’) entered into an
agreement with Research Machines PLC (‘RM’)
by which it granted a
license to RM in respect of the Omnis Software (the ‘1998
Agreement’). RM developed Integris using
the Omnis Software and
subsequently licensed Integris to Civica Education, which was then called RM
Australasia Pty Ltd (‘RMAP’).
Respondent and RMAP (now Civica Education) first entered into a contract for the
license and supply of Integris in 1999 (‘1999
Agreement’), with
further agreements in 2005, 2010 and 2021. The 2021 Agreement is the agreement
currently in force between
the Respondent and Civica Education and includes the
grant of a licence to the Respondent in respect of Omnis Runtime but not Omnis
Applicant applied to the Tribunal on 19 April 2022 for the Tribunal to fix the
terms upon which the Respondent may do the acts
comprised in the copyright in
Omnis Runtime. This is on the basis that DLA Group has been the sole exclusive
licensee in Australia
of the Omnis Software since 29 September 2021 such that
the Respondent is not lawfully entitled to use that software, including Omnis
Runtime. The Applicant alleges that it terminated the initial 1998 Agreement on
13 October 2021 such that the Respondent owes it
a licence fee from that date
for the use of Omnis Runtime.
Respondent disputes this. It denies the Tribunal has jurisdiction, and also
relies on the licence granted to it by Civica Education
to use Integris and a
perpetual sub-licence said to have been granted to it by Civica Education with
respect to Omnis Runtime.
ISSUES IN THE PROCEEDING
this background, the Applicant identifies three ‘key questions’ in
the proceeding:
(1) the terms and scope of any sub-licence granted by Civica Education to the
Respondent in relation to the Omnis Software;
(2) whether any sub-licence to the Omnis Software granted by Civica Education to
the Respondent continues in circumstances where
Omnis has terminated the 1998
Agreement; and
(3) whether any sub-licence granted by Civica Education to the Respondent in
relation to the Omnis Software is inconsistent with
the 1998 Agreement
(including Integris as used by the Respondent), with the result that the
sub-licence relied upon by the Respondent
is invalid.
Respondent does not dispute that these are the ‘key questions’ that
the Applicant seeks to ventilate and about which
it will need to put on
Applicant seeks production by the Respondent of documents it says are relevant
to these key issues. These documents fall into
five categories. Broadly
speaking, the Respondent objects on the basis that these categories are too
broad and will result in the
Respondent having to produce thousands of
documents, the large bulk of which it says will be irrelevant to the case before
the Tribunal.
RELEVANT PRINCIPLES
have canvassed many of the principles applying to the Tribunal’s power to
require the production of documents in
Reference by APRA AMCOS (Summonses)
[2022] ACopyT 4
’). This power
is contained in s 167(3) of the Act:
(3) A member or the Registrar may summon a person to produce specified documents
or articles to the Tribunal by producing the documents
or articles to a
specified person at a specified time at a specified place.
Tribunal may only exercise this power if it is satisfied that the specified
documents have a proximate connection with the discharge
of the Tribunal’s
at [6]. In this case, any documents sought must
have a proximate connection to the exercise of the Tribunal’s power to fix
the terms upon which the Respondent may do the acts comprised in the copyright
in Omnis Runtime.
a category of production does not sufficiently identify the documents sought,
those documents will not be ‘specified’
for the purposes of s 167(3)
with the consequence that a summons to produce that category will be beyond
at [10]-[11].
the power in s 167(3) is discretionary. Even if relevance is established, the
Tribunal may refuse to issue the summons where,
for example, it would be unduly
burdensome to require a party to comply with the summons having regard to how
necessary the documents
sought are:
at [12]. This assessment
will necessarily be impressionistic and involve a degree of speculation about
the ultimate relevance of
the material. The Tribunal ought to approach
production applications with caution and circumspection where a proceeding is
at an early stage:
at [9], [12].
CONSIDERATION
Category 1(a)
category 1(a), the Applicant seeks:
(a) Complete, unredacted copies of all agreements between the Respondent, or any
entity owned or controlled by the Respondent, and
any one or more of Civica Pty
Ltd (ACN 003 691 718) (
), Civica Education Pty Ltd (ACN 086 405
Civica Education
), or any related entity of either Civica or Civica
Education (together and separately, the
Civica Entities
Applicant submits that the 2021 Agreement operates as a variation of earlier
agreements between the Respondent and Civica Education.
As such, the Applicant
says that these earlier documents are required in order fully to understand how
the 2021 Agreement purports
to sub-licence the relevant Omnis Software to the
Respondent and to understand whether the 2021 Agreement (and earlier agreements)
are consistent with the limitations on sub-licensing contained in the 1998
Respondent criticises this category as being too broad because it captures a
number of irrelevant documents. According to the
Respondent, this category
would take in, for example: (1) documents relating to the extension of
agreements, none of which have been
in force during the period for which the
Applicant is seeking payment of a licence fee and which do not vary the terms on
Respondent was granted a licence to Integris, Omnis Runtime or any
other software; (2) service level agreements relating to software
maintenance and training which do not affect or alter provisions pursuant to
which software licences are granted to the
Respondent; and (3) an agreement
between the Respondent and Civica for the supply of a cloud-based student
information system, which
does not relate to Integris or Omnis Runtime at all.
The Respondent submits that it is sufficient for the Applicant’s purposes
that the Respondent’s solicitor, Ms Gay, has given affidavit evidence that
these documents are not relevant to matters in dispute
in these proceedings.
The only agreements that are relevant to the Integris and Omnis Runtime
licences, it says, are those from
1999, 2005, 2010 and 2021, to all of which the
Applicant already has access.
Applicant informed the Tribunal that in light of Ms Gay’s evidence, it
proposed in correspondence that it would not press
for further production
provided that the Respondent would limit its case to the documents already
produced. However, this proposal
was rejected by the Respondent as
‘unreasonable’ given that there were documents beyond those
identified, such as the
1998 Agreement between Omnis and RM, on which the
Respondent proposes to rely.
accept the Applicant’s submission that the concept of relevance that Ms
Gay, on behalf of the Respondent, seeks to apply to
this application is narrower
than that which the Respondent seeks to apply to the documents in its own case.
As I observed in
at [8]-[9], the relevance inquiry tends to
narrow over time as the true nature of the dispute between the parties
crystallises, and
as such, it is rare at this relatively early stage in a
proceeding for it to be appropriate to reject the issue of a summons for
production of documents ‘on a rigid view of what must be relevant or
irrelevant’. The Tribunal should approach relevance
circumstances such as these with caution:
that vein, I consider that documents falling within this category may colour how
the relationship between the Respondent and the
Civica Entities, founded on the
granting of the relevant sub-licences, has developed over time. This may well
be relevant to an
issue in dispute, which will, in turn, affect the discharge of
the Tribunal’s power (if enlivened) in s 183(5) of the Act to
terms upon which the Respondent may do the acts comprised in the copyright in
Omnis Runtime. The Applicant ought to have
the opportunity to examine these
do not take the Respondent to submit that producing this category of documents
would be overly burdensome. It would also appear
that the Respondent has
already identified a substantial portion of the documents falling within this
category for the purposes of
responding to this application for production. In
these circumstances, I would grant the Applicant production of this category of
Categories 1(b), (c) and (d)
categories 1(b), (c) and (d), the Applicant seeks:
(b) All documents (such as release notes, descriptions, work requests, change
logs or similar) concerning all software with which
the software “OMNIS 7
Runtime” and/or “OMNIS Studio Runtime” have been used by the
Respondent, including
any changes, upgrades or revisions to such software;
(c) All documents (such as release notes, descriptions, work requests, change
logs or similar) concerning the “Modules”
listed in Schedule 18 to
the 2021 “Contract Variation for EDRFP002/1997 Support, Maintenance and
Essential Services for the
School Information System” (the
(d) All communications or other documents concerning any request(s) for upgrades
from the Respondent to any Civica Entity in relation
to software used with [t]he
software “OMNIS 7 Runtime” and/or “OMNIS Studio
Runtime”, and any responses from
any Civica Entity;
falling within these categories relate to the practical dealings that have
occurred in relation to software with which the
relevant Omnis Software is used
and the software modules the Respondent is entitled to use. Given the overlap
that appears to exist
between these categories, the parties have dealt with them
together. I will do the same.
Applicant says that these documents are required for it to determine whether
there have been any dealings with the relevant Omnis
Software that are
inconsistent with the terms of the licence and sub-licence. For example,
release notes and communications are
relevant to understanding whether the
Respondent has used the Omnis Software in conjunction with an
‘Application’ as
required by the 1998 Agreement. The Respondent
complains that the categories are too broad, including in their failure to
specified documents and in their temporal boundlessness. This would
result in thousands of irrelevant documents being produced which,
in turn, so
the Respondent says, would place an undue burden on it.
am satisfied that there are documents falling within these categories relevant
to the matters in dispute. I accept that these documents
go to the way in which
the relevant Omnis Software has been used by the Respondent which may
consequently assist the Tribunal in
determining whether there has been any use
of the relevant Omnis Software beyond the scope of any licence. However, the
as currently formulated do not sufficiently specify the documents
sought, such that the power in s 167(3) is not enlivened. As I
observed in
at [11], the summons must ‘mention or name specifically
or definitely’ or ‘state in detail’ the documents
produced. In that case, I held at [42] that the word ‘evidencing’
used in that context did not specify a document
as required by s 167(3), but
found that the word ‘recording’ was sufficiently specific. Here, I
consider that the word
‘concerning’ as used in this context does not
sufficiently specify the documents sought for the purposes of s 167(3).
Anticipating
that this conclusion could be reached by the Tribunal, the Applicant provided
amended formulations of these categories
as an alternative which, in relation to
categories 1(b) and (c), remove its claim for ‘all documents’ and
replace the
word ‘concerning’ with ‘referring to’. In
amended category 1(d), the general catch-all ‘or other documents’
removed, and ‘referring to’ is added as an alternative to
‘concerning’.
accept that, like the word ‘recording’ in
words ‘referring to’ used in this way are sufficiently specific for
the purposes of s 167(3). The use of the word
‘concerning’ in
category 1(d) remains unsatisfactory, and it should be removed.
should not be thought that assessing a summons against the specificity
requirement of s 167(3) requires no more than identifying
the gerund by
reference to which the summons operates and plotting it along a continuum.
Rather, the terms of the summons must be
considered in their entirety and in the
context of the circumstances of the particular case.
I do not see any reason to limit production, as the Respondent suggests, to
various documents in force since 13 October 2021.
This is because the
Applicant’s case appears to extend out beyond those temporal bounds, given
the long history of dealings
between the Respondent and the Civica Entities.
to burden, the Applicant has made a modified production proposal whereby
production would be limited in the first instance to documents
which have been
digitised, after which it would make an assessment as to whether the remaining
documents falling in these categories
would be required. In circumstances where
a substantial number of these documents have been identified by the Respondent
purposes of responding to this application, and where I am satisfied as
to their relevance, I do not accept the Respondent’s
contention that
collating and reviewing these documents will be disproportionately burdensome
and costly. I will grant production
of the Applicant’s amended categories
as annexed to its reply submissions, subject to the removal of the words
‘concerning
or’ from amended category 1(d), on the modified terms
proposed by the Applicant.
Category 1(e)
category 1(e), the Applicant seeks:
(e) Any documents recording any license fees paid by the Respondent under the
2021 Agreement.
Applicant says these documents will allow it to understand what royalties are
owed or have been paid by the Respondent under the
2021 Agreement and thus to
test whether conduct under the 2021 Agreement was consistent with the
limitations in the 1998 Agreement.
The Respondent has offered to produce a
document recording all fees paid by it to Civica Education under the 2021
Agreement as well
as from 13 October 2021 to date. However, it is not prepared
to include in this document details of how such fees were calculated,
proposed by the Applicant in correspondence, which it regards as an expansion of
this category. In response, the Applicant contends
that the relevance of the
documents in this category is not merely the quantum of the fees paid by the
Respondent but also the descriptions
of the rights and services to which those
fees relate. I am inclined to agree. Although it is not certain whether such
descriptions
are included in the documents captured by this category, I am
satisfied that production of these documents has the potential to clarify
issues in dispute between the parties and therefore assist the Tribunal in
discharging its functions.
these circumstances, I consider it appropriate for the Applicant to be granted
production of any documents recording any license
fees paid by the Respondent
under the 2021 Agreement including, for the purposes of this application, fees
paid from 13 October 2021
Other matters
are two further matters to be addressed. First, the Applicant in its reply
submissions sought an order from the Tribunal granting
Mr David Lewis, the
Applicant’s CEO and ‘key instructor’, access to documents
subject to the confidentiality regime
currently in place. The Tribunal notes
that on 18 April 2023, Mr Lewis gave a confidentiality undertaking to the
Tribunal in relation
to these documents.
Respondent submits that it is not, in principle, opposed to Mr Lewis being
granted access upon his undertaking and has sought
consent from the Civica
Entities to which these documents are also confidential.
a communication dated 17 May 2023, the solicitors for the Respondent informed
the Tribunal that it understands that the Civica
Entities’ position is
that they do not consent to this proposal on the basis that the Applicant has
not provided a proper basis
for this request. Under these circumstances, I will
order that Mr Lewis be granted access to the documents subject to the
confidentiality
regime but I will stay the effect of that order for 14 days.
The Respondent is to notify the Civica Entities that they have 14 days
to set aside this order.
second matter relates to the costs of this application. There should be no
order as to costs.
I certify that the preceding thirty-seven (37)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 16 June 2023
RTF format (379 KB)
Signed PDF/A format