1414764 [2015] MRTA 810 (9 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 810
(9 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
Ms Hae Seung Lee
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
CLF2014/119204
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Dione Dimitriadis
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant
a Training and Research (Class GC) visa.
Statement made on 09 June 2015 at 11:42am
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
This is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the
Minister for Immigration on 11 August 2014 to refuse to
grant the applicant a
Training and Research (Class GC) visa under
Migration Act
The applicant applied for the visa on 17 March 2014. At the time of
application, Class GC contained one subclass: Subclass 402 (Training
The criteria for a Subclass 402 visa are set out in
of Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). The primary criteria must be
satisfied by at least one applicant. Other members of the family unit, if any,
are applicants for the visa need satisfy only the secondary criteria.
Applicants seeking to satisfy the primary criteria must meet
the ‘Common
criteria’, as well as the criteria of one of three alternative visa
streams: the Occupational Trainee stream,
the Research stream, or the
Professional Development stream.
In the present case, the applicant is seeking the visa in the Occupational
Trainee stream. This stream is for persons who want to
improve their
occupational skills (including in the field of sport) through participation in
workplace-based training in Australia.
The delegate refused to grant the visa
because the applicant did not meet cl.402.211 of Schedule 2 to the Regulations
because the
applicant did not meet Schedule 3 criterion 3004.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 5 June 2015 to give
evidence and present arguments. The Tribunal was assisted at the hearing
interpreter in the Korean and English languages.
The applicant was represented in relation to the review by her registered
migration agent.
For the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the decision under
review should be affirmed.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
In the visa application, the applicant stated that she was born in 1980 in the
Republic of Korea.
The records of the Department of Immigration and Border Protection (the
Department) indicate that the applicant’s last substantive
Subclass 572 Student visa, ceased on 12 March 2014.The applicant attempted to
lodge a Subclass 402 visa on 13 March 2014
but she did not make full payment for
the visa application until 17 March 2014. Her application for a Subclass 402
visa was validly
made on 17 March 2014.
Because the applicant was not the holder of a substantive visa at the time she
applied for the Subclass 402 visa, the Department
wrote to the applicant on 3
June 2014 and requested that she provide further information to show that she
meets criterion 3004.
On 21 July 2014 the Department received an e-mail from the applicant’s
then representative who stated that the applicant held
a Subclass 572 visa which
ceased on 12 March 2014. She was granted a Bridging C visa on 17 March 2014. The
representative stated
that the applicant was suffering serious illness prior to
her visa expiring. This was beyond the applicant’s control and she
unable to provide documents for the application until she recovered. The
representative stated that the applicant is not the
holder of a substantive visa
because of factors beyond her control. The representative stated that there are
compelling reasons for
granting the visa. The applicant complied substantially
with conditions that apply or applied to visas held by her and she would
been entitled to the grant of the visa if she had applied for the visa on the
day when she last held a substantive visa. The
applicant intends to comply with
conditions subject to which the visa is granted. The representative provided a
medical certificate
dated 10 July 2014 from ‘Royale Eastwood Medical
Centre’ stating that the applicant had flu like symptoms with fever
cough and she also has gastrointestinal symptoms and was unfit for work /school
or outside travel from 10 March 2014 to 15 March
2014 inclusive.
The delegate referred to the medical certificate and stated that the applicant
attempted to lodge the visa application on 13 March
2014 during the time that
she was ill and this raises doubts about the credibility of the
applicant’s claims that she was too
unwell to lodge a visa application
from 10 March 2014 to 15 March 2014. The delegate was not satisfied that the
applicant was suffering
from a serious illness. The delegate also referred to
the applicant’s substantial visa history and stated that it is reasonable
to assume that the applicant was aware of her visa status at the time. The
delegate stated that the end date of the applicant’s
course was 12 January
2014 and this gave her approximately two months after the completion of her
studies to make arrangements for
a further substantive visa application. The
delegate also noted that the applicant had not provided any claims that there
are compelling
circumstances for granting the visa. The delegate was not
satisfied that the applicant met criterion 3004(c) and (d). The delegate
to grant the visa on the basis that the applicant did not meet criterion 3004
and cl.402.211.
At the time of lodging the application for review, the applicant provided a
copy of the delegate’s decision record.
On 27 March 2015 the Tribunal wrote to the applicant and invited her to comment
on or respond to information that at the time she
applied for a Subclass 402
visa on 17 March 2014, her last substantive visa had ceased on 12 March 2014 and
that she may not meet
Schedule 3 criterion 3004. The Tribunal attached a copy of
Schedule 3 criterion 3004.
On 22 April 2015 the Tribunal received a letter from the representative who
stated that, before the applicant’s visa expired
on 12 March 2014, the
applicant agreed that her Subclass 402 sponsor (Rachelle Banta/Ausphin) lodge
the Subclass 402 nomination and
visa application together. The applicant gave
“full trust” to Ms Banta as the applicant did not know the process
lodging a Subclass 402 visa. The representative stated that on 10 March 2014
Ms Banta gave instructions to the applicant by e-mail
outlining a list of
documents required for the applicant to give to her “by the next
day”. During this time the applicant
had been suffering an illness
“which was also beyond her control.” The documents were dropped off
to Ms Banta at her
office on 11 March 2014. Ms Banta assured the applicant she
would lodge her Subclass 402 visa application by 12 March 2014. The applicant
left the office “knowing the visa would be submitted on time” as
advised by Ms Banta.
In a statutory declaration declared on 22 April 2015, the applicant stated that
Rachelle Banta, the CEO of Ausphin, (her sponsor)
told the applicant that Ms
Banta had to be the one to send the nomination and visa at the same time to the
Department and that the
applicant could not do it. The applicant stated that she
received an e-mail from Ausphin to bring her a list of documents for the
lodgement of the Subclass 402 visa application. The applicant stated that in the
e-mail she was advised that her visa would be lodged
in time and they would send
it by express mail to the Department in time. On 11 March 2014 the requested
documents were dropped off
to Ms Banta’s office “as requested by
her”. After receiving the letter from the Department on 3 June 2014, she
realised that Ms Banta had not lodged her visa in time as promised and nor had
the correct visa fees been provided to the Department.
She has now learned that
Ms Banta sent the documents to the Department a day late on 13 March 2014 but
her visa application was
not valid until 17 March 2014. The applicant thinks
this was because of a problem with the payment from Ms Banta’s credit
The representative provided an e-mail dated 10 March 2014 from Ausphin
requesting the applicant to send a number of documents to
their e-mail address.
The Tribunal hearing
The Tribunal informed the applicant that it has to be satisfied that she is not
the holder of a substantive visa because of factors
beyond the applicant’s
control (criterion 3004(c)) and the Tribunal has to be satisfied that there are
compelling reasons for
granting the visa (criterion 3004(d)).
The applicant stated that she is not working at the moment. She is pregnant.
She has permission to work. She used to work but the
business closed down. If
she is granted the visa, she will work again. The place she worked was
affiliated with Ausphin.
The applicant stated that her sponsor, Rachelle, lodged the application late.
It was out of the applicant’s hands. The Tribunal
brought to the
applicant's attention that she did not raise this with the Department and stated
that the reason her application was
late was because she was sick and she
provided a medical certificate. The applicant stated that because of all the
things done by
Rachelle on her behalf, as if she was the applicant’s
agent, Rachelle did not want to admit that she had made a mistake. The
applicant confirmed that the only explanation she made to the Department, for
the lodgement of the visa application after her previous
substantive visa
ceased, was her medical condition. The applicant stated that the medical
certificate is genuine. It was an important
time. She was completing her studies
and applying for a different visa. She was sick and suffering from stress.
The applicant confirmed that her course finished on 12 January 2014. The
Tribunal brought to the applicant's attention that she
had two months to lodge a
visa application before her Subclass 572 visa ceased on 12 March 2014. The
applicant stated she thinks
the sponsor did not want to get the blame so she did
not want to say that it was the sponsor’s fault. The applicant stated
the applicant said she would act for her and she asked for documents and money
and the applicant provided these.
The Tribunal brought to the applicant's attention that the e-mail she provided
from Ausphin asks the applicant to send documents
by e-mail yet she took the
documents to the office at a time when she claimed to be so sick that she could
not apply for the visa
on time. The applicant stated that there was another
person at the office and he communicated by text messages and asked her to bring
the documents the next day. The applicant came to know that Rachelle was
overseas and returned to Australia on 11 March 2014.
The applicant confirmed that she had applied for student visas in Australia.
The applicant stated that she received an e-mail to
provide documents to
Ausphin. She received that e-mail at 5pm. The Tribunal brought to the
applicant's attention that the e-mail
asked her to send the documents by e-mail.
The applicant stated that they did not only communicate by e-mail, but also by
text message.
She was told to come the next day by 10.30am. She entrusted
everything to Rachelle.
The Tribunal asked the applicant if she went to the doctor on 10 March 2014.
The applicant stated that the doctor is one of her
acquaintances. She was not
feeling well so she asked that person to issue a medical certificate. The doctor
came to her home.
The applicant stated that on 11 March 2014 she went to the office because she
had to sign the documents. She and Rachelle signed
all the documents. The
applicant left the office with another person who worked there and she told him
that she was worried. He told
the applicant he would send the documents by
express post. Rachelle told the applicant she would take care of the
application. The
application was late and the applicant found out that the fee
was not paid. It was out of the applicant’s hands.
The Tribunal asked the applicant if she wanted to give evidence about
compelling reasons for the grant of the visa. The applicant
stated that she
studied Child Care and her plan was to go to Korea and work in this area. She
has been affected by Rachelle and this
has ruined her career. The Tribunal
informed the applicant that she has not previously provided evidence to support
her claim that
there are compelling reasons for granting the visa. The applicant
stated that if she could have continued learning and studying,
she could have
proceeded with her future and continued her career in Korea.
Schedule 3 criteria
An applicant who is not the holder of a substantive visa at the time of
application must meet two requirements in order to satisfy
cl.402.211. Firstly,
the last substantive temporary visa held by the applicant must not be one of the
visas set out in cl.402.211(a).
Secondly, they must satisfy Schedule 3 criteria
3002, 3003, 3004 and 3005.
It is not in dispute that the applicant, in the present case, did not hold a
substantive visa at the time of application. Based
on the evidence before it,
the Tribunal is satisfied that the last substantive visa held by the applicant
was not one of those mentioned
in cl.402.211(a).
The issue in the present case is whether the applicant meets Schedule 3
criterion 3004 and cl.402.211. Criterion 3004 is set out
in an attachment to
this decision.
Does the applicant meet Schedule 3 criterion 3004?
Criterion 3004 applies to applicants who ceased to hold a substantive or
criminal justice visa on or after 1 September 1994, or
who entered Australia
unlawfully on or after 1 September 1994 and have not subsequently been granted a
substantive visa.
It requires that the Minister be satisfied that the applicant is not the holder
of a substantive visa because of factors beyond
his or her control, that there
are compelling reasons for granting the visa, and that the applicant has
complied substantially with
the conditions applicable to the last of any
substantive visas and any subsequent bridging visa held by the applicant. In
the Minister must be satisfied that the applicant would have been able
to be granted the visa if the applicant had applied on the
day he or she last
held a substantive or criminal justice visa, or would have satisfied the
criteria when he or she last entered
Australia unlawfully; that the applicant
intends to comply with any conditions of the visa; and if the last visa held (if
the applicant was a transitional (temporary) visa, that visa was not
subject to a condition that the holder would not, after entering
Australia, be
entitled to be granted an entry permit, or further entry permit, while the
holder remained in Australia.
In the present case, the applicant did not hold a substantive visa at the time
of making the visa application. Her last substantive
visa was a Subclass 572
visa which ceased on 12 March 2014. The applicant did not apply for the Subclass
402 visa (the subject of
this review) until 17 March 2014. The visa application
was not validly made until the visa application fee was paid on 17 March 2014.
Therefore at the time the applicant applied for a Subclass 402 visa, she did not
hold a substantive visa.
The Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant ceased to hold a substantive visa
on or after 1 September 1994. The applicant meets
Schedule 3 criterion 3004(a).
The applicant therefore must meet Schedule 3 criterion 3004(c) – (h).
The Tribunal will firstly consider whether the applicant was not the holder of
a substantive visa at time of application for the
Subclass 402 visa because of
factors beyond the applicant's control.
The applicant made submissions to the Department on 21 July 2014 that she was
suffering from a serious illness prior to her visa
expiring, this was beyond the
applicant’s control and she was unable to provide documents for the
application until she recovered.
The representative provided a medical
certificate dated 10 July 2014 from Dr Phillip Han of ‘Royale Eastwood
Medical Centre’
stating that the applicant had flu like symptoms with
fever and cough and also has gastrointestinal symptoms and was unfit for work
/school or outside travel from 10 March 2014 to 15 March 2014 inclusive.
Before the delegate made his decision, the claim by the applicant was that it
was beyond her control to apply for the visa before
the previous visa ceased
because she was suffering from a serious illness. However, the applicant has
made other claims to the Tribunal
as to the reason for the late application of
the Subclass 402 visa. The applicant has placed the responsibility on her
sponsor, Rachelle
Banta, of Ausphin. The applicant claimed that she fully
trusted Ms Banta as she did not know the process for lodging a Subclass 402
and the sponsor told her that she had to be the one to lodge the nomination and
visa application at the same time and the applicant
could not do it. The
applicant claimed that Ms Banta did not want to reveal that she was at fault and
that is why this information
was not previously provided. The applicant also
stated at the hearing that she was suffering from stress.
The Tribunal has considered the applicant’s evidence but has concerns
suffering from a serious
illness and provided a medical certificate covering the period from 10 March
2014 to 15 March 2014 and yet
she took the documents to Ms Banta on 11 March
2014 even though the e-mail from Ausphin dated 10 March 2014 requests that the
should send the documents to their e-mail address.
If the applicant was too sick to lodge her visa application by the relevant
date, being 12 March 2014, it is surprising that she
would take the documents in
to the office of Ausphin on 11 March 2014 at the time when she was suffering
from a serious sickness,
instead of emailing them to Ausphin. Although the
applicant claimed that a person from the office sent her a text message asking
her to bring the documents to the office, the Tribunal has concerns that the
applicant was well enough to go into the office instead
of organising to send
them in to the office, given her state of health.
The Tribunal has had regard to the judgment in
Su & Ors v Minister for
Immigration & Anor
[2007] FMCA 318
of Smith FM who referred to a
judgment of Mansfield J in
Secretary, Department of Social Security v Secara
(1998) 89 FCR 151
at 159-162 and stated at paragraph 17:
The first is that a test of whether something was beyond the control of a person
requires a consideration of whether that person,
in his or her own particular
circumstances, might have been able to do something to prevent the relevant
event occurring. The test
is in that sense “subjective”, rather
than being directed at deciding what would have been beyond the control of an
or “reasonable” person. A second point, is that what is
“beyond control” should be tested by considering
whether the
happening of the event was or was not within the control of the applicant in a
practical or realistic sense. A capacity
to control and avoid the happening of
an event which is only theoretical or impractical should not disqualify the
person from the
benefit of the ameliorative provision.
The Tribunal has considered whether the applicant might have been able to do
something to prevent the relevant event occurring.
Was the applicant able to do
something so that she applied for the Subclass 402 visa before her previous
substantive visa ceased?
The Tribunal is of the view that the applicant could
have taken steps so that she did not become unlawful. She could have made
arrangements
earlier to apply for the visa and not left it until just before her
previous substantive visa ceased. After all, her course that
she was studying
ended on 12 January 2014. She had two months before her visa ceased to apply for
a Subclass 402 visa. The applicant
has applied for a number of visas in
Australia. The Tribunal is satisfied that she would have been aware that she had
to apply for
the Subclass 402 visa before the Subclass 572 visa ceased.
The Tribunal has also considered the applicant’s evidence that she had to
sign documents at the sponsor’s office. However,
the Tribunal is satisfied
that the applicant could have arranged to sign these documents on an earlier
The Tribunal has considered the claim that the applicant’s sponsor had to
lodge the sponsorship and the visa application.
The Tribunal has had regard to
the judgment of the Federal Circuit Court of Australia in
Montero v Minister
for Immigration & Anor
[2014 FCCA 946].
Judge Manousaridis stated in
In my opinion, although the Tribunal referred to Smith FM’s exposition in
of the expression “
beyond the control of a person
the Tribunal did not apply it. The principal matter on which I base my opinion
is the Tribunal’s failure to refer to,
or otherwise indicate it
considered, the fact that the applicant could not have applied for an Employer
Nomination visa without the
co-operation of his employer; and that the
applicant, although he could urge, he could not direct his employer to do what
to do to enable the applicant to apply for an Employer Nomination visa
before the applicant’s 572 visa expired. In that regard,
cl.857.213(a) of
Schedule 2 to the Regulations, as it stood on the day the Tribunal made its
decision (26 April 2013), required that
as at the day on which the applicant
applied for an Employer Nomination visa he must have
by an employer, in accordance with subregulation 5.19(4), for
an appointment in the business of that employer
”. Had the Tribunal
correctly understood Smith FM’s exposition in
beyond the control of a person
”, the Tribunal would have
considered whether some act on the part of the applicant’s employer was a
necessary condition
to the applicant’s being in a position to lodge an
Employer Nomination visa while the applicant held a 572 visa and, if so,
his employer’s performing such act was within the control of the
In this case the applicant applied for a Subclass 402 visa. Clause
402.221(1)(a)(i) and (ii) requires that the applicant is identified
nomination by a training and research sponsor or an occupational trainee
sponsor; and the nomination meets the criteria in
regulation 2.72I.
Whilst it is
a requirement that the applicant is identified in a nomination by a training and
research sponsor or an occupational
trainee sponsor and the nomination meets the
criteria in
regulation 2.72I
, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant could
have taken steps so that she did not become unlawful and could have taken steps
to ensure that the sponsor lodged the nomination by following this up with the
sponsor, Ausphin. The only evidence of communication
by the applicant with the
sponsor is from 10 March 2014.
The Tribunal has considered the evidence but is not satisfied that the
applicant is not the holder of a substantive visa because
of factors beyond the
applicant’s control. The Tribunal is therefore not satisfied that the
applicant meets the requirements
of Schedule 3 criterion 3004(c).
The Tribunal has also considered whether the applicant satisfies criterion
3004(d) which requires that there are compelling reasons
for granting the visa.
Whilst the applicant’s former representative stated in the submission to
the Department that there are
compelling reasons for granting the visa, the
former representative did not expand on this claim. The Tribunal wrote to the
on 27 March 2015 and invited her comments about whether she met
criterion 3004. On 22 April 2015 the applicant’s representative
comments and a statutory declaration from the applicant. Although the
representative stated that there are compelling reasons
for granting the visa,
she did not provide evidence to support this statement.
At the hearing the applicant stated that Ms Banta has ruined her life. The
applicant had planned to work in Korea after she finished
her studies and she
could have proceeded with her future and continued with her career. The Tribunal
has considered the applicant’s
evidence and claims. She also stated that
she is pregnant. However, the Tribunal is not satisfied on the evidence that
compelling reasons for granting the visa. The Tribunal is not
satisfied that the applicant meets the requirements of Schedule 3 criterion
The applicant does not meet Schedule 3 criterion 3004(c) and (d). Therefore she
does not meet Schedule 3 criterion 3004. It is therefore
unnecessary to decide
whether she meets the other criteria in Schedule 3 criterion 3004. The Tribunal
finds that the applicant does
not meet cl.402.211(b)(ii). The Tribunal finds
that the applicant does not meet cl.402.211.
For these reasons, the applicant does not satisfy criterion 3004 for the
purposes of cl.402.211.
The applicant has only sought to satisfy the criteria for a Subclass 402 visa
in the Occupational Trainee stream. No claims have
been made in respect of the
other visa streams. As requirements that must be met by a person seeking the
visa in the Occupational
Trainee stream have not been met, the decision under
review must be affirmed.
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant a Training and
Research (Class GC) visa.
Dione Dimitriadis
ATTACHMENT - Extract from
Migration Regulations 1994
the applicant:
(a) ceased to hold a substantive or criminal
justice visa on or after 1 September 1994; or
(b) entered Australia unlawfully on or after 1 September 1994 and has
not subsequently been granted a substantive visa;
the Minister is satisfied that:
(c) the applicant is not the holder of a substantive visa because of factors
beyond the applicant’s control; and
(d) there are compelling reasons for granting the visa; and
(e) the applicant has complied substantially with:
(i) the conditions that apply or applied to:
(A) the last
of any entry permits held by the applicant (other
than a condition of which the applicant was in breach solely because of the
of the entry permit); and
(B) any subsequent bridging visa; or
(ii) the conditions that apply or applied to:
(A) the last of any substantive visas held by the applicant (other than a
condition of which the applicant was in breach solely because
the visa ceased to
be in effect); and
(B) any subsequent bridging visa; and
(f) either:
(i) in the case of an applicant referred to in paragraph (a)—the
applicant would have been entitled to be granted a visa of
the class applied for
if the applicant had applied for the visa on the day when the applicant last
held a substantive or criminal
justice visa; or
(ii) in the case of an applicant referred to in paragraph (b)—the
applicant would have satisfied the criteria (other than any
criteria) for the grant of a visa of the class applied for on the day when the
applicant last entered Australia unlawfully;
(g) the applicant intends to comply with any conditions subject to which the
visa is granted; and
(h) if the last visa (if any) held by the applicant was a transitional
(temporary) visa, that visa was not subject to a condition
that the holder would
not, after entering Australia, be entitled to be granted an entry permit, or a
further entry permit, while
the holder remained in Australia.
If the applicant was in Australia at the time of
application:
(a) at that time, the applicant held a
substantive temporary visa that was
(i) a Subclass 403 (Temporary Work (International
Relations)) visa in the Domestic Worker (Diplomatic or Consular) stream; or
Subclass 426 (Domestic Worker
(Temporary) — Diplomatic or Consular) visa; or
(iii) a Subclass 771 (Transit) visa; or
(iv) a special purpose visa; or
applicant did not hold a substantive visa at that time:
(i) the last
substantive temporary visa held by
the applicant was not a visa mentioned in paragraph (a); and
(ii) the applicant satisfies Schedule 3 criteria 3002,
3003, 3004 and 3005.
RTF format (209 KB)
Signed PDF/A format