D20-21\084 [2020] SCTA 192 (20 November 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\084
FILE NUMBER : 11-1836
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
JOINED PARTY
The Insurer
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Employer
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(the Complaints Act) and held on 3 August 2020 before:
Jocelyn Furlan,
Presiding Member
Carruthers, Member.
DECISIONS UNDER REVIEW
decisions under review are as follows:
That of the
Insurer to cease the payment of a Total and Temporary Disablement (TTD) benefit
to the Complainant and reject her claim
for a Total and Permanent Disablement
That of the
Trustee to affirm the Insurer’s decisions.
letter dated 31 May 2011 to the Complainant, the Insurer advised her that her
claim for TTD benefits was closed in accordance with
her request.
letter dated 11 December 2014 to the Trustee, the Insurer advised that the
medical evidence available in 2010 did not support the
Complainant being TPD and
that the Complainant herself does not consider herself to be TPD, but agreed to
re-open the claim should
the Complainant wish.
review, the Insurer advised the Trustee by letter dated 7 January 2016 that the
Complainant has not established an entitlement
to a TPD benefit.
further review, by letter dated 24 August 2020, the Insurer advised the Trustee
that the Complainant may not meet the terms of
the relevant policy for payment
of a TPD benefit.
Trustee notified the Complainant by letter dated 7 June 2011 of its decision to
close her complaint on the basis that she did
not wish to continue with a claim
for a TPD benefit.
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal determines as follows:
In relation to
the claim for TTD benefits, the Tribunal determines to set aside the decisions
under review and substitute its own
decisions that the Complainant’s claim
for payment of the balance of her TTD benefits is accepted. The Insurer must
TTD benefit to the Complainant.
In relation to
the claim for a TPD benefit, the Tribunal affirms the decisions of the Insurer
and the Trustee.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
Complainant sought leave to be represented by a lawyer. The Tribunal considered
and granted the request in accordance with its
discretion under s23 of the
Complaints Act.
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
Submissions
were received from the Complainant and the Trustee.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. The Insurer responded
and the Complainant provided a supplementary submission.
the Review meeting, further submissions were received from the Complainant and
the Insurer.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant is currently aged 53. She commenced employment with the Employer in
approximately 1989 and became a member of the
Fund on 31 December 2003.
Complainant last physically attended work with the Employer on 11 September 2009
and her employment was terminated on 18 December
2009 due to redundancy.
Complainant lodged a claim for TTD and TPD benefits in March 2010.
Complainant received TTD benefits for the period from 12 December 2009 to 31
March 2011.
a letter dated 22 March 2011, the Complainant lodged a complaint with the
Trustee in relation to what the Complainant felt to be
an ‘intimidating
and inappropriate’ Independent Medical Examination (IME) appointment.
2 May 2011, the Complainant wrote to the Trustee advising that she no longer
wished to make a claim for a TPD benefit but still
wished to continue with her
TTD claim. The Trustee informed the Insurer of this on 5 May 2011 and the
Insurer closed the TPD claim.
order to continue with the assessment of the TTD claim, the Insurer requested
the Complainant provide a completed Progress Claim
Form from her treating doctor
for the period from 1 April 2011 (payments had already been made to her for the
period 12 December
2009 to 31 March 2011).
a letter dated 20 May 2011, the Complainant advised that she no longer wished to
seek TTD disability payments.
letter dated 31 May 2011 to the Complainant, the Trustee confirmed to the
Complainant that both her claims were considered closed.
Complainant lodged a complaint with the Tribunal on 19 September 2011 in
relation to scheduled medical appointments that she found
threatening and
seeking payment of a TPD benefit without further medical examination.
email to the Tribunal dated 15 August 2012, the Complainant confirmed that she
was seeking payment of the TPD and TTD benefits.
6 December 2012 the Complainant was incarcerated and the Tribunal lost contact
a letter dated 13 June 2013, the Tribunal notified the Trustee that
consideration of the complaint had been suspended because contact
had been lost.
However, by letter dated 23 July 2014, the Tribunal advised the Trustee that the
Complainant had recently been in
Insurer wrote to the Trustee on 7 January 2016 confirming that it was not
satisfied that the Complainant had established an entitlement
to a TPD benefit
under the policy and on that basis, the claim had been declined.
letter dated 28 April 2017, the Trustee requested the Insurer review its
decision in relation to the Complainant’s claim.
further review, the Insurer advised the Trustee by letter dated 24 August 2020
of its view that the Complainant did not
meet the definition of TPD under the
relevant insurance policy.
Complainant’s complaint is that the decisions of the Trustee and the
Insurer were unfair or unreasonable for the reasons
summarised in this
determination.
resolutions sought by the Complainant are:
=Monthly Income Protection. Back pay and overdue and
payable immediately
Overdue since November 2010
payable immediately
Benefit in dispute
to the Insurer, the amount of the TTD benefit in dispute was $8,556.25 per month
for the period 1 April 2011 to 12 December
2011 and the amount of the TPD
benefit in dispute was approximately $370,000 as at 20 February 2012.
Events not in dispute:
− the Complainant’s date of birth.
Approximately 1989
the Complainant commenced employment
with the Employer.
− the date the Complainant joined the Fund.
− the date the Complainant last physically
– 31 March 2011
− the Complainant was in receipt of TTD
benefits from the Fund. (less offset for workers’ compensation benefits
− the date the Complainant’s employment
with the Employer was terminated.
the date the
Complainant lodged a claim for TTD and TPD benefits.
the date of correspondence from the Complainant to the Trustee stating that she is seeking TTD instalments on a
basis and confirming that she is not seeking Permanent Disability on the grounds that she is not permanently disabled.
the date of correspondence from the Insurer to the Trustee advising that the Complainant’s TPD claim had been discontinued
in accordance with her request.
the date of correspondence from the
Complainant to the Trustee advising that she is ‘no longer seeking
Disability payments’.
the date of correspondence from the Insurer
to the Trustee confirming that, at her request, the Complainant’s claim
been closed as of 26 May 2011.
the date of correspondence from the Trustee
to the Complainant advising that her case had been closed.
− the date the Complainant lodged a complaint
with the Tribunal about the requirement to attend medical appointments.
− the Complainant was charged with an indictable
offence and bail was refused. She was later convicted and remained in a
correctional
facility until parole was granted on 8 September 2020.
Tribunal considers that the trust deed of the Fund relevant to this complaint is
that in effect on the date when the Complainant
ceased active work (i.e. 11
September 2009), being the trust deed as amended up to and including the
amendment dated 21 February
2005 effective 1 July 2005 (the Trust Deed).
Trust Deed provisions relevant to the complaint are:
INTERPRETATION
1.1 Definitions
'Temporary Total Disablement'
of a Member:
(a) if there is a relevant policy of insurance in force – means
disablement which the insurer determines qualifies as temporary
disablement
under that policy; or
[not applicable]
'Total and Permanent Disablement"
of a Member:
(a) if there is a relevant policy of insurance in force – means
disablement which the insurer determines qualifies as permanent
disablement
under that policy; or
[not applicable]
Insurance Offset
(i) the Trustee has not determined to self-insure the risk;
[not applicable]
[not applicable]
(C) the insurer does not admit or pay all or part of a claim in respect of a
the Trustee must reduce any benefit which:
(I) is otherwise payable on the death or disablement (or both death and
disablement) of the Member concerned; and
(II) in the case of the Accumulation Division, is not calculated on the basis
of the Member's Account balance or proceeds of insurance,
unless the Trustee and the Participant agree otherwise.
INSURANCE POLICY
Tribunal considers that the insurance policy relevant to the complaint is that
in force on the date when the Complainant ceased
active work (i.e. 11 September
2009) being that executed by the Trustee and the Insurer, as endorsed up to and
including the endorsement
dated 1 August 2009 (the Policy).
Policy relevantly provides:
1.14 Definitions
means that the
person insured
is eligible to claim
under all four parts, (a), (b), (c) and (d) of the
total and permanent
disablement definition.
Medical care
means that the
person insured
must be receiving
and following medical treatment or advice reasonably recommended by a
practitioner
who has personally assessed him or her and been provided with
full clinical details of his or her case, and the
person insured
continue to be reviewed in these circumstances on at least a monthly basis
unless otherwise agreed by
Monthly benefit
means the lesser of:
75 per cent
times the first $320,000 of
benefit calculation date
divided by 12, plus
not applicable]
or such other
sum insured
as described in the
employer plan schedule.
Offset means:
(a) amounts paid or payable during the
person insured's benefit period as
replacement for loss of income in relation to the injury or illness of the
person insured
any amount which
is paid under any other disablement, injury or illness insurance policy
person insured
or any other insurance
company (except for lump sum
permanent disablement payments
or lump sum superannuation payments),
any amount which
is paid under common law actions, and
compensation paid,
(b) any other
income received
person insured
participating employer
is not as a result of the
person insured's
own personal exertion at the same time as we are paying
a benefit in respect of the
person insured,
but excluding any
Investment income,
employer superannuation contribution benefit
is included as
indicated in the
TTD employer plan schedule,
then any paid amount
designed to replace in whole or part the compulsory employer
Superannuation Guarantee contribution that would have been made by the
participating employer
behalf of the
person insured
superannuation fund had he or she not been
total but temporarily disabled
partially disabled.
This offset condition (c) is only applied to
employer superannuation contribution benefit
(if applicable).
Total and permanent disablement
The definition of
total and permanent disablement
comprises of four
(a) Unlikely to work
(b) Specific loss
(c) Future care
Terminal illness
The person insured
totally and permanently disabled
if either one of the parts below applies;
Part (a) Unlikely to work
When all of the following apply to the
person insured:
has been continuously absent from
through injury
or illness for the
waiting period,
considering all evidence which
believe is necessary to reach our view,
in our opinion the
person insured
has become incapacitated to such an
extent as to render the
person insured
unlikely ever to
or work for reward in, any occupation or work for which he or she is reasonably
qualified by
education, training or experience.
[remainder not applicable]
Total and permanent disablement, totally and permanently disabled
shall have a corresponding meaning.
Total but temporary disablement
means that; because of an injury or
illness, the person
continuously absent from
throughout the
waiting period,
is not capable
of doing the
important duties
of his or her regular occupation, and
is not working
in any occupation (whether paid or unpaid), and
medical care,
totally and permanently disabled
as defined under a
group insurance
issued by us, where he or she has
total and permanent disablement
Total but temporary disablement, total but temporary disability,
totally disabled, totally but temporarily disabled
and TTD shall have a
corresponding meaning.
3.4 Total and permanent disablement benefit
...subject to the terms of this
benefit for
total and permanent disablement
(if it applies to the
person insured)
total and permanent disablement
person insured
total and permanent disablement
cover slops
under clause 2.7 of
The meaning of
total and permanent
disablement
depends on which definition of
total and permanent
disablement
person insured
has under this
policy as described
in clause 3.1.1 of Part A
or as otherwise agreed between you and us.
3.3 Total but temporary disablement benefit
The meaning of
total but temporary disability
is provided in clause
1.14 unless otherwise agreed to by us and described in the
TTD employer plan
... if a person
totally but temporarily disabled, we
a benefit, until the earliest of the events described in
clause 3.13 of Part B occurs.
The sum Insured will be:
superannuation contribution
benefit (if any), less
(clause 4.1 of
sum insured
will be subject to the
maximum benefit
underwriting terms,
if applicable.
3.13 When benefits for a person insured stop
We stop paying a benefit for a person insured at the earliest of:
totally but temporarily disabled
he or she refuses to undertake reasonable treatment or
rehabilitation
which could, in
our opinion,
be expected to assist his
or her ability to return to
active employment
failing to make available to us within 60 days medical, financial or
other evidence reasonably required to assess the claim, that
we have requested
in writing, or
MEDICAL REPORTS
Complainant has been diagnosed with Major Depression since 2008.
following relevant medical reports were provided to the Tribunal in this
from Medical record of Dr AC, General Practitioner:
On 5 November
2009 a DASS test was administered. The results were stress 20 moderate, anxiety
20 extremely severe, and depression
24 severe. Lexapro (anti-depressant) was
increased to 30m daily. On 12 January 2010, Dr AC suggested that the Complainant
psychiatrist. On 8 March 2010 it was noted that Dr B suggested that she
‘undergo group therapy to improve self esteem - does
not personally think
she needs it.’
On 14 April 2010
Dr AC recorded:
Good + bad days. Admits to feeling invincible at times,
in process of writing a book, can spend $200 on clothes, etc to make herself
feel better, sometimes spends nights cleaning up house.
On 21 April
Lots of ideas to save the world, mainly up at night, sleeping
during the day.
On 1 June 2010
the Complainant was noted to be teary, emotional and agitated. ‘No-one
listens - they are all idiots’.
Strongly contest diagnosis of bipolar
On 2 September
Claims there is a conspiracy against her with solicitor claiming
they have lost her I.D, thinks her I.D. will be turned into terrorist...said
have reported to police + told to change her identity thinks an uninvited person
at her son’s 17
B’day party was the
devil... Says [Dr Y] only wants to put her into hospital + sedate her vehemently
denies that she suffers
from bipolar disorder.
On 10 January
Not taking her medications for a while
is the last consultation provided in Dr AC’s records. The Insurer
acknowledged receipt of these notes on 25 February 2011.
certificates provided by Dr AC, General Practitioner were as follows:
Dated 28 May
2009 stating the Complainant was unfit for work from 28 May 2009 to 12 June 2009
due to depression.
September 2009 to 29 October 2009.
Dated 5 November
2009 stating the Complainant was unfit for work from 30 October 2009 to 19
November 2009.
compensation certificate from 15 November 2009 to 29 January 2010 for major
depressive disorder and from 30 January
2010 to 3 March 2010.
compensation certificate from 1 March 2010 to 1 April 2010 and from 2 April to
21 April for Bipolar Disorder.
compensation certificate from 21 April 2010 to 5 May 2010 and from 4 May 2010 to
4 June 2010 for bipolar disorder.
compensation certificate written for bipolar disorder and on 1 June
Workers’ compensation certificate from 1
June 2010 to 1 July 2010 for
depression.
compensation certificate written from 1 July 2010 to 1 August 2010 due to
depression and subsequently from 1 August
2010 to 1 September 2010.
compensation certificate dated 2 September 2010 certifies that the Complainant
is unfit for work from 2 September
2010 to 2 October 2010 due to bipolar
Disability Claim Medical Report to the Insurer by Dr AC, dated 14 January 2010
confirmed that the GP had known the Complainant for
six years and that the major
diagnosis was ‘Major Depressive Disorder’. The Complainant had
first attended about the
conditions relevant to the complaint on 17 September
2009. Dr AC reported:
...Medical details
abusive ex-partner, broke up in Sept 2009, work issues & made scapegoat
by company she has been working for past 20 years. Diagnosis
- major depressive
disorder. Rx Lexapro 20mg daily, counselling. Suggest see psychiatrist.
Attempted suicide Sept 2009...
...anticipated treatment plan?
antidepressant, psychological treatment, rehabilitation.
...prognosis?
with treatment & vocational training patient should be able to return to
full time or part time work.
Complainant had been provided with a retrospective workers’ compensation
certificate by Dr AC from 15 September 2009 to
29 November 2010.
report by Dr AC to a workers’ compensation insurer dated 10 February 2010
In November 2008. [The Complainant] presented with symptoms
consistent with major depression. She had low mood. lost her usual interest
riding horses, had poor memory, difficulty concentrating, unable to make
decisions and resorted to comfort eating. She scored
34 out of 50 on the K10
depression scale...
It is anticipated that she will make relatively good recovery from her
depression with time as it is largely reactive in nature...The
timeframe for
which she will be able to resume some form of employment is 4-6 months depending
on the availability of a suitable
18 February 2010 she was seen by Dr JB who diagnosed bipolar affective disorder
and recommended admission to hospital which the
Complainant refused. At the
time she presented as hypomanic, was overly familiar and believed she had a
mission to spread the word
re depression.
further report by Dr JB, Psychiatrist to a workers’ compensation insurer
dated 17 March 2010 stated:
MENTAL STATE EXAMINATION
...She was attired, in my opinion, somewhat inappropriately for a medical
interview wearing a low cut black cocktail type dress...there
was no evidence of
psychosis, formal thought disorder or overt features of hypomania...
In view of the recent frequency of suicidal thoughts...and the symptoms of
depression...I recommended an inpatient admission to [Hospital]
mood disorders
relation to a subsequent phone call, Dr JB stated:
What followed was a largely incoherent, grandiose and bizarre
diatribe from [the Complainant]. She stated repeatedly that she “was
like anyone else”, that she had a “mission” to communicate
information about depression to the world and that
I was somehow required to
assist her in this mission. She spoke in an excitable and somewhat accelerated
manner...I note from your
correspondence a copy of an email from [the
Complainant] dated 20
February 2010...she stated that
she had “powerful information” and that “she has a very very
special gift, and
I need the chance to show it”...
...After our subsequent telephone consultation and reading a copy of the
correspondence provided by you I would amend this diagnosis
to a presumptive
diagnosis of Bipolar Disorder (II) currently in a mixed affective hypomanic
...On the basis of one consultation I am unable to give statement regarding
her fitness for employment at this time...I would strongly
advocate [the
Complainant] be reviewed by another consultant psychiatrist...
report by Dr PB, Psychiatrist to a workers’ compensation insurer dated 28
April 2010 noted that the Complainant’s son
was present throughout the
interview, and stated:
Time off Work and Suicide attempt-May 2009
“At work my brain froze, I couldn’t think. I couldn’t make
decisions . I couldn’t function, I just wanted
to go to sleep. I was
getting into trouble as I was not performing. I took three weeks off
She said that she should not be alive because she had made a suicide attempt
with Valium. “A few years ago I took 38 Valium
tablets with a glass of
wine.” She said the aim was to die and she had left a suicide note
expressing this intent...She did
not go to hospital.
Recent Psychological Symptoms – Leaving Work on 15 September
[The Complainant] said her more recent psychological symptoms began in
September 2009 and she left work then and has not returned.
Current Symptoms
[The Complainant] described her current symptoms as
said she is depressed as her mood is not right...
She says she can’t be bothered doing things, has no interest and has to
force herself to do things...
feels anxious all the time...”I have heightened senses. I’ve had
all emotions. I can feel the vibe – I
can feel people’s hurt very
easily; I see all through them (their feelings); I can feel straight through
them their feelings).”
She said she doesn’t trust anyone anymore.
She said she is just avoiding filling in forms...
She still gets anxious if she has to report to Workers Compensation.
Preoccupying
She said she has preoccupying thoughts most of the day.
“I have too many thoughts in my head” She said these are usually
She said that her sleeping pattern is “out of
whack” She sleeps about 8 hours a night but goes to bed at 4AM as she is
tired and then sleeps half the day...
feels constantly tired. ”I could even go back to sleep when I wake up. I
just want to sleep.”
Frustration and
She said she is frustrated by “the world and all this
shit-Workers Compensation.”
She said she is a lot angry at how she has been treated at work and nothing
Impaired memory
and concentration
Her concentration is impaired...
She has become forgetful of anything.
The main aspects of her presentation were (1) her unresolved anger that she
had been scapegoated for the failure of a project and
that this was not accepted
by her employer and instead she could not return to work for them and so came to
lose her employment,
and (2) that she does not see herself as ever being able to
recover from her psychological condition to be able to work again and
merits a lump sum payment from her employer in lieu of the loss of future income
to her retirement.
She was fully orientated in time, place and person. There was no objective
evidence of impairment either in her concentration or memory
interactional process of the interview. She was mentally astute. Her cognitive
processes were normal. Her intelligence
was not impaired. She had no psychotic
symptoms. She was not suicidal. She had no formal thought disorder.
In my opinion [the Complainant] currently has an
Adjustment Disorder
with symptoms of Anxiety and Reactive Depression...I considered its symptoms
and to be sustained by substantial unresolved anger.
The description by [Dr JB] of her interactive behaviour with him on the phone
call is quite suggestive of a period of hypomania...
The content of her thoughts as written in this email is quite suggestive of
the grandiose delusions which occur with hypomania leading
into mania, but it
could also be explained as a set of overvalued ideas in a stressed person...
I have been provided with a Factual Report. This indicates:
- In about early 2009 [the Employer] reports [the Complainant] started to miss
meetings and faltered on her required deliverables.
This situation continued
through 2009 and resulted in having to get other employees to take on some of
[the Complainant’s]
responsibilities...
- [The Complainant] tried to improve but continued to miss meetings and it
reached the stage that [the Employer] had to call her
before phone calls to
ensure she was out of bed...
- She ceased work on 15 September 2009.
- She then claimed she had been made a scapegoat and that her illness was work
She advised she had no intention of returning to work and
accepted redundancy on 25 October 2009.
It is not unusual for the first episode of Bipolar Disorder to occur
spontaneously and in the person’s early forties. In this
case her present
psychological condition, regardless of the diagnosis is not related to her
employment and her work is not a substantial
contributory factor.
Present Condition and Fitness for Employment
In my opinion [the Complainant’s] psychological symptoms are now mild
and consistent with seeking and obtaining suitable employment
should she want to
work at this time.
Prognosis and permanent disability
[The Complainant’s] Adjustment Disorder (and any MDE of the Reactive
should come to have no
permanent psychological condition from any problem at work.
report to the Insurer by Dr AC dated 3 June 2010 notes that the Complainant was
suffering from depression from 10 November 2008
to 1 August 2010 and that there
was an ongoing dispute with the previous employer against which workers’
compensation insurance
was claimed. The symptoms included low mood and
motivation and hypersomnolence. She had been referred to a psychiatrist. Dr AC
was uncertain when the Complainant would be fit to return to work.
report by Dr SY, Psychiatrist, to Dr AC dated 9 August 2010 stated:
She requested that I write that she was 100% permanently
I explained that I was unable to do so at this point in time as my priorities
lay with her immediate presentation. I explained that
I thought she should be
in hospital given the level of distress she was displaying...
However what she described to me appeared psychotic without any other
collateral history at hand...What I am unclear about at present
is the level of
immediate risk or danger.
I did give some thought to writing a “Schedule” under the Mental
Health Act however as I mentioned she said she was not
...Should there be immediate risk concerns then she should go immediately to
hospital. Otherwise encouragement with anti-psychotic
medication would be my
suggestion.
She was not happy with my suggestion about hospitalisation.
report by Dr AC, to the Insurer dated 24 August 2010 stated:
[The Complainant] initially presented in November 2008 with
symptoms of depression, describing low mood, poor concentration, poor
anhedonia, and inability to make decisions. This coincided with a time when her
having issues at school. Her symptoms improved after
taking Lexapro 20mg daily and counselling with a psychologist.
In September 2009, she presented with worsening mood expressing distraught
over cancellation of a major project she had been work
on with her employer [the
Employer] and felt that she was made a scapegoat for the project’s
failure. She admitted to a suicide
attempt with Valium and alcohol a week
In February 2010 [the Complainant] was seen by psychiatrist Dr JB. His
initial diagnosis was that of major depression but,...the suspicion
bipolar was raised. [The Complainant] was started on Epilim in April 2010 but
she stopped taking it less than 3 weeks later.
She saw [Dr PB]...appointed by
her WorkCover insurance company...My understanding is that [Dr PB] found no
features of bipolar disorder
and concluded that she had a major depressive
disorder of the reactive type related to her work.
In view of the differing opinions...She saw [Dr SY] on 9 August 2010. [Dr SY]
the suspicion of bipolar
disorder, but admitted that because [the Complainant] turned up very late for
her appointment, he did not
have sufficient time to fully assess her. He
indicated that the suggestion for her to be admitted to hospital was not well
In summary, it is highly probable that [the Complainant] has bipolar
disorder. However, the diagnosis has yet to be accepted by the
a report by Dr AC to the workers’ compensation insurer, Dr AC stated:
Upon reviewing my clinical notes, she did not present with
depressive symptoms until late 2008.
report by Dr AC to the Insurer dated 10 January 2011 noted that the Complainant
had suffered a recent home invasion in September/October
and that the
Complainant’s prognosis was uncertain in the longer term. The current
treatment plan was psychological treatment
and further psychological assessment.
The diagnosis was stated as depression with a differential diagnosis of bipolar
With respect to duties that the Complainant was unable to perform, Dr
AC noted that the depressed mood precludes planning, organising
and decision
making required in the patient’s usual occupation.
report by Dr AC to the Insurer dated 24 February 2011 noted the Complainant had
low mood, poor concentration, and lack of confidence.
She was in financial
difficulty and couldn’t afford to see a psychologist or psychiatrist, her
house was about to be auctioned
and her return to work date was uncertain at
Complainant attended an IME appointment arranged by the Insurer on 9 March 2011
with her teenage son. The psychiatrist Dr G refused
to conduct the interview
with the son in the room and the appointment was cancelled.
April 2011 there was a Schedule 22 Admission by Police and Access team and a
diagnosis of delusional disorder. The Complainant
was brought in by Police
having been scheduled by the Community Mental Health Team. She was found to be
delusional believing numerous
people and corporate entities were conspiring
against her and lacked insight into her condition. She settled in hospital, was
on 12 April 2011 with a tentative diagnosis of manic episode induced
by antidepressants and referred back to the Community Mental
Health Team.
Schedule 1 Medical Certificate by PH dated 8 April 2011 stated:
Client has a psychotic mental illness, untreated, her behaviour is
erratic and there is a high potential for harm to herself or others.
Mental Health Assessment, by B, Mental Health Nurse, dated 8 December 2012,
recorded that from 2008 to 2010, the Complainant had
consulted Dr AC, her
General Practitioner. She was experiencing work related stress and was diagnosed
with depression and prescribed
Lexapro. The Complainant believed she was
experiencing side effects from the Lexapro ‘went off my head, living in
the clouds’
and ceased after 2 years. She returned to her GP who
recommended she recommence Lexapro, but she refused. In April 2011 she was
scheduled by Police to a Mental Health Unit and kept for 5 days.
Complainant was arrested and remanded in custody on 6 December 2012.
Records while in custody
completed by Dr C, Registrar dated 17 December 2012 state:
Continues to discuss her belief that she is the victim in an
international plot against her...
Fixated on talking about her grievances. Difficult to shift her attention
away from the topic of the conspiracy against her and her
Insight: limited. Does not believe she suffers from a mental illness.
notes by Dr NR, Psychiatrist dated 15 January 2013, state:
Psychotic - persecutory + paranoid delusions of a complex nature
involving Australian government/banks/international espionage. Insightless.
by Dr CL, Registrar, dated 16 January 2013 include:
Believes federal police, federal members, local police, the
financial ombudsmen and court have all let her down...Denies any mental
Denies any need for treatment.
31 January 2013 the Complainant was admitted to a Psychiatric Hospital due to
paranoid psychosis and refusing treatment. A past
history of admission to a
Psychiatric Unit from 8 to 12 April 2011 was recorded with a provisional
diagnosis of Manic episode or
Delusional Disorder. It was also noted that the
Complainant had attempted an overdose with Diazepam in 2009. The Overall
Impression was ‘45 year old female with paranoid psychosis and
mood instability over past 2-3 years. Associated THC use and
significant
psycho-social decline.’ The Complainant was discharged on 27 April 2013 on
Olanzapine 12.5mg at night from what
was said to be a prolonged first episode of
psychosis and first time treatment.
notes during the admission include the following:
Does not believe that she has a mental illness or
requires medication, is at a loss as to why she is here.
Patient was observed to be elevated, grandiose, thought disordered
and insightless towards her mental illness.
11 April 2013,
Interview with Dr RR, Psychiatrist:
She denies overt mental health symptoms of psychosis but her
guardedness may ??? continuing delusional and specifically persecutory
ideas/delusions.
She accepts that she has been unwell and accepts the medication offered.
Imp Schizophrenia.
16 April 2013,
documented a diagnosis of Schizophrenia and noted that she was much improved,
her delusions now resolving.
Psychiatrist noted that the Complainant was back from hospital with a diagnosis
of paranoid schizophrenia.
Dr S, on 20 June
2014 recorded that the Complainant was stable with nil issues, nil psychotic
symptoms, not depressed, eating and
sleeping well. The Complainant was reported
to be well engaged, with normal speech, mood good with good insight and nil
Dr S, on 26
November 2014 noted that the Complainant was working as a clerk.
On 23 February
2015 at mental health review, the Complainant was reported to be calm and
relaxed with no hallucinations, delusions
or mood disorder.
On 6 July 2015 a
mental health review was conducted. It was noted that the Complainant’s
mood was good with no agitation. She
was eating and sleeping well and was
prescribed Olanzapine 12.5 mg for psychotic illness. The Complainant was noted
to be working.
On 12 August
2016, at mental health review it was recorded that the Complainant was
prescribed Olanzapine for schizophrenia which
was diagnosed in 2013. The
Complainant denied experiencing any psychotic symptoms.
On 27 March
2017, at mental health review no formal thought disorder was noted. Her mental
state was considered to be stable on medication.
It was recorded that the
Complainant was ‘on feet all day at kitchen.’
On 31 October
2019 a mental health review notes the Complainant’s plans to attend
forensic psychiatric report by Dr GE, Psychiatrist dated 8 November 2019
[The Complainant] has been diagnosed with Schizophrenia following a
psychiatric inpatient admission to [prison hospital]. She had
a relatively late
age of onset of the illness and I note again that her psychosis occurred in the
context of daily cannabis use.
I would also note that she was a previously high
functioning woman. She appears to have had a relatively prolonged period of
psychosis. Her illness has responded positively to standard
antipsychotic treatment...
She now appears in complete remission from psychosis...recommend that she
remain on antipsychotic treatment indefinitely.
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
main points made by the Complainant are as follows:
In her complaint
to the Tribunal, the Complainant submitted:
Attending medical examinations were threatening by
The medical
evidence indicates that the Complainant has been suffering mental health issues
for some time and ‘critically’
at the time of her TPD claim.
Complainant’s diagnosis ‘is not going to change.’
The Complainant
was suffering from mental health issues when she ceased employment with the
Employer. The medical evidence for the
legal proceedings state that she now has
a permanent disability.
sufficient information to establish the Complainant’s entitlement to the
TPD benefit.
The Complainant
...the medical evidence is one way, that is to say that the
Complainant has been suffering serious mental health issues. For example,
April 2011 the Complainant was detained pursuant to the
Mental Health Act
[state] and kept in a mental health facility for five days, where she
was diagnosed with hypomania.
Further, the
Complainant stated:
... the Trustee can make a decision in relation to the
Complainant’s claim because to date notwithstanding the voluminous medical
evidence that the [the Trustee] has received and considered the [the Trustee]
cannot refer to one single document, one iota of evidence
that suggests that the
Complainant was not suffering serious mental health issues at the relevant time
of the Application and Claim.
At all material
times the Complainant sent medical certificates of her incapacity to her
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
The reason for
the Trustee’s decision was that the Complainant advised that she did not
wish to continue with a claim for TPD
benefits and at her request, her claim for
TTD benefits was ceased.
At the time of
the Complainant’s complaint in September 2011, the Trustee’s
position was that, by the Complainant’s
own request, her TPD and TTD
claims had been closed. If the Complainant wishes her TPD claim to be
re-opened, the Trustee’s
position is that the Complainant needs to
participate in providing medical evidence, at the Insurer’s expense, to
support her
claim. It is in line with the Policy terms that the Insurer requires
appropriate information to assist it in assessing the Complainant’s
medical condition before it accepts liability, and the Trustee supports the
Insurer’s stance in this regard.
its submission in June 2020, the Trustee made the following relevant points:
The Trustee
reviewed the Insurer’s decision noting its fiduciary duties to the
Complainant including ‘making reasonable
enquires, acting with reasonable
care and exercising good faith.’
accepted the position of the Insurer had some merit, particularly given the
circumstances of the case including the time
that had elapsed, the Complainant
withdrawing and then re-instating her complaint and the difficulty in arranging
a further IME,
the Trustee stated that:
... the Complainant’s incarceration does not
preclude the possibility of an IME taking place and considers it reasonable that
a medical professional could visit [the Complainant] in jail and undertake an
The Trustee also noted that the decision of the Supreme Court [State]
regarding the Complainant’s sentencing for manslaughter
contains a lot of
information regarding the Complainant’s mental illness in 2012 (which is
when the offence was committed)
as well as some information as to her mental
state in the period of time leading up to the date of the offence. There are
also references
to the Complainant being spoken to by police in April 2011 and
detained pursuant to the
Mental Health Act 2007
[State] and kept in a
mental health facility for five days, where she was diagnosed with hypomania.
The Court was provided with reports
by forensic psychiatrists, Dr [MD] and Dr
It was based on
this view and the judge’s finding of fact regarding the
Complainant’s mental state in 2012 indicating
that these symptoms had been
present for some time, that the Trustee requested the Insurer reviews its
decision in April 2017.
The Trustee
... it has acted in accordance with the governing rules and
superannuation law and, in particular, has done everything that it is
required to do. The Trustee submits that it has:
(a) Acted honestly, in good faith and without bias;
(b) Exercised its duties and powers in the best interests of all members and
with the care, skill and diligence of a prudent superannuation
(c) Exercised its powers for proper purpose; and
(d) Given properly informed real and genuine consideration to the relevant
facts in the exercise of its powers.
The Insurer
main points made by the Insurer are as follows:
▪ In relation to the Complainant’s claim for TTD benefits under the Policy, the Insurer stated:
[The Insurer] accepted and paid the claim for the benefit
period 12 December 2009 to 31 March 2011. The TTD claim was closed due to
non-receipt of medical evidence certifying [the Complainant] to be Totally but
Temporarily Disabled, as required under the policy
terms. During the period of
the assessment of [the Complainant’s] TTD claim, customers were required
to provide monthly, unless
otherwise agreed, Progress Claim Forms for review.
Therefore, [the Insurer] makes no further submissions with respect to the TTD
paid TTD monthly benefits in good faith without medical
information being provided
In relation to
the claim for TPD
, the relevant date for assessment of whether the Complainant is TPD is March 2010, being six months after she ceased work due to
disability.
After receiving
the letter from the Trustee dated 31 March 2010, the Insurer took
to assess the Complainant’s claims by obtaining
medical, financial and other relevant information (such as the
Complainant’s
workers’ compensation file) necessary for the
assessments of her claims.
The Insurer
arranged an IME for the Complainant with Dr G, Psychiatrist for 9 March 2011 in
order to obtain an independent opinion
regarding the Complainant’s claim
as there was insufficient information to proceed with a determination of her
claim at the
The Trustee
confirmed that the Complainant would attend the IME in an email dated 2
On 9 March 2011,
Dr G contacted the Insurer and informed them that whilst the
Complainant
had attended his room for examination, she had
refused to proceed with the appointment without her son present. Dr G advised
Insurer that he was not prepared to proceed with the examination with the
Complainant’
-year-old son present. Accordingly, the examination did
not proceed.
that the Complainant attend an IME was fair, reasonable
and necessary for the assessment of the Complainant’s claims.
▪ Following a request from the Trustee on 20 August 2015 for a further review, the Insurer advised the Trustee on 19 November
2015 that there was insufficient information to satisfy the Insurer that the Complainant had met the terms of the Policy for payment
of a TPD benefit.
its ‘procedural fairness’ correspondence dated 24 August 2020, the
Insurer stated as follows:
▪ The information available to the Insurer does not support that the Complainant was continuously absent from employment through
illness for the waiting period (11 September 2009 to 11 March 2010).
▪ The available information does not support that the Complainant has become incapacitated to such an extent as to render her
unlikely ever to engage in or work for reward in any occupation or work for which she is reasonably qualified by education, training
or experience.
▪ The medical evidence indicates that the Complainant’s psychological symptoms were mild around the date of assessment
and that she was fit to return to employment.
▪ There is insufficient information to establish the Complainant’s entitlement to the TPD benefit.
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(2)(a) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must review the decisions of both
the Trustee and Insurer.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must determine whether the decisions
of the Insurer, to cease the payment of a TTD
benefit to the Complainant and
reject her claim for a TPD
benefit, and the decision of the Trustee to
affirm the Insurer’s decisions, were fair and reasonable in their
operation in relation
to the Complainant in the circumstances.
issue is not what decisions the Tribunal would have made on the material before
the Trustee and the Insurer but whether the decisions
were fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal has taken into account all the material
provided by the parties, the provisions of the
Trust Deed and relevant law. The
Tribunal is satisfied that the material it has relied on has been provided to
all Parties.
complaint has a long history. The Complainant was made redundant form her
employment in September 2009. She had been diagnosed
with Major Depression in
2008 and suffered from increasing mental health issues during 2009 to 2012.
Insurer paid her a TTD benefit from 12 December 2009 to 31 March 2011 but ceased
paying benefits because the Complainant refused
to attend medical
appointments.
2 May 2011 the Trustee received correspondence from the Complainant stating that
she was not seeking a permanent disability benefit,
however she would like to
continue with her TTD claim. However, on 20 May 2011 she advised the Trustee
that she no longer wished
to seek disability benefits.
Complainant then complained to the Tribunal on 19 September 2011 seeking full
payment of disability benefits without the requirement
for further medical
examination.
December 2012 the Complainant was convicted of manslaughter and incarcerated.
The Tribunal lost contact with the Complainant during
on 23 July 2014, the Tribunal advised the Trustee that the Complainant had
recently been in contact and wished to proceed
with her complaint, and by email
of 8 May 2015 to the Trustee, the Tribunal requested that the claims assessment
be recommenced.
correspondence dated 19 November 2015 and 4 October 2016 the Insurer advised the
Trustee that it had insufficient evidence to establish
that the Complainant
satisfied the definition of TPD at the relevant date of disablement (date last
worked September 2009). The
Insurer further submitted that given the time that
has elapsed, it may be prejudiced in its assessment of the TPD claim. The
had been unable to complete its assessment of the claim due to the
conduct and requests of the Complainant and the absence of required
medical and
vocational evidence. The Insurer also commented that ‘
intervening events, which may have caused a significant change in her condition
should not be taken into account in the assessment
‘procedural fairness’ correspondence from the Insurer to the Trustee
dated 24 August 2020 indicated that, in
its opinion, the Complainant did not
satisfy the definition of TPD in the Policy to entitle her to a benefit.
issue for determination by the Tribunal is the fairness and reasonableness of
the Trustee’s and Insurer’s decisions
to decline the
Complainant’s claims.
completeness, the Tribunal notes that section 4 of the Complaints Act provides
that a Trustee or Insurer makes a decision if it
fails to make a decision.
Accordingly, to the extent that the Trustee or the Insurer have not yet made a
final decision in relation
to the complaint, given the elapse of time since the
Complainant lodged her complaint in 2011, the Tribunal regards the lack of such
final decision as a decision for the purposes of Section 4.
her claim form, the Complainant stated that the reason her employment ceased was
retrenchment.
She stated that her employment ceased because of the
condition that caused her to make a disability claim.
Tribunal sighted correspondence from the Employer to the Complainant dated 18
December 2009 confirming that the project the Complainant
had been the Program
Manager of had been cancelled in early 2007. This correspondence recognised
that the Complainant had told the
Employer that she was extremely disappointed
upset which she experienced as a result of cancellation of the project
Complainant’s representative provided the Tribunal with a copy of the
judgement sentencing the Complainant after she pleaded
manslaughter.
Tribunal noted that the judgement included the following:
The Complainant
had been detained as an involuntary patient in April 2011 and kept in a mental
health facility. No medication was
prescribed but follow-up counseling was
transferred to the prison psychiatric hospital on 31 January 2013. She
commenced receiving antipsychotic medication and has
shown improvement since
commencing on that medication.
The judgement
to her mental state at the time of the offence. Dr [A] said there were
reasonable grounds to conclude that [the Complainant] was
suffering from ongoing
symptoms of psychosis. It was reasonable to conclude that her symptoms of
psychosis would have impacted upon
her cognitive functioning and capacity for
rational decision-making at the material time.
[D] made a diagnosis that [the Complainant] was suffering from chronic paranoid
schizophrenia at the time of the incident on 6
December 2012.
Complainant’s] prospects of rehabilitation were discussed in Dr
[A’s] supplementary report of 20 November 2014.
A negative indicator was
her longstanding psychotic illness. On the other hand he noted her high level
of functioning prior to the
onset of illness; her response to medication; her
relatively intact cognitive functioning (although this required testing); and
current level of insight and expressed willingness to comply with
psychiatric management
[A] said that the prognosis depended upon several factors, including the
psychiatric management available to her and her willingness
to comply with it.
Various measures that he thought would assist her were noted, including a need
for ongoing assertive treatment
and monitoring when she is released on
medical reports when considered alongside statements made by the Complainant
document the descent of a previously well woman to
severe psychotic illness.
The early stages of the illness resulted in the loss of her employment as a
Project Manager as her performance
deteriorated.
TTD benefits
Tribunal first considered the fairness and reasonableness of the Insurer’s
decision to cease payments of TTD benefits to
the Complainant.
relevant medical reports are as set out above. On 17 March 2010, Dr JB recorded
the first documentation of thought disorder.
Dr PB’s report on 28 April
2010 did not identify psychotic symptoms but notably he conducted the
examination with her son
in the room. Dr SY was clearly alarmed about the
Complainant’s condition on 9 August 2010. On 31 August 2010 the Trustee
expressed concerns about the mental health of the Complainant to the Insurer
following the receipt of disturbed communications.
This resulted in a
communication to the Complainant’s general practitioner. On 2 September
2010 her General Practitioner recorded
psychotic ideation.
Dr AC’s report on 24 February 2011 the Complainant’s social
circumstances were clearly in decline. ‘She was
in financial difficulty
and couldn’t afford to see a psychologist or psychiatrist, her house was
her return to work date was uncertain at that
Complainant attended for her IME on 9 March 2011 however she attended with her
son, but Dr G refused to conduct the examination
with her son present and the
appointment was cancelled.
24 March 2011 the Complainant made a complaint to the Trustee as follows:
My complaint is that on 9 March 2011, I was required to attend a
medical appointment with [Dr G] for examination. I felt this doctor
intimidating and in appropriate
I do not feel I need to attend any
further medical appointments and am engaging in my own treatment. I therefore
believe your decision
to send me for further examination is wrong.
this point in time, in the Tribunal’s view, the Complainant’s mental
illness and her lack of insight meant she was
unable to comply with further
requests for medical examinations.
her complaint to the Tribunal dated 18 September 2011, the Complainant wrote:
Attending medical examinations were threatening by nature. In
respect of the safety of my life & that of my son, the claim was
A number of police events also recorded 3
engaged to assist either mislead me and/or engaged in criminal activities under
separate investigations. My son and I were
also forced to flee our home
follwong threats both direct and indirect during October 2010.
Following complaint about [Dr G]... I was booked in for another spot at
on a weekday evening.
a phone call to the Tribunal on 14 February 2012, the Complainant was reported
as stating:
...that the Fund and/or the Insurer and her employer and her doctor
and her neighbour and her local MP have committed various criminal
offences...she described ‘them’ as ‘murderers’ and
stated that they harassed her.
Correspondence
from the Complainant to the Trustee and the Insurer during 2010 and 2011 was
increasingly bizarre and as noted above,
the Trustee was sufficiently concerned
to raise her mental health with the Insurer.
the Tribunal’s view the history set out above shows that there is
sufficient evidence that the Complainant was unfit for
work for the two year
period of her entitlement to TTD payments.
Complainant was unwilling to attend any further medical examinations due to her
mental illness. In the Tribunal’s view,
the only reason for her
non-attendance was her illness.
definition of TTD in the Policy requires that the Complainant is under medical
care. The Policy also provides that insured benefits
cease when an insured
person fails to provide evidence that the Insurer reasonably requires to assess
Complainant was clearly under medical care after the benefits ceased in March
2011 (she was admitted to hospital in April 2011).
As noted above, the Tribunal
is of the view that the reason for the non-provision of medical information or
attendance at medical
appointments was the extent of the Complainant’s
illness, and the Insurer was aware of it through her correspondence to the
Trustee which was brought to the Insurer’s attention. Therefore in the
circumstances, an Insurer, acting reasonably, would
have acceded to the
Complainant’s request for payment of the balance of the TTD benefits. To
comply with the Policy, the Insurer
did not reasonably require further medical
information to assess the TTD claim.
these reasons, the Tribunal is of the view that it was unfair and unreasonable
for the Insurer to cease payment of the Complainant’s
Tribunal considered whether interest should be paid by the Insurer on the TTD
payments because the Complainant has not had use
of the funds.
the circumstances of this case, the Tribunal has determined the interest is not
payable for the following reasons:
The Complainant
requested cessation of her TTD benefits. Accordingly, at that time, without
further evidence, the Insurer was entitled
to act on the Complainant’s
The Complainant
has been incarcerated since December 2012. The impact of this was that
resolution of her claim was delayed through
no fault of the Insurer.
TPD benefits
Tribunal then considered the Complainant’s claim for TPD benefits.
Complainant was convicted following a very serious incident on 7 December 2012,
and incarcerated. Once incarcerated her severe
psychotic illness became very
evident and she was scheduled to a mental health hospital on 13 January
reviewing her subsequent course it is clear that the Complainant responded well
to the introduction of anti-psychotic medication.
27 March 2017 a mental health review no formal thought disorder was noted. Her
mental state was considered to be stable on medication.
It was recorded that
the Complainant was ‘on feet all day at kitchen.’
Complainant has been able to undertake work while in prison and remains well on
medication. It therefore cannot be said that
she is unlikely ever to work
again. She therefore does not meet the requirements for TPD. The Complainant
also indicated a desire
to undertake further study on her release.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is of the view that the Trustee and Insurer’s refusal to pay
the Complainant a TPD benefit operates
fairly and reasonably in relation to the
Complainant in the circumstances.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decisions under review
if it is satisfied that the decisions, in their
operation in relation to the
Complainant, were fair and reasonable in the circumstances. In relation to the
claim for a TPD benefit,
for the reasons stated above, the Tribunal is so
relation to the TPD benefir, the Tribunal affirms the decisions of the Trustee
and the Insurer.
relation to the TTD benefit, for the reasons stated above the Tribunal is not
satisfied that the decisions to cease payment of
the TTD benefits were fair and
reasonable in their operation to the Complainant in the circumstances.
s37(3) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must make a determination and it can
set aside the decisions of the decision-makers
and substitute another
s37(1)(a) and (2)(b) of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal has all the powers,
obligations and discretions of the Trustee and
the Insurer.
making its decision, s37(5) of the Complaints Act requires that the Tribunal
must not do anything that would be contrary to law
or to the governing rules of
the Fund and the contract of insurance between the Insurer and Trustee.
s37(4) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal may only exercise its determination
making power for the purpose of placing the Complainant
as nearly as
practicable, in the position that they would have been in but for the
unfairness, unreasonableness, or both, that the
Tribunal has determined to exist
in relation to the Trustee’s and Insurer’s decisions.
accordance with these provisions, the Tribunal determines to set aside the TTD
decisions under review and substitute its own decisions
Complainant’s claim for payment of the balance of her TTD benefit is
Insurer must pay the TTD benefit to the Trustee. The Trustee must pay the
amount received from the Insurer to the Complainant.
noted above, the Tribunal’s view is that no interest is payable in the
circumstances of this case.
Jocelyn Furlan, Presiding Member
Date of Tribunal signature: 20 November 2020
RTF format (525 KB)
Signed PDF/A format