Robert McCrae and Special Broadcasting Service Corporation (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 173 (30 September 2025)
Robert McCrae and Special Broadcasting Service Corporation (Freedom of
information)
[2025] AICmr 173
(30 September 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of Justin Lodge, Acting
General Manager Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the
Australian Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Robert McCrae
Special Broadcasting Service Corporation
Decision date
Freedom of Information — Whether reasonable steps taken to find
documents — (CTH)
of Information Act 1982
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the internal review decision of the Special Broadcasting Service Corporation
(the SBS) of 2 May 2025.
I substitute my decision that documents falling within
the scope of the request have been found and do exist.
of this decision the SBS
must provide a response to the applicant in accordance with s 26 of the FOI Act
in relation to the documents
discussed below at paragraphs [
] and advise whether it has fully
implemented my decision.
decision sets aside the SBS’s internal review decision on the basis that
the SBS no longer maintains that it does not hold
any further documents within
the scope of the applicant’s request.
Reasons for decision
10 January 2024, the applicant applied to the SBS for access to various
documents relating to the assessment of their program pitch.
applicant’s request was framed in 8 parts.
2 May 2024, the SBS made an internal review decision to release one document in
full relating to Part 7 of the applicant’s
request. In relation to Part 5
of the request, the SBS referred the applicant to a publicly available document.
The SBS refused access
to the remaining six parts of the applicant’s
request under s 24A of the FOIA Act, on the basis that no documents could be
the same day, the applicant sought IC review of the SBS’s internal review
decision. During this review, the applicant also
sought an investigation into
the handling of their pitch and FOI request. The applicant’s complaint
FOI request has been considered separately
(CP24/01394; CP24/01396). In any case, these are not IC reviewable issues and do
within the ambit of my powers as a delegate for the purposes of s 55K
of the FOI Act.
this IC review, after having regard to the scope of the request, the searches
evidence provided, and the documents already
released to the applicant, the
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner identified other documents
relevant to the scope
of the request that the SBS have not provided to the
response, the SBS conceded that additional documents fall within the scope of
the applicant’s request, but it did not make
a revised decision to release
this material to the applicant.
assist with the timely resolution of this IC review, this matter has proceeded
to a decision under s 55K of the FOI Act.
the SBS no longer maintains that further documents cannot be found or do not
exist, I set aside the SBS’s internal review
decision and substitute my
decision that documents falling within scope of the request have been found and
Justin Lodge
Acting General Manager, Freedom of
Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian Information
Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
Accessing your information
If you would like access to the information that we hold about you, please
FOIDR@oaic.gov.au
information is available on the
information
page on our website.
On the question of the
processing deadlines that now apply, see
Fletcher and Prime Minister of
RTF format (22.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format