Application by Meltwater Australia Pty Ltd [2021] ACopyT 4 (20 December 2021)
Application by Meltwater Australia Pty
[2021] ACopyT 4
File number:
CT 2 of 2017
The Tribunal:
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
Date of decision:
Date of hearing:
No Catchwords
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Counsel for Meltwater Australia Pty Ltd:
Ms A Campbell
Solicitor for the Meltwater Australia Pty Ltd:
Baker McKenzie
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr R Lancaster SC with Mr B Lim
Solicitor for the Respondent:
MinterEllison
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 2 of 2017
APPLICATION BY:
MELTWATER AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (ABN 91 121 849 769)
MELTWATER AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (ABN 91 121 849 769)
001 228 799)
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL DIRECTS THAT:
1. The solicitors for Meltwater Australia Pty Ltd submit to the Associate to
the President of the Tribunal orders giving effect to
the Tribunal’s
reasons published today, by Thursday, 23 December 2021.
2. The costs of and incidental to the application heard by the Tribunal on
9 December 2021 are reserved for consideration in relation
to the question
of costs more generally.
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT):
1 These proceedings are concerned with the resolution of the terms of
proposed orders of the Tribunal to be made as between Meltwater
and CA (and all
abbreviations adopted in the principal determination of 15 October 2021;
Application by Isentia Pty Limited
[2021] ACopyT 2
are adopted in
these reasons) in relation to two outstanding matters (all other elements of the
proposed order having been agreed
between the parties). Although the Isentia
and Meltwater proceedings continue to be heard together, these reasons address
only outstanding
matters of concern between Meltwater and CA.
matter concerns a protocol for dealing with what is
described as “Interim Orders – Back pay”. The protocol
Order 5) contemplates that Meltwater is to serve on CA by
22 December 2021 a document that specifies how it contends that the
Licence applies during the “Interim Period” as that term is
defined in an interim order made on 23 April 2019; the quantum
of any back
payment during the period; the issue of how the back payment is calculated
including by reference to the matters set
out at Order 5(c); and as to
“usage data” and “click through rates”, the document is
to address the matters
at Order 5(d)(i) to (iv).
3 Meltwater says that it cannot provide the document by 22 December 2021
and will need until 28 January 2022 to do so. CA says that
if Meltwater is
provided with an extension until then, CA will need additional time to properly
analyse the data and form a view
4 Meltwater will be provided with the extension it seeks until Thursday,
28 January 2022 and CA will be granted a corresponding extension
Friday, 26 February 2022 to respond to the document.
matter concerns that part of the proposed orders
(Order 3) which addresses the extent to which CA may disclose the terms of
the Tribunal
Licence (which is Annexure A to the order of 15 October
2021, and otherwise a confidential document within the terms of the
confidentiality
protocol adopted by the parties), and to whom CA may disclose
the relevant information.
6 The proposed order seeks to address that matter by reference to
Annexure C to the orders which provides that CA “may disclose”
clauses 3.1 to 3.6 of the Tribunal Licence together with all definitions
referred to in those clauses and Annexure B and Annexure
Tribunal Licence) and the Downstream Licence Fees set out in Annexure A to
the Tribunal Licence together with the definition
of terms referred to in
Annexures A, B and C to the Tribunal Licence. The persons to whom any of
that information may be disclosed
(described as “Authorised
Recipients”) are CA’s downstream licensees where Meltwater has acted
in a particular
capacity as described at Annexure C (to the orders):
Annexure C, 2.1. Orders have been made in the Isentia proceeding on that
7 However, Meltwater is concerned about the scope and operation of
Order 3 cross‑referenced to Annexure C, for this reason.
8 Meltwater says that it has no difficulty with a right in CA, as proposed,
to disclose Annexures B and C to the Tribunal Licence.
Annexure B is
concerned with “Government Downstream Licence Terms”.
Annexure C is concerned with “Non‑Government
Downstream Licence
Terms”. Meltwater takes that position because disclosure of
Annexures A and B is consistent with the “ordinary
these licence arrangements that have existed previously between Meltwater and
CA. Meltwater says that disclosure
of clauses 3.1 to 3.6 of the Tribunal
Licence and disclosure of the definition of “Downstream Licence Fee”
in Annexure
A to the Tribunal Licence is a different matter. That is said
to be so because those matters relate solely to the commercial arrangements
between Meltwater and CA
and Meltwater says that it does
not understand why it is necessary to provide CA with a right to disclose to
downstream licensees
the amount (or fee) that Meltwater is required to pay
with respect to a downstream licence. That matter is said to be an
entirely commercial and confidential matter as between Meltwater
Meltwater says that the licence fee it pays forms part of its cost base and it
“will suffer commercial harm if that
information is disclosed”:
T, p 13, lns 27‑28. CA, in response, says two things.
, it says that clauses 3.1 to 3.6 of the Tribunal Licence
(and the related definitions) may well need to be disclosed by CA as they
provide the foundation upon which downstream licensees have been provided with a
licence to use CA licensed content.
, CA says that by operation of proposed Order 3(b)(i),
may disclose, on a confidential basis, the terms of the
Tribunal Licence as specified in Annexure D to the proposed orders, to
persons specified in Annexure D. Annexure D provides that
clauses 3.1 to 3.6 together with the relevant definitions referred to
those clauses may be disclosed and Annexures B and C and the Downstream
Licence Fees set out in Annexure A (together with definitions)
disclosed by Meltwater to a customer or a prospective customer of Meltwater. CA
says that it does not object to the discretionary
disclosure protocol Meltwater
seeks to adopt in Annexure D, but says that Meltwater is seeking to create
a differential set of obligations
between CA and Meltwater concerning the
downstream licences that is “neither even‑handed nor
justified” because
the approach reflected in Order 3(b)(i) and
Annexure D on the one hand, is quite different to Meltwater’s
proposed Order 3(a)(i)
as modified by Meltwater’s proposed changes to
Annexure C, at point 2 of the Schedule, on the other hand.
11 It is entirely understandable that Meltwater would view as confidential
(as does CA) the commercial terms of the licence fee it
is to pay CA as a
downstream fee according to Annexure A to the Tribunal Licence. The
question of whether Meltwater wishes to disclose
the quantum of that fee (or
not), the payment of which is an obligation or burden cast on it (and a benefit
conferred on CA), might
be thought to be a matter solely for it to decide and so
a discretion to do so might rationally be conferred on Meltwater consistent
a prohibition on CA disclosing to a downstream licensee a licence fee paid
by Meltwater to CA, in respect of those downstream licences.
Nevertheless, the confidentiality of that information is a matter of
confidentiality to both parties which is presently protected by the
confidentiality regime and if there is to be a departure from
that regime, the
operation of the departure ought to be consistent. Accordingly, the Tribunal
will not adopt the changes to Annexure
C as proposed by Meltwater.
12 Meltwater’s solicitors are requested to submit an order giving
effect to these reasons to the Associate to the President
by Thursday, 23
December 2021.
I certify that the preceding twelve (12)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination herein of
the Honourable
Justice Greenwood (President), Australian Copyright
Dated: 20 December 2021
RTF format (269 KB)
Signed PDF/A format