Sandhu v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1843 (12 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Sandhu v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1843
File number(s):
ADG 124 of 2022
Judgment of:
JUDGE GERRARD
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– student visa –
decision of the then Administrative Appeals Tribunal – genuine temporary
entrant criterion –
Direction 69 factors – whether the Tribunal
failed to afford procedural fairness – whether the Tribunal failed to
assess the applicants’ claims – whether the
Tribunal’s decision was irrational or illogical – whether the
Tribunal’s decision is affected by bias – no jurisdictional error
established – application dismissed.
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) cll 500.212, 500.311 in Schedule 2
Cases cited:
BKT17 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] FCA 384
Craig v State of South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
DAO16 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] FCAFC 2
Djokovic v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
(2022) 289 FCR 21
DQQ17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Kaur v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2025] FCA 931
Kumar v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2020] FCAFC 16
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v Singh
[2014] FCAFC 1
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
(2010) 240 CLR
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZRKT
[2013] FCA 317
(2013) 212 FCR
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
185 CLR 259
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507
MZAIB v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
NADH v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2004] FCAFC 328
(2004) 214 ALR 264
Prasad v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1985) 6 FCR
Randhawa v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437
SAAP v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2005] HCA 24
(2005) 228 CLR 294
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
(2006) 228 CLR 152
SZOAF v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
SZRUI v Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship
[2013] FCAFC 80
VFAB v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous
[2003] FCA 872
(2003) 131 FCR 102
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Applicants:
Self-represented with the assistance of a Punjabi
interpreter
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Tara Rossetto
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Sparke Helmore
Second Respondent:
Submitting appearance, save as to costs
ADG 124 of 2022
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
RAJWANT KAUR SANDHU
RAVINDER SINGH SANDHU
Second Applicant
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Second Respondent
JUDGE GERRARD
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
application be dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or
order to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
or to record a variation to the order pursuant to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2)
(General Federal Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE GERRARD:
INTRODUCTION
applicants seek judicial review of a decision of the then Administrative Appeals
the Tribunal
) affirming a decision of the first respondent
the Minister
) to refuse to grant the first applicant a Student (Class
TU) (Subclass 500) visa (
). As will be explained, for the
applicants to succeed in this Court, they must establish that the
Tribunal’s decision contains
a jurisdictional error. This Court cannot
undertake a review of the merits of the decision under review.
the reasons set out below, the Court has not found jurisdictional error in the
Tribunal’s decision. On that basis, the application
first applicant (
the applicant
) is a citizen of India (Court Book
) 3). She arrived in Australia with her husband (
) on 6 March 2020 as the holder of a visitor visa, having
previously visited for a month in 2019 (CB 168).
18 April 2020, the applicant applied for the visa which is the subject of this
application (CB 1-21). The second applicant was
named as a member of the
applicant’s family unit (CB 4-8). The applicant provided a ‘Genuine
Temporary Entrant statement’
GTE statement
) in which she indicated
that she intended to study a Certificate III and IV in Commercial Cookery and a
Diploma of Hospitality Management
(CB 22-33). She also provided a statutory
declaration, financial and academic documents, and an International English
Language Testing
) report dated 4 January 2020 in support of
her application (CB 34-47).
29 September 2021, a delegate of the Minister refused to grant the applicant the
visa. The delegate was not satisfied that the
applicant met the genuine
temporary entrant criterion in cl 500.212 in Schedule 2 of the
Regulations 1994
the Regulations
) (CB 53-58). That criterion
relevantly provided:
The applicant is a genuine applicant for entry and stay as a student because:
(a) the applicant intends genuinely to stay in Australia temporarily, having
(i) the applicant’s circumstances; and
(ii) the applicant’s immigration history; and
(iii) if the applicant is a minor—the intentions of a parent, legal
guardian or spouse of the applicant; and
(iv) any other relevant matter; and
(b) the applicant intends to comply with any conditions subject to which the
visa is granted, having regard to:
(i) the applicant’s record of compliance with any condition of a visa
previously held by the applicant (if any); and
(ii) the applicant’s stated intention to comply with any conditions to
which the visa may be subject; and
(c) of any other relevant matter.
16 October 2021, the applicants applied to the Tribunal for review of the
delegate’s decision (CB 59-66).
2 December 2021, the Tribunal invited the applicants, through their authorised
representative, to provide further information in
a ‘Request for Student
Visa Information’ form by 16 December 2021 (CB 74-75). The Tribunal also
provided the applicants
with a copy of Ministerial Direction No. 69,
‘Assessing the genuine temporary entrant criteria for Student visa and
Guardian visa applications’ (
Direction 69
) (CB 76-80). The
applicants completed the information form in response to the Tribunal’s
invitation, as well as providing a
Confirmation of Enrolment, academic documents
and a letter of support (CB 81-102).
10 February 2022, the applicants were invited to attend a hearing scheduled for
28 February 2022 (CB 103-108). On 17 February 2022,
the applicants’
representative provided the Tribunal with a completed ‘Response to Hearing
Invitation’ (
), along with submissions and supporting
documents on 21 February 2022 (CB 109-141).
23 February 2022, the applicants were notified that the Tribunal hearing had
been rescheduled for 11 March 2022 (CB 142-147). The
applicant attended that
hearing with her authorised representative and with the assistance of a Punjabi
interpreter (CB 160).
23 May 2022, the Tribunal affirmed the delegate’s decision not to grant
the applicants the visa (CB 166-183).
30 May 2022, the applicants lodged an application for judicial review in this
Court. That application seeks review of the Tribunal’s
decision pursuant
Migration Act 1958
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
obtain assistance from this Court, the applicants must show that the Tribunal
has fallen into jurisdictional error. It is thus
useful to outline the
Tribunal’s decision in some detail.
Tribunal began by identifying the visa under review, noting that the applicants
applied for the visa on 18 April 2020. The Tribunal
observed that, at the time
of application, the visa contained two subclasses: Subclass 500 (Student) and
Subclass 590 (Student Guardian).
However, the Tribunal noted that the applicant
had applied for the visa to study in Australia and did not make any claims to
the criteria for the Subclass 590 (Student Guardian) visa (at [2]).
Tribunal explained that a delegate of the Minister had refused to grant the visa
as the delegate was not satisfied that the applicant
genuinely intended to stay
in Australia temporarily (as required by cl 500.212(a) in Schedule 2 of the
Regulations) (at [3]). Accordingly,
the delegate was not satisfied that the
second applicant met the requirements of cl 500.311 as a member of the
applicant’s
family unit (at [4]).
Tribunal noted that the issue before it was whether the applicant was a genuine
temporary entrant for entry and stay in Australia
as a student (at [9]). The
Tribunal set out the relevant legislative provisions in that regard (at [10]).
Tribunal stated that it was required to have regard to Direction 69 in
considering whether the applicant satisfied cl 500.212(a)
(at [11]). The
Tribunal noted, however, that the factors set out in Direction 69 were not to be
used as a checklist and were intended
only to guide decision makers when
considering the applicant’s circumstances as a whole (at [12]).
Tribunal summarised the applicant’s migration history, noting that she
first came to Australia in 2019 to visit her family.
The applicant applied for
the student visa during her second visit to Australia in 2020 (at
[13]-[16]).
Tribunal confirmed that, prior to the hearing, the applicant had provided the
Tribunal with documents concerning the courses she
was studying and the nature
of her stay in Australia in accordance with s 359(2) of the Act, including
(among other supporting materials)
(at [18]-[19]):
a Certificate
III in Commercial Cookery from Durban International College issued 6 June
a Certificate IV
in Commercial Cookery from Durban International College issued 24 January 2022;
a Confirmation
of Enrolment for the applicant to study a Diploma of Hospitality Management at
Durban International College with a
course end date of 13 June
Tribunal noted the applicant’s evidence that she had also completed a
Diploma of Care Giving in 2006 and a Diploma of Cutting,
Sewing & Embroidery
Training in 2014, both in India, but that she was unable to obtain work due to
her low level qualifications
(at [20]-[21]).
Tribunal set out the applicant’s claims with respect to her GTE statement,
noting that the applicant claimed she decided
to undertake study in Australia
after being encouraged by friends and family during her second visit to
Australia in March 2020 (at
[22]-[23]). However, the Tribunal found that the
applicant’s evidence did not support that claim (at [24]-[31]).
the basis of the following evidence, the Tribunal found that the applicant had
come to Australia on a visitor visa with the intention
of undertaking long-term
(a) The applicant had undertaken the IELTS test (a requirement for the grant of
a student visa) on 4 January 2020 in India prior
to departing for Australia. The
Tribunal did not accept that she done so simply for the purpose of improving her
English skills (at
[25]-[26]).
(b) The applicant provided inconsistent evidence in her GTE statement and
Response regarding the availability of hospitality courses
in India. The
Tribunal found this to weigh against the applicant’s credibility in
assessing her explanation for undertaking
study in Australia (at [27]).
(c) The Tribunal found that the applicant enrolled in a course of study only a
month after arriving in Australia, having left a child
and farming land in
India, which pointed to her improperly using the visitor visa to enter Australia
for the purpose of engaging
in long-term study (at [28]-[31]).
Tribunal noted that she had completed the Certificate III and IV in Commercial
Cookery at the time of its decision, and that she
was currently undertaking the
Diploma of Hospitality Management, which the Tribunal found would only
marginally improve her prospects
of employment and expected level of
remuneration in India (at [35]).
the Tribunal recognised it was important to allow for reasonable changes to
study and career pathways, and that there may be
some differences between the
Australian and Indian education systems, it did not accept that her studies in
Australia show any meaningful
career progression or could not have been
undertaken in India in circumstances where she has previously completed two
diplomas there,
and where the cost of living and studying in Australia is likely
to outweigh the same costs in India (at [36]-[41]).
Tribunal noted that the applicant will have been in Australia for over two years
and four months by the time she completes her
current diploma, with no
documentary evidence to support her stated intention of returning to India (at
[42]). The Tribunal found
that the higher level of wages the applicant could
expect to receive in Australia would be an incentive for her to remain here
than return home (at [48]).
Tribunal found that the applicant’s assets and level of family support in
India were not a significant incentive for her
to return in circumstances where
she has been supported from abroad and where she has strong personal ties with
her husband, sister
and friends in Australia (at [53]-[57]).
Tribunal’s findings ultimately led it to the conclusion that the applicant
is using the student visa as a means to maintain
ongoing residence in Australia
Tribunal was therefore not satisfied that the applicant intends to genuinely to
stay in Australia temporarily in accordance with
cl 500.212(a) of the
Regulations (at [61]-[63]). Accordingly, the second applicant was unable to meet
the requirements of cl 500.311
Tribunal affirmed the delegate’s decision not to grant the applicants the
visa (at [66]).
APPLICATION TO THIS COURT
30 May 2022, the applicants filed an application for judicial review in this
Court. However, on 20 March 2025, the applicants filed
an amended application
with the following grounds of review (without alteration):
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) affirmed the decision to refuse my Student
(Temporary) (Class TU) Subclass 500 visa. Attached
is a copy of the
Tribunal’s written decision dated 23/05/2022, which was notified to me via
email on the same day.
submit that the Tribunal failed to apply the rules of procedural fairness in
making its decision and did not properly consider the
evidence I provided.
Tribunal erred in dismissing my Genuine Temporary Entrant (GTE) submissions,
where I clearly explained:
The value of my
chosen course.
The skills I
would gain from my studies.
The rationale
behind my change in career pathway.
Tribunal made illogical conclusions regarding my English test by wrongly
assuming that my intent in taking the IELTS Academic
test was solely for the
purpose of studying in Australia. My explanation that I took the test to improve
my English communication
skills was dismissed unfairly
Tribunal undermined the value of my chosen course and failed to acknowledge
My Diploma of
Hospitality Management builds upon my prior qualifications.
enhances my career prospects and aligns with my professional
aspirations.
Tribunal selectively applied Ministerial Directions in assessing my economic and
family ties to India, leading to a biased and
unfair conclusion that:
I had greater
economic incentives to stay in Australia due to potential higher wages.
family ties in India (including my parents, siblings, and child) were
insufficient reasons for me to return home.
Tribunal wrongly assumed that I misused my visitor visa to transition into a
student visa, despite the fact that:
My decision to
study in Australia evolved naturally after arriving.
I complied with
all legal visa requirements.
Tribunal failed to provide clear justifications for rejecting my evidence.
Instead of directly addressing my submissions, it relied
on generalized
assumptions and failed to explain why my reasoning was not considered
Summary or Errors in the Tribunal’s Decision
of Procedural Fairness
submissions were not properly assessed.
My evidence
regarding my career change and course value was ignored.
in Evaluating My English Test
Tribunal’s reasoning was illogical and did not consider the broader
benefits of English proficiency.
Unreasonable
Dismissal of My Course
The Tribunal
referred to my studies as “low-level” despite their direct relevance
to my career.
Misrepresentation
of My Economic Initiatives
The Tribunal
failed to consider key factors such as:
lower cost of living in India.
growth of the hospitality industry in India.
financial investment I made in my education.
and Biased Consideration of Ministerial Directions
family and financial ties to India were ignored or downplayed.
Tribunal’s reasoning was inconsistent and unfair.
Conclusion About My Visitor Visa Usage
The Tribunal
wrongly assumed that I had pre-planned to study in Australia on a visitor
to Provide Clear Justifications
The Tribunal
did not adequately explain why my submissions were not credible.
It failed to
engage with key evidence in my GTE submission.
Tribunal’s decision contains serious legal errors, including:
to provide procedural fairness in assessing my application.
to properly consider my economic and family ties to India.
and biased conclusions about my intent and eligibility.
For these reasons, I respectfully request that the FCC quash the decision and
reconsider my case in accordance with the law.
applicants appeared before the Court on 6 August 2025 without legal
representation but with the assistance of a Punjabi interpreter.
confirmed with the applicants that they had received copies of the Court Book
and the Minister’s written submissions.
materials before the Court include:
the amended
application for judicial review filed on 20 March 2025;
the affidavit of
the applicant filed on 30 May 2022 which annexes the Tribunal’s decision
(the affidavit being taken as read
and in evidence at the hearing on 6 August
the affidavit of
the applicant filed on 31 March 2025 (the affidavit being taken as read and in
evidence at the hearing on 6 August
2025, subject to relevance noting that the
affidavit contains documents which were not before the Tribunal at the time of
its decision);
a Court Book
numbering 183 pages (marked as Exhibit 1); and
submissions filed by the applicants on 12 March 2025; and
submissions filed on behalf of the Minister on 4 July 2025.
applicants were not represented at the hearing and the Court was thus mindful of
the comments of Colvin J in
DQQ17 v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2018] FCA 784
and Feutrill J in
BKT17 v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
that it is usually appropriate for an unrepresented applicant to
be given an opportunity to explain orally the matters that are said
to give rise
to an appeal (or review). That sensible and appropriate course is now the
standard procedure in this Court: see, by
way of recent example,
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2025] FCA 931
Accordingly, at the hearing of this matter, the applicants were invited to tell
the Court what they believed to be wrong with the
Tribunal’s decision
and/or procedure.
Court also took some time to explain that it could not undertake a merits review
of the Tribunal’s decision (
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
v Wu Shan Liang
(1996) 185 CLR 259
Wu Shan Liang
could only consider whether or not the Tribunal’s decision revealed
migration decisions such as
the decision being challenged, common categories of alleged jurisdictional error
(a) where the decision-maker identifies the wrong issue or asks the wrong
Craig v State of South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
(b) where the decision-maker ignores relevant material (
(c) where the decision-maker relies on irrelevant material (
(d) where the decision-maker fails to follow mandatory procedures (
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2005] HCA 24
at 354-355);
(e) where the decision-maker shows actual or apprehended bias (
Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship
[2013] FCAFC
(f) where the decision is illogical, irrational or unreasonable (
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
(2022) 289 FCR 21 at 27-28;
Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v SZMDS
(2010) 240 CLR 611
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR 332
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v Singh
[2014] FCAFC 1
231 FCR 437
it was also explained to the applicant that this was not an exhaustive list and
she should attempt to tell the Court why
she said the Tribunal had fallen into
this background, the applicant submitted that the Tribunal did not consider her
ties to family in India. The applicant said
that she told the Tribunal that her
son is overseas and that her plan was to study and then return to India, but
that the Tribunal
did not accept this and only considered the relevance of her
family in Australia. The applicant also reiterated arguments that were
in her written grounds and will be addressed below.
the Minister’s oral submissions at the hearing, the applicants were given
an opportunity to respond to anything they
disagreed with. The applicant said
she wanted to study more and requested leave to file written submissions in
reply. Balancing the
unorthodoxy of the request (which was opposed by the
Minister) against the challenges that self-represented applicants face in
their arguments, particularly via an interpreter, and noting that the
Court explained a reply submission should be limited to addressing
Minister’s arguments and not raising any new matters, leave was granted
for the applicants to file written submissions
12 August 2025, in lieu of reply submissions, the applicants filed a further
amended application which essentially replicates the
grounds reproduced above at
[29] with negligible differences. The Court has therefore not had regard to this
CONSIDERATION
outlined above, the amended application contains two numbered lists of asserted
errors. The Minister’s written submissions
as one continuous series of 16 overlapping grounds and the Court will adopt the
same approach. Noting
that the applicants were unrepresented in this matter, the
Court has endeavoured to interpret their grounds as broadly as possible
the principles in
MZAIB v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2015) 239 FCR 158).
addressing the grounds in the amended application, counsel for the Minister
responded to the applicant’s claim in oral
submissions that the Tribunal
did not consider the relevance of her family ties in India. Counsel for the
Minister submitted that
the Tribunal explained in its reasons why it did not
accept the applicant’s familial ties to India would operate as a
significant
incentive for her to return. The Tribunal noted that the minimum
wage the applicant could expect to receive in Australia was more
than triple
that in India and would therefore provide a significant economic incentive to
remain in Australia (at [48]). The Tribunal
further acknowledged the
applicant’s evidence about her parents, siblings and child in India, and
that this would ordinarily
provide an incentive to return home. However, in
circumstances where the applicant is in daily contact with them despite not
for over two years, and where she has stable accommodation and
financial support in Australia with the ability to earn a higher level
income, the Tribunal found the applicant’s familial ties did not provide a
substantial incentive to return home (at [56]).
applicant asserted that the Tribunal did not consider her familial ties to India
to be ‘relevant’. Counsel for the
Minister submitted that it was not
the case that the Tribunal found that evidence to be irrelevant, but rather that
the Tribunal
found those ties did not provide a sufficient incentive to return
to India. The Court agrees with the Minister’s position.
It is clear that
the Tribunal considered all of the applicant’s evidence with respect to
her familial and personal ties to
India and balanced that against the incentives
to remain in Australia. The Tribunal concluded that the applicant’s family
India did not provide a strong incentive for her to return home, and it set
out cogent and rational reasons for making such a finding.
The Court finds no
ground one, the applicant simply notes that the Tribunal affirmed the
delegate’s decision to refuse to grant the visa, a
copy of which Tribunal
decision was annexed to her application. This kind of introductory statement is
not uncommon in applications
by unrepresented litigants who are unfamiliar with
drafting legal documents. Nevertheless, it is an uncontroversial statement and
does not contain any allegation of error. Accordingly, no jurisdictional error
arises in respect of ground one.
Grounds two, nine and sixteen – did the Tribunal fail to
afford the applicants procedural fairness?
these grounds, the applicants assert that the Tribunal
“failed to apply
the rules of procedural fairness”
. However, the applicants have not
explained how the Tribunal’s process was unfair (beyond not properly
assessing the applicants’
submissions, which will be addressed later in
these reasons).
Minister submitted that the Tribunal properly complied with its procedural
fairness obligations under Division 5 of Part 5 of
the Act. Indeed, the Tribunal
must invite the applicants to appear before the Tribunal to give evidence and
present arguments (s
360 of the Act). The Tribunal appropriately did so and the
applicants attended a hearing for that purpose. The applicants were on
from the delegate’s decision, the ‘Request for Student Visa
Information’ form, the Direction 69 notification,
and the Tribunal’s
questioning at the hearing that the dispositive issue for consideration was
whether the applicant intended
genuinely to stay in Australia temporarily, as
required by cl 500.212(a) of the Regulations. The Minister submitted that the
complied with its procedural fairness obligations in that respect
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
(2006) 228 CLR 152
Minister further submitted that the Tribunal’s s 359A obligation to put to
the applicant clear particulars of any information
that would cause the Tribunal
to affirm the decision under review was not engaged in this case because the
information it relied
upon fell within the exceptions of s 359(4).
359A relevantly provides:
(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), the Tribunal must:
(a) give to the applicant, in the way that the Tribunal considers appropriate in
the circumstances, clear particulars of any information
that the Tribunal
considers would be the reason, or a part of the reason, for affirming the
decision that is under review; and
(b) ensure, as far as is reasonably practicable, that the applicant understands
why it is relevant to the review, and the consequences
of it being relied on in
affirming the decision that is under review; and
(c) invite the applicant to comment on or respond to it.
(4) This section does not apply to information:
(a) that is not specifically about the applicant or another person and is just
other person is a member...
Specifically
in this case, the Minister submitted that the information which the Tribunal
relied upon as to the minimum wage in Australia
was information that was
“not specifically about the applicant”
“about a class of persons of which the applicant...is a
and the Tribunal was therefore not required to put that
information to the applicant for comment. The Minister did not submit that
Tribunal relied on any other information that it would have been obliged to have
put to the applicant, and indeed the Court is
otherwise unable to identify any
such information in the Tribunal’s decision.
Court accepts the Minister’s submissions and finds that the Tribunal
properly complied with its procedural fairness obligations
under the Act. The
applicants were properly invited to a hearing and were on notice of the genuine
temporary entrant criterion that
was the issue in dispute. There was no
information which the Tribunal put to the applicants which engaged the
Tribunal’s obligations
under s 359A.
Grounds three, eight, nine and fifteen – did the Tribunal
fail to properly assess the applicant’s submissions?
these grounds, and in addition to the allegation that the Tribunal failed to
afford the applicants procedural fairness, the applicant
contends that the
Tribunal dismissed or failed to properly assess her GTE submissions. The
applicant submitted that the Tribunal
“failed to provide clear
justifications for rejecting [her] evidence”
and instead
“relied on generalized assumptions”
. The applicant further
submitted that the Tribunal failed to explain why it did not find her
submissions to be credible.
Minister submitted that these grounds cannot be made out given the Tribunal
repeatedly referred to the applicant’s GTE statement
throughout its
decision. For example, the Tribunal quoted extracts from both her GTE statement
and Response (at [21] and [27]), summarised
the applicant’s travel history
and decision to study in Australia as outlined in her GTE statement (at [23]),
and noted where
the applicant’s own evidence did not support the claims
made in her GTE statement (at [24] and [27]).
to what the applicant submits by these grounds, the Minister submitted that the
Tribunal provided clear justification for
rejecting the applicant’s
evidence in circumstances where it was inconsistent. The Minister pointed to the
following examples
in the Tribunal’s decision where the Tribunal
identified and engaged with such inconsistencies:
The applicant
claimed in her GTE statement that there were many culinary schools near her
she said that the nearest
“college of hospitality”
was 130 kilometres away (at
The applicant
gave evidence that she undertook the IELTS test in order to improve her English,
however the Tribunal found she could
have simply taken a general English course
if that were her true intention (at [26]).
The Tribunal
rejected the applicant’s evidence about deciding to stay and study in
Australia while on a visitor visa in circumstances
where she and her husband
would have needed to make prior arrangements for their farm and for their child
in India before coming
to Australia (at [29]-[30]).
Court agrees with the Minister’s submission that the Tribunal was entitled
to reject the applicant’s evidence and
that it provided clear and rational
justification for doing so. It is well established that the Tribunal is not
required to uncritically
accept any and all claims made by an applicant (see
Randhawa v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437
Prasad v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
(1985) 6 FCR 155 at 169-70). Indeed, as submitted by the Minister,
it is unsurprising that the Tribunal rejected the applicant’s
where it was inconsistent with her GTE statement. The Tribunal provided clear
justification for why it did not find the
applicant’s evidence to be
credible, and it expressly referred to the applicant’s GTE statement in
its reasoning.
Grounds four and ten – did the Tribunal reach an
illogical conclusion regarding the applicant’s English language
these grounds, the applicant alleges that the Tribunal reached an illogical
conclusion about why she took the IELTS test.
is well established that irrational or illogical findings of fact or reasoning
must demonstrate
“extreme illogicality”
in order to reach the
threshold of jurisdictional error (see
DAO16 v Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection
[2018] FCAFC 2
(2018) 258 FCR 175
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship v SZRKT
[2013] FCA 317
(2013) 212 FCR 99
). If the Tribunal’s
conclusion is one which a reasonable decision-maker could have reached, or a
conclusion on which reasonable
minds may differ, then the Tribunal’s
decision cannot be said to contain jurisdictional error (
Minister correctly submitted that the question before the Court is whether a
reasonable decision-maker could arrive at the same
conclusion as the Tribunal
did regarding the applicant’s IELTS test. The applicant told the Tribunal
that she sat the IELTS
test before coming to Australia because she wanted to
improve her English. However, the Minister submitted that it was permissible
the Tribunal to reject this explanation as
“nonsensical”
[26]) in circumstances where the IELTS test is designed to assess a
person’s English language skills at that point in time,
rather than to
improve them or provide any educational benefit. Counsel for the Minister noted
that this finding was made in the
context of the Tribunal’s other
findings, particularly that coming to Australia involved a substantial degree of
preparation
in circumstances where the applicants were leaving a business and a
child back in India (at [30]).
Court accepts the Minister’s submission that it was open for the Tribunal
to make the finding it did in relation to the
applicant’s IELTS test. The
applicant took the IELTS test some months before arriving in Australia and
before she is said (on
her own evidence) to have decided to undertake study in
Australia. It was not illogical, and was clearly open to the Tribunal, to
that the applicant undertook the IELTS test for the purpose of commencing
studies in Australia, and not to improve her English
skills as she had claimed.
Although it is a conclusion on which reasonable minds may differ, it is not a
conclusion that no other
reasonable decision-maker could have reached, and is
therefore not affected by the kind of extreme illogicality required to establish
Ground five – did the Tribunal undermine the value of her
chosen course?
this ground, the applicant alleges that the Tribunal erred by undermining the
value of her chosen course and failing to acknowledge
its benefits to her
ground appears to be directed to the Tribunal’s conclusion that it was not
satisfied the applicant had a reasonable motive
to undertake
in Australia in circumstances where she had already completed
diplomas in India (at [38]). The Tribunal found that the applicant
had already
completed the cooking components of the proposed courses in Australia and that
she could return to India to work as a
chef, thereby fulfilling her study
intentions. The Tribunal concluded that completing the remaining course
components would only
marginally improve her employment prospects and expected
level of remuneration in India (at [35]).
Minister submitted that the Tribunal was entitled to have regard to any
reasonable reasons or motives for not undertaking the
study in their home
country (as per clause 9a of Direction 69), and that the Tribunal’s
reasons in support of its conclusion
do not display any illogicality or error in
its reasoning.
Court accepts the Minister’s submission in that regard. The Tribunal was
correct to consider the applicant’s motives
for studying in Australia,
along with the value of the course to the applicant’s future, in
accordance with Direction 69. The
Tribunal’s reasons demonstrate that it
considered the applicant’s previous study history and current progress,
and weighed
that against any benefits to the applicant in their home country.
The Tribunal’s conclusion was not illogical, having regard
aforementioned factors. The fact that the applicant urged the Tribunal to reach
a different conclusion about the value and
reasonableness of undertaking the
proposed study in Australia does not mean the Tribunal’s decision is
affected by jurisdictional
the extent that the applicant expresses mere disagreement with the
Tribunal’s findings, the Court accepts the Minister’s
that this ground represents an impermissible invitation to engage in merits
review, which the Court explained to the applicant
it cannot do (
Grounds six, twelve and thirteen – did the Tribunal reach
a biased or unfair conclusion by selectively applying Direction 69?
these grounds, the applicant alleges that the Tribunal reached a
“biased and unfair conclusion”
“selectively
[applying] Ministerial Directions”
, and that the Tribunal’s
reasoning was inconsistent and unfair. Specifically, the applicant challenges
the Tribunal’s
findings that she had greater economic incentive to remain
in Australia due to potentially higher wages, and that her family ties
did not provide a sufficient incentive to return home.
Minister submitted that an allegation of bias is a serious allegation which must
be distinctly made and clearly proven (citing
Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507 at [127]). An
inference of bias on the part of the Tribunal cannot be established simply
because the Tribunal
made findings which were adverse to the applicant (
v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCA 872
(2003) 131 FCR 102
). The Minister submitted that the fact that the
Tribunal robustly tested the applicant’s claims and evidence, and asked
applicant questions to that effect, cannot sustain an allegation of
apprehended bias, let alone actual bias (
SZOAF v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2010] FCA 431
NADH v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 328
(2004) 214 ALR 264
mentioned earlier in these reasons, the Tribunal had appropriate regard to the
Direction 69 factors, including the applicant’s
circumstances in her home
country and her family ties to India. At [48], the Tribunal considered the
economic circumstances in India,
and at [56], it acknowledged that the applicant
had parents, siblings and a child living in India, and that the second applicant
owned a dairy farm in India which was earning income while they were in
Australia. The Tribunal considered those factors in reaching
its finding that
the applicant’s economic and family ties to India did not provide a
substantial incentive to return home in
circumstances where she had already been
in Australia for two years at that point, she has a sister who was providing
financial support
and accommodation in Australia, she would be able to earn a
higher level of income in Australia, and she could apply to have her
joined as a dependent if she was granted the visa (at [56]-[57]).
Court accepts the Minister’s submission that no allegation of bias can be
made out with respect to the Tribunal’s
decision. The Tribunal properly
considered all of the relevant factors as outlined in Direction 69. The Tribunal
considered the applicant’s
economic circumstances, including her asset
position in India, along with the financial prospects and current support
available to
her in Australia (at [47]-[53]). It also considered and weighed up
her familial ties to both Australia and India (at [55]-[57]).
The Tribunal
balanced all of those considerations in reaching its conclusion that the
applicant did not have a significant incentive
to return home to India.
Accordingly, the Tribunal’s conclusion demonstrates no inconsistency,
unfairness or bias, particularly
in circumstances where its reasoning and
findings were based on the applicants’ own evidence.
Grounds seven and fourteen – did the Tribunal wrongly
assume that the applicant misused her visitor visa to transition to a
these grounds, the applicant alleges that the Tribunal incorrectly assumed that
she was misusing her visitor visa and that she
had pre-planned to transition to
a student visa.
Minister submitted that the Tribunal made no error in finding that the applicant
intended to undertake long-term study in Australia
despite arriving on a visitor
visa. The Minister pointed to the fact that, at the time of the Tribunal’s
decision, the applicant
had already completed the relevant cooking
qualifications that would enable her to seek future employment (at [35]). The
therefore found that the applicant wanting to complete further courses
indicated an intention to undertake long-term study in Australia,
inconsistent with the purpose of her arrival on a visitor visa (at [59]).
Minister submitted that it was open to the Tribunal to make such a finding in
circumstances where it considered there had been
“substantial degree
of preparation involved”
in leaving a child and a profitable farm in
India. The Tribunal considered it was
“very unlikely that [the
applicants] would have made a decision to study while here on a visitor
when such a move to Australia required a significant level of
planning (at [29]-[30]).
light of those findings, the Court accepts the Minister’s submission that
it was reasonable for the Tribunal to conclude
that the applicant had come to
Australia on a visitor visa with a plan to engage in long-term study.
Accordingly, the Tribunal was
not satisfied that the applicant was a genuine
temporary entrant for the purpose of the visa (at [61]).
again, to the extent that the applicant seeks the Court to engage in merits
review of the Tribunal’s decision, the Court
is not permitted to do so
(see [63] of these reasons).
Court also asked counsel for the Minister whether there were any matters which
her client, who is subject to a direction to behave
as a model litigant, wished
to draw to the Court’s attention. There were none.
is also not evident to the Court that any other potential arguable error arises
in respect of the Tribunal decision. Indeed, as
submitted by the Minister, the
Tribunal’s decision was a
“routine, merits based evaluation in
the course of public administration”
Kumar v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2020] FCAFC 16
(2020) 274 FCR 646
Tribunal’s reasons for finding that the applicant did not satisfy the visa
criteria were rational and reasonable.
Court is satisfied that, even adopting the broad approach referred to at [38] of
these reasons, no jurisdictional error is apparent.
application for judicial review, supporting affidavit, written and oral
submissions advanced by the applicants have failed to
identify any
Accordingly,
the application is dismissed.
I certify that the preceding eighty (80)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 12 November 2025
RTF format (452 KB)
Signed PDF/A format