Review Applicant: Van Viet Tran Visa Applicant: Kim Tieng Ngo IRT Reference: V97/00579 #number 13378 [1999] IRTA 13378 (28 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND
REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT Reference: V97/00579 13378.doc
REVIEW APPLICANT: Van Viet TRAN
VISA APPLICANT: Kim Tieng NGO
TRIBUNAL: Michael RADIN
Senior Member
DATE: 28 January 1999
PLACE: Adelaide
DECISION: The Tribunal, in accordance with
Section 349
Migration Act
, remits this application to the Department with the direction that Kim
Tieng Ngo meets the relevant prescribed criteria for the grant
of a Subclass
300 (Prospective Spouse) visa, save and except for the criteria relating to
public interest and the provision of an
acceptable assurance of support
REASONS FOR DECISION
This application for review was made on 14 May 1997. The application was made
by Mr Van Viet Tran
('review applicant')
in respect of a decision by the
Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
('Department/'DIMA')
to refuse to grant to his fiancee Ms Kim Tieng Ngo
('visa applicant')
Prospective Spouse visa (Subclass 300).
Ms Ngo was born in Vietnam on 18 June 1961, and she is a citizen of that
country, and ordinarily resident there. She is a divorced
person, and engaged
as a dressmaker. Her nominator and prospective spouse, Mr Van Viet Tran, was
also born in Vietnam on 20 April
1964, and he is presently aged 34 years. He
settled in Australia in 1986 with his family, after securing refugee status.
an Australian citizen. He works as a machine operator, although he
is presently off work due to the effects of a work related injury.
Mr Tran has
three siblings in Australia, while his mother and three other siblings
currently reside in Vietnam.
Ms Ngo made application for a Prospective Spouse visa (Subclass 300) on 16 May
1995 at the DIMA post in Ho Chi Minh City. However,
on 7 May 1996, an officer
at that post
('primary decision-maker')
refused the application, finding
that the visa applicant had failed to satisfy the relevant prescribed criteria
for this type of
visa. Specifically, it was found that the visa applicant had
failed to establish that she had entered a genuine relationship with
nominator and that they were to live together as spouses in accordance with the
provisions of the relevant legislation.
Thereafter, Mr Tran made application to the Migration Internal Review Office
in Melbourne for review of the primary decision on 30 May 1996.
However, by letter dated 1 May 1997, Mr Tran was informed that the
application had been refused, with the primary decision being affirmed in the
The reasons for decision in that respect were set out, in part, as follows:-
'...Ms Ngo states that she first met Mr Tran in June 1994 when their respective
sick relatives shared the same ward in hospital...she
gave Mr Tran her address
and he then visited her before he departed from Vietnam...
...Ms Ngo claims that she was unaware...that Mr Tran knew her sister in South
Australia...
...when viewed in context with Ms Ngo's previous immigration...that is her
failed attempt to migrate here based on her marriage to
an Australian
resident...I consider that the circumstances of her meeting with Mr Tran are
somewhat suspect...I believe this to be
so...in view of the fact
that...following the earlier finding that her marriage was not genuine...which
resulted in the subsequent
refusal of her...application...Ms Ngo obtained a
divorce from her then husband...such action indicates to me that this first
relationship was in fact never seen as genuine by the couple but rather
was contrived for the purpose of securing the right of permanent
residence...for Ms Ngo...
...I acknowledge that...after Mr Tran again travelled to Vietnam on 26 December
1994, he and Ms Ngo became engaged on 08 January
1995...Both their respective
parents attended the engagement...along with approximately 50 friends...
...I fail to understand why neither Ms Ngo nor Mr Tran made mention of
it...With most of the couple's respective families living
there it seems
appropriate that they would follow the engagement with a traditional wedding
ceremony, thereby enabling their close
family members to attend...
...I have experienced some difficulty in believing statements made by the visa
applicant in this case...I accept that a number of
photographs have been
provided...these are of little value in trying to determine the strength of
their relationship...I consider
however that the other forms of evidence...in
particular...the restaurant receipt in joint names, represent an overzealous
by the couple to supply convincing evidence...
...The fact that Ms Ngo has been refused a migrant visa on a previous occasions
is I believe of paramount importance when assessing
her bonafides...she is
determined to gain entry into Australia and is prepared to grasp every
opportunity to achieve this aim...
...I am not satisfied that the relationship between Ms Ngo and Mr Tran is of a
genuine nature. There is insufficient evidence to
show that they genuinely
intend to marry nor intend to live together as spouses...'
Subsequently, on 14 May 1997, the review applicant sought review of the
previous decisions by making application to the Immigration
Review Tribunal at
its Victorian registry.
RELEVANT LAW
The relevant legislative criteria were prescribed at the time of application in
this matter in
Migration Regulations 1994
, and the relevant
parts of these criteria are set out as follows:-
'SUBCLASS 300 - PROSPECTIVE MARRIAGE
300.1 INTERPRETATION
300.111 In this Part:
"prospective spouse"
means the Australian citizen, Australian Permanent
resident or eligible New Zealand citizen referred to in clause 300.211;
"the parties"
means the applicant and the prospective spouse.
"woman-at-risk visa"
(a) a Subclass 204 (Woman at Risk) visa; or
(b) a Class 204 (woman at risk) visa within the meaning of the Migration (1993)
Regulations; or
(c) a woman at risk visa (code number 204) within the meaning of the Migration
(1989) Regulations; or
(d) a transitional (permanent) visa granted on the basis of an application for
a visa of a kind referred to in paragraph (b) or (c).
[NOTE: "eligible New Zealand citizen", "guardian" and "parent" are defined in
regulation 1.03.]
300.2 PRIMARY CRITERIA
: The primary criteria must be satisfied by at least one member of a
family unit. The other members of the family unit who are applicants
of this subclass need satisfy only the secondary criteria.]
300.21 Criteria to be satisfied at time of application
300.211 The applicant intends to marry a person who is:
(a) an Australian citizen; or
(b) an Australian permanent resident; or
(c) an eligible New Zealand citizen.
300.212 (1) The prospective spouse of the applicant is not prohibited by
subclause (2) from being a sponsor.
(2) The prospective spouse is prohibited from being a sponsor if:
(a) the prospective spouse is a woman who was granted a woman-at-risk visa
within the 5 years immediately preceding the application;
(b) on the date of grant of that visa:
(i) the applicant was a former spouse of that woman, having been divorced from
that woman; or
(ii) the applicant was the spouse of that woman and that relationship had not
been declared to Immigration; or
(iii) the applicant was permanently separated from that woman.
300.213 The applicant is sponsored by:
(a) if the prospective spouse has turned 18 - the prospective spouse; or
(b) if the prospective spouse has not turned 18 - a person who:
(A) an Australian citizen; or
(B) an Australian permanent resident; or
(C) an eligible New Zealand citizen; and
(ii) is a parent or guardian of the prospective spouse; and
(iii) has turned 18.
300.214 The parties have met and are known to each other personally.
300.215 The applicant establishes:
(a) that the parties genuinely intend to marry; and
(b) that the marriage is intended by the parties to take place within the visa
300.216 The Minister is satisfied that the parties genuinely intend to live
together as spouses.
300.22 Criteria to be satisfied at time of decision
300.221 The applicant continues to satisfy the criteria specified in clause
300.211 and clauses 300.214 to 300.216.
300.221A Subject to clause 300.221B, there is no impediment to the marriage in
Australian law.
300.221B (1) If the applicant or the prospective spouse is under 18:
(a) the Minister is satisfied that the applicant or the prospective spouse, as
the case requires, is due to turn 18 before the end
of the period within which
the intended marriage is to take place; or
(b) a Judge or magistrate has made an order under
authorising the applicant to marry the prospective spouse, or the
prospective spouse to marry the applicant, as the case requires,
and that order
is in force.
(2) If paragraph (1) (b) applies, the Minister is satisfied that the marriage
will take place.
Marriage Act 1961
, an order made under
of that Act ceases to be in force 3 months after it is made, if the marriage
contemplated by the order has not taken place.]
300.222 The sponsorship of the applicant under clause 300.213 has been approved
by the Minister and is still in force.
For limitations on the Minister's discretion to approve sponsorships
see regulation 1.20J.]
300.223 The applicant satisfies public interest criteria 4001, 4002, 4003,
4004, 4007, 4009 and 4010.
300.224 If the applicant has previously been in Australia, the applicant
satisfies special return criteria 5001 and 5002.
300.225 If so requested by the Minister, an assurance of support in relation to
the applicant has been given, and has been accepted
by the Minister...
Specifically, the parties in this instance are required to establish that they
genuinely intend to marry, and that the marriage will
take place not later than
6 months after the visa applicant's arrival in Australia. A decision-maker
also needs to be satisfied
that the parties intend to live in a genuine and
continuing marital relationship, and of course that there is no impediment to
marriage taking place in Australian law.
The Federal Court in the matter of
Minister for Immigration, Local
Government and Ethnic Affairs v Dhillon
(Full Court of the Federal Court,
(1990) 14 FCR 351)
, laid down the appropriate test for determining the genuine
and continuing nature of a marital relationship as follows:-
'...the true test, we would suggest the only test, is whether at the time at
which the matter has to be decided, it can be said that
the parties have a
mutual commitment to a shared life as husband and wife to the exclusion of
The Tribunal gave consideration to documentation submitted as a part of the
application in this matter, including written submissions
from the review
applicant's adviser. Also submitted were numerous copy letters in certified
translated form, telephone accounts,
photographs, and evidence of financial
transactions undertaken between the parties. The Tribunal also had available
to it the Departmental
file which was provided in accordance with the
provisions of the
Migration Act
A preliminary meeting was conducted with the review applicant and his adviser
on 11 December 1997, and subsequently, at the review
applicant's request, a
hearing was convened in the Tribunal's Adelaide registry on 19 February 1998.
Mr Van Viet Tran attended and
gave sworn evidence. He was assisted by his
adviser, and an interpreter.
He told the Tribunal that he was born in Vietnam on 20 April 1964. Presently,
his mother and three siblings continue to reside there,
while he has three
other siblings who are presently resident in Australia.
He entered Australia in 1986 after securing refugee status, and after having
spent some three years in Malaysia by way of transition.
He became an
Australian citizen in 1989.
He told the Tribunal that he is a machine operator by occupation, but has not
worked for some two years due to a work related injury
sustained to his
shoulder area. He still receives treatment, and has been unable to secure
weekly payments of compensation. Accordingly,
he draws unemployment benefits
from the Commonwealth Government. He lives in a housing trust unit with his
young 8 year old child,
and his sibling. In this regard, he told the Tribunal
that he previously married in 1989 having lived for some time with his spouse
on a defacto basis. He indicated that
'...I met her at a party here in
Australia, and after starting a relationship, we lived defacto a few months
later. It was the first
relationship of this type for both of us. We had a
little boy, who is now 8, and he lives with me. Things started to go wrong
the relationship, and we separated in about 1991. We never got along very
well, and so it was a mutual decision. We got a divorce
in March 1993, on my
application. I agreed to look after our child, but she does see him on a
regular basis. She does not pay any
maintenance, and I support my child
totally. I don't have much contact with her generally, and I'm not sure
whether or not she has
Mr Tran stated that he had no other relationships following the breakdown of
his previous marriage. He confirmed travelling to Vietnam
during 1994, and
meeting his current fiancee there in June of that year. In this regard he
stated that
'...she was not known at all to me prior to this time. It
turned out that I knew her sister here in Adelaide, and she has been my
for over 10 years. In fact her sister was my sister-in-law, because she was
married to my brother, Tran Van Su, but they
are separated now. But I did not
know of or personally know her sister, my current fiancee, until I met her in
In this regard, Mr Tran indicated that his mother fell sick in 1994, and he
went to visit her there. She was in hospital at the
time, and it turned out
that his fiancee's grandmother was also in the same ward. This is where they
met. He indicated that
'...initially we just talked together, but my
immediate impressions were favourable. I started thinking about her, and
promised to
visit her. We then started seeing each other, a few days after
that meeting at the hospital, on a regular basis, I suppose you would
dating. This went on for about two weeks. I realised after I came back to
Australia that I missed her, and so I began contacting
her by telephone, and we
exchanged letters. I asked her to marry me, initially by letter, and then
confirmed by telephone call,
in about October 1994. She said that she needed
to think about it initially, but about a month later, I think it was, she
my proposal. At this point I told her that I would go back in
December so that our families could get together and plan our marriage'
He told the Tribunal that they knew little about each other at that point, but
that he did know about her previous marriage, and
had told her about his.
'...I knew that her previous husband was an Australian citizen who had
unsuccessfully sponsored her. She told me that she was deceived
by him, and
that she had never been happy, and so she applied for that divorce at my
He stated that her divorce
'...came through I think some time in 1995'
In December 1994, Mr Tran returned to Vietnam, and stayed for some seven weeks.
He stayed with his mother, and together the family
journeyed some 150
kilometres to his fiancee's village in order to meet her family to seek formal
'...We all stayed at her village for a while. After a
traditional discussion, the two families pronounced that they were happy for
the engagement to go ahead. It formally took place on 8 January 1995, at my
fiancee's house. I think there were about 30 persons
present on both sides.
We were required to exchange gifts, and I gave her a ring and a necklace and
some earrings I think. She gave
me a ring in return. We did take photos and a
video tape. After the engagement we went to Saigon and visited other places as
to celebrate. After this, I went back to her family residence and I
stayed one night, and then returned to my mother's place where
I remained while
she stayed in her village. However, while we were on "holiday", we did start
sexual relations'
He told the Tribunal in his evidence that before he returned to Australia on
that occasion, he and his family returned yet again
to his fiancee's village,
and stayed there for some two days. His fiancee also travelled to the airport
to farewell him on that
occasion. He has not returned to Vietnam since that
However he told the Tribunal that
'...we have been in constant contact by
telephone and we write letters to each other. I have given you a lot of
evidence of this.
I have also sent her money, by way of international money
transfer through the Commonwealth Bank, and you have also seen evidence
this. I think I have sent about $3,000 in cash so far. I sent her some gifts
also on special occasions, and we exchanged photographs'
The Tribunal asked the review applicant why he and his fiancee had not married
while he was in Vietnam. He stated that
'...well you see we had to follow
our parents' instructions. Her parents were very worried about her being
"deceived" again, and
they were very disappointed at the man who had married
her before, and then lost interest when the application was refused. They
didn't want to lose "face" again in the village. So this is what my fiancee
meant when she told the person at the interview that
we needed some more time
to think things through. It was basically because of her parent's insistence
that past mistakes not be
repeated again'
He told the Tribunal that his wife is a qualified seamstress, and will look for
this type of work in Australia. He also intends
to resume work in the near
'...We have to look after the children, but I am sure she will love
my son. She already sends things to him, and speaks to him on
. He also confirmed in his evidence that he knows of his
fiancee's former spouse. In this respect, the Tribunal was told that
fact I have known him for a long time, because he used to work in the same
factory as my younger brother. But I did not know
that it was him who had been
married to my fiancee. I would say that I have known of him for 7
In relation to his fiancee's interview, he told the Tribunal that
was very intimidated by that situation. She is not used to being interviewed
by officials, and by nature she is a shy and
nervous person. This is perhaps
why the Department people say that she gave unsatisfactory answers'
He told the Tribunal in concluding his evidence that if his fiancee is unable
to travel here, he will go to Vietnam, and the marriage
will take place there.
If necessary, he will remain in Vietnam and live with her.
Mr Tran Van Su also gave sworn evidence. He was born in Vietnam on 30 March
1958. He is the review applicant's brother. He confirmed
arriving in
Australia in 1986 as a refugee, and became an Australian citizen some six years
ago. He presently works as a factory
hand. He is separated, and presently
lives with the review applicant. He also has custody of his child, who is aged
The child's mother, whom he married in 1982 in Vietnam, lives in
'...but she rarely sees the child. She shows little interest, and
pays no maintenance. I don't think she has another partner. We
separated in
The witness told the Tribunal that his former spouse is the sister of the visa
applicant. He stated in this regard that
'...of course because of this
family connection, I met her in Vietnam many years ago. But my brother did not
know about my former
wife's siblings. Nor did he know that a former work mate
of mine, Mr Le, had married his present fiancee some years ago. He only
aware of these things after he met his fiancee in Vietnam'
The witness told the Tribunal that he attended the family engagement ceremony
in Vietnam because
'...I had also gone there to visit my mother. I ended up
staying for some six weeks, so I attended their engagement. I saw my brother
and his fiancee many times in our village, and they seemed very happy
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
The central issue for determination by the Tribunal in this instance is whether
the intended marriage between the parties is a genuine
one, that such marriage
is intended to take place within the visa period, and that the parties
genuinely intend to live together
as spouses.
In this regard, the evidence has established that the applicants in this matter
first met in June 1994 while they were visiting respective
relatives in
hospital in Vietnam. It has been submitted by the review applicant that it is
coincidental that his fiancee, a fact
which he did know at the time of their
first meeting, was indeed the sister of his former sister-in-law, who lived in
Nonetheless, that former sister-in-law by that time had been
separated from Mr Tran's brother for some five years, and had very little
ongoing contact with him apart from occasional visits to see their child who
resided with Mr Tran's brother.
There is evidence before the Tribunal which confirms that the couple maintained
their contact by way of correspondence, ostensibly
by telephone, but also by
the exchange of letters. Later in 1994, when Mr Tran evidently felt more
comfortable with the situation,
he proposed marriage to his fiancee. It was a
month or so later before she confirmed her acceptance. The suggestion of the
is that the visa applicant's parents in particular were somewhat
cautious of the relationship, given Ms Ngo's recent experiences
prior to that
time. These included marriage to an Australian citizen, which ultimately broke
down after the refusal of Ms Ngo's
spouse visa in that regard. Again, it has
been submitted by the parties that it was entirely coincidental that Ms Ngo's
former spouse
and sponsor, a Mr Le, was a work mate of Mr Tran's brother, and
indeed was personally known to Mr Tran for a number of years in this
What has been suggested strongly to the Tribunal is that Mr Tran, the review
applicant, had no actual knowledge of the connection
between the parties at the
material points in time when the present relationship with his fiancee was in
its formative stages. The
Tribunal has been asked to accept these arguments,
and it must be stated in this regard that there is no solid material before the
Tribunal upon which to base a negation of such claims.
The previous assessments made with respect to the visa applicant's bonafides
appear tendentious, as they relate only to the episode
involving her former
spouse and nominator, and are not solidly linked to any evidence before either
the Tribunal or those decision-makers
which is relevant to the present
relationship and application. In that sense, the Tribunal finds them to be
essentially speculative,
and accords them little weight.
There are other minor discrepancies which need to be addressed. These relate
to the conduct of the visa applicant at interview,
and the information provided
therein. For his part, Mr Tran has told the Tribunal that his spouse was
'...shy, nervous and intimidated'
by that process, and could conceivably
have given incorrect or incomplete information. The Tribunal, particularly
given the cultural
context, finds this explanation to be plausible. It is
generally sensitive to the cultural factors present in this case, particularly
as they pertain to the betrothal process, which may even today continue to seem
unfamiliar to established anglo-western and prevailing
judeo-christian
practises. That however does not make them any less sincere or genuine.
In other matters, the parties seem to be predominantly in accord with each
other. Their respective evidence about the formation
of the relationship, and
its development to this point in time, is essentially consistent.
Accordingly, the Tribunal now sets out its findings in the following fashion.
In respect of the criteria to be satisfied at the time
of application, the
Tribunal finds that the visa applicant intends to marry Van Viet Tran, an
Australian citizen, who is not prohibited
from being a sponsor in this
Furthermore, Mr Tran satisfies the sponsorship requisites as set out in
subclause 300.213. In relation to 300.214, it is clear on
the evidence before
the Tribunal that the parties have met, and are known to each other
personally.
The Tribunal is satisfied, on the basis of the evidence submitted, that the
parties genuinely intend to marry, and that such marriage
will take place
within the visa period. Furthermore, in the Tribunal view, the parties have
successfully established that they intend
to live together as spouses.
In this regard, the Tribunal was impressed by the evidence given by Mr Tran.
There is no reason why it should not rely upon such
evidence. There is no
actual material before the Tribunal by which to refuse to accept these claims.
The only evidence before the
Tribunal which may militate against such findings
is that related to the visa applicant's immigration history, and her allegedly
suspect bonafides. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal elects in this
instance to accord such material little weight.
In relation to the criteria to be satisfied at the time of decision, the
Tribunal finds that sponsorship requisites are still in
place and are
satisfactory.
It now remains for the balance of the outstanding criteria to be assessed, and
for these reasons, the file shall now be returned
to the Department.
The Tribunal, in accordance with
Section 349
Migration Act 1958
this application to the Department with the direction that Kim Tieng Ngo meets
the relevant prescribed criteria for the grant
of a Subclass 300 (Prospective
Spouse) visa, save and except for the criteria relating to public interest and
the provision of an
acceptable assurance of support.
I certify this and the preceding 14 pages are a true copy of the Statement of
Decision and Reasons for Decision of Michael Radin,
Senior Member of the
for DEPUTY REGISTRAR
Michael Radin
Senior Member
RTF format (61.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format