CCDM Holdings, LLC & Ors v The Republic of India [2025] HCATrans 73 (5 November 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 073
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S90 of 2025
B e t w e e n
CCDM HOLDINGS, LLC
First Appellant
DEVAS EMPLOYEES FUND US, LLC
Second Appellant
TELCOM DEVAS, LLC
Third Appellant
THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA
BEECH‑JONES
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON
WEDNESDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2025, AT 10.02 AM
(Continued from
____________________
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Gleeson.
MR GLEESON:
Your Honour yesterday asked us at transcript 71 about the status of
the overseas cases. The answer is that the appeal from Sir
William Blair
is listed for hearing on 24 March next year. The
Infrastructure
Services Case
is before the United Kingdom Supreme Court listed on
1 December this year.
Kingdom of Spain v Blasket
subject of an application for certiorari to the United States Supreme
Court, which is under consideration.
In respect to that
United States decision, could I refer you to the respondent’s book of
further materials at tab 7, page 59.
For the brief which was filed by
the United States government in the proceedings in the Appeal Court,
between pages 87 and 90 you
will see the position taken by the
United States Executive before its court is that the waiver exception
cannot be made out unless
there is proof of an agreement to arbitrate,
particularly page 88, five lines from the bottom.
The position of
the United States Executive on page 89, consistent with what I put
yesterday, is that that is supported by all of
the relevant United States
case law, including all of the cases relied upon here by in particular the
Commonwealth in their written
submissions and their outline from this morning.
Seetransport
. At page 90, the Executive urges that, as I
put yesterday, their real difficulty is with finding sufficient clarity from a
agreement to arbitrate to lead to a waiver to enforce the award, even under
the NYC ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
this also addresses the ICSID Convention, I see.
MR GLEESON:
GAGELER CJ:
So, the position is inconsistent with our
decision in
Kingdom of Spain
MR GLEESON:
your Honour, is the answer. So, I only refer to it as an example
of – I do not think State practice is really at the centrepiece
the arguments
before you. There was something in the written submissions
particularly against us to say that all States have taken a particular
this question. It is pretty clear the United States – which is
a relevant State – does not take the State position
before its courts
that the Commonwealth apparently wishes to take today.
Its position on page 90, I think, explains what would be the preferable
MR GLEESON:
The route is the arbitration
exception ‑ ‑ ‑
explains much of the United States cases which we have been taken
MR GLEESON:
Yes, and they give the reason on page 92.
Perhaps it does not appeal to the Commonwealth currently, but the United States
aware that it can be sued in hundreds of countries in thousands of
lawsuits and, as they say there:
Although United States courts have historically exercised restraint in
construing implied waivers, other countries may not do so,
especially if they
perceive the United States as changing course.
So, in terms of State
practice, we certainly do not have the United States supporting the
appellants’ or the Commonwealth’s
position here.
And then the bottom at 92 is their primary position, that is that
agreement to arbitrate is a necessary prerequisite under both the waiver and
arbitration exceptions . . . to establish
MR GLEESON:
Yes, and that, we
submit, is the correct principle under international law and under our statute,
and if it matters, under
the basis – maybe I am wrong, but it looks like the basis for that
argument seems to be that the arbitration exception
is a carve‑out from
the waiver exception.
MR GLEESON:
Well, I do not think they
are going that route, your Honour. What they are saying is there should be
great caution using the waiver
exception, because it simply gets you into a lack
of unmistakable clarity. The way to go is the arbitration exception, but in
case, you would need proof of an argument to arbitrate. That is the
common theme of them.
It is at page 90, where it
The plain text of the arbitration exception indicates that it was intended
to displace the waiver exception –
MR GLEESON:
may go further than we need, your Honour.
MR GLEESON:
I do not go that far. I draw attention to that
because – if your Honours have the Commonwealth outline from
this morning,
there are three propositions I need to deal with in chief. The
second one is the proposition in paragraph 6 that we disagree with
vigorously as we can. It is a new proposition, or at least it is a refinement
of the written submissions of the Commonwealth.
You are now asked to find
the United States authorities support the proposition that a State waives
immunity by ratifying the New York Convention (without requiring
proof of the
existence of a valid agreement to establish waiver).
Now, everything I took you to yesterday disproves that proposition. The
Commonwealth goes on to say:
India’s submission . . . blurs reasoning that is
directed to two distinct exceptions –
I have sought to show you yesterday that the reasoning in fact has
addressed the arbitration exception, it has addressed the waiver
exception, it
has come to the same common ground. No agreement to arbitrate, no waiver, as it
was expressed in
Global Voice
. The submission goes on:
To the extent that the “waiver exception” authorities refer to
the existence of an arbitration agreement, they are identifying
a factum that
must exist before Art III can be engaged, rather than requiring a valid
arbitration agreement as a component of waiver
with respect, is just wrong. I will not go back to
Seetransport
through it in detail yesterday and
Seetransport
said to establish any
form of waiver, you need 1, 2 and 3. Element 1 was the NYC, 2 was the
agreement to arbitrate, 3 was the conduct
in consenting to the arbitration.
Your Honour the Chief Justice asked me about whether there were any
cases which required anything
less than 1, 2 and 3.
Now, all of that
discussion was in the context of what was necessary for the waiver. Can I go
then to the other two cases that I
did not address yesterday. So,
is in volume 5 at tab 34. This is the decision that is
the subject of the certiorari application, District of Columbia
Circuit 2024.
On page 1209 of the book, at
paragraph [3]:
The first question is whether the FSIA gives the district courts jurisdiction
to enforce (or decline to enforce) the arbitration awards
And the two lower courts had decided that question differently.
Then in the right‑hand column, under section 1:
The waiver exception provides –
and then the terms of it
are set out:
The companies contend that Spain implicitly waived its immunity by ratifying
the ICSID and New York Conventions –
Your Honour the Chief Justice observed, both were in issue in this
case. That was the argument for the investors, then beneath
Embracing that logic, the Second Circuit has held that, by ratifying either
convention, a country implicitly waives its sovereign
Then there is reference to some decisions,
Seetransport
, which we know does require elements 1, 2 and 3.
So, the submission that has been put here is rolling up a great deal. Then
is a reference to this Court’s decision in
The waiver issue remains “unsettled” in our
There is a reference to
Process & Industrial
Developments
To be sure, we have twice approvingly cited the Second Circuit’s
decision in
Seetransport
Which requires the three
. . . we opined in dicta that
Seetransport
“correctly” held that a foreign sovereign waives
sovereign immunity when it joins the New York Convention.
summary a proposition because what they have in fact approved was
Seetransport
with its 1, 2 and 3 elements:
. . . we held in an unpublished
judgment that “a sovereign, by signing the New York Convention,
waives its immunity –
I interpose,
was the case
where there was a binding arbitration agreement, and so that issue did not need
to be reached.
is the unpublished case:
More recently, however, we emphasized that “[a]lthough we have
favorably cited
Seetransport
and its reasoning in dicta and in an
unpublished opinion, we have not formally adopted it.”
Reference to
Process & Industrial Developments
And the United States urges against doing so –
decide the case on the waiver exception. So, if you come back to the
Commonwealth’s proposition,
does not stand for the
proposition that the existence of the valid arbitration agreement is not a
necessary part of the proof of
the waiver exception. The court then goes on to
deal with the arbitration exception. Consistently with what we put yesterday,
paragraph [6]:
we have explained –
it requires:
three “jurisdictional facts”: (1) an arbitration agreement, (2)
an arbitration award –
relevant treaty. At the foot of that column on 1210:
In its view, the plaintiff, as the party invoking the federal court’s
and persuasion.
So, it is not enough to go down the prima facie route –
this looks like a duck – you have to, as part of establishing
exception to foreign State immunity, establish jurisdictional facts which
include the existence of the arbitration agreement.
This, for the
arbitration agreement, is totally inconsistent with any idea of the Commonwealth
that existence to the agreement is
a mere anterior factum and, in the particular
case, what was put in issue over the page was the existence of an arbitration
You see at the foot of the first full paragraph
To make the issue jurisdictional, the sovereign must attack the existence or
validity of the arbitration agreement.
So, the very thing that India did at trial which the appellants left as
it was, undertermined – an attack on the existence of
agreement – is a central issue within establishing the exception to
immunity, not some anterior faction.
There is then, in
paragraphs [9] and [10, 11], an interesting and helpful discussion of how a
BIT with its arbitration provision
may, when combined with other matters,
ultimately produce an agreement to arbitrate. It is not of itself the agreement
to arbitrate
with an investor. You need other matters because it is regarded as
a “unilateral offer to arbitrate” – see the
of 1212 – and you then need relevant conduct accepting that
offer. They are all the issues that have not been taken up
in the present case.
does not support the proposition.
The last one is
Process & Industrial
Developments
. That is volume 6
at tab 39. I will pick it up at page 1323. Section B is about
the waiver exception. On 1324, at the end of
the first paragraph:
The D.C. Circuit has cautioned that the implied‑waiver provision should
be construed “narrowly,” –
referencing
the primary judge did not have
That is correct, your Honour,
But did have
MR GLEESON:
Yes. Paragraph [8]
There is no settled law in this Circuit either adopting or rejecting this
theory ‑ ‑ ‑
Where are you reading now, Mr Gleeson?
MR GLEESON:
paragraph [8].
So, this is the case where they
found waiver?
MR GLEESON:
Yes, and the reason they found
it – looking at paragraph [8], the precise argument is:
Nigeria waived its sovereign immunity by implication because it entered the
New York Convention, then agreed to arbitrate within the
territory of
another Convention –
country. So, your Honour sees the acts – the additional
acts – they were a centrepiece of the argument. It is both NYC
the agreement to arbitrate. That is the alleged waiver inconsistent with the
Commonwealth’s proposition. The proposition,
then expressed, is:
There is no settled law in this Circuit either adopting or
rejecting –
it. There is then a reference to
Seetransport
Seetransport
is described exactly as we have put
it, second column. It is a case of implicit waiver of immunity because knowing
that the other
were all New York Convention signatories—it agreed to an
arbitration clause with a German company –
element 2, and then:
participated in the arbitration in France.
Element 3. Then there
is the statement in the next paragraph:
Seetransport
has not been
adopted, but the Court has “come close”.
Just before you go to that bit, what do we make of the passage after that you
have just cited? So, if the court found that Navimpex
had implicitly waived its
immunity under the relevant act because they were signatories, and then:
agreed to an arbitration clause with a German company –
participated in the arbitration –
So, that is your 1, 2 and
3. What do we make of the next passage?
MR GLEESON:
next passage is illustrating element 1. Namely – on this view,
at least – if you sign the treaty, you may be taken
to contemplate
that there could be future acts, and if those future acts are proven, then you
may have lost your immunity.
I will ask a direct
question. Is it freestanding, or is it just further clarification or
elaboration of your first limb?
MR GLEESON:
latter, your Honour. So, in terms of the Commonwealth’s proposition,
it is clear from this that the existence of
the arbitration
argument – step 2 – plus the conduct in the
arbitration – step 3 – are part of the three
needed for the waiver. Then over the page, on the particular case, the court
accepts that approach – the
Seetransport
and on page 1325, the foot of the first column, says:
Nigeria’s entry into the Convention –
combined with its agreement to arbitrate in the territory of another
Convention signatory –
is strong evidence that Nigeria intended to subject itself to the
GAGELER CJ:
I am sorry, that is steps 1 and 2?
MR GLEESON:
Yes. The authority they were adopting was that you need 1, 2 and 3.
So, strictly, you would need to show their conduct in consenting
arbitration itself to apply the reasoning that they had said they were prepared
In paragraph [9] which follows, it
identifies the tension – i.e., the tension between a foreign
state ratifying the New York
Convention – and I understand your
argument to be that, although the goal of convention is to promote the
enforcement of arbitral
agreements in the way it is set out there, about which
there is no dispute – we were taken to that yesterday by
Mr Walker –
it still requires that paragraph to be read in these
circumstances. That picks up your steps 1 and 2 at least, if
not 1, 2 and 3.
MR GLEESON:
Because that is the same tension that
Sir Willam Blair identifies in the English decision, which
is – it is the elephant in
MR GLEESON:
and it is the way to reconcile satisfactorily, on the one hand, giving a
generous interpretation to the treaty promise together
with recognising the
continuing existence of the fundamental obligation in international law to
respect the equality of your other
sovereigns. They come together by saying
signing the treaty may open you up to the possibility you have lost your
immunity, but
you will need to have step 2 – and we would say 2
and 3 – to complete the waiver.
explanation given in the balance of that paragraph about access to international
markets and the like, which is the underlying
tension identified by
Sir William Blair, is that no more than to explain why the Convention
came into existence?
MR GLEESON:
Sir William Blair took it a step further, which is because the
convention is often applied in the context of complex trans‑border
markets, including financial markets, between experienced arms‑length
powerful parties, that is not always its application.
Parties are perfectly
capable in their individual contracts of being very precise about how far they
wish to engage in an act of
waiver, and in turn that may affect the pricing of
the transaction.
So, if you are dealing with a State and you wish to
have in your arbitration agreement an advance waiver which will operate in the
courts of any New York Convention country, you are perfectly capable of
expressing that in the agreement.
But you could also
express it in the BIT.
MR GLEESON:
You could express it in the
BIT, although as the previous case I showed you explained, the BIT is the
starting point of a chain of
consent towards waiver, not necessarily the
conclusion of it. But you could express it in the BIT itself and equally, as
your Honours
raised yesterday, you could say the exact opposite in either
the agreement or the BIT. Namely: my consent goes this far and I fully
preserve all my rights of immunity in respect of the courts of X, Y and Z
countries. So, all that confirms that the proof of the
agreement plus its terms
is quite correctly a central exercise in the waiver issue and not something to
be diminished in the way
the Commonwealth suggests.
Your Honour
Justice Gordon asked yesterday about the overlap between the issues in the
case before you and the case before Sir William
Blair in the Court of
Appeal. The waiver issue before you is the identical issue in the United
Kingdom. In each of Australia and
the United Kingdom, there is no finding
of a binding agreement to arbitrate. In fact, there was dispute about that and
not resolved.
So, the pure issue of law has come up in both courts on
the basis that there is element 1, but not element 2 and 3. As
we apprehend
it, the final decision of your Honours in this case will be
the end of the foreign State immunity question one way or the other because
way the parties joined issue in this case was the only exception relied upon was
section 10 plus section 11 – 11 is gone,
was never relied upon – and the whole of the argument and debate
is no ability in either
party to have a further go at that issue.
The only different issue in
the United Kingdom is that there is reliance upon the equivalent to
section 17 – which is section
9, the arbitration
exception – that question has not yet been reached. As I explained
yesterday, the arbitration exception
in the UK is in different language to our
section 17. Ours is much tighter.
It requires proof of an
arbitration agreement, plus the dispute is one in which the sovereign would not
have been immune had it been
litigated in the courts and one can understand for
good reason why the appellants did not run the arbitration exception, because
the answer to it would have been the same reason that Justice Jackman gave
on the commercial transactions exception. Namely, this
dispute arises out of an
alleged breach of international law obligation arising in a BIT. Australian
courts would not have jurisdiction
in that as a suit. Therefore, even if there
were an agreement to arbitrate, it would not attract the arbitration exception.
Your Honours, on the question of –
your Honour Justice Gordon put it to me about forensic choices
made at trial. This is pages
61 to 62, 74 to 75 of the transcript. Could
I add in addition to what appears from the primary judge’s judgment these
or three points just to put it beyond doubt. If you have the
respondent’s book of further materials, at tab 6. At
BEECH-JONES J:
is the page number, Mr Gleeson?
MR GLEESON:
I am referring you to paragraphs [31], [48] and [81] on page 57.
What happened at trial – and this was resolved by
evidentiary
rulings – was there was some issue as to exactly how the appellants
were alleging the acts of waiver. What they
did by way of this clarification or
withdrawal of their written submissions in these paragraphs –
particularly [81] –
was to make clear that their position was that
application of the Convention –
for the purpose of FSI:
is established by producing the . . .
award . . . and the original arbitration
agreement . . . It is not necessary, beyond the presentation
these documents, to
the validity of the agreement or the award.
So, from the very trial, they staked their claim on that basis, which is
what his Honour perfectly accurately recorded in the judgment.
submissions to the – sorry, the next step was in the notice of appeal
to the Full Court – which is core appeal
page 108 – grounds 3(a) and 3(b)(iv) expressly
challenged his Honour’s finding that this was
sufficient.
GAGELER CJ:
What page is
MR GLEESON:
MR GLEESON:
Ground 3(a) and, over the page, 3(b)(iv) and (vi) put the matters in
issue. As we have seen, there was no notice of contention
by the appellants
saying his Honour should have, contrary to their approach, found there was
a binding agreement. This issue was
then advanced squarely in appellants’
book of further materials volume 3 at page 913, which were our
submissions.
What page was that
MR GLEESON:
Page 929 – of this
section, paragraph 52 over to paragraph 57 – we squarely
put in issue that merely tendering what
looked like an agreement was not enough.
The response at page 952 – paragraphs 52 and
following – was they did not need
to do anything more than they had
done. They did not have any notice of contention saying in the alternative they
wished to prove
there was an agreement to arbitrate. Our reply at
page 1002, paragraph 24, reasserted our position and that was the
issue the court
had to decide. So, the parties have chosen their ground on that
Your Honours, these are the remaining points I wish to put
on Article III. Firstly, if you have the Commonwealth’s outline,
again could I just identify the two remaining major disputes we have with the
Commonwealth. The first dispute concerns their paragraphs
4 and 5 read
The Commonwealth’s answer to our submission from
yesterday, that a promise in Article III does not exclude the obligations
under foreign State immunity, is to say that they accept that in respect to
non‑contracting States the Article I and the Article
III promise
does not cut down their foreign State immunity, but they say Article III
operates differently in respect to contracting
States, which is that by signing
it you have waived your immunity.
As we see it, that is creating some
form of differential operation of the promises in Article I and
Article III. The best way you
can look at the second limb of it is that if
you are a contracting
State ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Gleeson, just so I get the framework for that – I might be
being slow – is that saying when Australia signs the
Convention it
says to all other contracting States: we will treat you as having waived when
we come to recognise and enforce an
award – but to
non‑contracting States it will say: we will respect your
MR GLEESON:
BEECH-JONES J:
understand. Thank you.
MR GLEESON:
So, the proposition is that
you get out of the general words of Article I and Article III, which
draw no distinction between the
position of contracting States and
non‑contracting States, this differential operation. Exactly as
your Honour put it to me,
that is logic of the proposition. We submit that
the far more straightforward and correct interpretation is that the Convention
in Article I has identified a scope of operation. These are the awards to
which it applies.
It does not define the awards by reference to whether
you are a contracting State at that stage. It may allow you to contract it
under later provisions. The promise is it preserves foreign State immunity in
all cases, and there would be something of an oddity
non‑contracting States have foreign State immunity. Contracting States
have it, but they have given it up immediately
by signing the very document in
which they otherwise have it. Certainly, by the standard of clear and
unmistakable waiver, it would
seem to be a rather strange conclusion to
Now, you see there the references are
– there is nothing in
that supports that. Then there is a reference to Professor Crawford, and
you have been given
Brownlie’s Principles of Public International
, the 2019 edition, at page 370. So, the Commonwealth proposition
seems to be that the promise in Article III and Article I can
comfortably
sit next to the pacta tertiis principle, but you do not carry with
it the broader foreign State immunity obligation.
You pick up only pacta
tertiis, therefore you protect non‑contracting States, but you do not pick
up foreign State immunity
more generally. What Professor Crawford has
accurately expressed in page 370 is firstly the nature of the pacta tertiis
but what he says is that it is sourced in the VCLT –
footnote 121 – particularly Articles 34 to 38, plus a lot
material, but he goes on to say:
it is a corollary of the principle of consent and of the sovereignty and
independence of states.
So, the idea that by our treaty we do not take
away the rights of non‑treaty parties is but another working out of the
that States treat each other as equal sovereigns. Foreign State immunity
is another working out of the same fundamental principle
the equality of
sovereigns and the independence of States.
Our short point would be,
once the Commonwealth correctly accepts that the pacta tertiis principle can sit
comfortably with Articles
I and III, even though it is not mentioned
in terms, the foreign State immunities principle also sits comfortably with
GAGELER CJ:
How many States are not party to the
UN Convention?
MR GLEESON:
It is now up to 167
members. At the time, Professor Crawford was writing it was about a third
of that. So, if one is trying to
understand an objective intention as
of 1958, it is a treaty looking forward hoping to attract a lot of
participation, but at that
stage at least recognising that it may be a fairly
small pool of attracting States. Because it has been so successful, it is a
larger pool of contracting States.
And is there
any international move – I am referring to what
Sir William Blair identified – to deal with this at that
treaty level? This issue? I could not find
MR GLEESON:
Sorry, your Honour, is there any
international ‑ ‑ ‑
Is there any move at the international level – that is, at
the UN level – to deal with this
MR GLEESON:
Not to our knowledge.
MR GLEESON:
The other point of
difference concerns the Commonwealth’s paragraph 7, where we take
rather different views on what follows
from the reference to rules of procedure
in Article III. The Commonwealth says that William Blair is wrong,
and the reference to
rules of procedure is wholly circular. Can I put this on
the topic of rules of procedure, and this is in elaboration of our outline
paragraph 11.
The starting point is that foreign State immunity is
recognised as a procedural rule under international law. We have given you
of the references in writing to identify the high point of that, and this is
identified in Sir William Blair’s decision.
It is the decision
of the ICJ in the
volume 5, tab 31, page 1061. It is pages 1044 to 1045,
paragraphs 56 through to 61. Paragraph 56 identifies foreign State
as a general rule of customary international law solidly rooted in the
current practice –
The foot of 56 identifies that in
international law this is:
on the one side and:
a corresponding obligation –
on the other side. So, in
Hohfeldian terms, we are talking about rights and corresponding duties.
Paragraph 57, it:
occupies an important place in law . . . It derives from the
principle of sovereign equality of States, which, as Article 2,
1, of the Charter . . . makes clear, is one of the
fundamental principles of the international legal order. This principle has to
be viewed together with the principle that each State possesses sovereignty over
its own territory . . . Exceptions to the immunity
State represent a departure from the principle of sovereign equality. Immunity
may represent a departure from the principle
of territorial sovereignty and the
So, the fundamental importance of the
principle of foreign State immunity in international law is sourced back to the
principles of
sovereign equality, the very principals from which pacta tertiis
also follows. Then paragraph 58, near the end:
as the Court has stated . . . the law of immunity is
essentially procedural in nature –
Arrest Warrant’s
It regulates the exercise of jurisdiction in respect of particular conduct
and is thus entirely distinct from the substantive law
which determines whether
that conduct is lawful or unlawful.
So, we have a rule which, in the international conception, is regarded as
procedural for the reason there stated. The parties in
the treaty have used the
expression: subject to the rules of procedure. One would naturally understand
foreign State immunity as
one of the rules of procedure capable of being dealt
with by the domestic court. The Commonwealth’s contention is best seen
from their written submissions at paragraph 30(a), which is an
extraordinarily narrow contention:
the phrase “rules of procedure” refers to the relevant
Contracting State’s procedures for the recognition and enforcement
arbitral awards.
In Australia’s case, that is sections 9 and 10. On that view,
rules of procedure do not pick up the full international meaning
that I have
explained. They are narrowed down to that category of rules which concerns the
method for recognition and enforcement
of the award.
To take a very
practical example which has been dealt with in the cases not addressed by the
Commonwealth is: what about limitation
periods? Is each domestic State
entitled to impose limitation periods, as Australia does, on the enforcement of
arbitral awards?
The answer that has been comfortably reached in the cases and
the commentators is of course yes, because limitation periods within
international framework constitute a rule of procedure in the way I have
explained from the
Commonwealth’s approach, Australia’s limitation periods in the State
statutes, or a federal statute if there
be one, cannot be permissible under
international law and would put Australia in breach of international law. That
indicates the
incredible narrowness of this view. There is then a submission at
paragraph 30(b) that:
support the conclusion
that . . . “rules of
procedure” –
were limited to:
presentation of documents and the need for translations, not the rules of
State immunity.
Your Honours will not find in the travaux support for the last part of
that statement. Namely, that the parties turned their mind
to it and said: by
adopting the term rules of procedure, we do not intend to allow rules of State
immunity to continue to exist
at State level. There is one reference given in
footnote 35, which is to a:
Record of the Tenth Meeting
The date is wrong, it
is not “12 September 1958”, it is 27 May 1958, and you will
find that at Volume 7, tab 76. In the
chronology of the travaux that
we have given your Honours, this is dealt with at item 32.1 on
What happened on this date, at the 11.25 am
meeting – particularly pages 2046 to 2050 – was there
was a lot of discussion
which might bring back headaches to your Honours
Kingdom of Spain
different jurisdictions as to how you went about enforcing awards. There was a
large amount
of disagreement between the States as to not only what their
domestic procedures were but how you could possibly accommodate these
international Convention.
Nothing in these pages identifies any of the
delegates addressing themselves to the present question, which is whether
foreign State
immunity or limitation periods would be in or out of any final
resolution of this topic, and indeed you see at the foot of page 2050,
was too hard to reach any resolution at this stage at all. So, if that is said
to be the proof that rules of procedure do not
include foreign State immunity or
limitation periods, it is a slender proof.
this was an issue which was not addressed by the court
MR GLEESON:
No, your Honour is correct, not
addressed by the court below. Justice Jackman found against us, around
paragraph 96 – he said
we were being “arid”, we were
being merely taxonomical ‑ ‑ ‑
That was in response to the submission put by
MR GLEESON:
Yes, he adopted that
submission. The reason it is not arid or taxonomical is that, as I have said,
the express reference to rules
of procedure, once one understands its meaning in
international law, is amply capable of being a mechanism to give effect to the
more fundamental conception in Article I and Article III that these
promises are not to cut down foreign State immunity.
Therefore, it is
not arid. It is an important textual recognition of the more fundamental point,
and it is not circular, because
it is allowing the domestic States to, through
their own implementation of their international law obligation, preserve the
State immunity which this Convention was never designed to take
You appealed that ground, and it was not dealt
MR GLEESON:
Sorry, your Honour?
You appealed that ground, and it was not dealt
MR GLEESON:
Not dealt with, yes. So, we do not need
it to win on our Article III argument. It is a particular of it; it is an
illustration
of the larger point that when you read this provision in its full
context, it was never designed to achieve the Commonwealth’s
effectively eliminating foreign State immunity for everyone except
non-contracting States.
Indeed, as the Commonwealth would say,
eliminating your immunity even if you have a viable case that you were deceived
by fraud into
entering what appears to be an arbitration agreement. That is the
extreme logic of the Commonwealth’s position. It is a strange
for a State to take but they are taking it, but the logic of it must be
confronted.
Their logic is that if the Commonwealth of Australia finds
itself on the wrong side of an award, from Mr Palmer or someone else,
if the Commonwealth of Australia has a viable argument that it never
agreed to the arbitration – for example, it was deceived
fraud – then the Commonwealth of Australian is then the
defendant in any one of the 167 contracting States.
It has lost its
immunity merely upon Mr Palmer presenting his piece of paper and is left to
try and run Article V defences if it
can, subject to the jurisdiction of
that court having lost its right as a sovereign to claim its immunity. That is
where the Commonwealth
wants you to go.
On the topic of rules of
procedure, I showed you yesterday that Professor Crawford’s opinion
was that rules of procedure amply
picked up foreign state immunity. The other
commentators to this effect we have referred to in paragraph 11. Could I
just mention
Professor Bjorklund, which is volume 8,
BEECH-JONES J:
Was that paragraph 11 of your
outline or your submissions?
MR GLEESON:
The outline.
Professor Bjorklund holds senior academic positions in
McGill University. She was an advisor to the American Law Institute
restatement of arbitration. She is a noted authority in the area. At
page 2255 of the book, having dealt with ICSID on the
previous page, she
draws the distinction between ICSID and the New York Convention. She
Unlike the ICSID Convention, the New York Convention was designed primarily
to permit the enforcement of arbitral awards in arbitrations
between private
Though nothing in the Convention explicitly refers to states, there is no
doubt that it permits enforcement against sovereign states.
She there cites Jan van den Berg. The limits of that will
be addressed later on. She then recognises the New York Convention has:
silence on the topic of state immunity.
The success of the New York Convention is traced to the limited grounds on
which a court may refuse enforcement of an award. State
immunity is not one of
It is clear, however, based on the negotiating history of the Convention,
that the delegates did not intend to preclude an immunity‑based
in enforcement actions against states.
The reference at footnote 41 is to Hazel Fox, the noted
authority on foreign State immunity. Then says:
Municipal state immunity law has inserted itself into the New York Convention
in two ways. First, Article III . . .
and then sets out the rules of procedure provision:
Accordingly, municipal immunity laws have been treated as preliminary matters
of procedure which claimants seeking to –
awards must overcome.
That is precisely how we would put it. She then
goes on to say that it could be also dealt with under the public policy
She then refers to, at the bottom of the page, “a mixed degree
of success” in seeking enforcement. Then on page 2256,
section A, she correctly recognises – as this Court did in
– that Article 54 of ICSID:
effectively waives a state’s jurisdictional immunity for recognition
proceedings.
Then notes:
The New York Convention . . . does not include a
similar provision. This silence caused several hiccups along the way as
courts adopted competing theories as to when and whether states, by
agreeing to arbitrate a dispute, had waived jurisdictional immunity
subsequent New York Convention enforcement proceedings.
So, the core of the immunity loss is through the agreement to arbitrate,
and she says that directly in the next paragraph:
It is now widely, though not universally, accepted that a state’s
agreement to arbitrate in a forum leading to a New York Convention
constitutes a waiver of immunity for jurisdictional purposes in any enforcement
And the balance of that paragraph and the reference to the draft UN State
Immunity Convention all concern agreements to arbitrate.
Mr Gleeson, the passages you took us to in relation
to 2255 and 2256 are dealing with execution, are they not? Not with
enforcement.
MR GLEESON:
They are recognition and
enforcement. They are not dealing with execution over assets.
MR GLEESON:
Professor Bjorklund deals with that topic separately on 2257:
Establishing Jurisdiction Over State Assets
and the issue I tentatively raised yesterday as to whether Mr Walker
is arguing New York Convention also is a waiver of execution
Professor Bjorklund deals with that on 2257 to 2258; all of it in
the context that you do have an agreement to arbitrate,
not that you do
I then wanted to refer you to Professor Bermann, which is
volume 9 tab 101; well known at Columbia University for 50 years,
chief reporter for the American Law Institute restatement on
arbitration. At page 2911 – at the foot of that
summarising his experience over almost the entire life of the
Convention, he says:
Although opinions differ, the prevailing view is that States do not, by
ratifying the New York Convention, waive their sovereign immunity
in national court to the extent they enjoy such immunity, even where the suit
seeks only enforcement . . . but that, by
entering an agreement
to arbitrate, they do waive such immunity.
So, at least step 2 if not step 3 is needed, and he fleshes
that out over the following page and the various
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Gleeson, step 3, if I
remember rightly, was actually participating in the arbitration, is that right?
MR GLEESON:
Yes, because as the reason explained in the
process decision, the BIT may be construed only as a unilateral offer by the
to the investor to arbitrate. The investor has to do something to take up
that offer, which the investor does, and then the first
question for the State
in the arbitration is: do I simply enter an unconditional
appearance?
If you do that, that might be argued to be step 3. If
what the State does as first step in the arbitration is to say: I do not
consent to this, I have not lost my immunity, I do not waive it –
then you are in the territory of saying you have not completed
three‑pronged waiver.
BEECH-JONES J:
Has any case ever
looked at whether steps 1 and 2 were enough, or step 3 did not
matter, or ‑ ‑ ‑
MR GLEESON:
I think that is a variation of what Your Honour the Chief Justice
asked me yesterday. I cannot give you a simple neat answer to
that, because
most of the cases have either been steps 1, 2 and 3, or more recently
just step 1.
GAGELER CJ:
Although, there is statements, are
there not, in that unpublished opinion of the DC Circuit that would suggest
that step 3 is not
MR GLEESON:
necessary, yes.
We had the debate this morning where
it would only refer to steps 1 and 2.
MR GLEESON:
Yes, but primarily it is stated the principle is 1, 2 and 3. So, our
position is you would need at least steps 1, 2 and 3, and
course of doing 1, 2 and 3, 2 is going to be proof of the agreement
plus construction of its terms to make sure it is truly
a consent to enforcement
in the place where you are enforcing it.
Your Honours, I wanted to
refer on this topic, finally, to a document called the UNCITRAL guide, which is
in volume 9, at tab 98.
The status of this document, it is not an
authoritative guide that sits next to the Convention. What it really is
compilation of where the authorities have reached on the
Convention, and it is helpful on the rules of procedure topic between
2864 and 2871, and particularly 2870 at paragraph 30.
This is an example of the point I made about limitation periods being
regarded as procedural rules. It is a decision of the Supreme
Yugraneft v Rexx Management Corporation
[2010] SCC 19.
Unlike decisions that have been reached in the
Russian Federation, India and the United Kingdom, treating limitation
procedural rules under Article III, the Commonwealth would deny
that is permissible under the Convention.
If your Honours have the
chronology that we filed, which should now be annotated by the references to the
joint book of authorities,
can I just indicate that on the current argument,
without reading them out, you will find, I submit, considerable assistance from
the entry at 17.1, particularly paragraphs 14 and 17, a central purpose to
preserve and:
maintain generally recognized principles of justice and respect the sovereign
rights of States.
That purpose and object could not be achieved on the
Commonwealth submission. Next, at item 25.1, the statement of the Italian
that the compromises being reached were intended to safeguard the
Commonwealth’s
construction. At 36.2 a comment by Australia’s
delegate will be relevant to the notice of appeal because it indicates a view
that the commercial reservation, if activated, did have some reciprocal work,
other Contracting States –
would need to:
know the exact extent of their obligations.
That is effectively the
Full Court’s approach on that. Then at 40.1, this is relevant to the
notice of appeal because it explains
that Article XIV, which contains the
general reciprocity provision, came in only at the very end without perhaps full
consideration
of how it interacted with everything else that had gone before,
but it was a general reciprocity clause covering every part of the
Convention,
including the reservation.
Then finally at 41.1, the Final Act is
important. Your Honour the Chief Justice asked: can you work off the
version of the Convention
attached to the
International Arbitration Act
You can for most purposes, but in terms of the full international law VCLT
exercise, you may have regard to the Final Act as an
agreement entered at the
same time as the treaty and/or as a supplementary means of interpretation, and
it is perfectly clear from
that Final Act that the purpose was to
the effectiveness of arbitration in the settlement of private law
and no broader than that. If your Honours
could return to our outline, please, that is proposition 13. Before
concluding the Article
III argument, can I advert to two additional
matters. The first is proposition 14, which is that his Honour in
paragraph 43 regarded
the Convention as creating interdependent obligations
to and from the contracting States, and that is part of what formed his analysis
of requirement.
We submit that a broader view should be taken of the
Convention. It is a multilateral convention which in a sense is creating erga
omnes obligations because it creates benefits in favour of non‑contracting
States and in favour of award creditors who are
not parties to it. In the
concept of that type of treaty, there is discussion that the obligations of the
parties should not be
treated as interdependent in the sense of a narrow
bilaterial contract.
The two sources we would give you for that are,
firstly, Fitzmaurice, which is in the supplementary JBA at tab 8,
page 118, paragraphs
125 to 126, where the learned author
described this type of treaty as one where the obligations are:
self-existent, as opposed to concessionary, reciprocal or interdependent
obligations –
And there is detailed discussion of that question in the work of Greig,
which is volume 9, tab 96, where he discussed in great details
reciprocity works in these sorts of treaties, including in respect to
reservations. The passages we rely upon are at 2585.
He picks up the work
of Fitzmaurice ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Sorry, what tab is this, please?
MR GLEESON:
Tab 96. He picks up the work of Fitzmaurice, bottom of 2585, and
then, over the next two pages, discusses two ICJ authorities, the
Reservations
Barcelona Traction
, where the court
discussed this type of case where the obligations are understood as erga omnes,
owed to the treaty community as
a whole, rather than narrow bilateral
obligations. Then discusses over 2588, that creates problems with enforcement,
because how
do you enforce a right that is held collectively? Indeed,
collectively not only with other treaty parties but with non-treaty
At the bottom of 2588 over to 2599, explains that
Australia – in the
Nuclear Tests Case
in the ICJ, and Portugal
against Australia in the
East Timor Case
Professor Crawford as counsel – sought to develop jurisdiction
that where you have erga omnes obligations, individuals
may be able to sue
internationally, but as a representative of, as it were, the body of either
contracting States or an even larger
body who are the ultimate beneficiaries of
the rights.
Now, I am not asking your Honours to resolve any of
this. What I am seeking to indicate is that when you look at paragraph 43
the judgment, which is the key one we need to
overcome ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
This is the primary judge?
MR GLEESON:
Primary judge.
What his Honour has done, if you breakdown paragraph 43, the first
step he has taken on the top of page 31, is to
say the submissions put to
do not capture the full force and scope of Art III in circumstances
where it is sought to be applied against a Contracting State which
is a party to
an arbitral award.
So, his first step is to narrow the construction of
Article III to the case of a contracting State, as opposed to giving
it its general
meaning in all cases. His second step is:
The promises in Art III are made by each Contracting State to all other
Contracting States.
That is true but incomplete for the reason I have just explained. He
talks about it as a “set of promises” whereas, really,
Fitzmaurice‑type treaty. Then where it really gets difficult, we submit,
India, along with all other Contracting States, requires by Art III that
Australia relevantly shall recognise arbitral awards as binding
and enforce
them, just as Australia requires India –
to do so. We submit: no. There is no requirement. At the
India, along with all other Contracting States –
has assumed its own Article III obligations directed to its own
territory and has obtained such rights – probably held
collectively
– against Australia to perform its obligations. The
holding of a right does not turn into a duty to assist Australia to perform
side of the obligation. So, the whole requirement logic does not follow from
the holding of a right. In any event, Australia’s
obligation is qualified
by foreign State immunity so that even if there were a requirement, it does not
lead to the conclusion reached.
BEECH-JONES J:
That submission
does cut away a bit, though, at the Full Court’s reasoning, does it
MR GLEESON:
Completely, because we say the Full Court
started at the wrong premise. It assumed there is this idea of requirement. We
is not there at all. The Full Court should never have started down
the track it went down.
Your Honours, paragraph 15 is our last
point on Article III. It is how the reservation in Article I(3)
intersects with Article III.
Can I show you how we put the argument in the
Full Court, which is in the appellants’ book of further materials,
This was, in the Full Court, one of a suite of arguments,
the rest of which I have put to you this morning. This particular of
argument is found at tab 15, page 926.
So, having advanced the
core argument on Article III, between paragraphs 31 to 41 –
all of which were sufficient for primary
judge 43 to be
overturned – we put an additional argument, which was that
his Honour at that paragraph had:
overread the scope and content of signatory states’ agreement in
construing that provision. In the sphere of multilateral international
instruments –
that is the point I have made a moment ago:
and particularly those in respect of which states have lawfully made
reservations –
so, it is picking up that this is a convention where there may be lawful
reservations:
it is dangerous to infuse the construction exercise with the assumption that
the treaty promises are akin to bargains struck between
parties to a commercial
contract. The terms of the Art III promise made by each signatory State is
narrow. It concerns what the
state will do in its territory in respect of
“arbitral awards”, where recognition or enforcement is sought before
courts. Further, that promise may be made subject to reservations by the
state (as India in fact made) that it will only apply the
treaty to differences
arising out of legal relationships which are considered commercial under it
national law: Art I(3). Signatory
states may also make reservation of
reciprocity –
So, to the extent Mr Walker was suggesting
he may not have been, we did not put into play in the Full Court the actual fact
reservation, that is wrong. We put it into play in saying,
when you look at this treaty’s structure, the parties have to contemplate
that different parties may be making different choices in respect of
reservations. Indeed, India has made its choices clear.
The question
is: what does that do for his Honour’s requirement logic? What it
does, we submit and did submit, is that it
destroys that logic because every
State has to accept from the outset that every other State will be making its
own choices on reservations
or not. One cannot contemplate a situation where
the contours of a State’s obligation will vary depending upon choices made
by other States.
Therefore, when India signs the Convention, including
with its reservation, it is not requiring Australia to perform Australia’s
Article III promise, that is the general point. In particular, it is
certainly not requiring it to do it in an area where India
has said: I am not
prepared to take on that obligation.
GAGELER CJ:
So, this is the
opposite of the point that was taken up in your favour by the Full
MR GLEESON:
This is the broader way of looking at it.
The way we put it was, in terms of treaty architecture, once you accept: I am
up to something where different people will make different
decisions – and we mention India made a particular
given that circumstance, the requirement logic is broken
because this is necessarily a treaty contemplating fragmented legal
relationships.
That was taken slightly further in the next
paragraph ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Just so I get this right, you say we put it in play in support of our
argument that just merely signing up to the Convention is not
a waiver, and you
say what happened was the Full Court took it and applied it in a different way
by effectively picking up some sort
of bilateral concept and using it in a
reciprocal.
MR GLEESON:
What happened was that
90 per cent of Dr Roughley’s argument, which was correct,
should have been adopted by the Full Court.
They said: we do not need to get
there, we think that may all be wrong because of Justice Jackman. So, they
never treat it with
our full argument.
What they then did was to
perceive within what was in effect particular 6 of our argument, which was
a point about treaty architecture
– illustrated by the fact India had
actually made a reservation – they treated that as our only argument.
Then within
our only argument, they said: in order to make it really bite, what
we are interested in is not just the fact that India made a
reservation – which is what we advanced – but we want to
be further interested in whether that reservation destroys this
So, if you read 43 – I will not read it
out – we are clearly referring to our reservation and we are saying
exactly what
we have done, and I might read this part out:
India relevantly agreed by entering into the NY Convention that Australia
will recognise and enforce awards against India free of
the “commercial
reservation”, and requires it to do so.
That is referring to his Honour’s logic. Then saying the
problem with it is, on that:
analysis, the contours of the express and implied Art III obligations
that is, including our reservation:
ultimately hinge on the scope of the obligations assumed by other signatory
States . . . Art III does not contain an implied
requirement
by each signatory State as to what every other signatory
State will do. Far less does it contain any promise that a signatory State
waive immunity
you fall before the courts in other
States. That is where we put it. We put it that argument today. It is
particular 6, which confirms
that the appellants’ approach cannot be
correct. I notice the time, your Honour. I think under the program we
GAGELER CJ:
Until 12.15 pm.
MR GLEESON:
Until 12.15 pm, and then we had sought to reserve half an hour to
rejoin to the Commonwealth plus new matters raised by Mr Walker,
he would ever dare do that.
GAGELER CJ:
We will take
the morning adjustment.
AT 11.17 AM
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 11.31
MR GLEESON:
Your Honours, to
complete what occurred in response to those submissions I have just shown you,
in the Full Federal Court –
in the appellants’ book of
further materials at tab 16, page 945 – the response to our
argument was that it went nowhere
because the commercial reservation operated
one way, and:
As such, Art I is a consent to Australia
limiting its
obligations –
under the reservation. The Full Court at
paragraphs 60 and 61 understood the exchange of submissions I have just
shown you as creating
a joinder of issue as per those paragraphs, and that is
the question they then decided.
If the Full Court has correctly
understood the exchange of submissions, then there is no procedural fairness
problem. If the Full
Court has overread what we were putting and what the
appellant was responding to, there is a procedural fairness problem, which is
cured as a matter of law by the ability for both sides to put full arguments on
the legal question in this Court, as has now occurred.
Could I just ask, as a matter of clarification, you agreed that the reservation
has the same operation that Mr Walker says it has,
that it operates by
India promising what it will do in its territories, and that is
MR GLEESON:
Your Honour, the short answer is no.
We have given you an aide‑mémoire. Could I ask your Honours
go to that. It
might clarify certainly what we put now, and I will explain what
we put then. The purpose of the aide‑mémoire is to
say the first
column is the promise of Article I(1), the second column is the reservation
under Article I(3), whether it will be
territorial or
commercial.
The direct effect for the reserving State of a reservation,
which is the third column, we agree with Mr Walker on. That is its
inward‑looking effect, that as a reserving State, I have no
obligations under the Convention to anyone: in the first case,
awards made in the territory of a non‑contracting State; in the second
case, to enforce awards which are not commercial
under my law.
we all agree upon. The fourth column is what the Full Court has done, and
it has taken two steps. The first step, and
it is quite a narrow step, really,
is to say: if I am a reserving State, and I say I will not take on obligations
in respect to
awards either made in the territory of a non‑contracting
State or in respect to matters non‑commercial under my law.
immediate narrow reciprocal effect is that the obligations of every other
contracting State to me – not inter se, but to
have likewise been contracted so that those contracting States are not bound to
me to apply the Convention in respect
of the reserved areas. That is what the
Full Court has found is the direct and immediate reciprocal effect. I cannot
that in those terms to the Full Court.
But do you agree with that now?
MR GLEESON:
We agree with
that now, to the extent it is necessary to reach it. That is
a practical question, then. In the case of an arbitral award to which a country
like India has been a party to, the reservation
will never be engaged because,
as you say, India has sovereign immunity for the purpose of enforcement. So, I
understand that.
In a case where it is two investors who have been subject to
an arbitral award, how does it practically kick in?
MR GLEESON:
So, with two investors, that would be commercial under the law of India, so the
reservation will not bite.
So, we would have to contemplate something closer to the present
where we have, let us say, an award under an international law
obligation which
we would say is outside India’s ‑ ‑ ‑
But what is the nexus with India that is required in
order for the reservation to bite in that case?
MR GLEESON:
direct effect is – the only nexus is: am I in India being asked to
enforce the award?
I understand that.
With the reciprocal or the flip effect, it is quite a narrow
effect. All it is saying is: I, India, cannot compel the Netherlands
Australia or anyone else to enforce an award if in India it would be
non‑commercial. So, we have to contemplate an award
which would be
non‑commercial in India: I, India, cannot compel the Netherlands,
et cetera, to enforce that award.
BEECH-JONES J:
narrow effect does not engage here because – sorry, I will let you
MR GLEESON:
That is the narrow effect. So, the Full
Court had two critical steps in its argument. The first step is to look at the
reciprocal effect, and that is our first paragraph in the fourth column.
The Full Court then said if it has the narrow effect that
India cannot call upon
Australia to enforce an award of that character – that is just the
reciprocity under 21(2) – then
if the primary judge’s original
reasoning had been correct that India was requiring Australia to enforce such an
basis of the requirement has disappeared.
So, the second step
in the fourth column is not a VCLT Article 21 step, it is a step about
waiver, all of it premised on this original
idea that India was requiring to do
it. That is why the notice of appeal is strictly in the alternative, because if
the whole requirement
idea is flawed in the first place, then you do not need to
unpack it through the reservation. But if the requirement idea had any
it, then you take the two steps in the final column and you say therefore there
is no requirement from India that Australia
enforce the award and, if there is
no requirement, therefore there is no inconsistency with claiming your FSI.
That is the logic.
BEECH‑JONES J:
And one of the
problems with that is that Holland does require.
Let me answer the “Holland does require”.
There are two answers to that, and this is again where perhaps our
III argument is what matters. If we are correct under
Article III that Australia’s promise to Holland and to everyone else
has always been subject to Australia’s FSI obligations to other States,
then Holland never requires Australia to enforce an
award absent a waiver by
India. That is why, if the original requirement logic is flawed, this plays out
the way it does.
There is a second answer, your Honour, and I can
just give it this way. It is hard to express this because it is all off a
of PJ 43 that we do not accept. The logic of PJ 43 seems to
be because India required Australia to enforce the award against India,
be inconsistent with that if India asserted its immunity. Therefore, you have
lost it; therefore, there is a waiver, but
here is the further step.
the effect of the reservation is that India is saying to all contracting
parties: I am letting you know now that my scope of
obligation does not extend
to non‑commercial awards under the law of India, and I am never going to
be requiring you to enforce
awards of that character, that is as between me and
you – then, when Holland comes to ask Australia to do something, it
do so consistently with the scope of India’s reservation and its
consequence for the relations between India and Holland.
Another way of
testing that is, if Holland sued India in the ICJ, India would be able to say:
but the package of rights between
us was one which was contracted by reason of
the reservation. Therefore, the requirement logic
BEECH‑JONES J:
But the problem with that
is that it assumes that India’s reservation in its terms expresses a nexus
with India, but one
way of looking at that nexus – it simply says, if
you have an arbitration that is not a commercial dispute under the law of
India – but it does not have to have a nexus with India.
That is correct,
your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
So, you can
have arbitration between a French company and a German company that is not
commercial under the law of India, conducted
in Holland, enforced in Australia;
that has nothing to do with India, does it? On its face.
That is all correct.
BEECH‑JONES
MR GLEESON:
reservation is saying as between India and every other State, including Holland:
if the award, wherever it be made, is
not one I regard as commercial, I will not
apply this Convention to that award. That is the language of Article I(3).
So, the question
is by saying: I will not apply to the award; can India compel
any other party to the Convention to apply to that award? The answer
That is the Article I step. Then the second step, according to the
Full Court, is that has destroyed the underlying requirement
founded the waiver in the first place.
BEECH‑JONES
Does all of that
mean that, practically speaking, it really has no relevance to much? This
reciprocal obligation whereby India
will not enforce an award that does not meet
the requirements of India law as to commerciality. I mean, is India ever going
that if the award has got nothing to do with it? To take the example of
Justice Beech‑Jones.
MR GLEESON:
The answer to
your Honour’s question is just about
MR GLEESON:
‑ ‑ ‑ because
the only time it matters – which is this bizarre case – is
where the Full Court is trying
to find a way to test whether the
requirement still applies in the face of a reservation. But if the
Full Court had taken the correct
approach and said the whole requirement
logic fell because Australia’s promise was always qualified by
FSI – there was
never a waiver – you did not need to go
down this path at all.
Basically, it is
India’s way – if you start from the premise that India has
waived its sovereign immunity under the Convention,
it is India’s way of
trying to cut back that waiver.
MR GLEESON:
To cut back the
If that premise is correct.
That is all it is. It is saying: can India get any purchase out
of the fact that its reservation directly cut back India’s
obligations
through reciprocity, cut back India’s rights against every other
Contracting State and, if it cut back those rights,
they were the very rights
which primary judge thought conveyed the waiver.
Can I ask you a different question. If you are wrong on your immunity main
argument, I think you can still rely upon your reservation
will invoke to claim that the award cannot be enforced in Australia –
do you have anything to say about Mr
Walker’s state of the evidence
Yes. So, if we defend the Full Court on the legal question
after full argument in this Court, then the question is: what do you
the matter? We have indicated in our material – so, let me go
further. The procedural fairness ground that is joined
in ground 5 of the
notice of appeal does not in fact say that they were denied the chance to lead
evidence on the law of India.
I heard Mr Walker say yesterday
something beyond ground 5, and I do not object him raising it beyond
ground 5. I think he said yesterday
that they have been denied the chance
to try and prove the law of India. If your Honours are satisfied that they
should have been
given that realistic chance, and there is something they
genuinely wish to say about it, we cannot strongly resist to
We have given your Honours in the materials the two
decisions that exist from the High Court of India in the State of Gujarat
New Delhi which both say that a BIT is non‑commercial under the
law of India.
GAGELER CJ:
We cannot receive that.
You cannot receive them under section 73, but on the
question of whether you grant a remitter and whether there is utility to
all we can say is we have something strong to say about it.
Therefore, I am not heavily resisting a remitter if you get to that
What also follows from what I have just said is the Commonwealth
submissions about whether the presumption should have applied should
reached by this Court – particularly through an
intervener – because what would happen on a remitter is we would
get the chance to lead the law of India – which we will
do – if for some reason no‑one led any evidence on
India, the remittal court can decide what to do with the resumption. So, we
think all that issue collapses pretty quickly.
The only final thing I
wanted to say on the legal issue is, on Article XIV, we see
Article XIV as positively supporting the Full
Court’s approach as a
matter of law because it embedded reciprocity in every obligation. The effect
of that was that if, as
I have said, India carves out its obligation in respect
to non‑commercial awards, it therefore cannot claim that any other
should enforce such awards, and that destroys the effect of the requirement that
is on the legal point. Your Honours, given
the time, we otherwise rely
upon the written submissions on the notice of appeal. Could I hand over to
Dr Roughley on notice of
contention ground 1.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you. Ms Roughley.
MR GLEESON:
And we have the
terms of a remitter, your Honours, which we have circulated between the
parties. If we cannot agree it by after
lunch, we will give you our version of
GAGELER CJ:
Well, we have the respondent’s proposed
remitter, Mr Gleeson.
MR GLEESON:
That is our proposal, if
your Honours reach a remitter.
GAGELER CJ:
MS ROUGHLEY:
It is NOC 2 I will be addressing, and the
premise of NOC 2 is that not all awards to which one or more States are a
party are within
the literal terms of Article I(1). The appellants have
ultimately agreed with that premise. Thus, as between the parties, there
dispute that only sometimes will awards concerning States be within the scope of
Article I(1).
The contest between the parties is the definitional
criteria for inclusion. India’s position is that the words in
I(1), “differences between persons”, is concerned with
the field of private law and, whatever the outer limits of that
excludes arbitral awards where the rights and obligations at issue are sourced
in international law. The Quantum Award
is an award of that kind, and for that
we can rely essentially on the primary judge’s findings for rejecting the
commercial transaction exception.
Perhaps the best way
for me to provide your Honours with all the references is in our written
submissions, paragraphs 9 to 12, which
summarise that whilst there was a
contract called the “Antrix Agreement” – often referred
to – it was not
one to which India was a party. The arbitration in
issue here that resulted in the Quantum Award was against India, not Antrix,
it involved allegations of breach of international law. That is the BIT that
your Honours saw yesterday in tab 1 of the appellants’
further materials volume 1.
Your Honours will read on in
paragraph 9 that there was an express disavow by the appellants of any
contention that the BIT or the
Antrix agreement fell:
within the definition of “commercial transaction” in
s 11(3), the former not being commercial in nature –
that is the BIT:
and the latter not being a transaction which India itself had entered
Paragraphs 10 through to 13 then address the balance of how
section 11 was dealt with, the focus being that this Quantum Award is
wholly the result of considerations of rights and obligations under public
international law in respect of India.
In that sense, in order to decide
notice of contention 2, this Court does not need to decide the outer
parameters of the field of
private law. It only needs to be satisfied that the
field of operation of private law does not include arbitral awards concerning
States where the rights and obligations at issue are sourced in international
law. We do not think it will be at all in dispute
that the Quantum Award is not
of that kind.
GAGELER CJ:
You are anchoring this
submission on the reference in Article I(1) to “differences between
persons”, is that right?
MS ROUGHLEY:
GAGELER CJ:
What about differences being physical
or legal? Is it that you are limiting the legal differences to differences
arising under
what you call private law as distinct from public international
MS ROUGHLEY:
I see, and where does that leave the work to be done by the
second of the potential reservations that is referred to in
MS ROUGHLEY:
At the commercial
reservation?
GAGELER CJ:
So, can I explain the commercial reservation this way.
If we put aside whether or not this New York Convention applies to States
at all and focus what was at least the primary focus of awards concerning
private parties, this commercial reservation was intended
to do some work in
that circumstance.
It derives from the precursor Geneva Conventions. In
the Geneva Conventions, which no‑one has ever suggested had application
States, this opportunity for States to restrict their obligations under both
the 1923 and 1927 Geneva treaties was restricting
their obligations
for disputes that were, on any view, within the field of private
So, the commercial reservations are saying there might be this
broad category of private law, but whatever its limits, a reserving
saying: if I do not consider that to be commercial – for example
matrimonial disputes – that is not an award
that I would enforce.
Some States it might be employment disputes are not considered to be
commercial.
There is a whole raft of ways in which States which make a
reservation of this kind would invoke it to exclude from the field of
even within respect of things that could never be said to be anything other than
private law disputes from the operation
of the treaty. So, that is what Article
I(3) is problem solving for, and so the correct way to understand it is that it
is a contraction
of obligations to recognise and enforce – or the
Article II obligation under the New York Convention – in respect
arbitrations within the field of private law.
background to that contraction is that the debate about whether or not the whole
of the agreement in the first place would be
confined to commercial
transactions, and that that debate having been lost, it was left to parties
themselves to exclude non-commercial
transactions.
MS ROUGHLEY:
That is the way it has been put against India. So, the logic of that
reasoning is that if you have the facility to contract to what
you consider to
be commercial and you do not do it, every other kind of dispute is within the
frame. That is the logic and that
immediately breaks down when it is accepted
that at least some kinds of disputes concerning States – at least
certain kinds
of inter‑State disputes, perhaps all of them – the
appellants’ position has shifted a bit – are outside the
Unless one does not found that in the notion
of persons, as the United States cases have not, and one says, well, it is just
the presupposition
upon which the whole of Article I is operating is that
it does not operate in a State‑State case.
MS ROUGHLEY:
So, it was suggested yesterday the Court would not have to reach whether
State‑State cases are in our out. We take a different
view. We think it
is necessary to understand whether the State‑State distinction is the
exhaustive statement of exclusionary
criteria or if it is an illustration of a
broader exclusionary category.
We say the latter, and that is given the
whole circumstances in which this Convention came to pass, and we do not need to
little tidbits of comments by persons in a 1955 ad hoc process
who may or may not have been talking as representatives of the State
tidbits that happened in the 1958 conference. We can rely on the fact that the
key institutional components that led to
this Convention were squarely concerned
with arbitral processes and disputes in the field of private law. That is the
from which all of this has then proceeded.
So, if that is the
proper way to understand it – and I will come to the parts in the
travaux we most rely on and the commentators
we most rely on – then
India is correct in saying the inter‑State arbitral awards is just merely
an illustration of the
category of exclusion from scope. Arbitral awards that
are concerned with rights and obligations under international law –
it is not the entire parameters of what might be arbitrations concerned with
rights and obligations concerned with rights and obligations
under international
law that are outside the scope of this Convention.
Can I come to the key
parts of the travaux on which we rely. Most of this I will do by reference to
our chronology, but the first
one is item 17.1 in our chronology and if I
can take the Court to it, it is volume 7, tab 66, page 1920.
There your Honours will
see that the resolution which started this process
is the resolution of the Economic and Social Council and it is:
Taking note of the draft convention on the enforcement of international
arbitral awards submitted by the International Chamber of
Establishes an Ad Hoc Committee comprised of representatives
eight Member States –
qualifications in that field –
to consider the proposal.
If I can ask your Honours to also have our chronology open, in our
chronology, item 4, we have set out
there what Article I of the ICC
draft provides, and the terms of Article I there are not terms which lend
themselves to an understanding
that this project is concerned with the rights
and obligations of States under international law that may be the subject of
arbitration.
In any event, the representatives of just eight States are
identified on page 1921, and at the top of the page, 5, I just ask
Honours to note these names because they are two of the commentators I
will come to. You will see there:
Mr. Oscar Schachter, Director of the General Legal Division of the
United Nations Secretariat –
and the capacity in which he was
here. He later is the secretary for the 1958 conference, and he wrote
a paper in 1960, on which
we rely, that treated public international law
disputes as outside, and this whole process has been about the field of private
The second person there is the secretary of the committee, Mr Paolo
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry, Ms Roughley, where are you
reading from? Which page?
MS ROUGHLEY:
paragraph 5.
BEECH-JONES J:
The second person there is:
Mr. Paolo Contini, Senior Legal Officer –
and he too has
authored one of the key papers on which we rely. Paragraph 11 is where
your Honours see:
In view of the technical nature of the subject matter –
it was truly in scope to consider the rights and obligations of States in public
international law, the technical nature of that
is far different to the mere
technical issues of arbitration concerning the field of private law. At
paragraph 17 is where the committee
– this is their
report – refers to:
the expression “International Arbitral Awards” used by the
International Chamber of Commerce –
and it would normally
refer to arbitrations between States, but this draft convention just does not
deal with them. In paragraph
20, where they were explaining what they were
intending to do by 20, it is done by reference to the
Geneva Convention
which as I say, did not have any application to arbitral awards concerning
They are seeking there to explain the advances that are being
made, having regard to what we are seeing as some of the drawbacks.
the drawbacks identified or the problems that they are seeking to solve for
concerns the rights and obligations of States
under public international law,
where they are parties to an arbitration.
GAGELER CJ:
to paragraph 17, it would be possible to have a State‑State private
law arbitration covered by the convention even
on your submission, would it
MS ROUGHLEY:
If the source of it is private law
rights, possibly, but it would all depend on the set up for it. If
BEECH-JONES J:
joint venture over a dam on a river, between the two
MS ROUGHLEY:
Where a foreign State has in fact
entered the private law domain of activities in another State.
Or an arms sale
MS ROUGHLEY:
Sorry, I missed
GAGELER CJ:
MS ROUGHLEY:
Yes, but that is all entering a field of
private law. So then, can I come back to the chronology and the other parts of
this institutional
moment. So, item 19 in the chronology. After the
publication of the report I have just taken your Honours to, the
Secretary‑General
has published comments by other States, not limited to
the eight member states, on their comments on what they have seen.
is Austria raising an issue about:
‘legal persons’ –
but it is limited to States consenting:
arbitral awards made in their favour or against them in cases of disputes
with subjects of private law.
And goes on to identify an extent to which
a possible convention might apply to States or:
corporate bodies under public law –
as being to the extent they have:
rights and duties under private law –
In the comments of Switzerland in 19.4 and the comments of the Society of
Comparative Legislation, that private law understanding
of being the object of
the project continues. Now, that is the ad hoc committee and the response of
the States. We then move forward
to the second institutional moment, which is
item 22, the calling by ECOSOC by resolution 604(XXI) of a conference
to conclude a
convention, and the recital we have captured in the chronology.
It is taking into account the activities of various organisations
aiming at furthering the development of
arbitration ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Sorry, where are you reading from,
MS ROUGHLEY:
Item 22 of the chronology, the
ECOSOC resolution 604. The recital itself is:
aiming at furthering the development of arbitration in private law disputes
as a measure beneficial to international trade
That is the umbrella for this project, and then the resolution:
(a) To call a conference of plenipotentiaries with the following terms of
(i) To conclude a convention . . . on the basis of the draft
Convention prepared by the –
Committee . . . taking into account the comments and
suggestions made by Governments . . .
(ii) To consider, if time permits, other possible measures for increasing the
effectiveness of arbitration in the settlement of private
We say this hangs together just as the recital is talking about private
law and (ii) is talking about private law; (i) and the purpose
of what was
being contemplated, we say would fall into the same category.
One of the difficulties is that the distinction between public and
private is not the same between, say, civilian and common law jurisdictions.
That may have been one of the reasons why confining the Convention to commercial
was abandoned.
MS ROUGHLEY:
Given the significance of the
courts of one country exercising jurisdiction over a foreign State –
or even doing anything
with respect to wholly internal affairs in a foreign
state which might be the subject of an arbitration – the possibility
this Convention was seeking to create circumstances in which the courts of
one State would be doing that – not just in respect
of signatory
parties but in respect of anyone else – that is a very large
proposition, given the whole premise for immunity
is that that does not happen
but the underlying principle is that sovereign equality and States are sovereign
within their territories.
So, this Convention which was providing for
recognition on a broader basis than merely having a territorial connection to a
contracting
party, it is immediately – if it is read so expansively
as outside the field of private law – going further. There is
nothing in any of this material – and we have sought to be balanced
is nothing in any of
this material that suggests that we are seeking to go beyond, and problem solve
with those types of things.
So, the key parts of this on which would
rely is 24. At the first meeting of the conference, we have Mr Schurmann
of the Netherlands
opening the conference as president and identifying
A successful conference would constitute some small progress towards the rule
of law and to the smoother settlement of private law
Without going into the small parts of what different people have said,
can I come to 38.5 and 38.6, which is where, getting towards
the hill of the
hunt, Italy’s delegate wonders:
whether the words “arising out of –
differences:
might not furnish grounds for invoking the Convention in a dispute between
and the president states he:
thought that the Ad Hoc Committee had had no such intention when it
had prepared the draft Convention.
At one point, the appellants sought to say that that was the exclusionary
criteria: only inter‑State disputes submitted to
the PCA. They now seem
to go beyond that and accept it is all inter‑State disputes but have not
been able to identify the
exclusionary principle that emerges from this that
would limit the exclusion just to inter‑State disputes.
come to the Final Act. Item 41, the Final Act in the conference on recognition,
to which Mr Gleeson referred. We have capped
it at 41.1; the key parts of
that text which repeated the terms of the ECOSOC resolution and its limitations
to private law. Then
there has been some papers written by persons who were
involved in that project and had some type of official role in what was
The first one I wish to come to is Mr Contini. You will find
his article in volume 10, tab 119, page 3475.
Are you planning to go through all of the references in
paragraph 20 of your outline?
MS ROUGHLEY:
the key ones: Mr Contini, Mr Sanders, if I have time, and
Mr Schachter. Mr Contini, at 3486, Roman (ii). Page 3486
is where he captures what the conference was intending to deal with, its object.
He notes the reservation – this is about a
third of the way
down – and to go to the question Justice Edelman asked me, it
does not mean that it:
may apply also to differences of a noncommercial nature. What other type of
differences should then be regarded as falling within
the most persuasive indication –
resolution on Other Measures –
in the Final Act:
which refers to the Convention as contributing to “increasing the
effectiveness of arbitration in the settlement of private
tends to support the conclusion that, except for states making the
reservation mentioned above, the Convention is applicable to arbitral
arising out of any private law dispute, whether commercial or not.
then goes on in the next paragraph to deal with whether it can capture States or
public bodies, and he concludes, in the last five
lines, that it is only if it
a dispute of a private law nature –
There seems to be no apparent reason why the Convention should not apply also
where both parties in an arbitration proceeding are
states or public
So, there are two matters there. There is,
first, that it was explained in the report that the public enterprises and
acting within the realm of private law are to be regarded as within
the scope. Then the second sentence says:
Although there was no specific discussion on this point, there are clear
indications of a general understanding . . . that where a
state or other public body has agreed to submit to arbitration a dispute of a
private law nature –
would also apply. You do not challenge
that aspect of it?
MS ROUGHLEY:
No, both are limited to
private law.
And then the next sentence is consistent
with your analysis?
MS ROUGHLEY:
Yes, I said I would go to
Professor Sanders. I will not, given the time, but I will give the
reference. It is joint bundle of
authorities, volume 11, tab 122,
page 3560. It is a 1960 article, and the relevant pages is
page 3562 and 3566. Professor Sanders
is described as the grandfather
of this Convention. He is the author of the Dutch proposal that ultimately
carried the day.
Oscar Schachter, his is at volume 10,
tab 118, and this is relevant to a question that Your Honour
Justice Steward asked yesterday
New York Convention trying to solve a problem of sovereign risk.
At 3458, Professor Schachter has, consistent
with his role at the
United Nations, set out to present – I am reading from
point 4 of the page – seeking to present:
to survey this area of international activity with the aim of indicating the
extent to which international mechanisms and laws are
being used and developed
in regard to the promotion and protection of private foreign
investment.
Can I come then to page 3464, where he looks at
investment treaties and codes and what the suggestions were about was helping
foreign investment and that these had not, so far, gone far enough.
At about point 6 of the page, the end of the last full paragraph,
your Honours will see reference to a code being developed:
by the International Chamber of Commerce, and in recent years similar
proposals have been made by unofficial groups.
And if you look at the footnote, footnote 27, it is a proposed code for
the treatment for foreign investments and other things, squarely
dealing with
the types of questions we say the New York Convention was not trying to
problem‑solve for. On 3465 is recognising
that it would be beneficial to
have such a code and ICSID obviously comes later. Coming through to 3470,
Mr Schachter deals with
arbitration between governments and investors and notes
Whatever may be the obstacles to reaching agreement in general terms on
procedural remedies, experience has shown that satisfactory
provisions –
in bilateral negotiations –
At the page of the next page,
From this point of view, the measures which various United Nations bodies
have taken to further arbitration in disputes of a private
law character should,
at least in the long run, have a beneficial effect on the flow of investment
capital to under‑developed
That then is the context on 3472, top of the page, where
Mr Schachter is referring to “recognition and enforcement”, and
in particular the:
United Nations
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards
We rely on all of this page, but middle of the page,
there is a sentence:
The Convention contains no express provision on this point, but its scope
extends to –
the words and then looks at:
The records of the drafting Conference –
and again the
restriction to:
an entity having rights and duties under private law.
And the paragraph ends with:
transactions having a private law character.
So, just on 3473, bringing this all together at the conclusion, bottom of
the paragraph, this is the survey of all of the activities
that were being
undertaken by the United Nations. There was much going on, but the New York
Convention is not being seen as –
to use Mr Schachter’s
language, fourth line from the end – “a one‑shot”
answer to having recognition
and enforcement of awards that relate to
arbitrations sourced in public international law rights and
obligations.
Now, the primary judge – I note the time, if I
can just finish off in three minutes – the travaux and came to the
after going through it, that it does not say it is not dealing with States
with rights and obligations under international law.
So, the absence of
exclusion was significant. At paragraph 88 through to 92 he then comes to
commentators, and he notes that there
is a number of them. We did refer to
all of them below. Mr Contini is dealt with at paragraph 89.
Mr Schachter is dealt with at
paragraph 90. He then comes
to Professor Crawford – Professor Crawford’s article,
the Court was taken to yesterday –
at paragraph 91.
Ultimately, the resolution of all of this is
Professor van den Berg and Professor Bjorklund. In the relevant
page of Professor van
den Berg that is ultimately referred to,
Professor van den Berg cites the views of Sanders and Contini.
When he says awards, commercial
and commercial to be construed broadly, that is
his qualification is to those authors. Fairly read, we say
Professor van den Berg
was intending to go no further, and all
that Professor Bjorklund does, as your Honours saw when Mr Gleeson
took the Court there,
Professor Bjorklund just refers back to
Professor van den Berg. So, we say none of that undermines what
is the real object of his
Convention once properly understood.
would bring me to Justice Katsas, to the decision in
your Honours saw yesterday. We would deal with that this way. In the
majority opinion, ultimately they end up deciding that
Nigeria and the award was
in scope because they saw the arbitration was governed by Nigerian law and they
took the view that this
was not Convention‑excluded because it dealt with
international law matters.
Judge Katsas in dissent took a different
view of that. On one view it is a narrow difference between them, but to the
Court is dealing with this question, we do rely on the reasoning of
Justice Katsas at least insofar as it is carving out from the
scope of the
New York Convention arbitral awards of the kind to which the Quantum Award
is, which concerns rights and obligations
arising under public international
law. I note the time.
Just a very quick
question before you sit down. If there is an arbitration between an investor
and a State that raises private
law issues of dispute, what happens if the
investor also wishes to raise an issue of, say, public international law in the
same dispute?
Is there no jurisdiction then or is that carved out?
I would say it will always be fact‑specific, but
can I do it by a concrete example by reference to the BIT here. We have
here that in Article 8 gives investors certain rights then in
Article 9 provides for arbitration between States. In both of
those cases
it is rights and obligations being determined in the arbitration that are purely
a matter of international law, and we
would say that carves it out. If there
ends up being some difficulty because an arbitration is partly a private law
field and partly
out, we would say it is outside the scope. The New York
Convention is dealing with arbitration explicitly concerned with private
GAGELER CJ:
Was Judge Katsas drawing the same
distinction between private law and public international law that you are
drawing? Or was he
drawing a different distinction between States acting in one
capacity and States acting in another capacity – the other capacity
being what he calls a sovereign capacity like an act‑of‑State
MS ROUGHLEY:
Judge Katsas goes further and
what I sought to do was saying this Court does not need to decide the
“further”. It
is enough to carve out the States acting on the
international plane. The majority said that was a question that they were
until later. They said, at page 1639 of the joint book of
authorities, or page 1071 of the report:
We do not resolve that ambiguity –
of inter‑State arbitrations:
for there are at least two things that may distinguish arbitration between
Where are you reading from,
Ms Roughley?
MS ROUGHLEY:
The very bottom of joint
book of authorities 1649, at the very bottom of report 1071. They go
on to give two reasons, and the top
reason on page 1640, report 1072,
there is other evidence from the drafting history suggesting that the
Convention does not apply to disputes between states over violations
international law.
And then notes that, ordinarily:
disputes between states are ordinarily governed by public international law,
while disputes between states and individuals are not.
And they go on in that same paragraph, so left‑hand column, middle
of the page:
the arbitration between Nigeria and Zhongshan was governed by “the law
of Nigeria as supplemented by international law –
So, Judge Katsas in dissent did not think that that distinction
would solve it. Judge Katsas says this is all arising from rights
obligations in international law, and he goes further than that to say the
convention does not apply to governments acting as
sovereigns, and he expresses
it in that general way. But there is that degree of overlap between them as to
working out: is the
arbitration governed by rights or dealing with rights and
obligations under international law? That is the territory on which we
GAGELER CJ:
there are lots of cases where, by reason of there being an arbitration agreement
and a submission to arbitration that you have
United States courts enforcing
awards made in an investor‑State context under the New York Convention.
All of those cases
would be wrongly decided on this submission, insofar as they
relied on the arbitration exception to sovereign immunity in the United
MS ROUGHLEY:
Two answers to that. One, as
Judge Katsas goes through them in descent, the issue was not raised, and so
not wrongly decided in
the sense issue not joined. Two is that we say it will
always depend on the facts as to working out whether what the arbitration
concerning a private law field or is concerning public international law rights
and obligations, and that would be fact‑specific.
One would need to go
through each of the cases in order to work out which side of the line it would
fall on, but what we do get
is a line and exclusionary
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Solicitor.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honours, the
Attorney‑General in oral argument will focus on three of the arguments,
but given the constraints imposed
by the division of time, I am going to have to
pick out particular points of significance within those arguments rather than
to address any of them in a comprehensive way. So, I hope
your Honours will forgive me for that.
The three topics are, first,
something briefly on the scope question of the
New York Convention – the matter that has just
addressed arising out of notice of contention 2. Second, arising out of
notice of contention 3, some arguments in support of
the proposition that
ratification of the New York Convention clearly unmistakably waives
sovereign immunity with respect to proceedings
to recognise or enforce awards
subject to the effect of the commercial reservation.
On those two
issues, the Commonwealth broadly supports the appellant in this Court. The
third issue relevantly to the appeal grounds
is the reciprocal effect of the
commercial reservation, and on that we support India and the conclusion reached
by the Full Court
below. On the notice of contention 2
question – and I will endeavour to be very brief here –
there was some discussion
yesterday of whether a State can be a person at all
for the purposes of Article I(1). You have been taken to some passages in
travaux that refer to that topic and Professor Crawford’s article
from 1980 that also refers to that topic.
The passage of time since
those sources came into existence is, we submit, important because there has
been very considerable State
practice in the application of the
New York Convention in the last 45 years since
Professor Crawford wrote what he wrote. That State
practice is relevant to
the interpretation of the Convention as expressly contemplated by
Article 31(3)(b) of the Vienna Convention
which permits recourse
Any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes
the agreement of the parties regarding its
interpretation
There is, as your Honours know, decades
now – four or five decades worth – of investor‑State
disputes being conducted
in particular under the UNCITRAL rules, where they are
almost invariable enforced by reason of the
New York Convention.
You will have seen in the primary
judge’s reasons in the paragraph just after the paragraph Ms Roughley
just took you to –
it is in the core appeal book at 54,
paragraphs 92 and 93, but in the commentary – particularly
Professor Bjorklund commentary
– she notes that:
many bilateral investment treaties permit investors to
the ICSID Convention or to convene proceedings under other arbitral
rules, and that under the latter option –
I am reading the middle of the page here:
nearly always –
the awards are:
subject to enforcement under the
New York Convention –
The primary judge accepted that view and then there is a reference in
paragraph 93 to the researchers that underpinned the annexure
his Honour’s reasons revealing:
30 occasions when the New York Convention has been applied to
investor‑State arbitral awards, 20 of them involving breaches
by States of
bilaterial investment treaties.
The United Kingdom decision of
Sir William Blair you have been referred to recognises in paragraph 29
that awards against States:
are frequently enforced under the NYC.
Court of Appeal, at page 1066 of the report, the DC Circuit Court of
Appeal recognises the same thing. So, in our submission,
there is a large body
of subsequent State practice including not just the awards mentioned there but
also all of the agreements the
States reach, including I might say major both
bilateral investment and multilateral investment treaties that contemplates at
the possibility of arbitration under the UNCITRAL rules to be enforced by
the New York Convention.
That is all predicated on the idea that at
least some of the time disputes involving States are within the scope of
under the New York Convention, and it would be a truly
seismic event in the world of international arbitration if this Court were
hold that States can never be persons for the purpose of events of that
There were at times in the argument yesterday – it
seemed to be being suggested – that that issue was in play in this
Court under notice of contention 2, but we submit it is not. The terms of
notice of contention 2 begin by saying: insofar as States
may be persons.
I will just get the language exactly right.
BEECH-JONES J:
not think Dr Roughley contradicted that a second ago.
No, I do not think she did either. I was more referring to some
of the exchanges yesterday. As Dr Roughley just developed, it
what the subset is, but it acknowledges that there is no line that
says – based on the very consistent State practice
over the last
decades it is clear, we submit, that “persons” sometimes includes
As Professor Crawford acknowledged long ago, once you reach that
conclusion, it is quite difficult to see why “person”
always include States, and that is the submission that we take, but I
immediately emphasise that that is not to say that
State‑State disputes
are necessarily within the Convention, because that assumes there are no other
limiting concepts to be
found in Article I(1), and your Honours have
in the course of argument identified a number.
Chief Justice, yesterday you referred to the possibility that legal
differences bears on the question, and there are a number
of other hooks that in
an appropriate case would need to be explored to work out whether, for example,
the public international law
line that Dr Roughley just developed should be
accepted or not.
Our submission though is that your Honours should
not accept the invitation made expressly in terms in India’s rejoinder in
paragraph 3, where it said the Court has to decide whether all awards to
which States are a party are always or never within the
scope of the Convention,
or to attempt to state exhaustively the “preferable criterion” for
answering that question.
That would be a substantial advisory effort on
your Honours’ part. What you have to do, in our submission, is much
than that. You have to rule upon the argument just developed by
Dr Roughley to the effect that there is a carve‑out as developed
then by reference to private law matters.
Your Honours will
immediately recognise – and some of the question has highlighted
this – that within the commentary
within the submissions this
morning, indeed comparing the submissions this morning to the written
submissions, there are quite a
range of different ways that that carve‑out
might be identified. In writing, our friends said “commercial or private
law disputes”. Today, I think it was “private law disputes”,
but in writing our friends also said: is it a distinction
between conduct of a
“State jure imperii or in its governmental capacity”
idea – which is closer to Judge Katsas
something different?
The very range of possible confinements, in our
submission, points against that kind of argument in circumstances where, as
Edelman pointed out, you had an attempt back at the negotiating
stage to limit the Convention expressly to commercial matters, which
failed, and
you then have as an answer to that, we submit, the commercial reservation which
allows States to ensure that, so far
as their own obligations are concerned, the
Convention can be tied back in that way.
Given the limits of time, I do
not really propose to say anything more on this point than to refer
your Honours to the majority in
, and in particular to
pages 1068 to 1074, where you see the majority discussing multiple examples
of United States courts enforcing
awards under the New York Convention
which, according to the majority, are awards with respect to sovereign conduct.
itself but also the authorities that they there
discuss. Having looked at arguments based on the travaux of a similar kind
here, their Honours say on 1073:
The “[c]herry‑picked generalizations from the negotiating and
drafting history” that –
“cannot be used to create a rule that finds no support in the
treaty’s text.”
And we submit your Honours should reach the same conclusion. You
can, as the Court did there, leave for another day the question
of whether there
is a line drawn by reference to public international law or private law or the
hybrid kind of case your Honour Justice
Edelman mentioned. In
, the line that was drawn was that it was said that it applies
at least to:
sovereign activity directed at a non‑state entity and that is governed,
in part or in whole, by domestic law.
That is at the bottom of the left‑hand column to the top of the
right‑hand column on 1072. That is all I seek to say
contention 2.
Can I just ask three questions
they said you do not find
anything in the text but it is apparent, at least from the materials we have
been taken to yesterday and
today, that it was initially concerned with private
international law, which I understand you accept?
MR DONAGHUE:
Private law, yes.
Private law. I had meant to say
private law, thank you. The third proposition, then, is time has moved on and
one then deals with
it by reference to those materials rather than having the
initial materials dictating the result?
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour, because we now know that bilateral investment treaty
arbitrations are very commonly enforced under this
award. They have their
sources, the Chief Justice pointed out, in international law.
agreements can contemplate the – both provide the agreement to
arbitrate and the content of the law that is in existence
in the arbitration,
but your Honours just do not need to decide anything more than that the
proposition as it now seems to be advanced
– which is that there is
an unstated limit that this convention can only apply to something identified as
private law according
to whatever standard that might be, because it does vary
from place to place – we submit your Honours should not accept
You should say that limitation has no foundation in the text.
There may be other limitations, including limitations by reference
content of the source of law, but that is a question for another time, just as
. Your Honours, on topic 2, the effect of
the ratification, at times yesterday this issue was approached on the basis that
in some way a radical or a new idea that ratifying the New York
Convention involves a waiver of immunity. Given the time, I largely
Mr Walker has said on this topic.
But we do note that the
conclusion that the primary judge reached, at paragraph 43 –
that the Full Court said had much to be
said for it – is the
conclusion that is supported not just by the unqualified text of
Article III, but also by the United States
cases that I am about to come to
and by the International Law Commission in work that was cited by this Court in
Kingdom of Spain
where the ILC listed multilateral conventions which
involved waiver of immunity.
The list that they included set out both
ICSID and the New York Convention, and in
Kingdom of Spain
inclusion of ICSID in that list was regarded as a matter of some significance,
and we say the same is true here. Without going
to it, the reference is
paragraph 75 of
Kingdom of Spain
, which refers to an ILC report that
your Honours have in volume 10, tab 105, and that in turn refers
to a list of multilateral treaties
which your Honours have in
volume 12, tab 129.
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry, what
paragraph of
Kingdom of Spain
MR DONAGHUE:
Kingdom of Spain
BEECH‑JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
Paragraph 75, your Honour, and
particularly footnote (134).
BEECH-JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
Whether or not your Honours accepted
there is a long history of that being ratification resulting in waiver being a
view that has
been taken about the New York Convention, it is not
something that an ultimate appellate court anywhere in the world has ever ruled.
Your Honours would be the first.
One of the propositions that has
been advanced against that argument – and Mr Gleeson
foreshadowed that I would make this submission
based on our outline –
is that it is said that the consequence of our argument would be that it would
be necessary for parties
to the New York Convention to enforce awards
against non‑parties to the Convention – the Nauru and Tuvalu
situation –
because it is said, well, if Article III is not
subject to sovereign immunity, it must follow that once States accept an
to recognise and enforce awards, they will have that obligation in
the same way as against parties and non‑parties. We submit
that that is
simply not so.
The reasoning path by which we get there is we start at
the same position as India, in that we accept, of course, that all States
customary international law right to sovereign immunity and that that right
carries with it a corresponding obligation on
the part of other States to
respect the immunity. Mr Gleeson took you to the ICJ decision in
, and we agree with what he said about that
case. So, the starting point is that all States have an international
obligation to respect
the sovereign immunity of all other
Against that starting point, the New York Convention
cannot properly be interpreted as affecting the sovereign immunity of States
that are not party to it, and the interpretative route by which one arrives at
that conclusion is that Article 31(3)(c) of the Vienna
Convention says
that it is necessary to take into account an interpretation:
Any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between
the parties.
And one of the most fundamental of such rules is the pacta
tertiis rule. It is described by Professor Crawford in the handout we
you that Mr Gleeson took you to as a fundamental principle of international
law. It is the treaty version of privity of contract.
In effect, the
rule means State A and State B cannot get together and agree with each
other that they will infringe the rights of
State C. Treaties just do not
work that way, so that the non‑party is properly treated as never in the
contemplation of obligations
that are taken on by the parties to either a
bilateral or a multilateral agreement, because States do not contract about the
of non‑party States. That idea is found partly expressed in
Article 34 of the Vienna Convention, which is a partial statement
the pacta tertiis rule. Article 34 says:
A treaty does not create either obligations or rights for a third State
without its consent.
And the reason we gave your Honours
Professor Crawford’s extract from Brownlie is that he points out that
that paragraph, that
article of the Vienna Convention, falls slightly short of a
complete statement of the pacta tertiis rule, because, to quote
This falls slightly short of expressing the customary rule, however: besides
not creating obligations or rights, treaties cannot
infringe the rights of third
states without their consent.
So, for the non-party State, we submit that the fact that other States
have agreed with each other that they will enforce awards can
say nothing about
their customary right to immunity. They just still have that right.
Article III is construed as subject to it,
but for the parties, that
rule – the pacta tertiis rule – has nothing to
The question – the interpretive question concerning
Article III is then, once you ratify the Convention and take on
III obligations and accept that other States will have
Article III obligations with respect to you: does that involve a waiver of
immunity? The United States cases in particular say yes, and I am about to come
to them, but the distinction that I have just drawn
between the effect of the
Convention on parties and non‑parties has been recognised in the United
States case law.
So, it was first recognised in a case I do not think
you have been taken to, which is
Creighton v State of Qatar
is in Volume 5, tab 24. It is one of the line of cases in the DC
Circuit, this one decided in 1999. When your Honours have
could turn to page 122, you see at 122 the beginning of the relevant
discussion, it is a discussion of the waiver exception.
So, you see in the
left‑hand column:
Implied Waiver –
The waiver exception from the United States statute is set out, and the
argument reflects a distinction that is of some significance
in the argument I
will develop about the United States cases, which is the distinction between
whether an agreement to arbitrate
subject to the law of a foreign State is a
waiver of immunity, which is one kind of argument, and an agreement that
ratification
of the New York Convention involves a waiver, which is another kind
of argument.
This argument was the former. The argument was that by
agreeing to arbitrate in France, Qatar had waived its sovereign immunity.
argument was sought to be developed by reference to
Seetransport
of the other cases that you have heard about. Over the page on 123, you
will see, in the right‑hand column after
a citation of
Seetransport
and some others:
In each of these cases, however, the defendant sovereign was (unlike Qatar) a
signatory to the Convention. In
Seetransport
the Second Circuit
reasoned, correctly we think, that “when a country becomes a signatory to
the Convention, by the very provisions
of the Convention, the signatory state
must have contemplated enforcement actions in other signatory
states.” . . .
Qatar not having signed the Convention, we do not think that its agreement
to arbitrate in a signatory country, without more, demonstrates
the requisite
So, two points out of that. Clearly, the court distinguishes in the
waiver effect between parties and non‑parties. Second,
it endorses the
reasoning in
Seetransport
– this is the Circuit Court
endorsing the reasoning of a different circuit, the second circuit from
Seetransport
, correctly, we think – that by becoming a
signatory, there was waiver. No
elements ‑ ‑ ‑
not think they are saying that, though, in
Seetransport
or here. What
they are saying is that it was not sufficient for waiver, you were just on
notice that they contemplated enforcement.
The words are:
the signatory state must have contemplated enforcement actions in other
signatory states.”
I think it is less than waiver.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour ‑ ‑ ‑
Necessary but not sufficient.
MR DONAGHUE:
BEECH-JONES J:
they saying, we have condition – unlike in Mr Gleeson’s
conditions, where here we have condition (2) – we have
condition (1), but we do not have condition (2).
We had condition (2), but we did not have
condition (1) in this case.
BEECH-JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
So, we had an agreement to arbitrate but
BEECH-JONES J:
Convention. You are right, yes.
MR DONAGHUE:
‑ ‑ ‑ ratification, and because there was no
ratification, no waiver.
BEECH-JONES J:
It was the conclusion.
BEECH-JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
recognise I am going to need to meet the condition (1), (2) idea, but
certainly immediately seeing no sign of condition (3).
In most of these
cases, you see no sign of condition (3), for reasons that I will come to in
So, I just want to make clear – I
had misunderstood – are you putting that that passage you have just
taken us to is suggesting
that the mere signing or ratifying of the Convention
is the waiver?
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, but I do not suggest that that
means that there does not need to be an arbitration agreement on the scene,
because unless
you have an arbitration agreement, you will never have an
arbitration award, and unless you have an arbitration award, you are not
the territory of Article I. So, clearly it needs to be there as at least a
factual precondition, but what I
does that mean – “at least needs to be there”, what does
MR DONAGHUE:
It means you do not need, as
Mr Gleeson would have it, to embark upon proof or to have a debate about
the legality or otherwise
of the arbitration agreement if the waiver argument is
based on the waiver exception. You do if it is based on the arbitral exception,
and that is one of the distinctions that you find expressed in the case law,
which we submit has been suppressed in
you need it if, as you comment, you already have an award?
Well, once you have an award, in my submission, you do not need
more, but you will not have an award unless you have something
that has at least
been treated as an arbitration agreement as a factually prior
My question is why do you need an
agreement if you already have an award, if it is only an ex facie
agreement? What on earth could
MR DONAGHUE:
the agreement add?
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, your Honour, I think I am in heated agreement with you in that. In
my submission, what these cases say –
Seetransport
number of the other cases say – is what they treat as significant is
what a country must have been taken to have accepted
by ratification of the
Convention. But that does not mean – the references in the
authorities to there being an award or to
there being an agreement are totally
explicable, we submit, because it is – will always be at least an
award, as your Honour
put; always be part of the factual context that gets
you into the New York Convention.
Where I think I part company
from Mr Gleeson is that he says, well, the kind of issue about the validity
of an arbitration agreement
or not, which is one of the things that you can
litigate under Article V of the New York Convention –
Article V(1)(a) of the
New York Convention says one of the limited
grounds you can fight about on a set‑aside application is whether there
agreement or not. He takes that and tries to put it into Article I,
and we say no.
BEECH-JONES J:
On your view, if the domestic law
of a particular treaty country said: you can invoke our arbitration procedures
against the foreign
State without them agreeing for some underlying
dispute – you then get an award, you can go off and enforce. The
of them entering the Convention is enough for waiver and you can
enforce that award under the sovereign immunity exception around
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, your Honour, there I am not sure
I fully understand what
BEECH-JONES J:
In other words, you do not have an agreement to arbitrate.
Well, whether you can truly describe what your Honour has
just put to me as an arbitral award is, in my submission, a very live
because in this Court’s jurisprudence – and including I think
, for example – it is the consent to arbitrate that is
at the heart of the whole idea. So, a unilateral process that labels
as an award but that does not have that consent as part of it might – I
said there are other limiting concepts, one
of them is the concept of an
arbitral award ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
‑ ‑ ‑ and I
would submit, in answer, that you would bite on a different limiting concept. I
note the time, your
Honours, I have
GAGELER CJ:
Solicitor, how are we going for time?
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, we are
moving as fast as we can, and I understand I have to finish. The five minutes I
have just taken into the lunch break
were borrowed back from my
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, of course.
MR DONAGHUE:
So, I will stop when I am supposed to stop, your Honour.
Very well. We will take the luncheon
adjournment.
AT 12.49 PM LUNCHEON
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 2.13
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honours, can I
turn now to the United States cases, and in particular to address India’s
proposition that the United
States cases support the proposition that you need
the three elements that they have identified in order to engage the waiver
I am going to take your Honours to two cases, in due course, in
relation to that.
Can I say at the outset that while India’s
submissions acknowledge that there are two distinct exceptions under the
United States statute – the waiver exception, which
resembles our section 10, and the arbitration exception – their
submissions took your Honours, on some occasions at some length, to
passages in the cases that concerned the arbitration exception,
particular to passages in those cases where the need for a valid arbitration
agreement is emphasised as a component of the
application of the arbitration
We take no issue with that proposition but submit that it
because there is no cross pollination between the requirements of those two
quite different statutory exceptions, so that in
many of the
authorities – and it happened again this morning in
– having dealt with the part of the reasoning
concerning waiver, your Honours were then taken on to a separate discussion
the case that required things, including things that look a lot like the
three‑part test that is being urged upon you, which
were occurring in the
United States authorities in the context of the different statutory provision,
and I will make that good when
I get there.
As to the three conditions,
we submit that the third condition, which is participation in the arbitration in
which the award was
issued, is rarely mentioned in the authorities. It seems to
have its genesis in what, at least on one view of it, was a recounting
had factually occurred in
Seetransport
. It is not mentioned in
at all. It is not mentioned in some of the
authorities, including the authorities that our friends that – the
commentaries,
rather, that our friends have taken you to.
As a matter
of principle, condition 3 in particular is completely unjustified, because
it would mean that a State that has ratified
the New York Convention and
has entered into an arbitral agreement could escape the consequences of having a
binding and enforceable
award made against it by defaulting an appearance before
the tribunal. So that, if it had honoured its legally binding commitments
the arbitration agreement on our friends’ case, provided you do not show
You can only escape that outside the courts of a supervisory jurisdiction or the
courts of the seat of the arbitration.
MR DONAGHUE:
They would say, I think, your Honour, that they have sovereign immunity,
which would answer that supervisory jurisdiction.
I think the respondent’s position was that that the
second condition was perhaps limited to the seat of the arbitration in
supervisory courts over the seat of the arbitration, but that it would not apply
to all State parties to the Convention.
MR DONAGHUE:
had not understood that, your Honour, but that may be so. Even if that
would be so, we still submit that it is an unprincipled
additional requirement
to participate in the arbitration and not one that you find having any
particular support in the authorities.
Condition 2 is more
complicated – this is the requirement for there to be an arbitration
agreement. I have called it in writing
that it needs at least to exist as a
factum, but it may be that much depends on exactly what that condition is said
to mean, because
we understand India to assert that what that condition requires
is that the existence of a valid arbitration agreement be proved
in order to
engage the waiver exception. We submit the United States cases do not support
that proposition.
If instead it meant that what you need to do is have
an arbitration agreement that meets the requirements of Article IV of the
York Convention, because your Honours will recall that in order to
obtain – in order to give effect to the Article III obligation
to obtain recognition and enforcement of an award, the party applying for
recognition and enforcement needs to provide both a duly
or authenticated
original award, or a duly certified copy, and the original agreement referred to
in Article II.
That having been done, the scheme of the
New York Convention is that, under Article V, there are a limited and
exclusive set of grounds
upon which recognition and enforcement can be refused.
The first of which is that:
The parties to the agreement referred to in article II were, under the
law applicable to them, under some incapacity, or the said
agreement is not
valid under the law to which the parties have subjected
So, the scheme of the Convention, we submit, is that the
question of the validity or otherwise of the arbitration agreement is one
exclusive grounds that can be relied upon on a set‑aside under
If what our friends were saying – or what
your Honours were to find – was that you need to have an
arbitration agreement
that can meet Article IV, and so the validity of
which can be tested under Article V, then that is a plausible reading of
the authorities,
because you will not be in the territory of having an award
that is capable of recognition and enforcement under the
New York Convention
unless you have that. Our submission is that if
you have that – which I think was referred to as a prima facie award
of the argument yesterday – and you have ratification, we
submit that the United States authorities do not support the idea
that you need
anything more.
Justice Jackman at first instance looked at the
United States authorities, and can your Honours go to the core appeal book
32, paragraph 45; you will see the commencement of that
discussion. So, in paragraph 45 there is a discussion of
Seetransport
, including a block quote of the key reasoning. Then in
paragraph 46 there is a discussion of
, and at the of that
paragraph reference to
, and then in 47 a reference to the
first instance decision in
, which I think is the case that comes
on appeal next year, which is one of the two cases I am about to go to, where
Judge Leon had
found – and you see this about 10 lines
down – that it was a prerequisite to the existence of the waiver
exception that
there was a valid agreement to arbitrate. Justice Jackman
records that:
Judge Leon did not undertake any detailed analysis of the terms of the New
York Convention –
to support that:
From the point of view of an Australian Court –
it is under
From the point of view of an Australian Court –
he did not find its reasoning persuasive. Then his Honour
While I accept that the reasoning in
Seetransport
in the passage which
I have extracted above does refer to the parties having entered into an
arbitration agreement as a matter of
fact, that was in the context of a case in
which there was no issue as to the validity or applicability of the arbitration
It was not necessary for the Court in
Seetransport, Creighton
to consider whether it would have been
sufficient . . . to have tendered what appears on its face to be
an arbitration agreement,
together with the award.
And we submit that
his Honour was right to read the cases in that way. Can I take
your Honours first to
, which is volume 5,
BEECH-JONES J:
Although what again was the
agreement on its face amounting to an arbitration agreement? Was that the BIT
in this case?
MR DONAGHUE:
In this case, I think so, yes,
your Honour, the agreement to arbitrate in the BIT. So,
a case decided last year. It discusses both the waiver exception and the
arbitration exception. It is true that the Court ultimately
decides the case on
the basis of the arbitration exception, but the fact that the matter is being
litigated and discussed in the
DC Circuit last year rather points against
the proposition that it is all now about the arbitration exception and that
there is no
need to consider the waiver exception anymore. Quite a number of
the cases are quite recent cases which discuss both.
So, you see in
that it was decided on the waiver exception at page –
I am using the pages in the report, rather than the joint book of authority
pages, but on page 1100. The discussion of the waiver exception occurs
relevantly on page 1099. So, your Honours see in the right-hand
just above the heading 1:
The companies contend that two of the FSIA exceptions apply in these cases:
the waiver exception and the arbitration exception.
Heading 1 then discusses the waiver exception. The arguments
recorded in the middle of that paragraph which Mr Gleeson read out,
contention that there was an implicit waiver from ratifying ICSID from the New
York Convention, and the argument effectively
is, the last few lines of that
By mutually agreeing with other sovereigns to enforce arbitral
awards . . . the logic goes, Spain waived its immunity
defense against
such an enforcement action in U.S. court.
Embracing that logic, the Second Circuit has held that, by ratifying either
convention, a country implicitly waives its sovereign
immunity from suits
seeking to enforce awards under that convention.
Now, you do not see there the court reading
Seetransport
by ratifying and by having a valid arbitration award and by participating in
arbitration itself. That is not how they
identify it. That proposition is
supported in part in the ICSID context by this Court’s decision in
Then in the left‑hand column on page 1100, the
waiver issue is acknowledged as being remaining “unsettled”. There
is citation of
Seetransport
. So, to be sure, we have twice approvingly
Seetransport
, the cases being
, which correctly
held that the foreign sovereign waives immunity when it joins the
Convention – again, you do not see elements
2 and 3 – then
there is a reference to
“a sovereign, by signing the New York Convention, waives its immunity
from arbitration‑enforcement actions in other signatory
And then their Honours say, well while:
we have favorably cited
Seetransport
and its reasoning in
dicta . . . we have not formally adopted it.”
and we leave that for another day. So,
it was put against you in relation to that paragraph by Mr Gleeson that
they are not deciding it and that one should read the
reference to
Seetransport
as having approved steps 1, 2 and 3. Then, in relation
– that there was a binding arbitration
agreement – there was no issue in dispute in that case about that
MR DONAGHUE:
I think Justice Jackman was right to
say there was no issue in dispute about any of those cases. In
Seetransport
itself, the three limbs – there is no passage in
Seetransport
that says, in order for the waiver exception to be engaged,
you must have 1, 2 and 3.
There is a paragraph at the end
of the reasoning in
Seetransport
that refers to all of those three things
having happened, but the reasoning in the passage that Justice Jackman set
that your Honours have already seen –
focuses on the effect of ratification of the Convention. It is seeking to do a
work to take the reasoning in
, citing those other cases
which focus on the ratification being the critical thing, and saying: well,
actually, there are these
additional requirements.
So, your point is that step 1 is the principal. Steps 2 and 3 are
merely descriptive of what may have happened in the case.
Indeed. That is how
Seetransport
can easily be read.
While it can easily be read in that way, I am seeking to acknowledge that, as a
practical matter – as
Justice Jackman put it, I think as a
matter of fact – unless you have got an arbitration agreement leading
to an award, you
could never have a recognition and enforcement proceeding under
Article I. So, if your Honours said you need to have
you need to have an agreement that at least, on its face,
would satisfy the requirements of Article IV – then that would
no difference, in my submission. You could characterise the
What you do not see in these cases, and what India is inviting
you to find, is a requirement that a State – I think a requirement
that a person making a claim against a State – proves, as part of
establishing a waiver exception, that there is a valid arbitration
So, import the whole litigation debate that might happen under
Article V(1)(a) into the prior stage at sovereign immunity.
You just do
not see the United States courts saying that.
In contrast to the
discussion, you do see in the context of the arbitration exception where that
very thing must be done in order
to establish the exception. Can I try to make
that good by taking you to – sorry, actually, just before you leave
GAGELER CJ:
Why would it be harder to establish the arbitration exception in
MR DONAGHUE:
Because, your Honour, in
principle that agreement – that exception is directed to the
previously‑contested question
a foreign country is enough for you to lose your immunity by itself. Well, I
itself”. That plus one of a number of different alternative
criterion, one of which is the applicability of the New York Convention,
there are various other limbs as well.
They are dealing with a situation
in which waiver might have nothing to do with an international convention
relating to recognition
or enforcement, it is where just agreeing to a contract
with an arbitration clause in it might get you there. If that is the basis
which waiver is said to have occurred, in my submission, one can readily see why
there needs to be a valid agreement.
If the agreement itself, the
arbitration agreement, is the source of the waiver, then it needs to be a valid
agreement. If the arbitration
agreement is not the source of the waiver but it
is the ratification of the Convention that is the source of the waiver that then
depends contingently upon a subsequent entry into an agreement to be recognised
or enforced, then that takes you somewhere different.
GAGELER CJ:
So, is the effect of your submission that those cases that have required a
valid agreement for the arbitration exception to apply,
they have just made hard
work of it, and that the waiver exception was applicable all
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, if the relevant party has
ratified the New York Convention. So, in
, for example, it had
not. Qatar had not. So, that is one of the cases where there was a relevant
difference between the two. If
your Honours still have
will see on the right‑hand column, paragraph [6, 7] together, and
Mr Gleeson read to you part of this.
So, their Honours have
just said: we will leave waiver aside, we will decide on the arbitration
exception – they set out part
of the exception, at the top of that
column, and then they say:
To proceed under this clause of the FSIA’s arbitration exception, we
have explained, a district court must find three “jurisdictional
facts”: (1) an arbitration agreement, (2) an arbitration award,
and (3) a treaty potentially governing award enforcement.
And then they say:
The plaintiff must initially satisfy a burden of –
establishing these facts, et cetera, et cetera. That looks a
lot like the kind of argument that India is trying to import into the
exception. You see something similar –
your Honour Justice Gordon asked some questions about
Zhongshan v Nigeria
yesterday, on page 1067, where those
requirements are exactly what the court is discussing, but they are doing it in
an arbitration
exception case, not a waiver exception
Your honour the Chief Justice asked in that context, he
referred to the sentence and I think the majority were also focusing just
that. They make that express in footnote 4 on that page, on
page 1067. So ‑ ‑ ‑
Is the high point of this line of argument what appears in
Seetransport
at 578 at the bottom up to the top of the page? Bottom
of the first column up to the top of the next column?
MR DONAGHUE:
Did your Honour say 578?
Yes. So, in the middle of 578, in the
left‑hand column:
Thus, when a country becomes a signatory . . . by the very
provisions of the Convention, the signatory State must have
contemplated
then the paragraph your Honour puts to me. Where the three parts
seem to come from is from the last paragraph in the bottom of the
right‑hand column on 578 over on to the top of 579, which reads
as a concluding paragraph referring to what has happened factually:
when Navimpex entered into a contract with Seetransport that had a provision
that any disputes would be submitted to arbitration,
participated . . . logically –
as a signatory, it must have contemplated involvement. That is an
application of the legal test stated in the left‑hand column
previous page, and it has turned into this three‑part test in the
submissions against us, but that it is not how –
it is true, as our
friends say, that there are single‑judge decisions that have read it in
that way, as having the three‑limb
requirement, but equally there are
other decisions in which it has not been read in that way.
We submit, as
a matter of principle, your Honours should not effectively import from the
arbitration exception or from Article V
a requirement to do something that
none of these cases, certainly in terms, suggest needs to be done in order to
engage the waiver
exception, which is to prove a valid
Your Honours, given the time, I would seek to leave the
United States cases there, although I should perhaps also note there is one
Amaplat v Zimbabwe
, in volume 4, tab 13. It is
another appellate decision of the DC Circuit from this year. Again, it mentions
Seetransport
; again, it was not
necessary to decide whether to – in the same way as the cases you
have seen, but there is nothing in any
of these cases that casts doubt on the
correctness of the
Seetransport
In my submission, the
worst it should go for the argument that I have just advanced is that
your Honours would conclude that ratification
of the New York
Convention and an award that satisfies Article IV – those two
things – would be enough. The United States
cases, in my submission,
cannot fairly be read as imposing an additional requirement to prove the
validity of the award.
BEECH-JONES J:
But on your case the award
answering Article IV has nothing to do with whether there is consent or
agreement under 10(2) of the
Immunities Act.
MR DONAGHUE:
In my case, you do not need it, but if I am wrong about that, an agreement
satisfying Article IV and by ratifying – a State
that ratifies
and agrees to arbitrate under an agreement that satisfies 10(4) would have
waived immunity whether or not it has a
good argument under
Article V(1)(a).
BEECH-JONES J:
But logically that would
only be right if the agreement was a real agreement, not one vitiated by fraud,
would it not?
MR DONAGHUE:
But the structure of Article V
contemplates that that is an issue that comes later.
BEECH-JONES
I understand, but the structure of section 10(2) is not that.
That is not the structure of the
Foreign State Immunities Act
is what we are looking at.
MR DONAGHUE:
That is true,
your Honour, but where the argument is that adoption of the New York
Convention framework constitutes the waiver,
that is a framework
which – and indeed I have failed to take your Honours to one of
the cases I was going to take your Honours
to, to make this point. It is a
framework that contemplates that when you sign up to it that you might be, to
use my friend’s
phrase, dragged before the courts of another State to
prove the Article V grounds. So, you are consenting to have to do that in
a case where ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Well, I understand that in a case out where there is no question of sovereign
immunity, so that if you are a private party you might
not be able to say:
well, my agreement to this arbitration was procured by fraud – and
you would be required to go through
Article V, but we are in a specialised
world of sovereign immunity and a different Act. What I was querying with you
is if you say,
well, at worst it is convention plus prima facie award under
Article IV, how does the fact that it is prima facie add anything to
consent or agreement under 10(2)?
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour’s question acknowledges, I have said at worst my primary
argument is ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
I understand.
MR DONAGHUE:
‑ ‑ ‑ that I do not need to get there, but it
can add, because in my submission when – and this builds
really on an
answer I gave to your Honour earlier, that when Article I(1) refers to
an arbitral award, that phrase is to be read
in the context of the New York
Convention as a whole, which includes Article IV and
GAGELER CJ:
I think what you are really saying
is that the waiver is in Article III and the award, and with it the written
agreement, is just
the mechanics.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, that is what
I am saying.
Can I ask another question. It
MR DONAGHUE:
you did not have the
mechanics ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
would not be invoking Article III anyway.
MR DONAGHUE:
‑ ‑ ‑ you would never get to
Article III.
GAGELER CJ:
MR DONAGHUE:
That is a clearer way of putting it, sorry, your Honour.
It may be the answer to this question is the same answer you just gave
Justice Beech‑Jones, but when you talk about a valid
arbitration
agreement, what do you mean? You said a valid arbitration agreement, and now
you have moved to an award.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, I
have said you do not need to prove a valid arbitration agreement, by which I
mean you do not need to prove an arbitration
agreement which could not be set
aside under Article V(1)(a). On my argument, it may be the case that a
State has, by ratifying
and accepting the Article III obligations, waived
sovereign immunity even though it will ultimately succeed in a particular case
before a domestic court of setting aside an award because there was no valid
agreement under Article V.
That would not affect the sovereign
immunity conclusion. I have run out of time to take your Honours to it,
but can we commend to
your Honours the analysis in
Developments
, which is volume 6, tab 39.
Particularly pages 7 through 11.
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry, what was that tab again?
MR DONAGHUE:
So, it is tab
39, volume 6. So, that is a first‑instance decision of the
DC Circuit, decided on a waiver exception. Both
were argued, but it was
decided on the waiver exception. On appeal, the Court did not disapprove of the
reasoning on the waiver
exception but said it would prefer to decide it on the
arbitration exception. So, there is the other
Process & Industrial
that your Honours have in the bundle, but I am referring to it
just because it is a helpful analysis.
So, I know you
do not want to us to it, but page 8, it said:
Nigeria’s entry into the Convention, combined with its agreement to
arbitrate . . . is strong evidence that Nigeria intended
subject itself –
MR DONAGHUE:
Indeed. So, that is one of the reasons that I have
developed the submission in the way that I have a moment ago, but there is
much in that discussion that – your Honour, I acknowledge that
it does say that. It is responding to the fact that that
is the argument that
was being put. So, the argument is recorded in paragraph [8], and the
argument is that Nigeria waived because
of those two things. So, the Court is
responding to it, but I cannot really add to the submissions I have made and the
have given.
Your Honours, I only have five minutes
left. Can I use them to try to address the reciprocity question. So, we start,
in our submission,
by the most obvious effect of the commercial reservation.
The most obvious effect is that India did not itself agree to recognise
enforce awards that are not considered commercial under its own law. The direct
effect of the reservation is to confine India’s
obligations under
Article III.
So, they are narrower than they would otherwise have
been. They apply only in relation to a subset of the awards in
Article I(1),
and Article 21(1)(a) of the Vienna Convention
supports that effect. The less obvious effect of the commercial reservation is
reciprocal effect it has on other parties,
I acknowledge immediately
that that reciprocal effect does not jump off the page except, it turns out, to
specialist international
lawyers, and it does not jump off the page because of
the words “it will apply” in the reservation which Mr Walker
yesterday, and he said, well, “it will
apply” – he is obviously talking about what India will do
within its own
territory, and that says nothing about what anybody else will
Our answer to that is to point out that reservations, if not
invariably, almost invariably – I cannot think of an example where
they would not – are concerned with a State’s own obligations
under a convention. That is what States do when they are
reserving, they are
limiting what they are required to do. It is therefore not surprising that they
would be expressed in a way
that is concerned with what the State is required to
do usually within its own territory.
So, the fact that the reservation
is expressed in that way is not a barrier to reciprocity, which is a very
established international
law principle that applies to the overwhelming
majority of reservations. The way you get the translating effect of the words
will apply to other parties” is via the Vienna Convention on the
law of treaties 21(1)(b), which says that the reservation:
Modifies those provisions to the same extent for that other party in its
relations with the reserving State.
So that the operative words are
“modifies . . . to the same extent”. As a matter of
methodology, we submit what one must
do is work out what the obligation modifies
for India – I have already described that – then apply
that exact modification
to the other parties
India. Because India’s obligations under Article III have been
limited so they do not apply to non‑commercial awards,
the same is true
for other parties. Their obligations under Article III do not apply to
non‑commercial awards
The Vienna Convention is not concerned with
modifying the obligations. It modifies the provisions. It is the provisions of
the treaty.
In other words, it means that the reduction of one State’s
obligations means that the reciprocal rights that other States
have against that
State are correspondingly modified.
MR DONAGHUE:
Article III is contracted, in effect, from both ends. There is no
obligation between India and any of the other contracting
parties with respect
to non‑commercial awards. That is, we submit, how it
You say on your case that it can be used as a
shield by India to avoid awards that are non‑commercial being enforced in
countries against it?
MR DONAGHUE:
I do not go quite that
far, your Honour. In my submission, what it means is that Australia
has – or the Netherlands or anyone
else – no obligation,
India, to enforce a non‑commercial
award. So, that would prevent India from seeking to enforce a
non‑commercial award
in the domestic courts of any other State because
they would be seeking to invoke an obligation that does not exist, because
III has been confined, but it is not about standing or who can call
upon people to enforce the awards, it is just about the nature
of the obligation
that actually exists as between the parties.
Australia and the
Netherlands obviously can agree as between themselves whether or not they are
going to enforce non‑commercial
awards, and they are unlikely to do so by
reference to the domestic law of India, but the critical point – and
this comes to
your Honour Justice Steward’s point about a
shield – the shield is not the limited effect of Article III, it
because of the limited effect of Article III, acceptance of the
obligations under Article III does not reveal a clear and unmistakable
intention to waive.
Because the logic of the waiver argument I have
already developed is that if you accept Article III, you must be accepting
that people
can enforce these awards against you. If you can fine
Article III in a way that has reciprocal effects for the obligation of
parties, you have not accepted that those non‑commercial awards can
be enforced. So, you have not clearly and unmistakably
thing – the very thing that on the waiver argument engages the
Can I have one or two minutes your Honour? To illustrate
the point, or to try to illustrate the point, if your Honours engage in
thought experiment that says when the New York Convention first commenced it had
two parties – Australia and India –
the reservation under
Article III means that you cannot apply the
Seetransport
analysis to
a non‑commercial award as between those two parties, because there is no
obligation with relation to non‑commercial
Netherlands joins by ratifying. Between India and the Netherlands, there is
likewise no obligation with respect to non‑commercial
awards. One cannot
then point, we submit, to the relationship – the obligations between
the Netherlands and Australia that
have come into existence subsequently and
say, well, by reason of those new obligations between Australia and the
Netherlands, India
has somehow waived its immunity.
The building up of
this web of relations between other contracting parties tells you nothing about
what States are required to –
what clear and unmistakable submission
or waiver of sovereign immunity might have occurred. It is really by analogy
with the pacta
tertiis rule I advanced earlier – and by analogy
because India is a party – but building up new treaty obligations
different parties cannot take away any sovereign immunity that India has
not itself given up. The extent of what it has given up
is, in our submission,
defined by the reservation.
But in your example, the
treaty between let us just say India and Australia as the only two parties, the
reservation that India
makes – that it will apply the Convention only
to differences arising out of non‑commercial relationships –
effect on Australia’s promise without reservation, so that in effect
Australia’s promise to apply it generally is reduced.
That is what you understand the
principle of reciprocity to do.
MR DONAGHUE:
That it is reduced
to – in this way, you need to be clear how it is reduced. It is
reduced only with respect to awards involving
India. So, there was a question
earlier about the ‑ ‑ ‑
Of a particular kind.
MR DONAGHUE:
The non‑commercial
ones. That is so.
BEECH‑JONES J:
When you say
“involving” you mean India the State.
MR DONAGHUE:
India the State. Not Indian companies, not – so, your Honour
made that point that one has to be careful with the nexus.
It is only India the
State, because it is only India the State that has the obligation carved out by
the commercial reservation
not to enforce particular awards; it is only India
the State that loses the benefit of that.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Well, India’s reservation may also bite in relation to a private company
in India involved in a non‑commercial dispute
with, say, an Australian
company. India would be saying to the world, if they have an arbitration: we
will not enforce the outcome
of that private arbitration if it does not answer,
being a commercial ‑ ‑ ‑
That is so in India, but in Australia if someone seeks to
enforce an award against an Indian company, the reservation will tell
nothing, because ‑ ‑ ‑
So, it is not reciprocal at all.
BEECH‑JONES J:
only reciprocal
immunity, you say.
It is only reciprocal to the extent that the obligation
is – one first identifies what India does not have to do. India
not have to enforce non‑commercial awards under the law of India, and it
is only reciprocal to the extent, then, that
India seeks to enforce
non‑commercial awards somewhere else. It is a very narrow form of
reciprocity.
BEECH‑JONES J:
And that is India the
India as a State.
India as a State.
I just find it very difficult. If you start with the
language of Article III and you map out India’s obligation with the
reservation included within it, and then you try to apply Article 21(1)(b)
to work out what Australia’s reciprocal obligation
is, I just do not know
what it is. I do not know how you state it.
Particularly the words “to the same
GAGELER CJ:
You need to go through that
exercise, do you not?
MR DONAGHUE:
You do need to
GAGELER CJ:
I have not seen it written out.
MR DONAGHUE:
not know that it has been written out, and I am trying to do it in a
compressed – but I accept that you need to go
through that process.
My submission about what that process requires you to do is that the only thing
that is carved out of the
Convention as between going back from Australia to
India by reason of “the same extent” language is that because India
the State has not agreed to enforce a certain kind of award, it is not entitled
to have Australia enforce that kind of award.
That not being a relevant issue in this case.
No, that is so, but that is what it has agreed not to
have done. It is only a relevant issue in this case, your Honour, because
of the light it then sheds
MR DONAGHUE:
The reservation relates to any commercial relationship, not
one that is confined to India the State.
MR DONAGHUE:
It relates to what India will do to any commercial
relationship.
GAGELER CJ:
It cannot be read, in my submission, as meaning that
where an Indian company engages in an arbitration with a Pakistani
– or Pakistan and England, say – that just because
there is an Indian company, that arbitration in England is governed
in some way
by Indian law; just because there is an Indian company involved, or even if it
is governed by Indian law, because they
are not the nexus requirements that are
identified in the Article. It is the State of India applying the Convention in
a particular
way is the nexus.
BEECH‑JONES J:
So, its only practical reciprocal effect is on sovereign immunity. That is
the only way the reciprocal effect bites, because we still
owe Holland and
America, and every other country, an obligation to enforce arbitral disputes
that might happen to be not commercial
under the law of India.
So, one of its effects is sovereign immunity, but if, for
example, India is under a multilateral investment treaty of some kind
succeeds in obtaining an award and wants to get the benefit of that award, and
it is a non-commercial award, it cannot go to
any of the Convention States and
use the New York Convention processes because it has given them
BEECH-JONES J:
So, its only practical reciprocal effect is
upon awards involving India the State?
MR DONAGHUE:
It is, India
BEECH-JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
That is our submission. Your Honours, I am out of time. Can I give
your Honours a reference to the ILC guide commentaries that
you were taken
to yesterday in volume 12, tab 106, referring in particular to comments
(25), (27) and (29) on pages 461 to 462, to
illustrate a discussion of just how
fundamental reservations are and how the default position is that they work both
ways and a reference
to Professor van den Berg in the article you
see at volume 8, tab 84, on page 14 for a discussion of why
Article XIV of the Convention
is fatal to the proposition that the
commercial reservation cannot operate reciprocally. The whole point of
Article XIV was to make
it clearer that it could, in our submission,
your Honours.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Solicitor, could I go back to
my question about how Article 21(1)(b) applies to modify Australia’s
obligations under Article
III of the Convention.
MR DONAGHUE:
GAGELER CJ:
It would be of assistance, I think, for you to
provide us with a version of Article III with any commentary that you think
is necessary
to explain it.
MR DONAGHUE:
Okay. To explain how
Australia’s obligation under Article III is to be read, is that what
your Honour is asking?
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, in light of
India’s reservation and through the operation of Article 21(1)(b) of
the Vienna Convention.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. Could we have 14
days? I ask, your Honour, because next week I am otherwise
GAGELER CJ:
You are doing other things.
GAGELER CJ:
MR DONAGHUE:
Thank you, your Honour. If the Court pleases.
GAGELER CJ:
And 14 days for any response from any other party further. Yes,
Your Honours, we will not
wait for the 14 days to expire before saying something about that last topic.
May I start with it?
GAGELER CJ:
Certainly. You are not waiving
your 14 days, are you?
I am not waiving it. I
am getting extra, I think. A question that is raised by the course of argument
concerning the reservation
is, with respect, well captured by a remark by the
Solicitor not very long ago. In truth, this has to do with a possible
– one which is argued to have been achieved by the solicitor,
that we resist – upon the message sent by India being a
contracting
party to the New York Convention, concerning the waiver or consent argument for
the purposes of our domestic section
10, question of its immunity from an
Australian proceeding of enforcement.
That is, more or less, the way in
which the Full Court saw it below. That it had an effect, and worked a fatal
detriment, to the
requisite clarity with which an acceptance of the intended
efficacy of the treaty, by way of actual enforcement proceedings going
produce orders, all of which entailed, of course, an award debtor being bound.
If the award debtor was a foreign sovereign
with immunity, it following in
accordance with the argument we put at first instance, accepted by
Justice Jackman, as to which the
Full Court had nothing bad to
say – though they did not rule on it – leading to the
conclusion of waiver or consent,
or agreement or submission.
is to be distinguished from what one could be forgiven for thinking was at least
in the air during Mr Gleeson’s submissions
effect of the reservation on the treaty obligation, relevantly of Australia. Or
for that matter, the treaty
position – maybe the word is
“right” – in relation to the Netherlands. The
Netherlands being the place where
the award was made, and the place where the
award was made is no mere adventitious matter. It is of considerable
significance in
relation to this scheme, and it is of considerable interest,
obviously, if countries that host such arbitrations – that they
efficacious in the enforceability.
In our submission, it is not possible
by way of reciprocity, either within the Convention Article XIV or within
the Vienna Convention
Article 21, for there to be any cutting
back – contraction – of the obligation of India or the
right of the Netherlands,
in relation to the enforcement of this award. One
could add, but I will do it only once, one could add obviously the rights in the
nature of a protection position of Mauritius with respects to its nationals as
Now, that follows – with respect from the
sovereign equality, as to which India places a considerable amount of weight on
arm of this case, and in particular in relation to the untrammelled
autonomy with which the sovereigns can become, or not, contracting
parties, and
equally, the untrammelled autonomy with which sovereigns may take advantage of
Article I(3) as to the only permitted
reservations – it is not
the case that a person who does not make a reservation thereby casts an adverse
light or detracts
from the efficacy as a reservation from a State actor who does
make a reservation, and vice versa.
That is why matters of reciprocity,
as the commentary to Article 21 – to which we drew attention in
chief, and to which I am
going to come back – makes it clear that it
is not every reservation that brings in its train, straightforward if any,
effect on the position of other parties to the treaty, particularly
non-reserving parties to the treaty. Some of them are obvious,
in what I will
call their reciprocity.
It is a ponderous way to describe what happens,
that when by a reservation, an obligation which would otherwise have existed,
party A is made that nobody can take advantage of that non-existent
obligation. If that be reciprocal, so be it. It is a ponderous
way of saying
that the destruction of an obligation means that there is nobody who is able to
take advantage of that obligation.
A correlative right, if you
That is really what Article 21(1)(a) and (b) would do with
respect to the reservation concerning the commercial nature of the difference.
That has nothing whatever to do with the position in an Australian court,
bearing in mind that Australia’s obligation has
not been reduced one iota
by India’s reservation as to what will happen in an Indian court. When
one bears in mind that the
concerned parties as contracting parties are the
Netherlands and Mauritius, India is not a concerned party as a contracting
it is concerned only because it is an award debtor.
coincidence I refer to in chief of it having not only the status of a
contracting party, which gives rise to our section 10 argument
against it,
but also obviously its position as an award debtor, which makes it the potential
object of proceedings in Australia by
way of enforcement and indeed in other
countries as well.
Is the effect of that, then,
that – the effect of a reservation is just the reduction of an
obligation.
That is right.
And the Article 21(1)(b) modification is just the corresponding reduction of
a right to compel that obligation.
That obligation,
yes. As I say, it is a little
ponderous ‑ ‑ ‑
It is a statement of the blindingly obvious Hohfeldian
correlative.
Yes. This might be first time any of
your Honours have seen legislation or treaties stating the blinding
obvious, but there it is,
it is a very clear example of
that is why the words “to the same extent” are there.
Yes, and in its relations with the reserving State, not in its
relations with other States, such as in this case the Netherlands or
BEECH-JONES J:
Does it also mean that if you
attempted to say, well, India carves out this but its only correlative effect is
on its own sovereign
immunity, then it is not to the same extent?
That is right. So, there is, in our submission, an important
point to be made about the operation together of Article 21(1)
Article 21(2) is
perhaps ‑ ‑ ‑
Article 21(2) is another statement of another blindingly obvious
proposition.
That is right. It is perhaps
unnecessary, but there is unmistakable rigour with which it is said this does
not affect the provisions
of the treaty for the other parties to the treaty
inter se, and that must include what happens when a national of Mauritius
an award made in the Netherlands to an Australian court. That is not
affected. So, whatever is said about this reservation, whatever
prepared of effects by a misreading, as we would put it, of Article 21(1),
Article 21(2) makes it crystal clear it does
not affect the position between
Australia, the Netherlands and Mauritius.
Now, that ought to be enough,
with respect, to dispose of the idea of a reciprocal effect concerning the
obligation of Australia
– owed inter alia to the Netherlands and to
Mauritius, Mauritius in its protecting role – that ought to be enough
show that there is no detraction from the reasoning by which
India – who remains of course, with its reservation, a party to
treaty – is to be seen by the Court in the following
First, a party who, recognising that others have not reserved,
understands that their obligations, unaffected by India’s reservation,
to enforce awards, regardless of their commercial character. That is the first
thing you can say of India. In other words, India
does not by its reservation
say: I am to be treated as somebody not a party to, not affected by, and owing
no obligation of any
kind with respect to the obligations without reservation of
other parties to the treaty.
Of course, the second proposition to be
said is therefore it has to be the case – as Justice Jackman
correctly, I think it
is in paragraph 43 – it must be the case
that India has accepted that this system for global enforceability, which
upon municipal court enforcement, is one where that pre-existing and no
doubt very important principle of sovereign immunity will
need to be sacrificed
and is sacrificed by an acceptance of that enforcement in other States’
courts, of awards which –
on the argument we have put and which I
will not return to in reply – will include, certainly, awards against
States sounding
in compensatory sums of money to be paid.
reaches that position concerning the nature of the reservation, you are left
only with the question: is there a lingering
decrement in the clarity with
which India accepts that is the position Australia has, as to its obligation, by
reason of India’s
reservation? I do not want to repeat what we have
written or said in chief, but in answer to the way in which it has been put,
by the learned solicitor at the end of his recent remarks and more
generally by Mr Gleeson, we need to emphasise these points.
not the case that a reserving party thereby indicates in any way a disapproval
of, opposition to, or non‑acceptance of
the position of
non‑reserving parties. That would be absurd and would fly in the face of
the autonomy and equality between
sovereign equals, which is the hallmark of the
contracting parties in their making of a treaty.
It follows, in our
submission, that the acceptance by India of Australia’s position,
non‑reserving, is such as to give
rise to the clear consent to what
Australia will do, it not having reserved, in Australian courts – by
Australian courts –
notwithstanding that were the facts different and
it was an Australian award sought to be enforced in India, India would apply the
screen supplied by its reservation as to whether or not Indian courts could be
enlisted to enforce the award.
There would be a consideration of whether
an award made in Australia, perhaps with the proper law of Argentina, passes
satisfying the reservation according to Indian law. That simply is
not this case, and this case is therefore one which is accepted
by India. That
is, this case is not a remarkable one, it is a very ordinary one in this
India therefore accepted that there would be a plethora of cases
imaginable – and indeed a fair few that have actually
materialised
– in which there are sought to be enforced awards to
which India is a party by reason of having undertaken BIT obligations
result in compensatory payments being ordered. India must be taken to have
accepted that they might be sought to be enforced
all around the world and
obviously enough, most dangerously for India, in places who have not reserved in
the same way as India has
It is at the heart of our argument
this Court, that
it cannot be the case that India’s reservation to any
degree depicts India’s message by its accession to the Convention
which it has reserved as being any less wholehearted in its acceptance of what
non‑reserving parties are obliged to do
than would have been the case in
the absence of an Indian reservation.
It is, in our submission, plain to
demonstration from the nature of the reservation which is contemplated about
what will happen
in Indian territory that India accepts that where that is not
the case, where correspondingly Australia has not made that reservation,
accepts that there is in force an obligation by reason of a treaty to which it
is a party. It is for that reason that we say
an equivalence of concept to the
way in which this Court proceeded in relation to ICSID in
there is, for the reasons Justice Jackman described – found
obviously to be of some weight, they are not decided in the
Court – there is the consent for the purposes of our
section 10.
So, the only way that there could be
a relevant effect on waiver would be if – assuming that by entry into
the Convention, India
would have waived its sovereign immunity – on
the proper construction of its reservation and Article III what India had done
was cut back that waiver, then correspondingly that would have effect on all
other countries.
Yes, and that is absurd and an
overreach which is really massive. We cannot find it anywhere in the
literature. One of the problems
layers of literature and there is kind of a compost approach going on. A lot of
is by dint of age and disparate quality of not much use in terms of
understanding quite precisely the agreed terms of the treaty
govern – which talk about – the reservation and the clear
doctrine in this Court and the application of the tests
concerning consent by
agreement, which include treaties for the purposes of our
section 10.
We have not found anything that comes anywhere near
this idea that a reservation on what India will require or permit its courts
do has any effect – could have any effect – consistently
with basal propositions about sovereign equality and the
making of treaties, and
particularly with a global multilateral arbitral award enforceability treaty of
this kind. Can I then
do that – if you step back from when you say to yourself: what could
they have done in order to achieve the level
the reciprocity – which
is put against
take up the abstract now on reciprocity?
They are actually – what
could they do to achieve the immunity they are after? They are only here as an
award debtor. We
are not in the ICJ, we are not debating their behaviour as a
contracting party. We have no complaints about their conduct as a contracting
party. We simply say that they have undertaken the obligations, correlatively
and cooperatively, that amount to the consent. They
reciprocity – it seems, with respect, to us – as a
stalking horse in this fashion.
They seem to say – and I
think this is, if anything, really an Article XIV, to which I am about to
come – that we, India,
accept, as if it were a burden –
though they are going to make it and patent it – we accept that we
will not be able
to ask we as a contracting party – not as an award
creditor, they are not talking about that – will never be in a
to go off to the ICJ and complain that some other country that has not
reserved is with respect to, say, an Indian award creditor
or, say, an award
made in India, that their courts are not enforcing the award.
apprehend that is the argument. That seems to be an Article XIV argument,
if anything, and I am going to come back to that.
I wanted to address, first of
all, that notion with respect to Article 21. Your Honours have seen
the aide‑mémoire.
I am not quite sure it has improved by being, as
it were, in diagrammatic form rather than narrative, but it is the cell on the
bottom‑right to which I want to address attention.
Is that the position? That you accept the other cells, which
is put against you.
If I may say so, I do
not think they are against us at all. If you look at the cell in the middle on
the top row, that is the
first kind of reservation; the territorial reservation.
That is exactly what we have put. That is a classic reciprocal
So, I have no problem with any of the cells on the top line for
the territorial. I am not sure there is any real step involved between
“Direct effect” and so‑called “Consequential
effect”. The territorial one presents no difficulty and
no analogy for
our case. It says nothing about immunity.
Could I just ask you a question before you go to the bottom, so I understand the
your Honour.
Is Article II of the
New York Convention relevant in the sense that “Each Contracting
State”, which would be the Netherlands
relevantly on
This is the:
shall recognize an agreement in writing –
Netherlands had to recognise the BIT which has clause 8, which is the
submission to arbitration – is that how this clause
Yes, and I do not think of any real
moment, but you will have noticed in Justice Chapman’s reasons, there
is a reference also
to the tender of an appointment agreement
arbitrators, yes.
As your Honours are
familiar, those are often mined by parties, one way or the other, for
agreements; substantive agreements concerning
arbitration. So, it is a package.
It does not, I think, affect what your Honour is
saying ‑ ‑ ‑
not think it would affect what I am saying.
it is either the BIT or the steps taken
Pursuant to
the BIT clause, though.
‑ ‑ ‑ accept the so‑called standing
offer, if that is the analysis you like and then actually to record the
appointment of arbitrators, all of which happened in this case
So, Netherlands had to recognise the agreement. The only qualification
on Article II seems to be concerning a subject matter capable
of settlement
by arbitration. That is a different concept from the reservations in
Article I(3). So, your argument is: step 1,
Netherlands directed by
Article II(1) could not go backwards looking at Article III, because
that is not relevant to concerning a
subject matter capable of
arbitration.
So, they make the award, and then you come to
Article III, and Australia shall recognise the award as made in the
Netherlands as
binding, et cetera, and it is as simple as that. You
never – because of what is happening, you on your reading of the
reservation
– get to the effect of the reservation impacting on the
operation of Articles II or III. Is
bold enough to put – one might say belied by the hours devoted to it
since I said this – it has nothing to do
with the matter, and I still
say that. In terms of the mainspring of our argument about section 10
consent – namely, India’s
position as a party to the treaty
under which Australia happens to have this obligation under
Article III – the fact that India
says it does not have that
kind of obligation says nothing, bearing in mind what flows from the general
principles to which I have
referred – sovereign autonomy, if you
like, and equality – plus as well what we see in the Vienna
Convention in Article
21 and in particular 21(2).
Article II is of some significance because it is, as you know, one of the
ways in which contracting States apply the Convention,
including by their court
systems. So, Article II and Article III. In that context, can I then
move immediately to Article XIV.
We rely on what we have written about
this as well, but if Article XIV is the way in which something under the
name of reciprocity
is to operate to our detriment in the argument here, we
still insist, with respect, that notwithstanding what has been written about
that – to which I will come directly – by our friends,
Article XIV does not, with respect, according to its tenor, do
anything to
the obligation of Australia, let alone to the effect that India does not
recognise or accept by the treaty that those
are Australia’s
obligations.
India’s reservation does not say that it will not
recognise or accept the position of non‑reserving parties under the
treaty. To the contrary, if you are a reserving party under a treaty, you are
accepting the treaty except with the contraction of
your obligation by reason of
your reservation, but being a party to the treaty you in every way essentially
accept – recognise
and accept – the obligations of
Article XIV against that context simply finds no
application to the present case or to a case like the present case. What is it?
Who is the contracting State – is it India or Australia? We think it
is intended in the argument against us to be India, but
if you test it with
Australia, it is even more absurd. What is it that India is not entitled to
avail itself of?
It is not trying to avail itself of anything in this
case. Because it is coincidentally an award debtor, it is trying to avail
not of something provided by the treaty but rather as something that
pre‑exists the treaty and may be affected by the treaty.
That is, its
immunity from the courts of other sovereigns. So, it fails at the first part in
Article XIV. It is not trying to
avail itself of the present Convention at
all. If it were availing itself of its own reservation, that is absurd
BEECH-JONES J:
Well, India was trying to enforce – India the State was trying to
enforce an arbitration over a dispute that was not commercial
under the law of
Which is a totally different question and
not our question.
BEECH‑JONES J:
But that is Article XIV.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Article ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, your Honours anticipate me. The only way in which it has any footing
is something that has nothing with this case. India,
not as an award debtor,
had nothing to do with that. India, going away presumably as an award creditor,
query in a protective sense:
one, an Indian national – and India
insisting that its nationals can do this, et cetera –
then XIV comes in. It for
those reasons that XIV has nothing to do
with this case and says nothing for our section 10 purposes.
I go to the distinguished commentator at van den Berg, to whom
reference has been made against us, and it is in the bundle
volume 8, starting at page 2130. I want to go to the passage to which
you have been referred. It starts at the very
foot of 2140 in the main
The first reservation is also called the
reciprocity reservation
You see how the word “reservation” is there referred
Sorry, Mr Walker, what page is that?
It is 2140.
And I am just picking it up at the foot of that page, because it
is the language of reciprocity with which a deal of what is on this
concerned. It refers to, piquantly:
The Russian delegate . . . proposing the phrase
“on the basis of reciprocity” –
the commentator saying:
must be deemed superfluous as the reciprocity . . . already
ensues from the first reservation itself.
That is the territorial reservation about which I made that comment in
chief. Then there is a paragraph talking about what I will
call, in broad
terms, the difficulties about that abstract noun. There is immediately a
reference to XIV, with which I have dealt
for our present case already.
Then there is a reference with respect to XIV, after again pointing out the
redundancy of the reference
to reciprocity. Then the paragraph at the foot of
Article XIV itself has not caused problems in practice. It has scarcely
been referred to by the courts and has not precluded enforcement
of an award so
far. As far as the commercial reservation of Article I(3)
concerned –
so, the second of the reservations:
Article XIV might be invoked in a case where enforcment is sought in a
Contracting State which has not used the commercial reservation
that is Australia in our case:
in respect of an award relating to a non-commercial matter made in a
Contracting State which has used the commercial reservation.
Well, that is not the Netherlands in this case:
In such a case the court of the State where the enforcement is sought may be
inclined to refuse enforcement on the basis of lack of
reciprocity, that is to
say, on the ground that the State in which the award was made would not enforce
awards made in the forum
State relating to non‑commercial
It obviously did not occur to the commentator – why
would it – that somehow if a reserving contracting State was, as it
happened, an award debtor, there would be some reciprocal effect by reason of
its reservation as a contracting party, which reservation
has nothing to do with
its status as being an award debtor. In our submission, if that is the kind of
material being relied upon
us with respect to reciprocity, it just does not
Could I go back to the plan handed up by way of the
aide‑mémoire. The consequential effect – which, of
we oppose and say is wrong – is the one that you will see in
the bottom right‑hand cell. So:
All obligations of every other Contracting State to the Reserving
that is, obligations of States to States here:
are likewise contracted such that no Contracting State is bound to the
Reserving State –
and that is emphasised by underlining, inspiring one to note
parenthetically: but is bound to all others:
’ the Convention to the recognition and
enforcement of awards in respect of differences arising –
et cetera, et cetera. It is said by way of, as it were, a
third pass, that equally the reserving State does not require any other
contracting State to so act. That is not, with respect, a reciprocal effect of
a reservation which concerns only what will not happen
in an Indian
More to the point, the words I have read – and my
comments are in relation to the emphasised text – makes it quite
that this cannot possibly touch or affect the state of affairs between
Australia, the Netherlands and Mauritius, who are the three
contracting
parties and the only three contracting parties with what might be called a
treaty interest of such a kind as to give
rise to the necessity to consider
something under the difficult rubric of reciprocity. It certainly has nothing
to do with a contracting
party who happens to be an award debtor, as India is;
significantly, in this case.
Your Honours, could I then come to a
matter which is pertinent to the concern that the parties have raised in their
opposite ways
with the Bench and some remarks that have come from the Bench
concerning the American case law. I am going to be able to either
writing, adopt in particular what the learned Solicitor has said about that and
make a few small points about the American
law itself.
Before I get to
that, more importantly – for our purposes – is to frame it
in relation to the issues in this case. Though
I will not dwell on it, the
forensic course was, with great respect, impeccably put by my learned friend
Mr Gleeson, except that
it stopped at this Court where, you will recall,
there is ground 4 in our notice of contention which, like ground 1, is
not pressed.
Indeed, ground 4 is expressly not pressed.
want to parse and analyse the ground, I simply want to make it clear that
Justice Jackman took a position concerning what
phrase in Latin for his English, and apropos some matters that
Justice Gleeson raised with me in particular in chief
called the state of proof – I use that word advisedly –
including by reference to the ex facie tender.
That is, the tender of
documents which ex facie have a certain
Your Honours can see immediately how that might
appertain to a consideration, for what it is worth, of the American case law.
a nutshell, we say it is wrong to see the American case law as proposing that
the enforcing party is bound to take on proof beyond
what they call production.
I will come to that when I come to some of the cases, but in this
country ‑ ‑ ‑
You mean proof beyond production of an arbitration agreement.
Yes, that is exactly right. The Americans talk in terms of shift
of burden. This might be heresy, might I just talk about Australian
that which affects our position, not because of a problem of the use of
comparative law, because there are differences, but
they are not either as great
or as serious for our case as might have been proposed by some of the arguments
against us in the American
Under Australian law, could I remind
your Honours that one starts with the way in which the Convention deals
with the matter, which
as you know is in Article IV. Article IV
commences with words that are extremely evocative of the way in which this
matter affects
the running of the case in relation to alleged invalidity or
vitiation. So, either inception or performance of an arbitration agreement.
starts off:
To obtain the recognition and enforcement . . . the
party applying . . . shall . . .
and then there is the paper. Then in Article V, the way the
Convention deals with this – in Article V, it:
may be refused –
the party against whom it is invoked . . . furnishes to the
competent authority –
That will be the court:
and then there are the familiar matters, which will include invalidity,
vitiation – all sorts of matters, and then ultimately
Article V(2) matters with which you are familiar and which no doubt will
lead to antennae twinkling in relation to fraud such
as public policy. That is
where you will also find the basal proposition as to whether or not the subject
matter was capable of
settlement by arbitration at all.
matters in Article V which are for the proof by the party against whom
enforcement is sought by somebody who, in order
to obtain that enforcement under
the Convention, supplies the award and an agreement. All of that happened by
us. That is what
the Convention does. How did we implement it? We implemented
it in section 9, to start with.
BEECH‑JONES
Section 9 or Article IX?
No, it is in our Act.
BEECH‑JONES
Yes, section 9.
our Act, it works this way. Article IV is implemented by section 9
and Article V is implemented by section 8. There is a little
crossover at the margin that does not matter. In our section 9, you can
see the implementation of the “To obtain”
provision in
Article IV:
In any proceedings in which a person seeks the
enforcement . . . he or she shall produce to the
there is the paper. Then there is some more detailed stipulation as to
what will be adequate paper. Then in subsection (5), familiar
words – and one might say having observed what is ex facie shown by
that paper – in section 9(5):
prima facie
evidence of the matters to which it relates.
And as to an arbitration agreement, if it be necessary as to appointment
of arbitrators as to the making of an award, and the terms
award – all of those matters ex facie on the documents referred to in
subsection (2) will be:
prima facie
of those matters, and that stands, of course, for the state of affairs
where, unless something is proved by the party against whom
enforcement is
sought, then there will be enforcement. That then brings us in our legislation
to section 8 which starts off –
as I say, it does not exactly
track the Convention, but you can see that there are elements of
Article III in subsection (8)(1).
Subsection (8)(2)
spells out that which would be implicit among all the different legal
systems – political systems –
covered by the Convention;
spells out that in this country, the enforcement will be:
as if the award were a judgment or order of that court.
That is one of the reasons, of course, why State‑State peace
treaties, for example – if they are arbitrated – are
going to be awards which fall under this kind of provision.
Subsection (3A) makes it clear that the matters that can produce
enforcement are exhaustively stated. I will not read it, your Honours are
well familiar with it, but you see that it covers
everything that Article V
contemplates, and it includes matters, which under UNCITRAL laws,
Article 16, are within competence‑competence.
This is all
case which resulted in the Quantum Award,
and those awards included dealing with
and disposing of objections to the validity, existence, binding nature of the
arbitration
agreement – fraud, et cetera – all of
that has been dealt with by awards. Now, that is competence‑competence
is subject to being revisited by an enforcing court, under Article V of
the Convention and section 8 of the statute.
the onus is of course on the party against whom enforcement is
sought – in terms of the proceeding in the
Australian court, it is
enough for the party seeking to attain that enforcement to have tended those
documents which ex facie show
the things which are then prima facie
BEECH-JONES J:
Those things do not govern what
constitutes agreement for the purposes of
section 10(2).
I am sorry, I did not catch
the first part of
your Honour’s ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES
Those matters do not govern what constitutes agreement for the purposes
of section 10(2) of the Immunity Act, though, do
The two statutes – they are not
carpentered to fit together, but they have to be read together in this case.
What they do
is absolutely to show that with respect to these enforcement
proceedings, which are just one of the multifarious proceedings that
section 10 might arise in, it says that the
Australian Parliament – the same Parliament as in Act
section 10 – says that
there are proceedings that can be
entertained against award debtors. If we are right with some fundamental
propositions, those proceedings
can be proceedings against a State contracting
party or a nod to the Convention, and certainly can be proceedings against a
– an award debtor – who is a contracting
For those reasons, in our submission, that which this statute
recognises as being a state of affairs apt to produce consideration
to enforce or not, proceeds on the basis of the prima facie proof of the
agreement. That prima facie proof of the agreement
must be taken as being
an agreement for the purposes of all other statutes which are germane to the
question of those proceedings.
It happens to include the
Foreign States
Immunity Act
It is for those reasons – though
of course they do not speak directly to each other, they can and do operate to
each other.
FSIA refers to one of cardinal features of proceedings. That is,
the amenability of a person to jurisdiction of the court. This
another aspect of proceedings; the state of proof stipulated by reference to a
prima facie evidence provision such as you
see in section 9.
for those reasons, in our submission, that Justice Jackman was of course correct
to determine that it would be absurd –
bearing in mind the provisions
of section 10(7)(b) of the FSI Act – for there to be a full
canvassing, presumably via the votee
evidence, of fraud allegations with respect
to an immunity claim, bearing in mind these are awards which Parliament
obviously appreciates
have competence‑competence.
So, the award is
the subject of the enforcement, including matters which can be revisited that
have been determined by the arbitrators.
Not the amount of damages, that will
not be revisited under Article V, but whether or not there is an agreement
to arbitrate, for
example, that will be revisited under
That plainly contemplates, in our submission, that the
accession to the New York Convention, which is the critical thing for our
section 10 argument, can operate upon a footing which is considered by the
Australian Parliament entirely adequate for the mounting
of a case under
Article V provisions – section 8 of the
International
Arbitration Act
– concerning the merit of all those answers,
going right back to whether or not there is an arbitration agreement at
GAGELER CJ:
That is an argument, I think, that your
position that there is an automatic waiver by accession to the Convention fits
with the scheme
of these two Acts.
Yes, that is
GAGELER CJ:
But you are not using this argument in any
way to read down section 10.
doubts – the New York Convention is not the subject of only prima
facie proof. No, there is no reading down.
Bearing in mind the time, could I
briefly say this in relation to the American case law, upon which otherwise we
rely upon what
the Commonwealth has said and what we have written. Could we
make it clear – and you have had a number of references to
which is tab 34 – that if you look, say,
at 1210 of the bundle, 1100 of the report, paragraphs [6, 7],
right‑hand column,
there is a reference to finding:
three “jurisdictional facts” –
Sorry, what was that page again,
bundle ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, I have it, thank you.
‑ ‑ ‑ 1100 report. In that
right‑hand column, those jurisdictional facts – the jargon, if
call it that, is that we apply, they say:
a burden‑shifting framework. The plaintiff must initially satisfy a
burden of production as to these facts –
There is a very
close, perhaps exact, resemblance of that to what happens under
which when met requires the foreign sovereign to “establish the absence
of the factual basis by a preponderance of the
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry, Mr Walker, I lost
you. So where are you reading from again?
Right‑hand column. The paragraph
commences [6, 7].
So this dealing with the
arbitration exception.
No, I understand. This is
talking about a different issue concerning – I am now talking about
the nature of the proof.
Those jurisdictional facts which my friend yesterday
said have to be proved – true, for this arbitration exception, those
facts do not have to be proved in the full‑fledged way that
his submissions might have been understood.
There was a
burden‑shifting way which greatly resembles what occurs in our ordinary
section 9 approach. Now, that has nothing
to do with questions of waiver
or consent. I am simply saying you should not read these United
States cases as if they require a
full contested trial on those issues,
even for something like the arbitration exception where you do have to prove, as
says, there is an arbitration agreement. Well, that is true, but the
way in which it is done resembles what is done in this country
Your Honours, I will have to rest on our writing otherwise.
We have earlier circulated forms of orders. I have seen our
– were this case to justify a remitter, there is nothing
wrong, with respect, in the way in which our friends have formulated
for determination on remitter. We are agreed that the remitter should permit no
more than investigating whether or not
the reservation is engaged, in case we
have failed in our argument about the effect of the reservation upon a consent
I have forms of an order which your Honours have.
I think we have it, Mr Walker.
know why, this takes me back two decades I think. So, we have framed it as
order, but we do not see – I hope I am
correct in saying
this – any substantive difference in terms of the intent. We
entirely accept – we volunteer, indeed
– that if this
event were to happen upon our failure with respect to the effect of the
reservation, then of course we need
no more than an opportunity on remitter to
consider the position and to act as we may be advised concerning that question
law and characterisation of the dispute. If it please your
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Walker.
Ms Roughley, do you have anything in reply and
MS ROUGHLEY:
Yes. I think the terms of the
timetable were limiting me to only things that are
GAGELER CJ:
MS ROUGHLEY:
that Mr Walker. I appreciate that I lost some time earlier. Can I start
with following up on a question
that your Honour Justice Gordon asked
me about how many States have signed the New York Convention.
Twenty‑two States have
not signed the New York Convention; one
hundred and seventy‑two are parties to it.
May I then go in the
order of NOC 2 and then I will come to NOC 3 in the United States
case law and, finally, the reservation and
the last point that was made about
NOC 4. As to NOC 2, the Solicitor‑General advocated the
position that the Court should
leave for another day where the line is drawn by
reference to public international law or private law. He said that this
for a few reasons.
One of them was that the
Solicitor‑General suggested that NOC 2 is confined. In the
Commonwealth’s outline, paragraphs
2 and 3, the same point is
advanced. It appears to us that involves a misreading of what is notice of
contention 2 and the terms
in which it appears at core appeal book,
tab 11, page 161.
The Commonwealth seems to think that
NOC 2 all depends on the meaning of the word “person”. That is
not how NOC 2 has
been limited. NOC 2 the Court will read for itself
and does not refer to any particular words in Article I(1). However, in
submissions, we have referred to particular words. Paragraph 19, of
our submissions, we have expressly stated, second sentence:
India contends that the reference to “awards”,
“differences” and “persons” in Art I(1) refer to
awards and differences of a commercial or private law nature, and do not include
acts of State
jure imperii
or in its governmental
Now, the last bit was perhaps wider than I put it
orally ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Certainly, it is.
MS ROUGHLEY:
‑ ‑ ‑ but it certainly was not the case
that we were limiting it to just the word
GAGELER CJ:
Well, how do you limit it,
because it is not the whole of that sentence, and it is not what you have got in
NOC 2 itself?
MS ROUGHLEY:
GAGELER CJ:
You should state precisely how you would put it.
MS ROUGHLEY:
Yes, and I thought I did. India’s position is that the reference in the
New York Convention, Article I(1), to awards:
arising out of differences between persons, whether physical or
is concerned with the field of private law, and whatever the outer limits
of that field it excludes arbitral awards where the rights
and obligations at
issue are sourced in international law. The other references in our submissions
for how we put it is paragraphs
41 and rejoinder 12.
second reason that the Solicitor‑General said it was not necessary for
this Court to decide where the line is drawn, by
reference to public
international law or private law, was exposed in questions with your Honour
Justice Gordon. It was first that
there is nothing in the text. Second,
there was a concession that the Convention is concerned with private law, but
the third point
was that times have moved on and State practice shows that it
has been assumed, and there are cases which have proceeded on the basis,
investor‑State arbitrations are under the BIT.
There are aspects
of that that go to the question your Honour the Chief Justice, but it
was put more boldly than that. In effect,
that the truck of history has moved
on and that it is too late to reverse the truck. None of the State practice
that has been referred
to by the Commonwealth and by reference to the primary
judge 93, at core appeal book page 55, includes India’s State
That is the reason why the primary judge said, none of that could be
relied on for the purposes of VCLT Article 31(3)(b) as subsequent
practice that reflects the agreement of State parties.
Why does that matter? I mean if there is widespread and
uniform State practice that does not include India, but it concerns the
construction of the scope of the Convention, that will ultimately affect the way
the Convention is interpreted in favour of or against
India, will it
MS ROUGHLEY:
No. Article 31 of VCLT,
volume 7, tab 59, page 1837, provides general rules of
interpretation which limits the extent to which
subsequent State practice might
affect the interpretation of the treaty. It is very precise –
31(3)(b) – it is:
Any subsequent practice . . . which establishes the
agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation –
There is nothing in conduct of national courts of some countries to which
India was not a litigant and has never expressed a concurring
view that gives
rise to India’s agreement as to the interpretation of this
Convention.
The third reason that was put, along the lines of the truck
of history has moved on, is that if it had not, it has now been decided
majority decision in
Zhongshan v Nigeria
, volume 10, tab 50.
We rely, and I will not go back to it, that page 1640 of the joint book of
authorities – page 1072 of
the report, at the bottom of the
page – as far as the court there, the majority, was prepared to go
was to say that there is
a categorical inapplication of the
Convention.
They left open questions about where the line is drawn in
respect of public international law and they left it open because they
view, on the facts of that case, that the issue did not arise. Of course, we
have different facts that the arbitration
was solely governed by public
international law obligations. It was not governed by the law of India, and so
this case does squarely
raise the question of whether the scope of
Article I(1), irrespective of its literal terms, does not apply in the
circumstances I
Of course, to the extent that the Attorney
falls back on a textual answer, in circumstances where there is a concession, it
not apply to at least some State‑State disputes. Text does not go
far enough to decide this question. One will have to consider
questions of
object revealed by the travaux, but also context, and that certainly includes
the rest of the machinery that is in the
New York Convention. As aspects
of even the appellants’ submissions yesterday said, there are parts of
this treaty that are
just inapposite to deal with certain kinds of disputes that
involve States.
So, can I just take you back
to Article 31(3)(b).
MS ROUGHLEY:
That interpretation
of Article 31(3)(b) would require evidence to establish that
agreement. It could not ever be established by
the case law, even the case law
of a State. It would be a matter of fact to be determined, would it
MS ROUGHLEY:
That is right, yes. That does not make the
case law irrelevant of course, to the extent it is persuasive, but it would have
have been dealing with the issue in order to provide any type of persuasive
answer, and it would just be a question of whether another
court agrees or
disagrees with the application of VCLT principles, or the general principles of
interpretation embodied in them,
to the position.
There can be a
difference though, of course, as the court in
was dealing with,
which is where certain States have made an agreement, including by treaty. This
is dealt with at JBA 1656, page
1088 of the report, dissenting reasons
of Judge Katsas. Left‑hand column, top of it, he refers to the ECT
containing a particular
agreement by those States which are party to it, that
they will treat the arbitral awards:
they arose under the New York
Convention –
That brings me to the second topic, which is
NOC 3. The argument put on behalf of the Attorney appears to have these
elements. One,
there is a waiver exception and an arbitration exception in the
United States. Two, there are three requirements which have been
articulated in
the case law and those requirements apply to the arbitration, but there is a way
to read the cases such that they
may not or do not all apply for the waiver
Three, the reason you do not need all three
requirements – you just need the first for a waiver
exception – is because,
putting it in a practical application, it
would allow States that are party to the New York Convention to invade
enforcement. If
that is the way to understand how the United States position is
thought to be deployed, India’s response is this.
Attorney identifies no case that supports that understanding of the waiver
exception in the United States, whether before
or after waiver. When I say
“supports”, I mean explicitly supports. In fact, primary
judge 47 – to which the
Court was taken – shows that
in none of those cases were those particular matters put in issue, and the
extent to which the
second and third requirements did not apply.
the Court was taken to
, joint book of authorities volume 5,
tab 34, page 1209, which cites the cases which contain the three
requirements. Nowhere does
it say there: we cite these cases – but
they do not stand for what they say. In qualified terms, you could ignore the
parts of it.
Seetransport
is being cited as relevant to waiver
Third, it seems that the Commonwealth’s argument is, in
effect, seeking to recharacterise the United States case law based
fearmongering that, assuming its own correctness, Article III has to be a waiver
because otherwise a contracting State might
object to the Federal Court of
Australia exercising jurisdiction over it. The policy concern that underlines
waiver there, as here
– as articulated by this Court in
paragraph 26, volume 3, tab 11, page 399 of the
JBA – is that the starting point is that it is a very significant
the courts of one State to be exercising jurisdiction over another and
In this sense, the insistence –
that it must be expressed is:
that any inference of a waiver of immunity must be drawn with great care when
interpreting the express words of that agreement in
Court cited Chief Justice Rehnquist in the United States Supreme
Court, that:
a foreign State will not waive its immunity merely “by signing an
international agreement that contains no mention of a waiver
of immunity to suit
in United States courts or even the availability of a cause of action in the
United States”.
And that that is reflecting what I was referring to as:
the “political principle that those who are independent and autonomous
cannot, except by consent, exercise authority over, or
establish an external
source of authority over, others of independent and autonomous
So, that is the driving policy of the foreign State immunity, and it
picks up a question Justice Beech-Jones asked to Mr Walker at
the end as to
when we are looking at the
International Arbitration Act
Foreign States
Immunities Act
that the policy for section 10
remains unmistakable waiver.
Fourth, India’s answer is that once
those policy concerns and the strictness of the test for waiver are put into
place it would
be indeed a very surprising result if the test for waiver, in the
case of arbitration, is more liberal than the test for arbitration
the test for arbitration, when courts are using the language of
“unmistakable”, it suggests even of itself that
the requirement is
higher, not lower.
Five is that, of all the cases that the Commonwealth
went to which expressly say something about waiver – sorry, the cases
the Commonwealth did not go to include ones that make it clear, as
Mr Gleeson took the Court, that you need an arbitral agreement
the New York Convention. Those, just to record them, were
Preble‑Rish
, volume 6, tab 38, at 1311;
, which is volume 5, tab 27, at 937 to 938; and
Process & Industrial Developments
, volume 6, tab 39,
at 1324 to 1325. That is what we wish to say about notice of contention 3
and the submissions put on behalf of
the Attorney.
That brings me to the
issue of the reservation. Of course, if we are into this part of the case, one
has to keep in mind what approach
is being taken but for the reservation to the
meaning and effect of Article III – for Australia, I will put it
in that way.
The stronger and more inflexible that requirement of Australia is
seen to be, and the more one reads a corresponding requirement
of India that
Australia recognise and enforce awards to the greatest extent possible, the more
important the reservation features
in the way to understand the
Now, it was said that there is no commentary which really grapples
with this. There is one that does so quite usefully. It has
a bit in it for
everyone, but ultimately the most in it for India. This one is volume 8,
tab 94 – this is Müller –
and relevantly
starting at 2509. I refer the Court to paragraphs 33 through
to 36, which seek – in quite a balanced way –
through all of the complexity the Solicitor‑General was referring to about
how reservations might work in different
kinds of treaties and having regard to
the nature of the – can I put it this way – positive
obligations being imposed.
Ultimately it all depends, is the answer, but
if PJ 43 is the prism through which we are approaching this, then the
answer for present
purposes is paragraph 36 on page 2511:
Even in these exceptional circumstances –
reservations are not affecting, in this case, the scope of, in this case,
Australia’s obligations to the rest of the
the reciprocity principle has one repercussion on the treaty relations
established between a reserving State and a State with regard
to which the
reservation has been established: even if the latter must respect and honour
the obligations contained in the treaty
the reserving State –
has no right to request the execution of the treaty obligations it does not
accept for itself.
So, if PJ 43 is the way to understand it, there
is no requirement being made by India and no right to request Australia to
and enforce in accordance with this quite extreme construction of
Article III. That is enough to defeat the premise that India does
a right anymore to claim immunity because it is, according to PJ 43, agreed
and accepted that
Australia will and must recognise and enforce awards
against it. I will defer anything else we say on that to the 14 days
So, that leaves last that notice of contention 4. It is
a creative way to get around a problem, but it does not work because of
The appellants have the onus on waiver. They have appealed to this Court and
agreed with the framing of the issue at respondent’s
submissions 2,
that the only act on which they rely is the conduct of India in ratifying,
subject to reservations, the NYC. What
NOC was doing – and we
have met that. That is the case that we have joined issue on, and
What NOC 4 was doing was something different, which was in
effect advancing a positive defence which, as we have said in writing,
do not need to prove – we just do not need to press, and that is
something more is needed. So, we have not put that
positive case in issue.
That does not undermine their onus and their obligation to establish that mere
ratification of the NYC is
enough of an act to constitute unmistakable
BEECH-JONES J:
So, is this meeting
Mr Walker’s last argument that it is enough to have effectively prima
facie an agreement to arbitrate?
Is that what you are addressing?
Yes, in a sense. I understood him to be responding to
Mr Gleeson saying we had a big argument at trial when it was unclear
what acts were relied on. They narrowed their case at the end on
appeal. It was an issue whether that was enough, and that was
the basis on
which it was fought, and I understood Mr Walker to say that was all well
and good until we get to NOC 4, and NOC 4 somehow
involved some change
to what acts are relied upon.
So, if their case is ratifying subject to
reservations is enough, which seems to be how they put it, it does not seem that
the tendering
of an award and prima facie proof adds anything as an act of
consent, that is the case that we are required to meet, and met, and
does not change it. May it please the Court.
GAGELER CJ:
you, Ms Roughley. Subject to the receipt of the further submissions that
have already been directed, the Court will consider
its decision in this matter
and will adjourn until 10.00 am tomorrow.
AT 4.11 PM THE
MATTER WAS ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.74 MB)
Signed PDF/A format