Application by Sea Swift Pty Limited [2016] ACompT 9 (28 July 2016)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by Sea Swift Pty Limited
[2016] ACompT 9
File number:
ACT 2 of 2016
FARRELL J, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
MR R C DAVEY, MEMBER
PROFESSOR D K ROUND, MEMBER
Interveners:
Toll Holdings Limited
Maritime Union of Australia
Date of Reasons for Determination:
Catchwords:
AUTHORISATION
Competition and
Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) – application under s 95AU for a grant of
authorisation under s 95AT – acquisition of shares in, and assets of,
applicant’s major competitor in the supply of scheduled marine freight
services to remote communities in Far North Queensland
and the Northern
Territory – whether s 95AZH(3) applied to prevent the grant of
authorisation – whether there are net
COMPETITIVE DETRIMENT
– consideration of the future
“with” and “without” the proposed acquisition –
where “with”
or “without” the proposed acquisition the
applicant’s major competitor will exit the market in the short term
where “with” or “without” the proposed
acquisition applicant likely to acquire its major competitors leased
at Gove – where future “with” the proposed acquisition
undertaking offered by applicant as a condition of
authorisation addressing potential competitive detriment
– where condition of authorisation preventing applicant from enforcing
clauses in contracts novated to it by its major competitor
relating to
exclusivity, minimum volumes and rights of first refusal allows other service
providers to compete for the contracts
during their term – where
conditions of authorisation mandate minimum frequency of services to specified
remote disadvantaged
uncontracted customers in the communities – where condition of
authorisation
mandates applicant’s leased facilities at Gove be subject to
undertaking providing for better prices and access than its major
competitor’s existing
undertaking in relation to those
facilities – where Tribunal satisfied that public benefits justify
authorisation
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Trade Practices Act 1974
Cases cited:
Application by Medicines Australia Inc
[2007] ACompT 4
Application for Authorisation of Acquisition of Macquarie Generation by
AGL Energy Limited
[2014] ACompT 1
Australian Gas Light Company v Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (No 3)
(2003) 137 FCR 317
[2003] FCA 1525
Hospital Benefit Fund of Western Australia Inc v Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission
(1997) 76 FCR 369
(1997) 157 ALR 105
(1997) ATPR
Re Australian Association of Pathology Practices Incorporated
206 ALR 271
(2004) ATPR 41-985
[2004] ACompT 4
Re Qantas Airways Limited
[2004] ACompT 9
Re VFF Chicken Meat Growers’ Boycott Authorisation
[2006] ACompT 2
(2006) ATPR
; [2006] AComptT 2
Date of hearing:
6-10, 14-17 June 2016
Date of last submissions:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr N Young QC and Ms R Orr QC with Mr A
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Gilbert + Tobin
Counsel for the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
Mr J Burnside QC with Ms N Sharp and Ms C van Proctor
Solicitor for the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
Counsel for Toll Holdings Limited:
Mr J Lockhart SC with Mr C Colquhoun
Solicitor for Toll Holdings Limited:
Minter Ellison
Counsel for the Maritime Union of Australia:
Mr R Scruby
Solicitor for the Maritime Union of Australia:
W.G. McNally Jones Staff
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 2 of 2016
APPLICATION FOR MERGER AUTHORISATOIN OF THE PROPOSED ACQUISITION OF
CERTAIN ASSETS OF TOLL MARINE LOGISTICS AUSTRALIA’S MARINE
SEA SWIFT PTY LIMITED
FARRELL J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
MR R C DAVEY (MEMBER)
PROFESSOR D K ROUND (MEMBER)
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES THAT:
to the conditions in the Annexure to this determination, Sea Swift Pty Limited
(ACN 010 889 040) (“Sea Swift”)
is granted authorisation pursuant to
ss 95AT and 95AZJ of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) to acquire:
(a) shares in:
(i) Perkins Maritime Pty Ltd (ACN 009 616
(ii) Perkins Lady Jan Pty Ltd (ACN 064 110 247); and
(b) assets from:
(i) Perkins Shipping Pty Ltd (ACN 009 597
(ii) Perkins Properties Pty Ltd (ACN 009 592 885); and
(iii) Gulf Freight Services Pty Ltd (ACN 010 755
as set out in a Deed of Amendment dated 17 March 2016
and the appended Amended and Restated Asset and Share Sale Agreement between
following parties:
Perkins Industries Pty Ltd (ACN 009 593 257)
Perkins Shipping Pty Ltd (ACN 009 597 835)
Perkins Properties Pty Ltd (ACN 009 592 885)
Gulf Freight Services Pty Ltd (ACN 010 755 683)
Vendor Guarantor:
Toll Holdings Limited (ACN 006 592 089)
Sea Swift Pty Limited (ACN 010 889 040)
Purchaser Guarantor:
Sea Swift (Holdings) Pty Limited (ACN 159 387 390)
determination includes the Annexure and all Schedules thereto.
TO THE DETERMINATION DATED 1 JULY 2016
CONDITIONS OF THE TRIBUNAL’S AUTHORISATION
TRANSFERRED
CONTRACTS CONDITION
1 Transferred Contracts Condition
authorisation is subject to the condition that Sea Swift will not give effect
to, or rely on, any provision in the Transferred
Contracts which requires the
Customer to:
(i) exclusively use the marine
freight services of Sea Swift; or
(ii) allow Sea Swift a Right of First Refusal; or
(iii) ship a minimum volume of freight with Sea Swift,
(together the Transferred Contracts
Condition).
(b) For the purposes of the Transferred
Contracts Condition:
(i) Transferred Contracts means
the contracts listed in Schedule 2; and
(ii) Sea Swift must ensure that its obligations under the Transferred Contracts
Condition are published on Sea Swift’s website
and communicated to
Customers within 30 days of the Completion
REMOTE COMMUNITY SERVICE CONDITION
2 Remote Community Service Condition
authorisation is subject to the condition that Sea Swift
(i) maintain a minimum level of
scheduled services to the locations and at the frequencies set out in the Remote
Community Service
Schedule contained in Schedule 3; and
(ii) maintain an up-to-date shipping schedule of services on its website,
(together the Remote Community Service
Condition).
(b) Sea Swift’s obligations under the
Remote Community Service Condition are suspended to the extent that it is
prevented from
carrying out those obligations by an event or circumstance, or
combination of events or circumstances, that are beyond the reasonable
of Sea Swift, including but not limited
(i) fire, lightning, explosion,
flood, earthquake, storm or any other act of God or force of nature;
(ii) damage to vessel(s) or port facilities;
(iii) civil commotion, sabotage, war, revolution, radioactive contamination, or
toxic or dangerous chemical contamination;
(iv) strikes, lock-outs, industrial disputes, labour disputes, industrial
difficulties, labour difficulties, work bans, blockades
or picketing;
(v) the impact of public holidays or necessary vessel maintenance or refit;
(vi) any event or circumstance that prevents or jeopardises the safe operation
of any scheduled service.
REMOTE COMMUNITY PRICE CONDITION
3 Remote Community Price Condition
authorisation is subject to the condition that Sea Swift
(i) charge no greater than the
Maximum Charge for the destinations and services listed in the Remote Community
Service Schedule, except
as allowed by Condition 4 or in accordance with the
Independent Price Review Process set out in Schedule 5;
(ii) publish on its website the Maximum Base Price for the Services, as well as
the applicable rate of GST, Consignment Note Fee,
Dangerous Goods Surcharge and
Minimum Freight Charge, for each Financial Year,
(the Remote Community Price
Condition).
(b) For the purposes of the Remote Community
Price Condition:
(i) Subject to clause 3(b)(ii)
below, Maximum Charge means:
(A) for Vehicle Freight Services, the Maximum Base Price multiplied by the
number of units carried; and
(B) for all other Services, the Maximum Base Price multiplied by total tonnes or
total cubic metres carried (whichever is greater);
(the Maximum Base Freight Charge),
additional charges that may include:
(C) the Fuel Surcharge Fee;
(D) applicable GST;
(E) the Consignment Note Fee;
(F) the Port, Council and Royalty Charges;
(G) the Dangerous Goods Surcharge (if applicable); and
(H) Other Charges (if applicable).
(ii) If, for a particular service, the sum of:
(A) the Maximum Base Freight Charge;
(B) the Fuel Surcharge Fee;
(C) the Consignment Note Fee;
(D) the Port, Council and Royalty Charges; and
(E) the Dangerous Goods Surcharge (if applicable);
is less than the Minimum Freight Charge, then the Maximum Charge is the total
(F) the Minimum Freight Charge;
(G) applicable GST; and
(H) Other Charges (if applicable).
(iii) Maximum Base Price is to be determined in accordance with the following
Maximum Base Price = Base Price x (1 + CI)
CI = CPI + LRI
is determined as follows:
For the Financial Year commencing 1 July 2015 the rates set out for the services
listed in Schedule 4.
For each subsequent Financial Year, the Base Price is the accumulated Maximum
Base Price as calculated for the previous Financial
is determined in accordance with the following
CPI = [(CPI
= the quarterly
Consumer Price Index
groups, Australia
for the quarter that was most recently published as at the
date on which Sea Swift proposes to complete an Annual Price Review.
= the quarterly
Consumer Price Index
groups, Australia
for the quarter ending June of the previous Financial
= the cost component weighting of general costs to
provide the Service (31%).
And CPI is subject to a minimum of zero. CPI cannot be a negative number.
is determined in accordance with the following
= the annual labour rate percentage increases as set out
in the Sea Swift Collective Agreement.
= the cost component weighting of labour costs to
provide the Service (52%).
And LRI is subject to a minimum of zero. LRI cannot be a negative number.
(iv) Consignment Note Fee is a per-consignment fee to cover the cost of
documenting a consignment from receipt through to delivery.
The Consignment Note
Fee is as follows:
(A) for destinations listed in the Remote Community Service Schedule in the
Northern Territory: $15.00 plus GST.
(B) for destinations listed in the Remote Community Service Schedule in Far
North Queensland: $15.00 plus GST.
(v) Port, Council & Royalty Charges means any charges or statutory fees
levied by the applicable port, government or council
bodies on the cargo that is
imported and exported to/from a wharf, barge ramp or any other landing site in
respect of the Service
being provided to the customer.
(vi) Fuel Surcharge Fee is calculated as a percentage of the Maximum Base
Freight Charge for a Service. The percentage surcharge
and fee are calculated
(on a monthly basis) as follows:
Fuel Surcharge percentage = [(F
Fuel Surcharge Fee = Fuel Surcharge percentage x Maximum Base Freight
= the average fuel price as at 2 February 2016 obtained
AIP Terminal Gate Pricing – Diesel – National Average
(exclusive of GST and any applicable rebates).
= the average fuel price on the first Business Day of the
month prior to the Monthly Fuel Surcharge Review obtained from
AIP Terminal
Gate Pricing – Diesel - National Average
(exclusive of GST and any
applicable rebates).
= the cost component weighting of the fuel costs to
provide the Service (17%).
And the Fuel Surcharge Fee is subject to a minimum of zero. The Fuel Surcharge
Fee cannot be less than zero.
(vii) Other Charges means any charges for voluntary additional services that a
customer requests to be provided in conjunction with
the service. These charges
are notified to and accepted by the customer prior to the service being
(viii) Dangerous Goods Surcharge is applied as a percentage of the Maximum Base
Freight Charge for all goods that are classified
as dangerous goods under the
Australian Dangerous Goods Code or the International Maritime Dangerous Goods
Code. During the term
of this Condition, the Dangerous Goods Surcharge
percentage will be no higher than 25%.
(ix) Minimum Freight Charge means a specified minimum charge to consolidate and
transport a single consignment of freight. The Minimum
Freight Charge is as
(A) for destinations listed in the Remote Community Service Schedule in the
Northern Territory: $50.00.
(B) for destinations listed in the Remote Community Service Schedule in Far
North Queensland: $50.00.
4 Price Reviews
(a) Sea Swift may
increase the Maximum Base Price for the Services from or on 1 July each
Financial Year in accordance with the formulas
set out in Clause 3(b)(iii)
above (Annual Price Review).
(b) Sea Swift may increase the Fuel Surcharge Fee on a monthly basis in
accordance with the formula set out in Clause 3(b)(vi) above
(Monthly Fuel
Surcharge Review).
(c) Sea Swift may increase the applicable GST at any time but only in accordance
with changes legislated by the Australian Federal
Government.
(d) Sea Swift may only:
(i) increase its Base Price
above the Maximum Base Price determined using the formula in
Clause 3(b)(iii); or
(ii) increase the Additional Fees above the amounts set out in or determined
according to Clause 3(b)(iv)-3(b)(viii);
in accordance with the Independent Price Review Process set out in
Schedule 5 (Additional Proposed Price
5 Period for Which Sea Swift Must Comply With the
(a) Subject to
paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) below, Sea Swift must comply with the Conditions
until the earliest of:
(i) five years from the
Completion Date;
(ii) a determination is made by the Tribunal that it is no longer necessary for
Sea Swift to comply with the Conditions (including
in circumstances where the
ACCC has accepted an undertaking under section 87B of the Act in substantially
the same terms as the Conditions);
(iii) if the parties do not complete the Proposed Acquisition, when Sea Swift
notifies the Tribunal of the non-completion of the
Proposed Acquisition (and
provides a copy of the notice to the
(b) Sea Swift will be relieved of its
obligation to comply with the Transferred Contracts Condition in respect of each
of the Transferred
Contracts on the date that the Current Term of that
Transferred Contract expires.
(c) Subject to sub-clause 5(d) below, Sea Swift will be suspended of its
obligation to comply with the Remote Community Service Condition
operator commences operating a weekly (or more frequent than weekly) Scheduled
Service, and operates that Scheduled Service
for a period of 12 consecutive
weeks or more:
(i) along one of the following
routes, in which case the suspension applies to that route and any destination
transhipped through
that route:
(A) Cairns – Weipa;
(B) Cairns – Thursday Island/Horn Island;
(C) Darwin – Gove; or
(D) Darwin – Groote Eylandt,
(ii) to any specific destination set out in the Remote Community Service
Schedule contained in Schedule 3, in which case the suspension
respect of that destination.
(d) If Sea Swift is suspended of its
obligations to comply with the Remote Community Service Condition under
sub-clause 5(c) above,
because another operator commences operating a
weekly (or more frequent than weekly) Scheduled Service along one of the routes
in sub-clause 5(c)(i) or a specific destination under sub-clause
5(c)(ii), and that operator subsequently ceases to provide that
Service, Sea Swift must re-commence that Scheduled Service in accordance with
the Remote Community Service Condition as
soon as practicably possible, but no
later than 28 days after that operator ceases to provide the Scheduled
(e) Sea Swift may subcontract any or all of its obligations under the Remote
Community Service Condition to another qualified supplier,
but will remain
responsible for satisfying the Remote Community Service Condition, subject to
clause 5(c) above, at prices that comply
with the Remote Community Price
SELF-COMPLIANCE REPORTING
6 Annual Reporting
30 days of the end of each Financial Year comprising the Term of these
Conditions, Sea Swift is to provide the ACCC with a
report containing the
following information:
(a) in relation to each of the Services to destinations listed in the Remote
Community Service Schedule:
(i) the Base Prices that it
charged for the previous Financial Year;
(ii) the Base Prices that it is charging in the current Financial Year,
including details of all inputs and calculations underlying
any increase to the
Base Prices from the previous Financial Year that have been made in accordance
with Clause 3(b)(iii);
(iii) the Fuel Surcharge Fee for each calendar month of the past Financial Year,
including all underlying calculations;
(iv) the result of any Independent Price Review process during the previous
Financial Year, including all documents prepared for
the purpose of, or
resulting from, the Independent Price Review; and
(v) details of any instances of non-compliance by Sea Swift with the Remote
Community Price Condition during the relevant Financial
Year, or confirmation
that there has been no instance of
non-compliance.
(b) the current schedule of Services and the
frequency of those Services to each of the destinations set out in the Remote
Service Schedule.
(c) details of any instances of non-compliance by Sea Swift with the Remote
Community Service Condition (including failure to provide
services in accordance
with Schedule 3) during the relevant Financial Year.
Sea Swift must provide the ACCC with any information or documents that the ACCC
reasonably requests to verify the accuracy of the
7 Event Reporting
Within 30 days of
the occurrence of an event listed below which occurs during the Term of these
Conditions, Sea Swift is to provide
the ACCC with a report containing the
following information:
(a) for any suspension of Sea Swift’s obligation to comply with the Remote
Community Service Condition under clause
(i) the nature and duration of
these circumstances; and
(ii) the resulting changes that Sea Swift has made to its Scheduled Service
schedule and the expected duration of those
(b) for any suspension of Sea Swift’s
obligation to comply with the Remote Community Service Condition under clause
(i) details of the Scheduled
Service route(s) and destination(s) that Sea Swift has ceased or intends to
cease servicing; and
(ii) details of the other operator who has commenced operating a Scheduled
Service in relation to the relevant routes(s) or destinations(s)
including the
frequency and continuous duration of the Scheduled Service provided by that
(c) for any obligations under the Remote
Community Service Condition that are subcontracted by Sea Swift to another
qualified supplier
under clause 5(e):
(i) the details of the Scheduled
Service route(s) and destination(s) that Sea Swift has subcontracted; and
(ii) a copy of the subcontract agreement between Sea Swift and the qualified
8 Review Event
(a) If a Review
Event occurs, Sea Swift may apply to the Tribunal to vary or suspend (for a
period of time) one or more of the Conditions
to the extent the variation or
suspension is necessary to deal with the effect of the Review Event on Sea
(b) Review Event means an event or circumstance that has the result that Sea
(i) is unlikely to be able to
comply with its obligations under the Conditions; or
(ii) believes that it is necessary to seek some variation due to changed
circumstances (including any relevant market change, such
as the loss of major
contracts to competing coastal and community marine freight suppliers, or
overall market contraction, or changes
within the relevant regulatory
environment, any of which that has a material impact on service
viability).
GOVE LEASE UNDERTAKING
9 Gove Lease Undertaking
authorisation is subject to the condition that Sea Swift:
(a) by the Completion Date has executed and given to the ACCC in respect of the
Gove Lease an undertaking pursuant to section 87B
of the Act in the same form as
Annexure E to Sea Swift’s Application for Authorisation filed on 4 April
(b) complies with the Gove Lease Undertaking in all material respects unless and
until released from it by the ACCC; and
(c) does not transfer the Gove Lease without the approval of the ACCC.
TOLL COMMITMENTS
10 Toll Commitments
authorisation is subject to the condition that Toll:
(a) releases back to their owners two vessels it currently uses in the Northern
Territory, being the
Toll Territorian
Bimah Tujuh
as reasonably practicable after the Completion Date;
(b) sells the
as soon as reasonably practicable after the
Completion Date; and
(c) does not sell the
to Sea Swift, any Officer of Sea Swift,
any Related Entity of Sea Swift or any Officer of such Related Entities, or any
person acting
under the direction or for the benefit of any of those persons or
Related Entities.
11 Time limit on Proposed Acquisition
The authorisation
is subject to the condition that the Proposed Acquisition is completed by 30
September 2016.
12 Defined Terms and Interpretation
expression starting with a capital letter in the conditions:
(a) which is defined in the Dictionary in Schedule 1 of the Annexure
(Dictionary), has the meaning given to it in the Dictionary;
(b) which is defined in the Corporations Act, but is not defined in the
Dictionary, has the meaning given to it in the Corporations
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
means the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission.
Additional Fees
means the Fuel Surcharge Fee, the Consignment Note Fee,
the Port, Council and Royalty Charges, the Dangerous Goods Surcharge and Other
Additional Proposed Price Increase
has the meaning given in clause 4.
means the Annexure to the Tribunal’s determination dated 1
July 2016 including all Schedules to the Annexure.
Annual Price Review
has the meaning given in clause 4.
has the meaning given in clause 3(b)(iii).
Completion Date
means the date on which the Proposed Acquisition is
means each of the conditions set out in this Annexure.
Consignment Note Fee
has the meaning given in clause 3(b)(iv).
means a counterparty to the Transferred Contracts identified in
Schedule 2.
Current Term
of a Transferred Contract includes any option to renew or
extend the term of the Transferred Contract.
Dangerous Goods
means dangerous or hazardous materials classified under
the Australian Dangerous Goods Code or the International Maritime Dangerous
Goods Code.
Dangerous Goods Surcharge
has the meaning given in clause 3(b)(viii).
Dry Freight Services
means scheduled services for the transport of cargo
by sea (including the transport of Dangerous Goods) which does not require a
temperature
controlled environment and does not include Vehicle Freight
Financial Year
refers to the period from 1 July to 30 June in each
Fuel Surcharge
has the meaning given in clause 3(b)(vi).
means the lease between Perkins Properties Pty Ltd and the
Arnhem Land Aboriginal Council in relation to the Gove Wharf at Melville
Foreshore Drive, Nhulunbuy, to be acquired by Sea Swift as part of the Proposed
Acquisition.
Gove Lease Undertaking
has the meaning given in clause 9(a).
means the Goods and Services Tax.
Independent Price Expert
means the person appointed under Schedule 5.
Independent Price Review Process
means the process set out in Schedule 5.
Maximum Base Price
has the meaning given in clause 3(b)(iii).
Maximum Charge
has the meaning given in clause 3(b)(i).
Minimum Freight Charge
has the meaning given in clause 3(b)(ix).
Monthly Fuel Surcharge Review
has the meaning given in clause 4(b).
Other Charges
has the meaning given in clause 3(b)(vii).
Port, Council & Royalty Charges
has the meaning given in clause
Price Increase Notice
has the meaning given in clause 3(a) of Schedule
Proposed Acquisition
means the proposed acquisition by Sea Swift
(i) Perkins Maritime Pty Ltd
(ACN 009 616 960); and
(ii) Perkins Lady Jan Pty Ltd (ACN 064 110 247);
(i) Perkins Shipping Pty Ltd
(ACN 009 597 835);
(ii) Perkins Properties Pty Ltd (ACN 009 592 885); and
(ii) Gulf Freight Services Pty Ltd (ACN 010 755
as set out in a Deed of Amendment dated 17 March 2016 and the appended Amended
and Restated Asset and Share Sale Agreement.
Refrigerated Freight Services
means scheduled services for the transport
of cargo by sea (including the transport of Dangerous Goods) which requires a
temperature
controlled environment and does not include Vehicle Freight
Remote Communities Independent Price Expert
means the person appointed in
accordance with clause 1(a) of Schedule 5.
Remote Community Price Condition
has the meaning given in clause 3.
Remote Community Service Condition
has the meaning given in clause 2.
Remote Community Service Schedule
means the schedule identified in
Schedule 3.
Review Event
has the meaning given in clause 8.
Right of First Refusal
means a clause in any of the Transferred Contracts
that may have the purpose or effect of requiring a Customer to allow Sea Swift
to match any price proposed by a competitor.
Scheduled Service
means a service by which an operator offers to the
public to carry freight between two or more destinations at predetermined dates
or days of the week.
means the entity Sea Swift Pty Ltd ACN 010 889 040.
Sea Swift Collective Agreement
means the collective agreement between Sea
Swift and employees of Sea Swift lodged with the Fair Work Commission in 2009 in
to employees’ terms and conditions of employment, and includes
any replacement of that agreement in the future.
means the scheduled general cargo services set out in Schedule
(a) Dry Freight Services;
(b) Refrigerated Freight Services; and
(c) Vehicle Freight Services,
but excluding charter services.
means the period between the Completion Date and that date that is
five years after the Completion Date.
means the entity trading as Toll Marine Logistics Australia.
means Toll Holdings Limited (ACN 006 592 089)
Transferred Contracts
means the contracts listed in Schedule 2.
Transferred Contracts Condition
has the meaning given in clause 1.
means the Australian Competition Tribunal.
Vehicle Freight Services
means scheduled services for the transport of
motor vehicles by sea, specifically meaning a domestic vehicle under 6m in
TRANSFERRED CONTRACTS
Gemco (BHP) (Groote Eylandt)
Pacific Aluminium (Rio Tinto) (Gove)
Allied Pickfords Pty Ltd
Alyangula Recreation Club
Aminjarrinja Enterprises Aboriginal Corporation
Kun Huy Kag t/a Angurugu Chinese Takeaway
Anindilyakwa Land Council
B Kumar & P Kumar & P Kumar & R Kumar t/a Country Fried
The Trustee for Dugong Beach Resort t/a Dugong Beach Resort Pty
Groote Eylandt & Bickerton Island Enterprises Aboriginal
Gove Unit Trust t/a Gove Motors
Gove Tackle & Outdoors
Groote Eylandt Aboriginal Trust
Ericann Pty Ltd t/a Groote Retravision & Homeware
Hasting Deering (Aust) Ltd
Scoffee Pty Ltd t/a The Coffee Shop
Three C's Café
Walkabout Lodge & Tavern
Bradley Carey t/a BC Autos
Fulton Hogan Industries Pty Ltd
Miwatj Health Aboriginal Corporation
Best Bar Pty Ltd
Outback Stores Pty Ltd
Maningrida Progress Association
REMOTE COMMUNITY SERVICE SCHEDULE
Frequency (per week)*
Dry Services
Refrigerated Services
Dangerous Goods Services
Vehicle Services
North Queensland (ex Cairns)
Stephen Island
(1/mth tide dependant)
(1/mth tide dependant)
(1/mth tide dependant)
(1/mth tide dependant)
Horn Island
Thursday Island
Seisia/Bamaga
1 (wet season only)
1 (wet season only)
1 (wet season only)
1 (wet season only)
Lockhart River
1 (wet season only)
1 (wet season only)
1 (wet season only)
1 (wet season only)
Northern Territory (ex Darwin)
Ramingining
Elcho Island
(1/fortnight tide dependent)
(1/fortnight tide dependent)
(1/fortnight tide dependent)
(1/fortnight tide dependent)
Bickerton Island
Fortnightly
Fortnightly
Fortnightly
Fortnightly
Lake Evella
Groote Eylandt
Pirlangimpi
1 (wet season only)
1 (wet season only)
1 (wet season only)
1 (wet season only)
Croker Island
Goulburn Island
Unless otherwise specified.
BASE PRICES
NORTH QUEENSLAND
Schedule of rates (excludes GST) ¹
(ex-Cairns) ²
Bamaga / Seisia (NPA), Thursday Island, Horn Island, Weipa
OTSI, Lockhart, Aurukun
Dry (m³ or tonnes) ³
Refrigerated (m³ or tonnes) ⁴
Passenger vehicles (each) ⁵
¹ Excludes Additional Fees, including the Fuel Surcharge Fee and Port &
Council Charges (see further information below on
Additional Fees).
² Dry and refrigerated freight will be charged either per cubic metre or
per tonne, whichever measure is the greatest for a
given consignment. Note that
where freight is outside standard slot dimensions (20ft container size 6m x 2.4m
x 1.8m) or weighing
more than 20 tonnes, this schedule of rates will not apply
and the Remote Community Price Condition does not apply to that service.
Swift will provide an individual quote to customers for such freight.
Sea Swift and TML adopt different terminology in categorising
their respective rates. Sea Swift’s standard terminology for
freight is “Dry”. TML’s standard terminology for dry freight
is “General Cargo”. Sea Swift’s
terminology has been adopted
in this Schedule.
⁴ Sea Swift’s standard terminology for temperature controlled
freight is “Refrigerated”. TML’s standard
terminology for
temperature controlled freight is “Freezer / Chiller”. Sea
Swift’s terminology has been adopted
in this Schedule.
⁵ Sea Swift’s standard terminology for vehicle freight is
“Passenger Vehicles”. TML’s standard terminology
for vehicle
freight is “Vehicles up to 5.3 mtrs”. Sea Swift’s terminology
has been adopted in this Schedule. Note
that the schedule of rates will not
apply to vehicles over 6 metres in length and the Remote Community Price
Condition does not apply
to that service. Sea Swift will provide an individual
quote to customers for such freight.
NORTHERN TERRITORY
Schedule of rates (excludes GST) ¹
Freight (ex-Darwin)
Dry (m³ or tonnes) ³
Refrigerated (kg) ⁴
Passenger vehicles (each) ⁵
Port Keats ⁹
Milingimbi / Ramingining
Lake Evella
Groote Eylandt
Garden Pt (Pirlangimpi)
Snake Bay (Milikapiti) ⁸
Nguiu ⁶ / Paru ⁷
Black Point
Bickerton / Numbulwar / Umbakumba
¹ Excludes Additional Fees, including the Fuel Surcharge Fee and Port &
Council Charges (see further information below).
² Dry freight will be charged either per cubic metre or per tonne,
whichever measure is the greatest for a given consignment.
Refrigerated freight
will be charged per kg. Note that where freight is outside standard slot
dimensions (20ft container size 6m
x 2.4m x 1.8m) or weighing more than 20
tonnes, this schedule of rates will not apply and the Remote Community Price
Condition does
not apply to that service. Sea Swift will provide an individual
quote to customers for such freight.
³ Sea Swift’s standard terminology of “Dry” freight has
been adopted.
⁴ Sea Swift’s standard terminology of “Refrigerated”
freight has been adopted.
⁵ Sea Swift’s terminology for vehicle freight has been adopted in
this Schedule. Note that the schedule of rates will
not apply to vehicles over
6 metres in length and the Remote Community Price Condition does not apply to
that service. Sea Swift
will provide an individual quote to customers for such
⁶ Note that TML does not currently service Nguiu. Sea Swift’s rates
as at 1 August 2015 for deliveries to Nguiu have
been adopted.
⁷ Note that TML does not currently service Paru. Sea Swift’s rates
as at 1 August 2015 for deliveries to Paru have been
⁸ Note that TML does not currently service Snake Bay. Sea Swift’s
rates as at 1 August 2015 for deliveries to Snake
Bay have been adopted.
⁹ Note that TML does not currently service Port Keats. Sea Swift’s
rates as at 1 August 2015 for deliveries to Port
Keats have been
Additional Fees Information
Fuel Surcharge Fee
A fuel surcharge fee applies on all deliveries. The fuel surcharge fee is
subject to monthly review based on movements in the national
average fuel price
as monitored by the Australian Institute of Petroleum.
Consignment Note Fee
A one-off consignment fee applies on all deliveries ($15.00).
Port & Council Fees
Various ports and councils charge port cargo fees on the volume of cargo that is
shipped through the relevant facility. Port &
Council fees will be added to
those consignments which attract port cargo fees (where
applicable).
Dangerous Goods Surcharge
For goods classified as dangerous goods under the Australian Dangerous Goods
Code or the International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code,
a 25% surcharge on the
Maximum Base Freight Charge will apply.
Minimum Freight Charge
Where the total calculated rate for a consignment (including all Additional Fees
other than any applicable Other Charges) is below
$50.00, a minimum charge of
$50.00 for those services will apply, in accordance with clause
3.2(b)(ii).
Other Charges
Where customers request additional services from Sea Swift, including pallet
wrapping or transport by road to the departure depot,
Sea Swift may apply a
charge for those additional services.
INDEPENDENT PRICE REVIEW CONDITION PROCESS
1 Appointment of Remote Communities Independent Price
28 days of the Completion Date, Sea Swift must appoint a Remote Communities
Independent Price Expert for, subject to paragraph
1(c) of this Schedule 5, the
duration of this Condition.
(b) Remote Communities Independent Price Expert must have the qualifications and
experience necessary to carry out its functions
independently of Sea Swift and
must not be:
(i) an employee or officer of
Sea Swift or its Related Bodies Corporate or of Toll or its Related Bodies
Corporate, whether current
or in the past 3 years;
(ii) a professional adviser of Sea Swift or its Related Bodies Corporate or of
Toll or its Related Bodies Corporate, whether current
or in the past 3
(iii) a person who holds a material interest in Sea Swift or its Related Bodies
Corporate or of Toll or its Related Bodies Corporate;
(iv) a person who has a contractual relationship with Sea Swift or its Related
Bodies Corporate or of Toll or its Related Bodies
Corporate (other than the
terms of appointment of the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert);
(v) a customer, material supplier or material customer of Sea Swift or its
Related Bodies Corporate or of Toll or its Related Bodies
Corporate; or
(vi) an employee or contractor of a firm or company referred to in paragraphs
1(b)(iii) to 1(b)(v) of this Schedule
(c) Sea Swift must, as soon as practicable,
appoint a replacement Remote Communities Independent Price Expert who meets the
requirements
set out in paragraph 1(b) of this Schedule 5 in the following
circumstances:
(i) if the Remote Communities
Independent Price Expert resigns or otherwise stops or is unable to act as the
Remote Communities Independent
Price Expert; or
(ii) if Sea Swift has terminated the Remote Communities Independent Price
Expert's terms of appointment in accordance with those
terms of appointment.
(d) Where the Remote Communities Independent
Price Expert is unable to act for a period of time, Sea Swift may appoint a
replacement
Remote Communities Independent Price Expert to act as the Remote
(e) Within 2 Business Days of the appointment of the Remote Communities
Independent Price Expert under paragraph 1(a) of this Schedule
5 or replacement
of the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert under paragraphs 1(c) or 1(d)
of this Schedule 5, Sea Swift must:
(i) forward to the ACCC a copy
of the executed terms of appointment; and
(ii) publish the name and contact details of the Remote Communities Independent
Price Expert on Sea Swift's
2 Conditions relating to the Remote Communities Independent
Price Expert's functions
Sea Swift must:
(a) procure that the terms of appointment of the Remote Communities Independent
Price Expert include obligations on the Remote Communities
Independent Price
(i) continue to satisfy the
independence criteria in paragraph 1(b) of this Schedule 5 for the period of his
or her appointment;
(ii) provide any information or documents requested by the ACCC about Sea
Swift's compliance with this Independent Price Review Condition
Process directly
to the ACCC; and
(iii) report or otherwise inform the ACCC directly of any issues that arise in
the performance of his or her functions as the Remote
Price Expert or in relation to any matter that may arise in connection with this
Independent Price Review
(b) comply with and enforce the terms of
appointment for the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert;
(c) maintain and fund the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert to carry
out his or her functions;
(d) indemnify the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert for any expenses,
loss, claim or damage arising directly or indirectly
from the performance by the
Remote Communities Independent Price Expert of his or her functions as the
Remote Communities Independent
Price Expert except where such expenses, loss,
claim or damage arises out of the gross negligence, fraud, misconduct or breach
duty by the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert;
(e) not interfere with, or otherwise hinder, the Remote Communities Independent
Price Expert's ability to carry out his or her functions
as the Remote
(f) provide and pay for any external expertise, assistance or advice required by
the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert
to perform his or her functions
as the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert;
(g) provide to the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert any information
or documents requested by the Remote Communities Independent
Price Expert that
he or she considers necessary for carrying out his or her functions as the
Remote Communities Independent Price
Expert or for reporting to or otherwise
advising the ACCC; and
(h) ensure that the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert will provide
information or documents requested by the ACCC directly
3 Raising an Additional Proposed Price Increase
(a) Sea Swift may
seek an Additional Proposed Price Increase by providing written notice to the
Remote Communities Independent Price
Expert (Price Increase Notice).
(b) A Price Increase Notice must detail:
(i) the specific Service and
location (within the Northern Territory or Far North Queensland) to which the
Additional Proposed Price
Increase relates;
(ii) the specific amount of the Additional Proposed Price Increase; and
(iii) Sea Swift’s reasons for the Additional Proposed Price Increase. By
submitting a Price Increase Notice, Sea Swift agrees
to comply with this
Independent Price Review Condition
(c) Sea Swift may at any time withdraw a
Price Increase Notice by written notice to the Remote Communities Independent
Price Expert,
in which case the powers and authority of the Remote Communities
Independent Price Expert to make a determination of that Price Increase
under paragraph 4 of this Schedule 5 shall forthwith cease.
4 Remote Communities Independent Price Expert
Determination
(a) Where the
Remote Communities Independent Price Expert has received a Price Increase Notice
in relation to an Additional Proposed
Price Increase, the Remote Communities
Independent Price Expert must:
(i) determine whether Sea
Swift’s proposed price increase is reasonable and appropriate having
regard to the principles listed
in paragraph 5 below; and
(ii) decide whether to accept, reject or vary Sea Swift’s proposed price
(b) The Remote Communities Independent Price
Expert will make his or her determination
(i) 30 days of the receipt of
the Price Increase Notice from the Sea Swift; or
(ii) such further period as necessary for the Remote Communities Independent
Price Expert to consider information requested under
paragraph 4(c) of this
Schedule 5, as the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert reasonably
(c) Sea Swift must provide the Remote
make a determination
under this paragraph 4 of this Schedule 5 within a
timeframe reasonably determined by the Remote Communities Independent Price
(d) In the event that more than one Price Increase Notice is received in
relation to a proposed new Additional Proposed Price Increase
for a particular
Service, the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert will only make a single
determination about that Additional
Proposed Price Increase.
(e) The Remote Communities Independent Price Expert's determination is final and
binding on Sea Swift.
(f) When making a determination under this paragraph 4 of this Schedule 5, the
Remote Communities Independent Price Expert is acting
as an expert and not as an
arbitrator.
5 Relevant considerations
In determining
whether an Additional Proposed Price Increase is reasonable and appropriate, the
Remote Communities Independent Price
Expert will have regard to the following
principles:
(a) that the Additional Proposed Price Increase should be set taking into
(i) all efficient input
(ii) an appropriate allocation of Sea Swift’s relevant overhead costs;
(iii) expected volumes over the period Sea Swift has used to calculate the
proposed price increase;
(iv) whether the “weighting factors” (WF
) referred to in the calculation of Maximum
Base Price continue to accurately reflect the cost component weighting of
general costs,
labour and fuel;
(v) a rate of return that utilises a weighted average cost of capital which
would be required by a benchmark efficient entity providing
services with a
similar degree of risk as that which applies to Sea Swift; and
(vi) the long term interests of customers of the
6 Notice and Publication of Determination
(a) The Remote
within seven days of making a determination.
(b) Within 30 days of receiving the
determination:
(i) Sea Swift must notify its
affected customers of the Remote Communities Independent Price Expert's
determination by writing to
or emailing customers, or publishing the information
(ii) if a retrospective adjustment is necessary to comply with the Remote
Sea Swift must
refund the relevant adjustment amount to the relevant
customer(s).
(c) Whatever the outcome, the cost of the
Remote Communities Independent Price Expert's determination will be borne by Sea
7 Date price increase takes effect
If the Remote
then the new price increase as determined
by the Remote Communities Independent
Price Expert takes effect on the date that Sea Swift is notified under paragraph
6(a) of Schedule
8 Sea Swift must notify the ACCC
Sea Swift must
notify the ACCC at the time it initiates an Independent Price Review Process and
must notify the ACCC of the results
of each review, in each case within 5
business days of the relevant event occurring
FOR DETERMINATION
THE TRIBUNAL:
otherwise indicated, all references to legislation are references to the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
4 April 2016, Sea Swift Pty Limited (“Sea Swift”) filed a Form S
with the Australian Competition Tribunal (“the
Tribunal”)(“Application”). Sea Swift thereby applied under
s 95AU for the grant of an authorisation under s 95AT(1)
in relation to its
proposed acquisition of shares in two companies and most of the assets
associated with the general marine freight
business of Toll Marine Logistics
(“TML”) in Far North Queensland (“FNQ”) and the Northern
Territory (“NT”)
from subsidiaries of Toll Holdings Limited
(“Toll”) (“Proposed Acquisition”). Annexure A to the
Application
set out conditions (“Proposed Conditions”) on the basis
of which the Tribunal might grant authorisation. Sea Swift also
indicated that,
if required by the Tribunal, it was prepared to give an undertaking to the
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
(“ACCC”) pursuant to
relating to arrangements for accessing the wharf facility at Gove
that was to be acquired from TML as part of the Proposed Acquisition
(“Gove Lease Undertaking”); the proposed form of the undertaking was
set out in Annexure E to the Application. The Application
also set out
commitments that Toll was willing to make if the Tribunal were to grant
authorisation (“Toll Commitments”).
was given leave to intervene in the proceedings on an unrestricted basis. While
Toll was an intervener in these proceedings,
both Sea Swift and Toll sought
approval of the Proposed Acquisition.
Maritime Union of Australia (“MUA”) was given leave to intervene on
the basis that its intervention would be limited
to making submissions, adducing
evidence and cross-examining other witnesses on the topic of any detriment to
the public by reason
of any risk to the employment or prospective employment of
its members by Sea Swift or Toll in the NT or FNQ in relation to the Proposed
Acquisition.
DETERMINATION
1 July 2016, the Tribunal announced that it had determined to authorise the
Proposed Acquisition subject to the conditions set
out in the determination
(“Determination”). Shortly before making the determination, the
Tribunal circulated to the
ACCC, Sea Swift and Toll a draft of the Determination
containing conditions which it intended to impose and invited submissions in
relation to them. Changes to the Proposed Conditions required by the Tribunal,
including conditions relating to the provision of
the Gove Lease Undertaking and
the Toll Commitments are mentioned below.
is a condition of the Determination that the Proposed Acquisition be completed
by 30 September 2016.
are the Tribunal’s reasons for making the Determination.
CONFIDENTIALITY REGIME
15 April 2016 Justice Middleton (now the President of the Tribunal) issued a set
of directions for the use and management of confidential
information provided to
the Tribunal in respect of the proceedings (“Confidentiality
Regime”). “Confidential Information”
was defined as
“all information filed with the Tribunal in these proceedings in respect
of which a claim of confidentiality
has been made and not refused by the
Tribunal, including the Sea Swift Pricing Information”. External legal
advisers, consultants
and independent experts retained by Sea Swift, Toll, and
the ACCC (and their support staff) received unrestricted access to Confidential
Information provided that the names of those persons had been notified to Sea
Swift, the ACCC, any intervener and the Tribunal.
The ACCC and its staff as
well as the Tribunal and staff of the Tribunal and Federal Court of Australia
assisting the Tribunal were
also given access to Confidential Information as
necessary. Mr Scruby, counsel for the MUA and Mr Nathan Keats, the MUA’s
legal representative, were given access to some Confidential Information on the
same basis.
Information
which remains subject to the Confidentiality Regime has been redacted. Prior to
publication, the Tribunal circulated
a final draft of the reasons to the ACCC
and external legal advisors to Sea Swift, Toll and the MUA to facilitate
maintenance of
confidentiality claims.
INTRODUCTION
Sea Swift and TML operate “full service” marine freight businesses
providing scheduled services for delivery of freight
by sea to islands and
remote coastal communities in FNQ (including the Outer Torres Strait Islands
(“OTSI”)) and the
NT. Those services will be referred to as
“scheduled services”, distinct from ad hoc charter (sometimes called
freight services described more fully below. Sea Swift
and TML are each other’s nearest competitors in FNQ and the NT.
Swift has provided a scheduled service to remote communities in FNQ for over 30
years; its main depot has been in Cairns since
1987. In 2009, TML was
established following Toll’s acquisition of Perkins Industries Pty Ltd and
its subsidiaries (“Perkins
Group”). For ease of reference in these
reasons, the Tribunal will refer to Perkins Group without distinction between
companies since nothing turns on the distinction. Perkins Group had
been providing shipping services predominantly in the NT, including
to remote NT
were less extensive and, since some time
before 2003, they were largely limited
to servicing contracts with Alcan (later Rio Tinto) and Woolworths on the
Cairns-Weipa route.
Swift is a subsidiary of Sea Swift (Holdings) Pty Ltd (“Sea Swift
Holdings”) which became majority owned by private
equity firms CHAMP
Ventures Funds (“Champ Ventures”) in November 2012. HarbourVest
Partners 2007 Direct Fund LP and
various individuals (including members of Sea
Swift’s management) invested at the same time.
Swift describes itself as a marine logistics company providing shipping and
associated services in FNQ and the NT. The main products
and services that Sea
Swift supplies are:
General cargo services:
Sea Swift operates
both charter and scheduled services for cargo including food, fuel and other
goods to customers such as businesses,
government agencies, mining projects and
individuals on remote islands and in coastal communities;
Fishery support:
Sea Swift provides mothershipping services to
fishing fleets, including the delivery of fuel, fresh water, packaging,
consumables
and exchange crew to fishing vessels and the transportation of catch
Charter and project logistics
: Sea Swift provides these services to
resources and infrastructure customers who require large, sporadic or one-off
deliveries, including
the movement of construction and infrastructure materials
and machinery for major projects;
Passenger cruise:
Sea Swift provides limited services transporting
passengers and their vehicles to various locations across FNQ and the Torres
Islands; and
Fuel retail
: Sea Swift retails a small volume of fuel to regional
Swift operates the Humbug Wharf in Weipa on behalf of RTA Weipa Pty Ltd and has
utilised the Gove Boat Club facility at Gove since
early 2014. It operates
depots at Darwin (Hudson Bay), Cairns, Weipa, Seisia/Bamaga (without a lease),
Horn Island, Gove and Thursday
2009 until August 2014, in addition to charter and scheduled services provided
to island and coastal communities in FNQ and the
NT, TML ran Perkins
Group’s international liner service on the Darwin-Dili-Singapore route.
That international part of the
service was sold as part of a planned restructure
and turnaround of the performance of the TML business as a whole. TML no longer
provides any international liner services into or out of Australia. It
continues to provide marine logistics services to the oil
and gas sector in
Queensland and Western Australia. Toll became a subsidiary of Japan Post Co Ltd
in May 2015.
conduct its scheduled service business in the NT and FNQ, TML currently employs
the following assets.
– TML uses two vessels in FNQ and three vessels in the NT. The two
vessels in FNQ are both owned by TML: the
. The vessels used in the NT to provide scheduled services have
changed from time to time, but currently include: the
Bimah Tujuh
chartered from Barge Express and the
Territorian
also on charter. TML also owns the
Biquele Bay
is currently used for ad hoc charter work (not scheduled services).
– TML uses various landing facilities in the NT and FNQ,
all of which are common user facilities apart from its private landing
facilities in Darwin and the facilities that it operates at Gove.
Toll currently
has a lease over wharf facilities in Melville Bay, located on the Gove
Peninsula, about 13 kilometres from the community
of Nhulunbuy in the NT; it is
owned by the Arnhem Land Aboriginal Land Trust (“Gove Lease”). The
wharf is land based,
on the lee side of Gove Harbour. The facilities include a
public wharf, a “heavy lift” (“lift-on/lift-off”)
and a “roll-on/roll-off” landing ramp. The landing ramp is suitable
for discharge of freight from barges. An
aerial photograph of this facility
identifying each of the wharves appears at Annexure 8 to these reasons. Access
to the heavy lift
wharf (but not the landing ramp) is the subject of an
undertaking to the ACCC under
The undertaking was first given by
Perkins Group in December 2003 after it acquired Gulf Freight Services Pty Ltd
(“Gulf Freight
Services”); it was modified in 2005 to allow a
priority user arrangement with Alcan during the expansion of its alumina
at Gove; and it was continued when Toll acquired Perkins Group in 2009.
TML provides stevedoring services on the heavy lift wharf
roll-on/roll-off landing ramp.
private landing facility in Darwin at Frances Bay is on land which is partly
owned and partly leased by Toll. If the
Proposed Acquisition is authorised,
Toll will be required to allow Sea Swift to use this facility for an interim
period. The evidence
of Toll’s officers is that whether or not the
Proposed Acquisition was authorised, the Frances Bay facility will be closed
(subject to necessary approvals) the land will be re-zoned and sold for
residential development.
TML uses other
common user facilities in the NT including the Groote Eylandt Mining Company Pty
Ltd (“GEMCO”) facility
at Groote Eylandt and various landing ramps
in the remote communities.
In FNQ, the
landing facilities used by TML at Cairns, Seisia/Bamaga, Thursday Island and
Horn Island are all common user facilities
managed by Ports North.
In Weipa, TML uses a common user facility managed by North Queensland Bulk Port
Corporation.
infrastructure or equipment in the remote communities where customers typically
collect their freight from the landing
point (usually a beach) when the barge
– TML employs staff across the NT and FNQ, including management and
administrative staff in Darwin, terminal managers and support
staff in Darwin
and Cairns, material handling officers and other staff to operate depots and
handle freight, and crew to operate
the vessels used to provide the services
(other than the
Bimah Tujuh
which is manned by the vessel owner, Barge
Express). Based on evidence given by Mr Scott Woodward (the General Manager of
Toll Energy
which incorporates TML), TML employed 128 staff of whom 17 live in
remote communities and are employed as depot/terminal staff.
Vessel crews are
subject to an enterprise bargaining agreement between Toll, the Australian
Maritime Officers Union and the MUA.
None of TML’s staff will be
transferred to Sea Swift under the Proposed Acquisition.
– There are only a limited number of contracts which provide
“base load” volume for scheduled services in the NT
and FNQ. The
routes (and therefore remote communities served) and the frequency of the
scheduled services that TML provides is typically
determined by the requirements
of its base load customers. Due to the nature of much of the freight (for
example, fresh produce
and other perishable items and fuel) and customer
requirements, TML services most destinations on a weekly basis. The exceptions
are that TML services some destinations in the NT on a fortnightly basis and
services remote communities in OTSI on a schedule “TBA”
to low levels of demand in those locations.
the time of the hearing, TML’s five largest contracts which provide base
load for the provision of scheduled services (“Largest
Contracts”)
(1) GEMCO (60% owned by South 32), which has manganese
mining operations on Groote Eylandt in the NT;
(2) Rio Tinto, which has mining operations in Gove in the NT and Weipa in FNQ.
TML has a contract with Rio Tinto in relation to
Gove (Sea Swift has the
contract for Weipa). In mid-February 2016, lest authorisation not be granted to
the Proposed Acquisition,
Rio Tinto put the Gove and Weipa contracts out to
tender; XXXX XX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXX XXXX XXX XXX XXXX;
(3) Arnhem Land Progress Aboriginal Corporation (“ALPA”), which
operates retail stores in over 25 remote locations in
the NT and FNQ. TML only
provides scheduled services to ALPA in the NT;
(4) Puma Energy Australia (“PUMA”), which supplies fuel to remote
the Northern Territory
Power & Water Corporation (“NT Power & Water”); and
(5) Islanders Board of Industry and Service (“IBIS”), which operates
stores and fuel depots in 15 remote communities
in FNQ. This is the only large
customer contract that TML has in FNQ.
customers party to the Largest Contracts will be referred to as the
“Largest Customers”.
charters the
Bimah Tujuh
and a crew from Barge Express to provide
services under the ALPA and PUMA contracts to communities at Garden Point,
Maningrida, Ramingining,
Milingimbi, Goulburn Island and Croker Island. It has
subcontracted the performance of its services in the FNQ under the IBIS contract
to Sea Swift.
XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXX some have exclusivity provisions or
rights of first refusal.
full list of the customer contracts which TML will transfer to Sea Swift under
the Proposed Acquisition is set out in Schedule 2
of the Annexure to the
Determination; there are 28 in all (“Transferred Contracts”).
Competition between Sea Swift and TML
2013, there was a period of intense competition in the NT and FNQ with both Sea
Swift and TML adopting a strategy of aggressive
pricing in an attempt to gain
market share in the territory in which the other was dominant. This resulted in
reduced prices and
improved service levels on some routes.
January 2013, Sea Swift acquired a NT-based marine freight service provider,
Tiwi Barge, and with the support of Caltex it commenced
offering a full service
scheduled service in competition with TML in the NT. It pursued a strategy of
expanding its business in
the NT by competing for TML’s contracts. In
2013, Caltex awarded a contract to Sea Swift previously held by TML in relation
to the carriage of fuel in support of the contract Caltex had with NT Power
& Water. TML also lost the Woolworths contract
at Gove, the Rio Tinto
Weipa contract and the Woolworths Weipa contract to Sea Swift, resulting in TML
incurring heavy losses.
retaliated by expanding into the Torres Strait in FNQ in early 2014. TML won
the IBIS contract from Sea Swift but it was not
otherwise successful in winning
large contracts in FNQ.
October 2014, TML recovered the contract to carry fuel in the NT when PUMA won
the NT Power & Water contract from Caltex.
a result of aggressive competition, both TML and Sea Swift made heavy losses in
the financial years 2014 and 2015. They both subsequently
cost-cutting measures, including abandoning or subcontracting some routes.
March 2014, Toll’s senior management considered the various options for
the TML business, including restructuring and cost
cutting, divestment or merger
and exiting the market. Mr David Jackson (CEO of Toll’s Resource and
Government Logistics division,
the division in which TML sits) says that he
doubted that cost cutting would be effective because of TML’s underlying
base, including enterprise bargaining agreements that resulted in a high
cost of labour compared to other operators. Mr Jackson
says that in taking a
decision to exit the market, Toll would seek to minimise costs and disruption to
TML’s customers. This
was important because Toll wished to maintain its
reputation with customers who were customers of the broader Toll group; it was
therefore important to maintain continuity of supply and for the contracts to be
performed on their current (or no less advantageous)
terms. He was also aware
of the social dimensions of the business conducted in the NT and FNQ.
this basis, Toll made contact with CHAMP Ventures to see if there was interest
in a merger between TML and Sea Swift. In August
2014, the Toll Board
considered the options of winding up the business or selling to Sea Swift. Mr
Jackson was authorised to pursue
negotiations. In light of all of the factors
and the scale of the losses incurred by TML, Mr Kruger (Toll’s
Managing Director)
and Mr Jackson were of the view that Sea Swift was the only
realistic purchaser as only Sea Swift would be able to generate sufficient
synergies to offset TML’s substantial operating losses. In Mr
Jackson’s view, it would be a waste of time and
money to seek another
purchaser and Mr Kruger agreed that there was no other likely purchaser. Mr
Scott Woodward also holds that
Timetable concerning the Proposed Acquisition
Proposed Acquisition and the associated regulatory process developed as
(1) On 8 September 2014, Sea Swift and Toll entered into
a terms sheet in relation to a proposed transaction.
(2) On 24 November 2014, Sea Swift, Sea Swift Holdings, Toll and the relevant
subsidiaries entered into an Asset and Share Sale Agreement
Agreement”) relating to the shares and assets to be sold to Sea Swift.
The Original Agreement contained a
condition that Sea Swift obtain either formal
or informal merger clearance from the ACCC or merger authorisation from the
before a sunset date of 31 May 2015.
(3) On 5 December 2014, Sea Swift and Toll sought informal merger clearance from
(4) By letter dated 26 February 2015, Toll advised its customers that if the
transaction with Sea Swift was not approved, Toll would
commence winding up
TML’s operations in the NT and FNQ.
(5) The Original Agreement was varied on 26 June 2015 following renegotiation of
the sunset date and to address concerns raised by
the ACCC during the informal
clearance process. A side deed was also executed.
(6) On 9 July 2015, the ACCC advised that it would not grant an informal
(7) On 21 September 2015, the Original Agreement (as amended) was varied and Sea
Swift filed an application pursuant to s 95AU with
the Tribunal seeking
authorisation under s 95AT. Sea Swift withdrew that application on 16 November
2015 after it became apparent
that there were issues surrounding the accuracy of
its financial statements.
(8) By letter to its customers dated 21 October 2015, Toll reiterated its
intention to exit the markets in the NT and FNQ and advised
customers that it
anticipated that if the Tribunal did not authorise Sea Swift’s acquisition
of TML’s marine freight
business in the NT and FNQ, it would cease
providing scheduled services within approximately 60 days and wind up its
operations.
(9) The Original Agreement was further varied on 17 March 2016 when a Deed of
Amendment was executed. The Amended and Restated Asset
and Share Sale Agreement
(“ARASSA”) giving rise to the Proposed Acquisition was set out in
Schedule 1 to the Deed of
(10) A further application under s 95AU seeking authorisation under s 95AT
was filed by Sea Swift on 4 April 2016.
(11) The Tribunal issued a memorandum as to the validity of the application
under s 95AW on 8 April 2016.
(12) On 22 April 2016, the ACCC filed the “ACCC Issues List” in
relation to the Proposed Acquisition and on 16 May 2016
it provided its Report
to the Tribunal pursuant to s 95AZEA (“ACCC
of the Proposed Acquisition are summarised at [79]-[84].
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
was no contention between the parties as to the principles applicable to the
Tribunal’s decision whether to grant authorisation.
prohibits a corporation from acquiring shares or assets if the acquisition
would have the effect, or be likely to have the effect,
of substantially
lessening competition in any market.
Tribunal may grant authorisation to a person to acquire shares in the capital of
a body corporate or acquire the assets of another
person and it may do so
subject to such conditions as are specified in the authorisation, including a
condition that a person must
make and comply with an undertaking to the ACCC
ss 95AT(1) and 95AZJ.
does not prevent an acquisition
in accordance with an authorisation, so long as the conditions of any
authorisation are complied
with before, during and after the acquisition:
ss 95AT(2) and (3).
Test to be applied – s 95AZH
Tribunal must not grant an authorisation “unless it is satisfied in all of
the circumstances” that the proposed acquisition
would result, or be
likely to result, in “such a benefit to the public that the acquisition
should be allowed to occur”:
s 95AZH(1).
95AZH(2) specifies certain matters to which the Tribunal must have regard in
determining what amounts to a public benefit.
None of the matters set out in s
95AZH(2) is relevant to Sea Swift’s application.
“Net public benefits” test
is the second time the Tribunal has had to consider s 95AZH. However, as
noted by the Tribunal in
Application for Authorisation of Acquisition of
Macquarie Generation by AGL Energy Limited
[2014] ACompT 1
at [156], it has, on a number of occasions, considered
the expressions “benefit to the public” and “detriment to
public” appearing in
which continue to apply to the evaluation
of non-merger authorisations.
Section 90(9)
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), which is in substantially the same terms as s 95AZH, was
considered at some length in
Re Qantas Airways Limited
[2004] ACompT 9
, s 95AZH does not refer to detriment to the public as a factor in
the Tribunal’s decision whether to authorise a proposed acquisition.
Nonetheless, the Tribunal in
found that in applying the test
under s 95AZH(1), it must examine the likely anti-competitive effects of a
proposed acquisition on
the one hand and the likely public benefits flowing from
it on the other and weigh them against each other:
This Tribunal adopts that position.
public benefit arises from a proposed acquisition if the benefit would not exist
without the acquisition or if the acquisition removes
or mitigates a public
detriment which would otherwise exist. If a claimed public benefit exists, in
part, in a future without the
proposal, the weight accorded to the benefit may
be reduced appropriately. Public benefit is a wide concept and may include
of value to the community generally so long as there is a causal link
between the proposed acquisition and the benefit: see
Application by
Medicines Australia Inc
(2007) ATPR 42-164
[2007] ACompT 4
Medicines Australia
”) at [107], [118]-[119]. Benefits not
widely shared may nevertheless be benefits to the public:
Hospital Benefit
Fund of Western Australia Inc v Australian Competition and Consumer
(1997) 76 FCR 369
at 375-377. However, the extent to which the
benefits extend to ultimate consumers is a matter to be put in the scales:
public detriment includes the reduction of competition arising from an
acquisition as well as other matters contrary to the goals
pursued by society,
including the goal of economic efficiency; public detriment may not be confined
to competitive detriment: see
Medicines Australia
at [108] and [115]; see
Re Australian Association of Pathology Practices Incorporated
[2004] ACompT 4
206 ALR 271
; ATPR 41-985; [2004] AComptT 4 at [93]-[94]; and
Chicken Meat Growers’ Boycott Authorisation
[2006] ACompT 2
(2006) ATPR 42-120
AComptT 2 at [66]-[67].
Future “with and without”
assessing relevant public detriments and public benefits associated with a
proposed acquisition, the Tribunal looks to hypothetical
futures, one where the
acquisition takes place and is in effect and one where it does not take place,
the so called “with and
without” test. The test is not to compare
the present situation with the future situation: it is not a “before and
Medicines Australia
at [117]-[119].
Degree of satisfaction required
Tribunal must be satisfied that a claimed benefit or detriment is such that it
will, in a tangible and commercially practical
way, be a consequence of a
proposed acquisition if the acquisition is allowed to occur and that the
applicant is commercially likely
to act in a way which brings about the benefit
or detriment. The benefit or detriment must be sufficiently capable of
(but not necessarily quantitatively so) rather than “ephemeral
or illusory”: see
a benefit or detriment to be taken into account, it must “be of substance
and have durability”. Any estimate as to
their quantification should be
robust and commercially realistic. The assumptions underlying the estimates
should be spelled out
in such a way that they can be tested and verified. Care
must be taken to distinguish between one-off benefits and those of a more
lasting nature. The options for achieving claimed benefits should be explored
and appropriate weighting given to future benefits
not achievable in any other
less anti-competitive way. The Tribunal must be satisfied that “there is
a real chance, and not
a mere possibility” of the benefit or detriment
eventuating. While it is not necessary to show that the benefits or detriments
are certain to occur, or that it is more probable than not that they will occur,
claims that are purely speculative in nature should
not be given any weight: see
at [163]-[164] and the cases there cited.
Tribunal’s decision must be based in the real world and not rest on
speculation or theory alone: see
Australian Gas Light Company v Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission (No 3)
(2003) 137 FCR 317
AGL v ACCC (No 3)
”) per French J (as he then was) at
[348]. While French J was considering the test in
, the parties accept
that this proposition is equally applicable to the assessment which the Tribunal
is required to make under s
summary, the Tribunal is called upon to make a robust and commercially realistic
judgment of the claimed public benefits and public
detriments, exposed by its
reasoning process: see
at [172]; cf
[206]-[210].
Does s 95AZH(3) bar the grant of an authorisation?
authorisation cannot be granted for an acquisition that has occurred:
s 95AZH(3).
completeness, the Tribunal mentions that shortly before the
“readiness” case management conference held on 3 June
2016, it was
drawn to the Tribunal’s attention that Sea Swift’s Application had
been made on 4 April 2016, more than
14 days after the ARASSA was adopted by Sea
Swift and Toll when they entered into the Deed of Amendment on 17 March 2016.
relevant because of the combined effect of
the Tribunal was satisfied that it had jurisdiction to hear the application
which had been validly made, it sought submissions
as to whether it was in a
position to grant an authorisation if it was satisfied that the Proposed
Acquisition resulted (or would
be likely to result) in “such a benefit to
the public that the acquisition should be allowed to occur”: see
s 95AZH(1).
(a) a person has entered into a contract to acquire shares in the capital of a
body corporate or assets of a person;
(b) the contract is subject to a condition that the provisions of the contract
relating to the acquisition will not come into force
unless and until the person
has been granted a clearance or an authorization to acquire the shares or
assets; and
(c) the person applied for the grant of such a clearance or an authorization
before the expiration of 14 days after the contract
was entered into;
the acquisition of the shares or assets shall not be regarded for the
purposes of this Act as having taken place in pursuance of the
(d) the application for the clearance or authorization is disposed of; or
(e) the contract ceases to be subject to the condition;
whichever first happens.
[Emphasis added]
In this Act:
(a) a reference to the acquisition of shares in the capital of a body corporate
shall be construed as a reference to an acquisition,
whether alone or jointly
with another person,
of any legal or equitable interest in such shares
(b) a reference to the acquisition of assets of a person shall be construed as a
reference to an acquisition, whether alone or jointly
with another person, of
any legal or equitable interest in such assets
but does not include a
reference to an acquisition by way of charge only or an acquisition in the
ordinary course of business.
[Emphasis added]
the case management conference on 3 June 2016, Mr Burnside QC referred the
Tribunal to
AGL v ACCC (No 3)
at [338]-[339] in which these provisions
were considered by French J:
... Acquisitions of shares are defined by
what amounts to a deeming provision in
of the Act. A reference to
such an acquisition ‘shall be construed as a reference to an acquisition,
whether alone or jointly
with another person, of any legal or equitable interest
in such shares’. On that definition, one transaction may give rise
successive acquisitions for the purposes of
A corporation which enters
into a contract to purchase the shares of a body corporate may acquire an
equitable interest prior to
settlement and thereby acquire the shares pursuant
This will not necessarily attract the prohibition in
the acquisition of the legal interest has not been completed and no right
subsists in the acquirer as a shareholder in the
target body corporate then
forging any link to a substantial lessening of competition would be problematic.
In the case of a contract subject to a condition precedent, as in the present
case, no interest is conveyed until satisfaction of
the condition.
Hill Pty Co Ltd v Trade Practices Tribunal
[1980] FCA 91
(1980) 47 FLR 384
(1980) 31 ALR
concerned an acquisition of shares conditional upon authorisation by the
Trade Practices Commission. It conveyed no direct beneficial
interest in the
shares. A direct beneficial interest was acquired only when the contract became
specifically enforceable by an order
to convey or transfer. Prior to the
condition being satisfied, the purchaser could seek an order to require the
vendor to do what
it must under the contract to secure fulfilment of the
condition...
2 of the ARASSA states that the contract is conditional on the Tribunal
authorising the Proposed Acquisition. Sea Swift and
Toll submitted that Sea
Swift’s only entitlement under the ARASSA was to specific performance of
any steps required to fulfil
the condition; no “acquisition”
occurred as a result of entry into that agreement. It was further submitted
it were to be found that Sea Swift had acquired a legal or equitable
interest in the relevant shares or assets upon entry into the
Deed of Amendment,
Sea Swift did not seek authorisation of that interest; it sought authorisation
of the acquisition of assets and
shares that would occur if and when the
agreement is completed. Accordingly, Sea Swift did not seek to rely on
ACCC did not seek to contradict those submissions. As submitted by Mr Burnside
QC at the case management conference, if
operated as a time bar it
would also have profound implications for the ACCC’s informal clearance
and relying on the reasoning and authority of
at [338]-[339], the presidential member found that s 95AZH(3)
does not prevent the grant of an authorisation in this matter.
WITNESSES AND OTHER EVIDENCE
Matters the Tribunal must take into account
95AZG(2) sets out the matters that the Tribunal is required to take into account
in making its determination which include:
(1) any submissions in relation to the application made
to it within the period specified by the Tribunal. In addition to written
oral submissions received from Sea Swift, Toll, the ACCC and the MUA, the
Tribunal received submissions from Mr Peter Ah Loy
of See Hop Trading Pty Ltd
trading in the Thursday Islands; Mr Mark Hedley of Weipa; the Torres Strait
Island Regional Authority;
the Honourable Warren Entsch MP, Federal Member for
Leichhardt based in Cairns; the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
(“Department
of PM & C”); and the Department of the Chief
Minister of the NT. One submission was received from an entity which was
prepared to allow the parties access to the submission. As the entity did not
respond to a request from the Tribunal to provide
the submission to the
parties’ lawyers or experts under the Confidentiality Regime so that they
would have an opportunity to
respond to it, the Tribunal has treated that
submission as withdrawn and has not considered it;
(2) any information received pursuant to a notice issued by the Tribunal under
s 95AZC; a notice was issued to Sea Swift and a response
(3) any information received pursuant to a notice issued by the Tribunal under
s 95AZD; notices were issued to, and responses received
from: Toll; TML;
PUMA; ALPA; Barge Express; Mr Ken Conlon, the Managing Director of Barge
Express; and Mr Stephen Muller, the Chief
Executive Officer of MIPEC Pty
Ltd (“MIPEC”);
(4) any information obtained from consultations under s 95AZD(2);
(5) any report by the ACCC given to the Tribunal under s 95AZEA. The
Tribunal received the ACCC’s Report on 16 May 2016; and
(6) any information or evidence provided to the Tribunal in the course of the
ACCC assisting it under s 95AZF.
Lay witnesses
Tribunal received one or more statements or evidence by way of affidavit from
each of the lay witnesses set out in Annexure 1
to these reasons other than Mr
Slimming (who attended the hearing in response to a summons issued by the
Tribunal pursuant to
at the request of the ACCC). As is evident
from Annexure 1, the lay witness included officers and employees of Sea Swift
their competitors (both for scheduled and charter services),
CHAMP-Ventures, remote community based organisations and current or
customers of TML and Sea Swift. Those lay witness who gave oral evidence
appeared before the Tribunal in person or by video-conference
facilities from
Cairns or Darwin. The Tribunal thanks each of them for their
assistance.
Expert evidence
expert witnesses were engaged by the ACCC or Sea Swift and each provided a
report. No expert evidence was tendered by either
Toll or the MUA. Of the
experts who provided a report, only Professor Stephen King was not called to
give evidence at the hearing.
who were asked to provide a report by the ACCC were:
Williams of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd;
Stephen King, Department of Economics, Monash University; and
Lindholm, a partner in Ferrier Hodgson specialising in insolvency and
turnarounds.
asked to provide a report by Sea Swift were:
Siolis, a partner in RBB Economics;
Mr Simon Bishop,
a partner in and co- founder of RBB Economics;
Meyrick, an associate of Synergies Economic Consulting; and
Mr John-Henry
Eversgerd, a partner in PPB Advisory. Mr Eversgerd is the partner in charge of
the disputes and valuation practice.
King was asked by the ACCC to provide an opinion on the Proposed Conditions, as
contained in Annexure A to Sea Swift’s
Application, in terms of the
conceptual and/or practical issues that could arise in relation to the
implementation and enforcement
of behavioural undertakings. He was also asked
to assess whether the Proposed Conditions and the Gove Lease Undertaking set out
in Annexure E to Sea Swift’s Application were likely to be effective in
addressing the anti-competitive detriments alleged
by the ACCC to be the likely
consequence of the Proposed Acquisition. While he did not give oral evidence,
Professor King’s
opinions were the subject of submissions by the parties
and addressed to some extent in concurrent evidence given by the other expert
economists.
Siolis was asked by Sea Swift to answer the following questions in respect of
the operations of Sea Swift and TML in the NT and
(1) Are one or both parties currently profitable in the
relevant market?
(2) Could one or both parties become profitable in the relevant market if they
succeeded in winning some major (large multi-destination)
(3) What are the likely costs of a single operator operating in the relevant
enable Mr Siolis to answer these questions, Sea Swift and TML provided him with
data relating to their operations in the NT and
Lindholm was asked by the ACCC to respond to the following questions:
(1) What would you advise Toll to do with its marine
logistics business in the NT and FNQ if the proposed acquisition of TML’s
assets by Sea Swift does not proceed?
(2) If, at February 2016, Sea Swift had a right to terminate the ARASSA, at that
time, would you have advised Sea Swift to exercise
that right or to amend the
ARASSA, and why?
(3) What amount of the total consideration to be paid by Sea Swift under the
ARASSA is attributable to goodwill?
Eversgerd was instructed by Sea Swift to review and comment on Mr
Lindholm’s opinions, but, due to time constraints in the
lead up to the
hearing, he was not asked to perform his own analysis of the questions put to
Mr. Lindholm.
Lindholm and Eversgerd gave concurrent evidence at the hearing. Concurrent
evidence is sometimes colloquially referred to
as a “hot tub”.
Bishop and Meyrick were each asked by Sea Swift to address the following
(1) Is the Proposed Acquisition likely to substantially
lessen competition in the relevant markets?
(2) What public benefits, if any, are likely to arise as a result of the
Proposed Acquisition?
(3) Is the Proposed Acquisition likely to result in a public benefit that
outweighs any likely public detriment constituted by any
lessening of
competition?
Williams was asked by the ACCC to respond to the following questions:
(1) Identify and assess any public detriments that are
likely to arise as a result of the Proposed Acquisition, including in particular
any competitive detriments.
(2) Comment on whether the public benefits of the Proposed Acquisition claimed
by Sea Swift and Toll have a real chance of happening;
would be a result of the
Proposed Acquisition; and whether they are of substance, durable, quantifiable
and of a lasting nature.
(3) Comment on whether the claimed public benefits of the Proposed Acquisition
outweigh any public detriments that are likely to
arise as a result of the
Proposed Acquisition.
(4) Review and comment upon the reports of Mr George Siolis, Mr Stephen Meyrick
and Mr Simon Bishop.
Williams and Messrs Bishop and Meyrick (who are together referred to as the
“expert economists”) also gave concurrent
the hearing, the Tribunal asked each of the two groups of experts who would give
concurrent evidence to produce a document
that outlined areas of agreement, and
perhaps more importantly, areas where they could not agree. Two very helpful
documents were
provided to the Tribunal and those documents were of assistance
in formulating the questions put to the witnesses by the parties’
and the Tribunal.
expert economists agreed on 16 of the 30 propositions considered by them. Of
the 14 propositions about which there was disagreement,
nine related to barriers
to entry, expansion and exit, and two to the closely related issue of potential
competition. Of particular
note were the disagreements on whether sunk costs;
reputational advantages; the timing of tenders for big contracts; the
availability
of assets (especially vessels and depots); and access to wharf
facilities at Gove constituted barriers to entry.
to these considerations was disagreement about whether the market was
contestable in any acceptable manner; whether the Proposed
Acquisition would
increase the market power of Sea Swift beyond what would happen in the
counterfactual; whether goodwill can be
a reliable indicator of market power;
and whether the reshaping of the market represented an integral part of the
on-going competitive
process in the market for scheduled marine freight services
in the NT and FNQ.
their joint document, Messrs Eversgerd and Lindholm concurred on seven of the
nine propositions relating to the first question
asked of Mr. Lindholm, two of
the three propositions under the second question, and two of the five
propositions under the third
question (Mr Lindholm stated that he had not been
asked by the ACCC to provide an opinion on one of the propositions under the
question). They disagreed strongly on three key matters:
(1) how to assess the present value of the consideration
that Sea Swift proposes to pay Toll for the purchase of its operations if
reference to the face value attributed to it by Sea Swift and Toll;
(2) the best commercial option for Toll to pursue, given its decision to exit
the NT and FNQ markets, and to whom it might seek to
sell its assets; and
(3) the estimated goodwill value included in the purchase
should be noted that neither of Messrs Lindholm or Eversgerd was asked to
provide a formal valuation of the consideration Toll
would receive under the
Tribunal would like to thank all the experts for their contributions. They
developed their arguments carefully and clearly; they
engaged on the disputed
issues with civility. That the Tribunal has accepted some of the
experts’ assessments and rejected
others casts no reflection on the work
or diligence of the experts whose arguments were not accepted by the Tribunal.
2-7 to these reasons were prepared by the parties as a joint response to the
Tribunal’s request for information dated
15 June 2016. The information in
these annexures is derived from information in Sea Swift’s Application,
witness statements,
annexures to witness statements, oral evidence given at the
hearing and exhibits. Footnotes (other than explanatory footnotes), which
appeared in the joint response have been omitted and minor grammatical
amendments have been made.
8 is an aerial photo of the Gove Wharf. It was included as a schedule to Sea
Swift’s proposed s 87B undertaking in
respect of the Gove Lease which was
filed as Annexure E to Sea Swift’s Application.
THE PROPOSED ACQUISITION
Proposed Acquisition is constituted under a Deed of Amendment dated 17 March
2016 which appends the ARASSA. The Proposed Acquisition
will take effect
subject to the Conditions set out in the Determination.
Shares and assets to be acquired
summary, Sea Swift sought authorisation to acquire:
(1) all of the shares in Toll’s subsidiaries
Perkins Maritime Pty Ltd and Perkins Lady Jan Pty Ltd;
(2) three vessels,
Toll Coral Bay, Toll Fourcroy
Toll Biquele
(3) by novation, the Transferred Contracts including the five Largest
(4) the Gove Lease; and
(5) a small number of leases or freehold title to depots and residential houses
which are used as staff accommodation in various
locations and rights to various
containers and equipment (such as forklifts, container handlers, vehicles and
demountable buildings)
and miscellaneous small assets.
Excluded assets
specific assets are not the subject of the Proposed Acquisition,
(1) one of Toll’s vessels, the
and two vessels which TML charters (the
Bimah Tujuh
Territorian
(2) TML’s Frances Bay terminal facility in Darwin. Sea Swift will have
access to the Frances Bay facility for a limited transition
mentioned above, Sea Swift will not employ TML’s employees as part of the
Proposed Acquisition.
Proposed Acquisition does not include TML’s marine logistics work for the
oil and gas sector in Queensland or Western Australia
or TML’s scheduled
or charter services outside of the NT and FNQ. These parts of TML’s
business are not subject to the
XXXXXX XXXXX mentioned in the next paragraph.
Consideration
consideration for the shares and assets Toll’s subsidiaries will receive:
(1) at completion, approximately XXX XXX cash, the
agreed value of the tangible assets (other than bunker oil) being
transferred;
(2) deferred consideration in the form of a note issued by Sea Swift with a face
value of XXX XXXXXXX, an interest rate of XXX per
annum and a term of XXXXX
commencing at completion (XXXXXX XXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXX). The
vendor note will rank after
external lenders but before loan notes to other
shareholders;
(3) XXX of the issued securities in Sea Swift Holdings. Toll and its affiliates
will be subject to a XXXXXX XXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXX
XXXX XXX XXX XXXXXX XXXXX
XXXXXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXX XXX XXXX; and
(4) a reimbursement amount of XXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXXX XXXXXX XXXXX
XXXXXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXXX XXXXXXX XXXXX
XXXX XXX XXX XXXXXX XXX
XXXX. This amount was also payable (subject to conditions) if the authorisation
was not granted.
PROPOSED CONDITIONS
Proposed Conditions as set out in Sea Swift’s Application were modified as
a result of issues raised by the Tribunal at
the hearing and in consultation
relating to the draft Determination. For reasons which appear below, the
Tribunal did not accept
that the Proposed Conditions (other than the Gove Lease
Undertaking) were required to address competitive detriments arising out
Proposed Acquisition.
was the Tribunal’s view that the Proposed Conditions as modified by the
Tribunal (described below) resulted in public benefits
that justified
authorisation. The Gove Lease Undertaking requires special comment and it is
dealt with elsewhere in these reasons.
Transferred Contracts Condition
set out in Sea Swift’s Application, this Proposed Condition prohibited Sea
Swift from relying on or giving effect to any
exclusivity or minimum freight
volume clauses in the Transferred Contracts during their term. As noted
previously, there are 28
Transferred Contracts, including TML’s five
Largest Contracts.
of the Largest Contracts contained rights of first refusal. Although Sea Swift
submitted that this right did not impair the contestability
of these contracts
because it would be open to the customers to terminate the contracts on XXXX XXX
XX notice, the Tribunal accepted
the ACCC’s submission that from the
perspective of a new entrant, these provisions would have a similar effect to an
exclusivity
clause because it gives the incumbent service provider the right to
match competitive offers on price or service conditions. Sea
Swift accepted the
Tribunal’s position that the Transferred Contracts Condition should
preclude reliance on rights of first
Swift also accepted the Tribunal’s position that the list of Transferred
Contracts should not remain confidential and confirmed
that references in the
Condition to the “term” of a contract referred to the initial term
and all periods by which the
term might be extended or renewed at the option of
the customer. The Transferred Contracts are listed in Schedule 2 of the
to the Determination so that this information is available to Sea
Swift’s competitors.
the Tribunal provided the parties with a consultation draft of the
Determination, the ACCC submitted that although the Condition
prohibited Sea
Swift from relying on a provision which required the customer to consign a
minimum volume of freight with Sea Swift,
it should be amended so that it also
applied to clauses which provided for price discounts when specified volumes of
freight were
exceeded. The Tribunal did not accept the ACCC’s submission
because price discounts set at different levels of volume are
a normal aspect of
competition in a market; they reflect the fact that the greater the volume the
easier it is for a provider to
meet its fixed costs and derive a profit. The
Tribunal did not accept that the suggested amendment was required to support
contestability
of the Transferred Contracts.
Remote Community Service Condition
set out in Sea Swift’s Application, this Proposed Condition requires Sea
Swift, for a period of five years after the completion
of the Proposed
Acquisition, to maintain a minimum level of scheduled services to the locations
currently serviced by Sea Swift or
TML as set out in Schedule 3 of Annexure A to
Sea Swift’s Application, and maintain an up-to-date shipping schedule of
on its website. This Proposed Condition covers 38 remote locations;
Sea Swift will undertake to service 35 of these locations on
a weekly basis, two
on a fortnightly basis and one once per month. The services may not be provided
following a specified “force
majeure” event.
framed in Sea Swift’s Application, Sea Swift would be relieved of this
Condition if another operator provided services on
a route for eight consecutive
weeks. Having regard to the needs of remote communities, the Tribunal raised
with Sea Swift its concern
that this was not a sufficient time to test whether
the competitor would provide the service as a real substitute to Sea Swift.
a result, Sea Swift offered to amend the Proposed Condition by substituting a
period of 12 weeks for eight weeks and undertaking
to re-enter the route within
28 days after it became aware that the other operator had ceased to provide at
least a weekly service.
Sea Swift submitted that if it lost one of the base
load contracts which secured the viability of a route, it would be inappropriate
for it to be required to service the communities along that route for a long
period, but it accepted that it would prejudice those
other operator operated in the market for only a relatively short period and
then withdrew. The Tribunal
accepted that crafting the Condition by reference
to the base load contracts could give rise to undue complexity.
Condition as imposed by the Tribunal was amended to include the 12 week period
offered by Sea Swift, a requirement that Sea Swift
resume services within 28
days of an alternative provider withdrawing from that route and a requirement
that Sea Swift’s yearly
report contain any instances of non-compliance
with this Condition.
Remote Community Price Condition
this Proposed Condition, Sea Swift undertakes to charge no greater than a
specified “Maximum Charge” for a period of
five years in relation to
“dry freight”, “refrigerated freight” and “vehicle
freight” to the
remote communities, and it will comply with specified
requirements for any price increase. Mr Bruno, Sea Swift’s Chief
Officer, says that these are the types of freight most usually carried
for uncontracted customers. It does not cover “liquid
commodities”,
such as bulk fuel in containers such as 200 litre drums, other bulk goods in
containers across sizes of 5-20
feet, bulka bags or integrated bulk containers,
or other items such as boats, trailers, gas bottles and machinery.
“Maximum Charge” specified in the Remote Community Price Condition
is set by reference to the “Base Price”
identified in Schedule 4 of
the Annexure to the Determination. For customers in FNQ, the Base Price is
based on Sea Swift’s
scheduled rates as at 1 August 2015. For customers
in the NT, it is based on TML’s scheduled rates as at 1 September 2015
(except for destinations not currently serviced by TML, in respect of which Sea
Swift's scheduled rates apply). The Maximum Charge
will be subject to annual
price increases based on publicly available price indexes – being the
Consumer Price Index and the
annual labour rate percentage increases in Sea
Swift’s collective bargaining agreement. Schedule 4 also sets out how Sea
will impose the other components of its pricing for these services such as
a fuel surcharge fee, a consignment note fee, a port and
council fee, a
dangerous goods surcharge, a minimum freight charge and charges for any
additional services a customer may require.
Apart from indexed increases, Sea
Swift may only increase prices affected by this Condition if the increase is
approved by an independent
pricing expert or the Tribunal determines that it is
no longer necessary for Sea Swift to comply with this Condition. Sea Swift
notify the ACCC at the time it initiates an Independent Price Review Process as
well as the results of any review. It is also
required to report annually to
the ACCC the Base Prices charged in the previous financial year and the Base
Prices it is charging
in the current financial year (including details of the
inputs and calculations underlying any increase to the Base Prices).
Gove Lease Undertaking
Swift submitted that access to the facilities operated by TML as part of the
Gove Lease is not a significant barrier to entry
for suppliers in the NT because
there are other facilities available at Gove. Sea Swift argued that it entered
the market without
use of the facilities at the Gove Lease (see [148] below).
Nonetheless, Sea Swift offered to accept as a condition of authorisation
enters into the Gove Lease Undertaking. Sea Swift submitted that the prices
reflected in the Gove Lease Undertaking are
less than those currently charged by
TML and that the undertaking is in a form that had previously been accepted by
the ACCC when
offered by the Perkins Group. Further, Sea Swift submitted that
the undertaking will extend to the roll-on/roll-off ramp which is
not covered by
the existing s 87B undertaking.
Toll Commitments
offered to make the following commitments to the Tribunal if authorisation was
(1) to release back to their owners two vessels it
currently uses in the NT, being the
Toll Territorian
(2) to sell its line haul vessel, the
, in a timely manner and
at a fair market value. The
is currently used by TML to
provide scheduled services on the Cairns-Weipa route. Toll offered undertakings
in relation to how the
value would be determined; and
(3) to not sell the
to Sea Swift.
Tribunal is unconcerned about the price at which Toll sells the
, but considered that the other aspects of these commitments
should comprise a Condition of any authorisation, a position accepted
Swift and Toll.
Swift is required to submit documentation to the ACCC in relation to its
compliance with the Conditions at the end of each financial
year and to provide
the ACCC with the details of any suspension of its obligations in accordance
with the Conditions or any subcontract
it enters into for the performance of its
obligations. The reporting requirements proposed by Sea Swift were amended by
the Tribunal
to require Sea Swift to report any failure to comply with the
Remote Community Service Condition as well as the Remote Community
Condition and to provide any information to the ACCC which it requires and
reasonably requests in relation to matters raised
in the report.
SEA SWIFT AND TOLL’S POSITIONS IN SUMMARY
Swift and Toll claimed that the Proposed Acquisition results in public benefits
which justify authorisation having regard to the
Proposed Conditions. They
claimed that there are no public detriments having regard to the
“counterfactual” that TML
will withdraw from the NT and FNQ in any
event, leaving Sea Swift as the only full service provider and the most likely
to TML’s Largest Customers. They submitted that if the Tribunal
finds that the Proposed Acquisition does result in competitive
detriments, the
Proposed Acquisition should be authorised because it results in net public
benefits which justify authorisation.
public benefits that Sea Swift and Toll contend will result from the Proposed
Acquisition are, in summary:
(1) Subject to the customers’ consent to transfer
the Transferred Contracts to Sea Swift, Sea Swift will honour the Transferred
Contracts for their term, including the prices negotiated under those contracts.
Absent the Proposed Acquisition the customers under
the Transferred Contracts
would have to seek an alternative provider and the customers would be likely to
lose the benefit of the
prices negotiated during the heat of competition between
Sea Swift and TML.
(2) The Transferred Contracts Condition allows customers to “try before
they buy” because Sea Swift will not rely on
exclusivity or minimum volume
clauses in those contracts. This means that customers would not suffer
disruptions in service while
providing them with the opportunity to investigate
and test the capabilities and terms of alternative providers. Sea Swift said
that the Transferred Contracts are regularly contested by actual and potential
competitors through tender processes conducted on
a periodic basis and the
effect of the Proposed Condition is to enhance the contestability of the
contracts, thereby improving conditions
for entry and expansion into the
relevant markets. It also imposes an additional competitive discipline on Sea
Swift which may not
exist if authorisation is refused and the TML business in
the NT and FNQ is wound up.
(3) The proposed Remote Community Service Condition and the Remote Community
Price Condition are designed to “protect the most
frequency of services and imposes a limitation
on price increases for
uncontracted customers in remote communities. Without the Proposed Acquisition
there would be a risk of declining
frequency of services on routes and no
protection against arbitrary price rises. Indeed it may not be in the
commercial interest
of Sea Swift or any other service provider to service some
of these routes so that routes might be rationalised.
(4) The Proposed Acquisition allows an orderly exit for TML, minimising
disruption to TML’s customers and the potential for
damage to its
reputation and customer relationships. It also allows TML’s assets to be
more efficiently deployed in the market
as some of TML’s vessels will
remain in the NT and FNQ for use in the provision of scheduled services. Toll
will realise better
value for its assets than it would in a wind up scenario,
the funds from which it will be able to allocate or deploy in its other
activities. Sea Swift and Toll submitted that this lowers barriers to entry
because new providers will be more likely to
enter the market (or existing
providers are more likely to expand their operations) if they know that an
orderly exit is possible.
This will result in a competitive environment that is
more conducive to new entry over a longer period than if the TML business
(5) Sea Swift will be able to access additional revenues, vessels and equipment
which would allow it to rationalise and reduce the
combined fixed costs of both
its scheduled services and charter services; this will enable Sea Swift to
maintain these services on
a more reliable, efficient and sustainable basis in
the long term. It allows the industry to move towards its most efficient cost
Swift and Toll say that the Proposed Acquisition results in no public detriment
(1) As TML will exit the markets with or without the
Proposed Acquisition, it will not result in any public detriment arising from
any lessening of competition. Sea Swift contends that the movement towards one
full service operator of scheduled services in FNQ
and the NT will occur with or
without the Proposed Acquisition. There is insufficient demand to support more
than one full service
provider across all routes in the relevant markets. The
sustainable and most efficient market structure is one with a single full
service operator with peripheral competition from other barge operators.
(2) Barriers to entry are low; the markets are relatively unsophisticated with
low levels of innovation, technological change and
product and service
differentiation. There is a range of potential entrants who could win key
contracts or routes. In support of
these propositions, Sea Swift and Toll say
(a) The inputs used in supplying coastal and
community freight services are readily obtainable by other operators; the inputs
non-specialised, commonly available and inherently re-deployable.
Specifically, the four main requirements for a supplier to be
able to supply a
scheduled service (vessels, landing facilities, depots/equipment and employees)
remain unaffected by the Proposed
Acquisition. TML’s vessels are not
specialised and Sea Swift will acquire some vessels for convenience only. The
of TML’s staff will not be transferred to Sea Swift so that
they remain available to competitors. There are alternatives to
the Gove Lease
for landing facilities at Gove, noting in particular that Sea Swift established
itself there without needing to access
the facilities operated by TML at the
Gove Lease.
(b) Large customer contracts sufficient to underpin entry into the market have
terms of three to five years and they are often subject
to termination at the
customer’s convenience or are non-exclusive; a new entrant can readily
compete for those contracts.
These conditions demonstrate that major customers
have substantial countervailing power and can react if prices become too
or if the quality of service reduces by awarding contracts to new
providers in order to sponsor entry.
(c) There are many other providers of charter services in the NT and FNQ who are
able to commence scheduled services without substantial
investment. Sea Swift
submitted that, with the exception of Barge Express, the other competitors in
FNQ and NT that currently provide
charter services are unlikely to be in a
position to commence servicing TML’s Largest Contracts within the 60 day
which TML will wind up its operations. It submitted that in due
course Ezion/Teras (“Teras”), Shorebarge, Carpentaria
Contracting,
Pacific Marine Group and MIPEC may seek to provide scheduled services
“should they consider it economically worthwhile”.
response to the MUA’s contention that public detriment arises from the
fact that TML’s workforce will no longer be
employed if the Proposed
Acquisition proceeds, Sea Swift submitted that the position of TML’s
employees is the same whether
or not the Proposed Acquisition is
THE ACCC’S POSITION IN SUMMARY
ACCC opposed the grant of authorisation on the basis that the claimed public
benefits from the Proposed Acquisition are minimal
and do not outweigh the
substantial detriments likely to result from the lessening of competition if the
Proposed Acquisition proceeds
so that it does not meet the “net public
benefits” test.
ACCC’s position can be summarised in the letter of instructions dated 12
May 2016 given to Professor Stephen King by the
ACCC’s solicitors in
connection with seeking his opinion of the Proposed Conditions:
assume the following in relation to Sea Swift’s and Toll Marine
Logistics’ (
’s) current scheduled marine freight service
operations in the Northern Territory (
) and Far North Queensland
1.1 New entrants face barriers to entry
and/or mobility.
1.2 The barriers to entry and/or mobility
1.2.1 Incumbent scheduled marine
freight service providers have advantages over potential entrants when competing
for customer contracts,
which represent a substantial proportion of available
volume and revenue on many routes. This is because:
(a) Reputational factors (in particular a track record of providing a reliable
service in a region) lead to customer loyalty towards
incumbent scheduled marine
freight service providers.
(b) There are economies of scale in the provision of scheduled marine freight
services, and the staggered timing of tenders for customer
contracts provides
incumbents with a competitive advantage when bidding for incremental customer
contracts as they individually come
up for retendering.
1.2.2 There is a lack of access on reasonable terms and conditions to the
roll-on-roll-off ramp at Gove. There may also be similar
access issues in
relation to other ports and other common user landing facilities.
1.2.3 Sea Swift has previously engaged in strategic behaviour, including low
pricing, in response to attempted entry.
1.2.4 Potential new entrants are likely to incur sunk costs which are not
recoverable on exit, including losses incurred during the
establishment phase
after entry and the costs of acquiring and relocating suitable vessels. There
are cost disadvantages from not
being able to access already
‘fit-for-purpose’ vessels that are appropriate for the purpose of
providing scheduled marine
freight services.
assume that the detriments that are likely to result from the Proposed
Acquisition include:
2.1 The Proposed Acquisition will remove Sea
Swift’s largest and closest competitive constraint (i.e. TML) and lessen
of competitive constraint from other existing and potential suppliers
of scheduled marine freight services.
2.2 If the Proposed Acquisition does not proceed, TML will seek to maximise its
profits/minimise its losses from its exit from the
relevant market(s). This is
likely to involve TML seeking to see its business as a going concern –
either in part or as a
whole (for instance, by selling its business operations
in the NT). If it is unable to do so, it will seek to sell its assets and
likely to seek to sell them in bundles, including by way of assisting to assign
existing customer contracts to third parties that
acquire some of its physical
assets. It is also possible that in the process of TML seeking to sell its
business in whole or in
part or seeking to sell its assets, one or more
customers may choose to put their contracts out to tender in the market such
TML will not be able to assign those contracts. These alternatives all
have the potential to reduce the identified barriers to entry/mobility
that will provide a greater competitive constraint on Sea Swift in the future
than would be the case if the Proposed Acquisition
2.3 It will be more difficult for potential entrants to win customer contracts
from Sea Swift if the Proposed Acquisition proceeds
because of customer
stickiness: reputation of (and past dealings with) suppliers matter for
customers of scheduled marine freight
services. This is especially the case
given existing TML customers will have already been transferred to a new
supplier (i.e. Sea
Swift) if the Proposed Acquisition proceeds.
2.4 If the Proposed Acquisition proceeds, potential entrants will not be able to
bid for TML’s assets and the market will lose
the benefit
2.4.1 competition from potential
entrants for TML’s assets and customer contracts;
2.4.2 potential entrants obtaining contracts and/or assets such as
fit-for-purpose, proven vessels that will enable them to better
compete with Sea
Swift for customers in the future (including when contracts come up for
renewal); and
2.4.3 Sea Swift being forced to compete for TML’s customers at a time when
TML would be seeking to sell its assets and assign
contracts to potential
acquirers of its assets.
2.5 Sea Swift will acquire the lease with
the Arnhem Land Aboriginal Land Trust in relation to the Gove heavy lift wharf
and roll-on
roll-off ramp at Melville Bay Rd, Foreshore Drive, Nhulunbuy, in
circumstances where there is not suitable alternative landing facility
(collectively, the
‘Competitive
Detriments’).
the ACCC accepted that the most likely outcome is that TML will not continue its
operations in the NT and FNQ, it submitted
(1) It is very unlikely that TML would abruptly withdraw
from the market in breach of its customer contracts and any benefit flowing
TML’s contracted customers from having their contracts novated to Sea
Swift would be limited in scope and duration.
(2) The claimed benefits relating to issues including lowered costs of entry for
competitors, cost savings and dynamic efficiencies
should be given little to no
on the reports by Mr Lindholm and Dr Williams, the ACCC submitted that the fact
that Sea Swift did not take advantage of TML’s
exit announcements on 26
February and 21 October 2015 and instead elected to enter into the renewed
agreement on 17 March 2016 and
pay a “substantial premium” over the
value of tangible assets to be acquired demonstrates that it is buying market
by paying to ensure that TML’s assets are not obtained by its
competitors, resulting in a substantial lessening of competition.
Proposed Acquisition did not proceed, it would be open to Toll to maximise
profit and minimise reputational damage resulting
from TML’s exit by
selling its NT business as a going concern or selling its vessels together with
the assignment of contracted
customers along “trunk” routes (see
[164] below) in the NT. The ACCC submitted that these are counterfactuals that
Tribunal should take into account on the basis that there is a “real
chance” that they might occur.
ACCC submitted that TML’s exit in the absence of the Proposed Acquisition
is the most pro-competitive outcome because it
presents a “unique
opportunity” to lower barriers to entry or expansion for Sea Swift’s
competitors by making TML’s
major customer contracts contestable at the
same time, not in the usual staggered way, so that the factor of incumbency is
This opportunity would be lost if the Proposed Acquisition is
authorised. The ACCC said that large customers do not have sufficient
countervailing power to constrain Sea Swift from increasing prices after the
Proposed Acquisition because very few of them are in
a position to sponsor a new
entrant. Even if the threat of sponsoring a new entrant is effective for large
customers, it would not
constrain prices for uncontracted customers.
ACCC submitted that if the Proposed Acquisition proceeds, the likelihood of
marine freight operators entering or expanding to
provide scheduled services in
competition with Sea Swift will be limited. In closing submissions, the ACCC
submitted that as a result
of the high barriers to entry, “hit and
run” entry would not be credible. This view was based on a number of
which the ACCC identified as constituting significant barriers to entry
or expansion by Sea Swift’s competitors, including:
(1) the need to secure regular freight volumes;
(2) difficulties overcoming the advantages held by an incumbent supplier which
would include customer loyalty, the perceived “quality”
product through reputation, economies of scale and the staggered timing of
contracts coming up for renewal;
(3) the lack of suitable access to landing facilities, particularly at the Gove
(4) the risk of strategic responses by incumbents to new entry; and
(5) sunk costs of entry, including losses incurred while establishing a
reputation and the costs of acquiring and repositioning suitable
on Professor King’s report, the ACCC submitted that:
(1) the Transferred Contracts Condition does not address
the advantages of incumbency that Sea Swift would enjoy when competing against
other potential rivals for customer contracts in the future;
(2) the Gove Lease Undertaking would not mitigate Sea Swift’s incentive
and ability to price discriminate against its competitors;
(3) the outcomes to be derived from the commitments offered by Toll are, in
respect of some of its vessels, likely to occur in any
event should the Proposed
Acquisition not proceed;
(4) the Remote Community Price Condition would be ineffective and inadequate in
scope; for example, it does not apply to some major
freight categories, such as
fuel, and it does not reflect the discounts which a substantial proportion of
the market currently receives.
Due to the complexity of the calculations, it
will be difficult for customers to monitor whether Sea Swift is complying with
(5) the Remote Community Service Condition would provide little or no benefit to
customers because it is likely that all communities
will continue to be serviced
with or without the Proposed Acquisition. The Condition does not maintain
current service levels as
services to some remote communities will drop back
from twice weekly to once weekly;
(6) the Remote Community Service Condition and Remote Community Price Condition
suffer from the following shortcomings:
(a) they are limited in duration and are
therefore incapable of remedying the effects of a significant structural change
arising from
the Proposed Acquisition;
(b) they are unlikely to reflect prices or service frequencies that would be set
in a competitive market in the future in the absence
of the Proposed
Acquisition;
(c) there is a real prospect that Sea Swift would be able to circumvent or
mitigate the extent of its obligations under these Conditions;
(d) these Conditions are not subject to independent monitoring or oversight or
any other enforcement mechanism; and
(7) there is a significant risk that the Proposed
Conditions will lead to market distortions.
ACCC was concerned that the information that Sea Swift was obliged to provide
under the Remote Community Price Condition and the
Remote Community Service
Condition was inadequate.
ACCC had a range of comments in relation to the Gove Lease Undertaking,
including those put forward by Professor King and that
it did not reflect its
current practice in relation to other ports. In its 29 June 2016 response to
the Tribunal’s draft Determination,
the ACCC said that the undertaking
should include standard provisions for independent audit employed in
infrastructure access undertakings
such as the one imposed by the Tribunal in
. This was the first time the ACCC gave the Tribunal any draft
provisions to support its submissions on the content of the Gove Lease
Undertaking.
POSTION TAKEN BY THE MUA
MUA was concerned that if the Proposed Acquisition was authorised, Sea Swift
would hold all of the major contracts for the provision
of scheduled services in
the NT and FNQ such that it would be “highly unlikely” that other
service providers will have
any need for additional labour. It submitted that
the downturn in mining and project work in recent times means other employment
prospects in the industry are poor.
MUA contended that the employment prospects of TML’s employees were
“significantly improved” in the future without
the Proposed
Acquisition because of the “greater likelihood” that other service
providers would increase their activities
in FNQ and the NT by acquiring some of
TML’s customer contacts and/or vessels. The MUA relied particularly on
the evidence
of Mr Hamilton of Shorebarge and Mr Conlon of Barge Express.
MUA submitted that it was Sea Swift’s evidence that it will use its
existing workforce who are currently employed on a casual
or part-time basis to
fill additional labour requirements and would otherwise consider using
independent contractors. On that basis
and whether or not former TML employees
were members of the MUA, the “practical effect” of the Proposed
Acquisition from
the point of view of the TML employees was equivalent to a
restraint on trade. As put by Mr Scruby in oral closing submissions “the
TML employees are shut out of even competing for jobs and it is not simply a
matter that they’re not going to get them”.
MARINE FREIGHT SERVICES INDUSTRY IN NT AND FNQ
Description of marine freight services
marine freight services involve the carriage of cargo by ship or barge and fall
into two categories, charter services and
scheduled services.
Charter services
(sometimes called project) marine freight services are one-off or short-term
services for specific (usually large) customers
which sometimes require an
entire vessel for a particular shipment, often in the mining, construction and
electricity businesses.
Those services more likely involve the carriage of
different (usually bulky) goods which cannot easily be supplied on regular
services and are generally carried from point to point with no
intermediate stops.
parties agree that the companies which provide these services in addition to Sea
Swift and TML in the NT are: Barge Express (formerly
Sealink), Bhagwan Marine,
Teras, Offshore Marine Services and Shorebarge; and in FNQ they are: Carpentaria
Contracting, Carpentaria
Freight Services, MIPEC and Pacific Marine Group and
Palm Island Barge.
Scheduled services
services are regular services between two or more locations according to a
regular schedule and voyages take place irrespective
of whether there is
sufficient cargo to cover the cost of that journey. The supplier carries cargo
for anyone who wishes to ship
it between those locations; some customers are
regular or contracted (such as supermarkets or mining companies) and others only
ad hoc services for freight for items ranging from vehicles to household
items. For example, Sea Swift currently operates a scheduled
service from
Cairns to Horn Island, Thursday Island, Seisia and Weipa, departing from Cairns
on Tuesday and arriving at the other
locations according to a schedule that is
published by Sea Swift in advance. Any customer who wishes to ship goods from
those locations can deliver goods to Sea Swift in Cairns prior to a
particular cut off time on Monday for the shipment that departs
island and coastal communities in FNQ and the NT that require marine freight
services generally fall into two categories, communities
built around mining
projects and communities predominantly comprised of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Island people. The services
are essential to these communities because road
access to them is impossible (because the community is on an island) or limited
due to the state of the road or they are impassable during the wet
season). Some roads to coastal areas are being improved but they
are generally
not yet sufficiently reliable to provide a year-round alternative to scheduled
marine freight services. Air freight
is prohibitively expensive for bulk
requirements and the size of planes used means air freight is not suitable for
other items, such
as heavy equipment or vehicles.
3 and 4 to these reasons are maps demonstrating the routes for scheduled
services currently operated in the NT and FNQ by
Sea Swift, TML and their
competitors. As can be seen, the routes cover long distances. The provision of
services to some communities
can be restricted by tides, strong currents and
reefs so that navigation is only safe at certain times of the day or month.
routes are generally very sparsely populated. A submission from the Department
of PM & C indicates that of the approximately
35,515 people living in the
Strait Islanders. That figure
does not include people living on outstations or
smaller satellite communities who depend on the larger communities for goods and
services. The affected communities have high rates of unemployment and welfare
dependence.
largest communities to which cargo is delivered are, usually, the centres which
revolve around mining: Gove, Groote Eylandt and
Reliance on scheduled services
consistent evidence of the witnesses from the remote communities is that they
need scheduled services to be regular and reliable.
This is because they carry
essentials such as groceries, fuel, pharmaceuticals, mining consumables and
building materials. Many
of these customers require “depot to door”
services, where the freight is not just delivered to a particular wharf, but
a business or other premises. Many communities require weekly scheduled
services, because they do not have storage capacity for
large quantities of fuel
and stocks of perishable foods.
from the remote communities emphasised the importance of scheduled services
arriving at or near the scheduled times, since
many landing facilities in remote
their shelf life
may be limited if a landing is not made at a scheduled time so
that the facility is unattended; it is also costly for customers to
arrange for
staff to deal with stock landed at non-scheduled times.
obtaining better prices, additional weekly services
(twice weekly where they
previously only had one) and more reliable arrival at scheduled times. Two
scheduled services at different
times in the week allow quick “catch
up” for perishable goods, fuel or other supplies, for instance, where
weather has
prevented a scheduled delivery or where a consignor has missed the
time for loading on a provider’s vessel. For this reason,
many of the
witnesses from remote communities have stressed that they would prefer to
continue to receive two scheduled services
from competitors. However, a number
of witnesses did not appear to be aware at the time they gave their witness
statements, or even
when they were cross examined at the hearing, that TML had
announced that it will cease to provide scheduled services if authorisation
Is there a static level of demand?
has been a significant downturn in demand for the carriage of freight over the
past 18 months due to the end of the project
construction phase of the mining
boom, reductions in government spending and lower prices received for many
commodities. This has
affected both scheduled services and charter services.
There has been a drop in population in some areas; for instance, by reason
the closure of the aluminium smelter at Gove, Rio Tinto’s workforce has
reduced from 1,200 to 400.
ACCC submitted that the downturn in the mining and resources industries is
cyclical and there are other areas of growth such that
the Tribunal should not
accept Sea Swift’s proposition that there is a relatively static level of
demand for scheduled services
in the NT and FNQ. For instance, the Amrun (South
of Embley) project is being developed by Rio Tinto 40 kilometres south of Weipa
(the mine at Weipa is nearing the end of its productive life), GEMCO plans to
spend US$139 million in expanding its mine on Groote
Eylandt, there is some
population growth in Arnhem Land and there are building projects around
Maningrida, which has been identified
by the NT Government as one of the major
NT growth towns. Other communities are aiming to develop offerings for fishing
(for instance, at Gove) and tourism (for instance, in FNQ). There is
a whole of government plan for the Torres Strait Islands involving
an investment
of $169 million in capital works between August 2013 and September 2019.
Tribunal accepts that the mining and resources industries are cyclical and
therefore the profitability of service providers to
those industries will also
have cyclical features. Sea Swift’s board papers prepared in 2014 reflect
this fact. However,
while it would not be appropriate to take a short-term
view, there is no evidence of when the current cyclical downturn will end
what level those industries might be expected to recover. Further, even if
there is likely to be some population growth in
the NT and FNQ due to
infrastructure development, the population is nonetheless sparse and suggestions
that there may be significant
growth are speculative.
Tribunal accepts Mr Bruno’s evidence that the market for scheduled
services is constrained by relatively static year-on-year
volumes of freight
shipped to and from remote communities in FNQ and the NT.
Services provided by Sea Swift and TML in the NT and FNQ
Swift and TML are the only providers of scheduled services in FNQ. They each
have depot facilities in Cairns, Thursday Island,
Horn Island, Seisia/Bamaga and
Weipa. Of the 21 communities receiving scheduled services in FNQ, 18 were
serviced by both Sea Swift
and TML. Seventeen of these communities were
serviced by both providers on a weekly (or more frequent) basis.
the NT, Teras has been providing a scheduled service between Darwin and Port
Melville and Port Keats since 2013 and for a number
of years TML has
subcontracted some of its scheduled services in the NT to Barge Express. Sea
Swift and TML compete with each other
and approximately ten others in both FNQ
and the NT for charter and project services.
the 17 routes operated in the NT at the time of the hearing, Sea Swift was
servicing 12 and TML was servicing 13. Eight of the
routes were being serviced
by both Sea Swift and TML; seven of these were on a weekly (or more frequent)
are arrangements between TML and Sea Swift on an ad hoc basis apparently
directed at ensuring uninterrupted services to communities
in the NT and FNQ. A
reciprocal slot arrangement between Sea Swift and TML allows for each of them to
carry the other party’s
freight in the event of an emergency or breakdown.
For a temporary period in 2015, due to the dry-docking of one of its own
Sea Swift charted a vessel owned by TML. On the rare occasion, Sea
Swift also accesses TML’s Gove Lease facilities.
REQUIREMENTS TO BE ABLE TO PROVIDE A SERVICE
are four basic logistical requirements for a person who wishes to supply marine
freight services: vessels, access to landing
facilities in the various remote
the Tribunal accepts
that these four requirements (save for landing facilities
at Gove) can be met easily by a market entrant with the necessary
line haul vessels and barges/landing craft; these
are required to have relevant
registration.
operator with sufficient funds is currently able to buy or charter these types
of vessels domestically. The evidence given by
Mr Bruno and officers of Sea
Swift’s competitors discloses that following the end of the downturn in
the mining and resources
industries, there are numerous suitable vessels
available for purchase or charter in Australia, including in Darwin and Western
at relatively modest cost and in a relatively short time frame of up
to a month. Vessels can also be obtained internationally, but
this would take a
little longer and would cost more to ensure that the vessel meets Australian
registration standards. Although
Mr Johnson of Teras gave evidence that it had
once taken him eight months to secure registration of a vessel he obtained from
he explained to the Tribunal at the hearing that this was not a
typical vessel and the problem occurred in the early days of a new
registration
Tribunal accepts that Sea Swift will acquire the proposed vessels from TML under
the Proposed Acquisition for convenience. While
they are known to be suitable
for the routes operated by TML, acquiring those vessels confers no competitive
advantage because of
that factor.
Tribunal also accepts that, although a charter service is different from a
scheduled service, the vessels used by an operator
providing a scheduled service
are typically the same types of vessels that are used by charter operators or
can easily be modified
to be “fit for purpose”. For instance, Mr
Kannikoski of Bhagwan Marine gave evidence that he would consider initiating
scheduled service if he cannot find buyers for three barges which it currently
has available for sale.
Access to landing facilities in the various remote communities
facilities are required to be able to load and unload vessels. There are three
methods of handling cargo which were discussed
during the proceedings:
(1) “roll-on/roll-off” which requires a
shore side ramp and a landing ramp on the vessel to enable cargo to be
loaded/unloaded
by a fork lift;
(2) “lift-on/lift-off” which employs one or more cranes. A crane
may be on a “geared” vessel and/or deployed
on the wharf. This
method is used mostly with line haul vessels although it can be used with
barges; and
(3) “fork-on/fork-off” (sometimes called “fork to fork”)
which employs a fork lift on the vessel and a fork
lift on the wharf.
method employed will depend on the nature of the cargo, the nature of the
landing facility, the type of vessel in use and tides
affecting the degree of
incline between the vessel and landing facility. Roll-on/roll-off and
fork-on/fork-off methods are most
commonly used by barges; they are generally as
efficient and of equivalent cost, although carriage of a fork lift takes up some
on a barge. For instance, Sea Swift employs the fork-on/fork-off method
at the Humbug Wharf which it operates at Weipa and the roll-on/roll-off
is generally used by TML at Gove.
wharves and landing facilities in FNQ are “common user facilities”
which any operator can access by filling out a
booking form and, in some
instances, obtaining a permit.
of the wharves and landing facilities in the NT outside of Darwin are owned by
the NT Government and they are open for access
to all users. All that is
required is an application to the Northern Land Council, which oversees the
various ports. The three
ports where Sea Swift and TML do not use the NT
Government-owned facilities are Darwin, Groote Eylandt and Gove.
companies use their own private landing facilities in Darwin. Mr Perkin’s
evidence is that there are a number of areas
in Darwin where other operators
could do the same.
Groote Eylandt
operates its own wharf to handle the manganese it mines. Adjacent to it is a
roll-on/roll-off ramp and GEMCO provides third
party access to the ramp and a
lay down area without charge; barge operators must provide their own stevedores
to load and unload
are several facilities at Gove.
first are the facilities at the Gove Lease as described in [18] above currently
operated by TML which (subject to Toll and Sea
Swift obtaining the appropriate
approvals) will be transferred to Sea Swift and operated in accordance with the
Gove Lease Undertaking.
Swift has provided marine freight services through Gove since February 2014
using a boat ramp operated by the Gove Boat Club.
The Commodore of the Club, Mr
Bradley Smith stated that that facility will not be available to Sea Swift or
any other commercial
operator after 30 June 2016.
Tinto owns and operates a wharf at Gove, commonly referred to as the
“limestone wharf”. The limestone wharf is an
wharf at the end of a pier extending 284 metres into Gove Harbour. Until Rio
Tinto closed its smelting operations,
this wharf was used to land and load
limestone used in the aluminium smelter to process bauxite.
ACCC submitted a letter dated 15 June 2016 from Mr Rob McDonald, Rio
Tinto’s Superintendent of Port Operations and Infrastructure,
Operations. The letter informed the Tribunal that the western side of the
limestone wharf is available for use since Rio has
closed its smelting
operations but it has been used only once in the year to date. The eastern side
is used by Rio Tinto to moor
two tugs, a pilot launch and a dumb barge.
However, prior to any significant commercial use, the western side of the
limestone wharf
will require capital works at an estimated cost of $250,000 and
Rio Tinto would expect users to contribute “appropriately”
cost. In the past 18 months, three or four parties have approached Rio Tinto
capital works. None of the parties pursued this option further.
evidence from Mr Lonsdale (Toll Energy West and National Marine Manager, Toll
Energy) that the platform of the limestone wharf
can be used for lay down
facilities, that is suboptimal given its exposed nature. Mr Lonsdale gave
evidence that in his assessment,
wind and tidal factors would not prevent use of
the fork to fork method of unloading cargo at the limestone wharf during some
Mr Kahler of Rio Tinto also said that it would be possible to use the
fork to fork method at the wharf (even though he had never
seen the method in
operation). However, Rio Tinto through Mr McDonald has the view that during
April to October each year the wharf
is only suitable for use by geared vessels
(which have a crane installed) because it is unsafe to use the fork to fork
method during
that time and the design of the wharf is not suitable to install a
substantial crane on it. It might be expected that Rio Tinto
will behave in
accordance with those beliefs.
Tribunal has formed the view that the limestone wharf does not offer a
commercially realistic alternative as a base for scheduled
services without an
operator being willing to make an appropriate contribution to significant
capital works and it is subject to
restrictions as to the type of unloading
method (and therefore, the type of vessel) which may be employed during half of
That would not preclude use of the limestone wharf on an ad hoc
basis, with the permission of Rio Tinto, perhaps making it suitable
charter operator but not a scheduled service operator.
Catalina Wharf at Drimmie Head was used for Catalina flying boats during the
Second World War. It is connected to Gove through
a causeway that is now
covered by a concrete ramp. It is generally accepted that this facility is not
suitable for scheduled services
in its current state. While two witnesses
suggested that they could invest in upgrading that facility if required, one
that he required bank funding to buy a vessel and the other
operator’s parent company is currently looking to sell it due to
financial circumstances and the witness had not been to Gove. The Tribunal
gives very little weight to their evidence.
Helms, CEO of the Gumatj Corporation Limited/Gumatj Aboriginal Corporation
acknowledged that appropriate alternatives to the Gove
Lease site for the
operation of scheduled services are limited. He says that the Corporation would
support any barge operator wishing
to operate regular services to find a landing
site, provided they were interested in operating a regular scheduled service and
in the community infrastructure. That would be consistent with the
Gumatj Corporation’s desire to develop Gove as a hub for
fishing vessels.
Having regard to the fact that Rio Tinto has closed its smelting operations
thereby significantly reducing the
population in Gove, the general downturn in
the resources industry, and the nature of the evidence given by marine freight
operators at the hearing, the Tribunal believes that it is unlikely that
there will be investment in new port infrastructure at Gove
in the near
Tribunal has formed the view that the Gove Lease is the most suitable facility
for the provision of scheduled services at Gove.
With investment, a new entrant
would be in a position to establish suitable facilities, but until then,
exclusive access to the
Gove Lease by one scheduled services provider would be a
restraint on competition for scheduled services.
Depots and equipment
need to be located at major ports (Darwin or Cairns) and in the larger remote
operate as distribution centres.
Establishing a depot requires a lease over suitable land so that a safe and
secure storage facility
can be set up and equipment such as forklifts, trucks,
light vehicles, side loaders and trailers can be parked.
Tribunal accepts that obtaining a lease is not difficult in most locations,
because local councils are willing to assist, including
by accommodating those
seeking access to allow them to operate without a lease if necessary or in
addressing contentious land rights
claims between local indigenous communities.
It is not controversial that obtaining the necessary equipment is not difficult.
expenditure would be required to build refrigeration or fuel farm
facilities where necessary.
Tribunal also accepts Mr Bruno’s evidence that Sea Swift proposes to
acquire some depots and equipment from TML as a matter
of convenience, and that
it would not be difficult for a new entrant to acquire established facilities of
Employees in the central depots and on the vessels
of a sea freight provider employed on a vessel are required to have various
maritime qualifications in order for the operator
to satisfy its regulatory
requirements. It is Mr Bruno’s evidence that it is not difficult to
obtain employees qualified to
serve on a vessel. Mr White, the Managing
Director and Chief Executive Officer of Sea Swift, gave evidence that if the
Acquisition is authorised, Sea Swift intends to staff the vessels which
it will acquire from TML with current employees who are covered
by casual or
part time employment contracts, in the first instance. Sea Swift may use
independent contractors and would advertise
if it required more staff. Former
employees of TML would be able to respond to advertisements and may be employed
as a result.
The Tribunal accepts this evidence.
main qualification for employees located on land is that they hold a forklift
licence and in some circumstances a heavy truck
licence. There is no evidence
that it would be difficult to recruit staff with the necessary
qualifications.
other requirement to run a scheduled service is, of course, customers.
customers of marine freight services in FNQ and the NT fall into three different
pricing categories:
(1) Contracted customers where the price is negotiated
at the commencement of each contract (often through tenders in the case of
contracts) and they are protected by those contractual arrangements.
(2) Custom rate customers (who are not a party to a contract) where the price is
negotiated with the provider on the basis of standard
terms and conditions. It
is common for the customer and supplier to have a longstanding relationship such
that the supplier agrees
to provide a discount from the scheduled rates.
(3) Uncontracted or ad hoc customers where the price is determined by the
supplier based on the supplier’s scheduled rates,
depending on the type of
freight to be shipped.
main customers currently serviced by Sea Swift, TML and other competitors in the
market for scheduled services in FNQ and the
NT include mining projects such as
those operated by Rio Tinto and GEMCO; utilities and energy companies such as
Caltex and PUMA
(and through PUMA, NT Power & Water); councils such as
Torres Strait Island Regional Council (“TSIRC”), community
enterprises and supermarkets which run grocery stores on a for profit or not for
profit basis such as Woolworths, IBIS, ALPA, Seisia
Enterprises and Bamaga
Enterprises, and, to a lesser extent, other commercial enterprises such as
hotels and resorts.
customers provide the base load volume that underwrites the provision of
services to the more remote communities which provide
incremental income. As a
result, many (but not all) services operate on a “hub and spoke”
model. There are high volume
routes over longer distances (sometimes known as
“trunk routes”) where larger ships make deliveries to hubs. There
lower volume routes over shorter distances (sometimes known as “branch
routes”) where smaller ships and barges transport
goods from the hubs to
the more remote locations. Annexure 5 to these reasons sets out TML’s
Largest Contracts, the equivalent
contracts held by Sea Swift and the services
to remote communities on the routes which are supported by those contracts.
Tribunal accepts that it is generally only possible to provide scheduled
services to remote communities profitably where the provider
has one or more
base load customers, because scheduled services in FNQ and the NT are expensive
to operate due to the high fixed
cost components such as the vessels, fuel, crew
and port charges. Routes are long and sparsely populated and scheduled services
must operate whether or not there is sufficient freight to cover the costs of
any voyage. Service to remote communities on the route
provides incremental
income. Messrs Dodd, Hamilton, Slimming and Johnson, all competitors of TML and
Sea Swift, each gave evidence
to the effect that the viability of routes depends
on having base load contracts of sufficient size and price to support the
load customers have significant negotiating power as a result of that factor.
The large customer contracts which were provided
to the Tribunal show that, in
general, they are for periods of three to five years (some with provision for
extension at the customer’s
option) and made on the customer’s terms
and conditions; they often provide no guaranteed minimum volume and many are
non-exclusive or allow the customer to test the market as to price. Most
large customers put their work out to tender when contracts
fall due, though not
always. The evidence of officers of a number of these customers is that they
generally do business with the
provider with whom they have entered into a
contract during its term even when the contract is non-exclusive, although these
were made by customers whose contracts are subject to first rights of
refusal or minimum volume requirements and it is likely that
this accounts for
that factor at least to some extent.
customers engage other providers for charter services for goods not suitable for
scheduled services and some use other scheduled
services where there is a time
constraint and the alternate service is more convenient, or to test prices. The
evidence of most
officers of large customers was that the customer would not be
willing to sponsor a competitor although some, such as Mr Elu who
Chairman of the Torres Strait Regional Authority and Seisia Enterprises (among
other organisations), indicated that he would
be willing to band with other
customers to support a new entrant if a provider put up prices unduly or dropped
Tribunal also accepts the evidence given by officers of service providers and
TML’s Largest Customers that cost is not the
only factor in the selection
of a scheduled service provider; reliability is a highly significant and
sometimes determinative factor.
The customers will want to have had experience
of service provision before they will appoint an operator to supply scheduled
although the experience can be obtained through chartered services or
through ad hoc use. They will not award a contract to a provider
unless they
are satisfied that it is (or will be) in a position to provide the service at
the time the contract is awarded.
HISTORICAL POSITION OF ENTRY AND EXIT FROM THE NT AND FNQ
6 and 7 to these reasons provide histories of the entry and exit of scheduled
service providers and charter service providers
in the NT and FNQ since the late
1980s represented in the form of a bar graph with related narrative
chronologies. The bar graphs
have been updated by the parties from similar
graphs which appear in the ACCC’s Report and the chronologies have been
Tribunal accepts the ACCC’s contention that there has been more than one
operator on some routes historically in both FNQ
and the NT. The bar graphs
demonstrate that there has been frequent entry and exit by operators of
chartered and scheduled services
over time. The bar graphs and chronologies
also demonstrate that there has typically been only one larger operator in each
with smaller competitors operating on some routes.
Perkins’ uncontested statement was that for a number of years leading up
to the late 1980s, a company known as Barge Express
(not the company by that
name currently controlled by Mr Conlon) serviced some remote locations in the NT
that the Perkins Group
did not service. Then, in the early 1990s, the Perkins
Group expanded its services into those areas of the NT being serviced by
Express. It won some volume from Barge Express. Both companies suffered losses
before Barge Express decided to exit the market
and it was acquired by Perkins
Group. Once the Perkins Group was able to ship 100% of the volumes to those
locations, those routes
became profitable for it.
in 2002, Gulf Freight Services sought to expand its operations into the NT and
beyond the Cairns-Weipa route in FNQ. It
is Mr Perkins evidence that Gulf
Freight Services quoted low prices in an attempt to gain business. Mr Perkins
considered that the
prices quoted were unsustainable. In 2003, Gulf Freight
Services decided to exit the market before it was acquired by Perkins Group.
The acquisition was considered by the ACCC which accepted a s 87B
undertaking from Perkins Group that provided for access to and
maintaining
levels of customer service at the Gove Lease.
Barge previously serviced (and only serviced) the Tiwi Islands. Although
Perkins Group considered whether to expand scheduled
services to these islands,
it decided not to do so because there was not sufficient volume to support two
operators. The Tribunal
notes that TML and Teras have both operated services on
this route since 2013.
evidence from competitors such as Mr Dodd of Pacific Marine Group and customers
such as Mr Alistair King of ALPA is that two large
operators of scheduled
services are generally unlikely to be economically viable in either the NT or
FNQ because of insufficient
demand and the high fixed costs involved in
providing that service. That was also Mr Perkins’ view when, in 1996, he
contemplated
competing in the FNQ market.
the basis of the history of FNQ and the NT and their own financial performance
in the 2014 and 2015 financial years, Sea Swift
and Toll contended that it is
not possible to have more than one profitable full service operator in the NT or
FNQ. That view was
supported by Mr Siolis.
ACCC submitted that expert evidence given by Mr Siolis should not be accepted
because it was hard to isolate the financial performance
of TML’s marine
freight businesses in the information given to Mr Siolis as the data included
information relating to TML’s
charter services and road business
operations. The ACCC further contended that Mr Siolis did not take into account
the improvement
in Sea Swift’s forecast 2016 numbers (to which he did not
have access) nor did he consider the possibility that another provider
different business model might compete profitably. The ACCC noted that Sea
Swift’s EBIT margin in the FNQ in 2015 was
XXXX and that improved further
in 2016 to a forecast XXXX. Sea Swift’s EBIT performance in the NT also
improved in 2016 to
a forecast XXXX, since it scaled back scheduled routes.
Tribunal notes that EBIT margin is not indicative of economic profitability and
both Sea Swift and TML have found it necessary
to scale back services or
subcontract them in order to avoid the dramatically negative performance each
experienced in the 2014 financial
year. The ACCC did not suggest what alternate
model Mr Siolis should have taken into account. Further, while one competitor
gave evidence of its proposals for innovation in services which might
improve the cost base for its operations, it has not yet obtained
agreement from
a customer to supply those services and it is not clear when or if it will
obtain that agreement or be sustainable
when it does. Leaving to one side the
difference between TML and Sea Swift’s cost structure resulting from the
employees not being subject to the same work place agreements as
those negotiated by Toll, there was simply no evidence before the
Tribunal of a
cost structure for the provision of scheduled services different from that
employed by TML or Sea Swift.
parties accept that a key feature of the market in both FNQ and the NT is that
there are a small number of base load customers
whose significant volumes either
alone or in some combination are the key to the profitable operation of a route.
The Tribunal accepts
that the markets are relatively unsophisticated with low
levels of innovation, technological change and product and service
differentiation
The result is that the areas of competition are price,
reliability of service and frequency of service, with a need for cargo volume
offset high fixed costs.
history of both the NT and FNQ markets demonstrates that entry has been
relatively easy. Entry occurs sometimes by acquisition
of a small scheduled
service operator on one or more routes or of a charter service operator, with
the support of a large customer
(for instance, Caltex’s role in Sea
Swift’s entry into the NT following Sea Swift’s acquisition of Tiwi
but sustainability of two full service operators has been difficult to
attain usually due to the consequences of a period of fierce
price competition.
The result has been that one of the two competitors will either acquire the
other (so that sustainable pricing
can be achieved) or one competitor exits the
market. It is not always the incumbent provider which survives, rather it is
with the most endurance, financially speaking. TML’s exit is
consistent with historical patterns. The Tribunal accepts that
it is to be
expected that each of the NT and FNQ will be characterised by a single full
service provider with peripheral competition
on certain routes from time to time
and this is likely to be the case absent the Proposed Acquisition.
Having said all of that out of deference to the submissions made, the Tribunal
accepts that the question of whether it is possible
to have two profitable full
service operators in either of the NT or FNQ or what the most efficient
structure might be is not ultimately
determinative of the question that the
Tribunal is called upon to consider in this case. The relevant question is a
relative one:
whether there is a net public benefit in the future with the
Proposed Acquisition compared to the likely future without the Proposed
Acquisition having regard to any relevant counterfactuals.
MARKET DEFINITION
are areas of close competition in supply and demand, that is, they are areas of
competitive constraint. Market definition
is not an end in itself but a means
to assess the likely future consequences for competition of the conduct that is
at issue; it
is a tool for analysing the extent of competitive constraints that
apply to the entities operating in the market.
its Application, Sea Swift outlined three alternative market delineations that
could be used to assess the Proposed Acquisition’s
effect on competition.
The first was the market for the supply of coastal and community marine freight
services in FNQ and the NT
collectively. The second (effectively identifying two
separate markets) was the market for the supply of “coastal and community
marine freight services” in FNQ and the NT individually. The third
alternative (also effectively identifying two separate
markets) was the market
for the supply of “scheduled coastal and community marine freight
services” in each of FNQ and
parties and their experts all agreed that a precise definition was not needed
and would not be determinative in this matter.
Tribunal observes that the expert economists who commented on market definition,
while having slightly divergent or nuanced preferred
definitions of the
boundaries of the relevant market(s), were essentially in agreement that
whatever delineation is adopted will
not change the final assessment of the net
public benefits arising from the Proposed Acquisition. That is, precise market
is not determinative in this matter so long as all the relevant
demand-side and supply-side substitution factors are taken into account
analysis, as well as the possibility that different patterns of competition may
exist across different shipping routes.
Supply side substitution
respect to supply-side substitution, it is especially important to consider
entry barriers and mobility/expansion barriers (which
represent barriers to
intra-market expansion), and entry or mobility possibilities from any relevant
geographically adjacent market
(in this matter, the NT or FNQ) or from different
routes within these markets.
Demand side substitution
speaking, the product dimension of the market relates to the provision of
scheduled services (sometimes referred to as a “full
service”) and
charter services in the NT and FNQ as discussed above. For the reasons given
above, road and air freight are
not substitutes for these services.
was agreed that on the demand side of the market there could be no substitution
between scheduled services and charter services
as scheduled services provide
regular deliveries of essentials including fuel and food which need to be
delivered fresh or replenished
according to a known schedule. Charter services
are usually provided on an ad hoc basis. A user of a scheduled service could
without costly investment (for example, the installation of larger bulk
fuel storage facilities), or without the inconvenience of
irregular service,
switch to an ad hoc charter service in response to a significant and sustained
price increase in the service that
they currently use. As a result there will
be little if any demand-side substitution between the two types of marine
freight services
provided in the two geographic areas.
Accordingly,
two separate markets may be distinguished in terms of demand-side
substitutability for the carriage of marine freight
– a market for
scheduled services, and a market for charter services.
Geographic dimension
determine the geographic dimension of the market in this matter, the Tribunal
must consider whether there are two separate geographic
markets, one for the NT
and one for FNQ, or whether these two geographic areas can be aggregated
meaningfully into a single geographic
Notwithstanding
a proposal (best described as in its infancy) by one marine freight operator
that might at some distant point in the
future lead to a contrary view, a
scheduled service on a route in FNQ cannot be used by a customer requiring goods
to be delivered
to a location in the NT (or vice versa) because the distances
involved make it uneconomic to do so. They are not demand-side substitutes
so do not belong in the same market into the likely future.
the same and they are mobile. With relatively
little expense, they can be moved
from one area to another in response to a perceived profitable opportunity. In
other words, there
is supply-side substitutability between the vessels typically
used in both areas, such that an aggregated geographic market covering
NT and FNQ could exist.
Submissions
Swift submitted that the relevant market is the market for the supply of coastal
and community marine freight services in FNQ
and the NT (that is, both scheduled
and charter services), as operators have the ability to shift vessels relatively
easily and quickly
between these geographic areas. Toll agreed that supply-side
substitution exists between the NT and FNQ. It further submitted that
context of the Proposed Acquisition, the market definition should include
charter services.
ACCC noted that the area of contention mainly concerns the extent of supply-side
substitutability. It said that from a supply-side
perspective, market
definition was not determinative in this matter provided that due regard was
given to the degrees of substitutability
in any particular market that might be
delineated. Ultimately, the ACCC accepted that it should not matter if the
relevant market
is bounded by the particular routes on which the parties operate
or extends across most of northern Australia, or whether the market
beyond scheduled services to include charter services, provided that supply-side
substitution is treated as a matter of degree.
ACCC submitted that the key question was the level of competitive constraint.
It says that an incumbent in a market may be constrained
by another operator in
that market, or by a potential competitor that is in a position to commence
providing scheduled services relatively
quickly if the incumbent were to raise
prices and/or reduce its service levels. However, the ease with which a
potential competitor
may start providing services will depend on the extent of
the competitive advantages enjoyed by an incumbent provider. If the market
defined narrowly, the level of constraint on an incumbent will be influenced by
barriers to entry. If the market is defined more
broadly, the level of
constraint will be influenced by barriers to expansion.
ACCC observed that there will be a higher degree of supply-side substitution for
destinations along the same route, with the result
that an incumbent servicing a
particular destination is most competitively constrained by a rival servicing
the same destination
or different destinations on the same route. There will be
a lesser degree of supply-side substitutability between destinations
different geographic regions, resulting in a weaker degree of competitive
constraint.
ACCC also submitted that providers of charter services provide a relatively weak
competitive constraint on providers of scheduled
services compared to other
providers of scheduled services, mainly because charter operators seeking to
switch to supplying scheduled
services will need to obtain the necessary volumes
to underwrite a scheduled service, which must run regardless of whether the
receives sufficient revenue to cover the costs of a particular voyage.
The ACCC submitted that charter operators must overcome the
first mover
advantages enjoyed by an incumbent provider of scheduled services, especially
reputation and the difficulty of obtaining
large customer contracts to
underwrite a regular service. It relied on the evidence of Mr Dodd of Pacific
Marine Group to the effect
that if a charter operator were to win a scheduled
services contract of sufficient size it would need to be in a position to
on “price, but it would also be reliability and back up”
because, customers are concerned “about surety as well
It would ordinarily be necessary to price below the incumbent or provide
something perceived as better value than
the service provided by the incumbent.
The ability to win customers from an incumbent depends upon “reliability,
your ability
to deliver when they want, your ability to overcome obstacles, your
financial depth, your backup provisions...” Further, some
operators do not have vessels suitable to provide regular scheduled services,
although the Tribunal is satisfied that suitable
vessels are readily available
to any operator who wished to provide such a service.
The Tribunal’s position
Tribunal accepts the expert economists’ position that
structural and behavioural characteristics of each geographic area, while not
identical, are such that any analysis of the competitive
process, competitive
detriment and public benefits would be the same no matter which of the possible
markets were to be taken into
the Tribunal accepts that entry barriers, properly identified, can be a major
and lasting source of competitive advantage for
an incumbent operator, they must
be carefully distinguished from the costs of entry. Costs of entry are faced by
all operators,
including the incumbents when they first set up operations in the
market. Such costs are a commercial reality and do not
barrier to entry or expansion or mobility. This factor is discussed further
this, the Tribunal will assess the Proposed Acquisition in terms of the supply
of scheduled services in one or more of the three
possible geographic
aggregations as outlined in [182] above. Where it is necessary to distinguish
between the three possibilities
it is noted in these reasons.
THE COUNTERFACTUAL
Toll’s stated intentions
mentioned above, TML first advised its customers of its intention to leave the
market in the NT and FNQ in its letter of 26 February
2015. In its letter dated
21 October 2015, it advised its customers in the NT and FNQ that:
As we have stated previously, our business
in the NT/FNQ is losing a substantial amount of money. Market conditions have
challenging and we are not getting the freight volume required to
sustain our operations. After operating in the market for some
time now, it is
our firm belief that there is simply not enough freight volume to underpin two
competing full service providers incurring
the substantial fixed costs of
operating vessels on regular scheduled routes.
Despite our best efforts to reduce costs and enter new markets to increase the
revenue base and turn around our profitability, the
financial position is such
that Toll was left with two choices:
the transaction with Sea Swift; or
up the business and sell our assets individually.
told TML’s customers that if the Tribunal did not authorise the Proposed
Acquisition then:
Toll will commence winding up the business
in NT and FNQ. We anticipate this will be completed in approximately 60
Toll will meet with contracted customers to discuss options and to assist them
to find alternative arrangements.
Toll will communicate a date for final services.
Uncontracted customers and Communities will need to make alternative shipping
arrangements.
Toll will advertise its vessels for sale in Australia and International markets
to achieve the maximum sale price. There is no guarantee
Toll’s vessels
will remain in NT/FNQ markets.
Toll’s terminals will be closed following the last
evidence given by Mr Woodward is that if the Proposed Acquisition does not
proceed TML’s exit from the market would involve
the following
: Toll will use a broker to sell the
ships it owns. They would be laid up in Darwin until they are sold. It is not
clear whether
they would be sold to an Australian or international buyer. Toll
will cease its charter arrangements for other vessels.
: Toll will either re-deploy staff within the Toll Group or
make them redundant.
Depots and real estate
: Toll will look at whether these assets can
be used by other businesses in the Toll Group. If not, Toll will sell the
(including seeking to re-zone its Frances Bay land in Darwin prior to
sale) or terminate the leases.
Other equipment
: Toll will use auction houses to sell equipment it
owns and terminate the leases of equipment that it leases.
Customer contracts
: Toll will seek to transfer customer contracts to
other suppliers, with the agreement of the customer and the alternative
If a replacement supplier cannot be found, Toll would not contemplate
continuing to operate in the market. It would be XXXXXX XX
XXXX XXXX XXXX
: Toll may also seek to sell or sub-lease the Gove Lease
subject to the consent of the landlord, although another, but less preferable,
option may be to continue to operate the facilities at the Gove Lease for a
period of time.
What Sea Swift did not know on 17 March 2016
Swift submitted, and the Tribunal accepts, that it did not know at the time it
entered into the Deed of Amendment (and therefore
the ARASSA) on 17 March 2016
(1) TML would consider sub-contracting to Sea Swift the
performance of its obligations under the Rio Tinto and GEMCO contracts if
not made other arrangements by the time TML exits the markets;
(2) XXXXXXX XXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXX XXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXX;
(3) XXX XXXXX and GEMCO had consented to the novation of TML’s contracts
to Sea Swift;
(4) with certainty, TML would not continue to subsidise its marine freight
business for any significant period if the Proposed Acquisition
(5) two vessels which Toll charters would be returned to their owners
irrespective of whether the Proposed Acquisition is authorised;
(6) TML would not contemplate selling the NT business as a going concern;
(7) TML would contemplate XXXX XXXX XXX XXXX XXX XXXX; and
(8) Toll would not only close its depots following the last sailing, but it
would seek to re-zone and sell the Frances Bay depot
site for residential
development.
The ACCC’s view
noted previously, the ACCC accepts that TML would likely exit the market in the
NT and FNQ if authorisation was refused. What
it cavilled with is how that
would occur.
ACCC said that it was not clear that TML would leave the market in the NT in 60
days. Despite Toll’s statements to customers
and the Tribunal, there is
in fact no hard and fast deadline. Based on the evidence of Mr Lindholm as to
what he would advise TML
to do and on the evidence of Toll’s executives
that Toll will seek to maximise its return and maintain its reputation with
customers by minimising disruption to their services, the ACCC submitted that
there is a “real chance” that what Toll
might do if authorisation
was refused is:
(1) seek to sell its NT business as a going concern;
(2) seek to sell vessels together with the assignment of contracted customers
along trunk routes in the NT.
ACCC says that the Tribunal does not have to be satisfied that these outcomes
are the “most likely” to occur, only
that that there is a
“real chance” that they might occur so that they are counterfactuals
which the Tribunal must take
into consideration. It says that the
Tribunal’s obligation cannot be “usurped by the categorical
declarations by the
executive of a company” of what the future without the
Proposed Acquisition would look like.
ACCC submitted that TML’s exit in the absence of the Proposed Acquisition
presents a “unique opportunity” to
lower barriers to entry or
expansion for Sea Swift’s competitors by making major contracts
contestable at the same time, so
that contracted customers may make their own
arrangements to secure a new operator, for instance by way of tender.
of the ACCC’s major contentions was that an incumbent enjoys a significant
competitive advantage because it is difficult
for new entrants to win customers
because few contracts are large enough to cover the high fixed costs of
providing a scheduled service
and customers are often reluctant to switch
suppliers due to the essential nature of the service.
ACCC said that the evidence shows that potential competitors are interested in
purchasing TML’s vessels, plant and equipment
and the opportunity to
compete for TML’s customer contracts. In this, the ACCC was relying
primarily on the evidence of Mr
Hamilton of Shorebarge, Mr Johnson of Teras and
Mr Wallin of Carpentaria Contracting.
ACCC rejected Sea Swift’s submission that, having regard to TML’s
stated intentions, it would be the likely provider
to TML’s Largest
Customers in the future without the Proposed Acquisition. The ACCC contended
that the fact Sea Swift was
willing to pay a significant price for the
“certainty” of having the Toll contracts transferred to it shows
not clear that Sea Swift would win those contracts if the acquisition
was not authorised. In saying this, the ACCC relied on the
evidence of Mr
Readdy (an executive of CHAMP Ventures and non-executive director of Sea Swift)
that Sea Swift considers the certainty
of picking up TML’s Largest
Contracts to be a benefit of the Proposed Acquisition. The ACCC asserted that
Sea Swift was prepared
to pay a “substantial premium” despite
TML’s announcement that it would exit the market in the short term if the
Proposed Acquisition was not authorised because it avoided the risk posed by
competitive forces which would exist if the Proposed
Acquisition did not
theory, a vendor would usually seek to sell a business as a going concern or to
sell contracts with related assets because that
is the most likely way of
maximising value compared to the sale of individual assets: both Messrs Lindholm
and Eversgerd accepted
that position. In theory, such an exit may also provide
a “unique” opportunity for competitors to acquire TML’s
customer contracts, but that depends on the will and capacity of the competitors
to compete for those contracts on terms likely
to be acceptable to those
customers. In theory, the payment of a consideration greater than the value of
a company’s tangible
assets may indicate that the purchaser is paying for
a market share that could result in a significant lessening of competition.
However, in the Tribunal’s consideration of Sea Swift’s Application,
theory must give way to fact.
Why Toll would choose to exit quickly if authorisation is
Woodward’s evidence as to the amount of TML’s losses on an EBITDA
basis in FNQ and the NT in 2015 and in the period
to March 2016 is set out in
his statement dated 25 May 2016. This information, broken down to exclude
revenues and costs relating
to TML’s charter service and road freight
businesses and with greater definition in relation to the allocation of costs
overheads, was not available to Mr Lindholm when he made his report.
Woodward said that Toll decided not to seek expressions of interest for
TML’s businesses in the NT and FNQ because its financial
performance meant
that it would likely only be attractive to Sea Swift because it would provide
Sea Swift with an additional revenue
stream having regard to the assets which it
had already deployed. He says that TML’s business in the NT is not
on a stand-alone basis and this would be “immediately apparent
to any prospective purchaser”. Mr Readdy agreed with
that view on the
basis that TML’s EBITDA for 2015 had been XXXXX XXX XXXX.
Woodward further said that, given the size of the ongoing losses suffered by the
TML in the NT and the period for which they have
been sustained, Toll would not
contemplate running a going concern sale process if authorisation was refused.
In his view selling
the NT business or, alternatively, selling that business in
parts would be a waste of time and resources; nobody would be interested
these unprofitable operations and no new bidder would be revealed.
Woodward said that there are no or few obvious pairings of vessels and
contracts, among other reasons, because only one of the
three vessels proposed
to be transferred to Sea Swift is in fact used by TML to provide scheduled
services in the NT. The other
two vessels are either used as a back-up or in
FNQ. TML’s other services in the NT are provided using charter vessels.
only merit in trying to bundle a loss-making contract with a vessel would be
if it was being offered to a provider of an existing
service which would benefit
from the incremental volume and cost synergies, such as Sea Swift. In the 18
months since the Proposed
Acquisition was announced, no other operator has
proposed to Toll any of the courses of action suggested by the ACCC; one person
has made a telephone enquiry with a view to buying a vessel for use outside of
the NT and FNQ.
Kruger and Jackson had the same view as Mr Woodward. Their evidence is that
Toll’s commercial imperative is to avoid
ongoing losses and “wind up
the business as quickly as we can”.
Expert evidence in relation to Toll’s
Lindholm’s evidence was that he formed the view that there may be a
purchaser for TML’s NT business or some routes
in the NT based on a
consideration of “gross margin after direct costs”, being the costs
of operating vessels (excluding
shore side costs), and the fact that the
business had close to XXX of that market. He thought that a possible purchaser
would reach
its own conclusions on what costs it would have to incur, link that
with its own fixed overhead structure and then decide whether
it would want to
make an offer or not. He had not considered a hypothetical purchaser’s
shore-side costs or indirect overheads.
He had therefore formed no view as to
what a theoretical purchaser’s cost structure might be.
Eversgerd did not share Mr Lindholm’s view. Mr Eversgerd observed (among
other things) that:
(1) Toll’s management is likely to be in a unique
position to assess the options with respect to the NT business due to their
understanding of the TML business and the industry in which it operates;
(2) Mr Lindholm may have overstated the profitability of the NT business due to
a number of factors, including the additional expenses
that might be incurred by
a buyer as a result of separating TML’s NT and FNQ operations;
(3) the focus on gross margin and EBITDA in Mr Lindholm’s report instead
of on free cash flow does not truly reflect the underlying
profitability of the
(4) recent earnings suggest there is minimal value in the NT and FNQ businesses
on a “business as usual” basis;
(5) historical earnings (2011-2013) are no longer comparable to the business
going forward having regard to TML’s loss of major
customers to Sea Swift
and stagnant demand resulting from the decline in resource-related and
government construction projects and
Rio’s closure of its Gove refinery.
Therefore, reference to the historical earnings in Mr Lindholm’s analysis
misleading;
(6) the outcome of a sale on a going concern basis is uncertain and the sale
process was likely to result in TML incurring additional
costs and trading
(7) the successful assignment of customer contracts to another buyer is not
guaranteed; and
(8) separating the NT and FNQ operations into independent businesses may be
challenging and costly.
Lindholm’s evidence does not provide a sound basis for the ACCC’s
proposed counterfactual as to how Toll would behave
if authorisation was not
granted. The Tribunal accepts the reasoning of Mr Eversgerd. Further, it is
highly relevant that no competitor
of Sea Swift has approached Toll to purchase
the whole or some part of TML’s business as a going concern and the only
was from someone investigating the possibility of buying one of its
vessels for use outside the NT and FNQ. While Mr Johnson of
Teras gave evidence
that he felt constrained from approaching Toll due to the various regulatory
processes on foot in respect of
the Proposed Acquisition, that evidence was not
convincing. Toll’s decision that TML would exit the market with or
regulatory clearance of the Proposed Acquisition and the exigencies of
the regulatory process which the transaction has faced has
been played out in
public over a long period.
respect and in fairness to him, Mr Lindholm’s view was theoretically based
within the limits of his instructions and the
information provided to him. He
readily admits that his view was formed without the benefit of discussion with
Toll’s executives
or on the basis of detailed knowledge of TML’s
costs of providing the services other than vessel costs. He had therefore
no view whether TML’s cost structure was inflated and he was not in
a position to say whether it was a realistic assessment
of the cost that any
other provider of those services might also have to bear. He does not challenge
the truthfulness of the evidence
given by Mr Woodward or Mr Jackson, nor does he
contend that they are wrong in their approach. He accepts that they are in a
position than him to make these assessments. He was not in a position to
identify with any particularity what cost savings might
be made by a
hypothetical other buyer of the various bundles of TML’s assets which he
suggested might lead to a profitable
Tribunal accepts that absent authorisation, TML would exit the market in the NT
and FNQ in accordance with the intentions it announced
to customers and the
evidence given by Mr Woodward.
Toll’s reputational risk
of the Largest Customers (Rio Tinto and GEMCO) are confident that if the
Proposed Acquisition was not authorised, Toll would make
the necessary
arrangements so that they would not suffer disruption. That confidence appears
to be well-founded, based on Mr Woodward’s
evidence and the fact that they
are otherwise substantial customers of Toll and have the means to pursue
enforcement of terms which
are commercially beneficial to them.
both contracts require the scheduled services supplier to meet specific
performance standards XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX,
Sea Swift is the most
obvious provider able to meet this requirement. If the Proposed Acquisition did
not proceed, it is Mr Woodward’s
evidence that TML would seek to
subcontract the performance of these contracts to Sea Swift. XXXX XXXX XXXXX
XXXX XXX XXXXXXX XXXXX
XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX. The Tribunal
recognises that this might well not be an expression of preference but rather
it would not be reasonable to withhold consent to assignment of the
contract to Sea Swift as a full service provider. Having said
that, in case the
Proposed Acquisition was not authorised, Rio Tinto commenced a tender process in
relation to the Gove and Weipa
routes; XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXX XXX. For the reasons
by Toll in its closing submissions, the Tribunal is highly sceptical that
XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXXXX.
Mr Luttrell of GEMCO
indicated that he would have XXXX XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXXX XXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX
XXXX XXXXX. Accordingly, the
need to preserve Toll’s reputation with
these customers does not lead to the conclusion that TML will remain in the
on Mr Woodward’s evidence, some of the Largest Customers cannot enjoy the
same commercial certainty as Rio Tinto and GEMCO.
Those customers include large
suppliers of essential services to the remote communities, such as IBIS, ALPA
and NT Power and Water
(through PUMA).
customers understand that they do not have any assurance that TML will not wind
up its business in the timeframe it says it
will. For this reason, although Mr
King’s primary position is that the best outcome for the communities ALPA
serves is for
the Tribunal to grant authorisation and for the Proposed
Acquisition to proceed, he considered his options with alternate providers
the time the Proposed Acquisition was announced. He contacted a number of
operators he believed he could use if the Proposed
Acquisition was not
authorised and the ALPA contract was not novated to Sea Swift. After testing
the market, his preferred option
is to XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXX
XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX. Mr King’s evidence
also clear that he would not consider XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX.
He would not do this because it would allow a provider
to “XXXX XXXX XXXX
XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX
primary position is also that the Tribunal should authorise the Proposed
Acquisition to secure the pricing which underpins
its contract with NT Power
& Water and for the benefit of the remote communities it serves. The
Tribunal accepts that the evidence
suggests that ALPA and PUMA, as
multi-destination remote community contracts, go “hand in hand” and
neither contract
is likely to sustain a scheduled service on its own. Sea Swift
currently operates the Port Keats route making deliveries for PUMA.
therefore very likely that the PUMA contract would follow the ALPA contract and
Sea Swift will be best placed to secure that
contract in the short term.
the Largest Contracts, only the IBIS contract relates to FNQ. It is Mr
Woodward’s evidence that TML is unlikely to continue
to subcontract the
IBIS contract to Sea Swift: it is most likely that TML would XXX XXXX XXXX.
IBIS’ primary position is that
it prefers to secure the benefits to its
Proposed Acquisition.
If the Proposed Acquisition did not proceed, having
regard to the fact that IBIS’ contract with TML is already performed by
Sea Swift by way of subcontract (and has been since TML won the contract), it
appears likely that IBIS would contract with Sea Swift,
at least in the short
term, but it is not clear on what terms.
Toll might incur some reputational loss with the clients from whom TML walks
away, it is a business issue for Toll how it evaluates
that risk against ongoing
losses incurred by the provision of the service and the extent to which it is
willing to pay a client to
be released from its contract. The Tribunal has no
evidence as to the quantum of any damages for which TML might be liable.
XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXX XXXX is not inconsistent with Mr
Jackson’s concern to ensure consistent supply of scheduled
services to the
remote communities: Toll wants TML to transfer these contracts to the other
full service provider on their current
terms, and XXX XXXX XXX XX XXXXXXX
XXXXXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XX. If the Tribunal were to refuse authorisation,
ALPA, PUMA and
IBIS have had a long period of notice in which to make other
arrangements and could have acted to minimise any losses they might
Tribunal accepts that TML gave letters dated 26 February and 21 October 2015 to
customers containing notice of its intention to
exit the markets in FNQ and the
NT even though some of the witnesses gave evidence that they were not aware of
whether their organisation
had received the letters.
Tribunal does not accept that it should act on the basis that it will be
necessary for TML to remain operating in the NT and FNQ
contrary to its stated
intentions in order to minimise reputational risk. The Tribunal accepts that
there is a real chance, and
it is the most realistic prospect, that Sea Swift
would be the provider to TML’s Largest Customers in the without scenario,
at least in the short term.
“Unique opportunity” and the position of the
competitors
parties agree that the current competitors of Sea Swift and TML in relation to
the provision of scheduled services are those set
out in Annexure 2 to these
reasons. Representatives of all of these companies (other than Palm Island
Barge) gave evidence.
in theory, TML’s exit may present a “unique opportunity” for
its competitors to win customer contracts in
the short term by making them
contestable at the same time, the evidence is that this is not a realistic
proposition. This is because
the evidence establishes that:
(1) The remote communities require at least weekly
services but the provision of that service must be underwritten by a base load
contract to make the route financially viable;
(2) TML would cease providing services within approximately 60 days of
authorisation being refused and Sea Swift will be the provider
Largest Customers at least in the short term with or without the Proposed
Acquisition; and
(3) The negotiation of the base load contracts takes some time, especially if a
tender process is undertaken, which is the usual
(though not exclusive) method
of awarding these contracts. TML’s Largest Customers usually require that
operators agree to
their standard terms and that the provider be in a position
to provide the service at the time the contract is awarded. Those customers
in a strong negotiating position (particularly on price) because they provide
base load volume. While Rio Tinto has gone out
to tender at this time, XXX
XXXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX
XXX XXXX XXXXX XX. ALPA
would also XXXX XXXXX XX having sought out
alternatives.
Position of competitors
Tribunal accepts as a fair summary of the evidence given by officers of the
competitors that, with the possible exception of Barge
Express, in the absence
of the Proposed Acquisition Sea Swift is the only operator which is currently
both able and willing to take
over scheduled services operated by TML if TML
does as it says it will and exits the market. For the reasons set out below in
to each individual contractor, the Tribunal has formed the view that
none has taken realistic, concrete steps to be able to compete
for and win
Transferred Contracts in the short term if the Proposed Acquisition is not
authorised. Their best opportunity to compete
effectively in the long term is
if the Proposed Acquisition is authorised and proceeds subject to the
Transferred Contracts Condition:
see [251]-[252] below.
The ACCC relied on the evidence of Mr Hamilton that he could
“straightaway” provide all of the services that TML currently
provides to PUMA, and that he did not require any new facilities to do so. He
said he could also provide all services to ALPA, GEMCO
and Rio Tinto within 30
to 40 days. Mr Hamilton explained that if he was approached by a large customer
he could secure an additional
barge within an agreed period of time. He said
“[t]here are many barges available in the Northern Territory and
waters looking for work.” He also said, “leasing the
barges is not hard, the transportation is usually four –
say five to six
days to actually bring them to Darwin. The crewing is reasonably easy”.
He then conceded that: “there
would be problems, there’s no doubt
the Tribunal did not find Mr Hamilton to be a convincing witness or his
aspirations to be credible in the short term. Toll
correctly pointed out that
Mr Hamilton’s actions to date are limited to a “brief
discussion” with Mr King of ALPA.
Mr King says XXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX
XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXX XX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXXXXXX. There
is no evidence
that Mr Hamilton has discussed providing scheduled services to
XXXXX, there is only evidence of “discussions ... [that] ...
progressed” in relation to charter services. XXXXX confirms that
discussions about scheduled services have not occurred.
XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX
XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXX XX XXXXXX. Sea Swift
correctly points out that, while
Shorebarge would like to commence scheduled
services in the NT and Mr Hamilton says that it could do so within 30 to 40
XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXX XX XXXX XXXXX
XXXX XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXX XX XXXX XXXXX XXXX
XXX XXXXXXX
XXXX XXXX. That matter alone makes it unlikely that Shorebarge would be in a
position to take on TML’s contracts
in the time required following
TML’s exit, especially if the contracts were put out to tender. The
Tribunal accepts that Mr
Hamilton’s confidence about how fast he could
start a service should be treated with caution given that there are some
inconsistencies
between his evidence and Mr Johnson’s evidence that Teras
is still providing scheduled services on the Darwin to Port Keats
contract said to have been won by Shorebarge) because Shorebarge was not able to
The ACCC relied on Mr Johnson’s evidence that Teras could take on all of
TML’s business within 30 to 60 days if TML’s
customers adopted
Teras’ standard terms of charter while negotiating longer term agreements.
In addition, he did not rule out
signing up and commencing a full service on
terms stipulated by TML’s major customers within 30 to 60 days.
Tribunal formed the view that Mr Johnson’s expressed interest was
theoretical at this stage and that he had not undertaken
any form of detailed
planning or taken any concrete steps to be in a position to compete immediately
for some or all of TML’s
Largest Contracts. While Mr Johnson explained
that he had not thought it proper to approach potential customers before the
process concluded, he appeared challenged by the need to adopt
the standard terms required by TML’s Largest Customers. He
expected to be
able to negotiate them, but that would necessarily take time given that
TML’s Largest Customers are usually
successful in contracting on their own
terms. In his statement, Mr Johnson said that it is unlikely that Teras could
immediately
service all of TML's customers and may not want to gain all of them.
He later explained that he may not want any of them: they would
“make commercial sense for me to do it”.
Tribunal infers from this evidence that Mr Johnson has not yet undertaken an
assessment of the basis on which Teras would establish
a scheduled service of
the kind operated by TML and the likely prices he could achieve with customers.
Although Mr Johnson expressed
a willingness to take up the ALPA and NT Power
& Water contracts, he gave no details of how this would occur (including any
to acquire further vessels and depots). He also did not provide details
of how such plans would be financed, given that Teras’
parent company
(AusGroup Limited) is XXXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXXXXX.
The Tribunal takes from Mr Kannikoski’s evidence that Bhagwan
Marine does not currently provide scheduled services and it has
no current plans
to provide a scheduled service and no real appetite to do so. It has access to
landing barges and the expertise
to provide a coastal community landing barge
service if it wished to do so. However, Mr Kannikoski’s evidence is that
only contemplate a scheduled service if he was unable to sell his three
barges which are currently for sale.
Carpentaria
Contracting
: Mr Wallin’s evidence is that Carpentaria Contracting has
no plans to provide a scheduled service in FNQ and that it would
need to make
upfront capital investments to be able to tender for the large contracts which
it is not in a position to do without
the certainty that it will be successful
in securing those contracts. He said that Carpentaria Contracting would need
three to six
months to take over “some” of TML’s customer
contracts. Ms Ahwang (of TSIRC) said that Carpentaria Contracting
is not capable
of servicing its requirements.
MIPEC’s business is based in Gladstone and it provides marine, port,
engineering and contracting charter services to the mining,
industrial, marine
and oil and gas sectors in the Queensland region. It does not provide scheduled
services but is considering doing
so following the downturn in the mining and
resource industries. MIPEC has gained “preferred status” with TSIRC
with Sea Swift, but it has not yet carried out any work under that
contract. XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX
XXX XXXXXXX XXXX
XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXX XX, XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX
XXX XXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXX XXX
XXXXXXX. The Tribunal’s view is that it
is unlikely that MIPEC could take over TML’s contracts in the NT in the
term following TML’s exit.
Marine Group
: While Mr Dodd does not consider that it would be difficult for
Pacific Marine Group to provide scheduled services in FNQ if there
was a chance
of securing profitable work, the force of his evidence is that there is not
sufficient demand for more than one operator
and the high fixed costs associated
with that business make it unattractive.
: Mr Conlon says that he has no objection to the Tribunal
authorising the Proposed Acquisition and he will implement his plans when
Tribunal has made its decision. Previously called Sealink, Barge Express has
provided a charter service to customers in the
NT since 2005. It has a fleet of
four landing craft, one of which (the
Bimah Tujuh
is currently
chartered to TML to carry out TML’s scheduled services to six remote
Ramingining, Milingimbi,
Goulburn Island and Croker Island). Earlier this year, Barge Express advertised
the commencement of a scheduled
service in the NT between Darwin and Elcho
Island, stopping at Maningrida, Goulburn Island and Croker Island, but the
service has
not yet commenced; Mr Conlon says that he XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXXXX XXX
XXXXXX XXXX XXXX XXXXX. Barge Express also plans to expand
its services beyond
those destinations. Mr Conlon considers Barge Express to be “in a great
position to compete in the market”,
and it would seek to cover 60-80% of
the services in the NT that TML currently provides. Mr Conlon considers that
Barge Express
has what it needs in order to do this.
Tribunal accepts that Barge Express is the competitor of Sea Swift most likely
to be in a position to provide scheduled services
in competition with Sea Swift
in the near future should Mr Conlon determine to do so. However, Mr Conlon has
no objection to the
Tribunal granting the authorisation and considers that the
Transferred Contracts Condition will remove any ‘paper barrier’
company may face as an alternative supplier to Sea Swift. The Tribunal got no
sense of urgency from Mr Conlon; it is plain that
he will only do business on
his own terms, especially as to price. He has spoken to TML’s Largest
Customers who have approached
him, although the evidence does not suggest that
Barge Express is likely to win their work in the short term; it appears that he
has been told more than once to XXXXX XXX XXXX XXXXX XXXXXX.
Summary of findings
evidence given by Toll’s executives about why the Proposed Acquisition and
winding up the businesses in the NT and FNQ were
the alternatives Toll pursed
after mid 2014 is reasoned, based on actual knowledge of TML’s cost
structure and profitability
and supported by written statements made twice
during 2015 to TML’s customers as to what it would do if the authorisation
not granted. TML’s Largest Customers know TML’s position and
most have taken some steps to deal with it.
Tribunal does not accept that the evidence of Toll’s executives amounts to
“categorical declarations” of a kind
which it should reject. The
Tribunal accepts that Toll’s executives have made a commercial judgment of
the best course open
to it to deal with TML’s operating losses and that
the only counterfactual with a “real chance” is that Toll will
on its stated intentions as set out above. The Tribunal prefers the evidence of
Toll’s executives to the theoretically
based speculation by the ACCC as to
what Toll or some other person might or should do in the circumstances.
Tribunal does not accept that if the Proposed Acquisition did not proceed there
is a “real chance” that TML would
remain in the NT market for a
period materially exceeding 60 days for the profit maximising or reputational
risk management reasons
suggested by Mr Lindholm.
Tribunal accepts that the relevant counterfactual is that if the Tribunal did
not grant authorisation of the Proposed Acquisition,
TML would exit the markets
in the NT and FNQ in approximately 60 days and Toll would deal with TML’s
assets in the manner described
by Mr Woodward set out in [202] above. The
Tribunal does not accept that there is a “real chance” that Sea
competitors will be able or (if able) willing to compete on terms
acceptable to TML’s Largest Customers at least in the short
Tribunal has formed the view that Sea Swift will become the provider to those
customers, either by subcontract or as a
result of winning a new contract, if
authorisation was not granted.
factual findings fatally undermine much of the ACCC’s theory of harm. On
this basis, the Tribunal does not consider that
it is necessary to deal with the
ACCC’s submission that Sea Swift was willing to enter into the ARASSA on
17 March 2016 and
pay a “substantial premium” to avoid the risk of
failing to capture the revenue streams from TML’s Largest Contracts.
Suffice it to say that as there was no evidence given to the Tribunal of the
present value of the vendor note or the shares in Sea
Swift which Toll will
receive as consideration under the Proposed Acquisition, the foundation for the
ACCC’s contention that
there was a “substantial premium” was
not made out. Further, Sea Swift’s perceptions of risk without full
of TML’s intentions or the intentions of TML’s Largest
Customers, and the amount that it was willing to pay for TML’s
assets as a
result, is irrelevant to the Tribunal’s evaluation of the impact on
competition with and without the Proposed Acquisition.
ACCC did not establish why payment for goodwill is necessarily a proxy for the
acquisition of market power, especially in a situation
where the multiple of
earnings to be paid is in the middle of the ordinary range having regard to Mr
Eversgerd’s evidence.
It is true that it might be difficult to see why a
purchaser would pay much for the transfer of a contract with a customer when
purchaser is likely to attain their custom anyway. However, whether or not that
transfer puts the purchaser in a position to
exert market power is a factual
matter which depends significantly on the nature of the rights the purchaser
obtains and it is to
be compared with the position the purchaser would enjoy in
the counterfactual.
some of the things which have been said to the ACCC and at the hearing by
officers of operators other than Sea Swift and TML,
their evidence does not
demonstrate any immediate willingness or capacity to compete for or take on
TML’s base load contracts
in the short term on the conditions (especially
as to cost) which some of the Largest Customers require. The Tribunal has
the submission that there is a real chance that those customers would
choose to use those other operators in the short term and therefore
“unique opportunity” posited by the ACCC does not exist. The
ACCC’s contention that a new entrant would not
face the same position in
all material respects in the without scenario is therefore misconceived.
in the without scenario, there is a high prospect that Sea Swift’s
position would be entrenched with TML’s Largest
Customers in the long
term, either as a subcontractor of TML or under new contracts entered into as a
result of TML’s exit
from the markets in the NT and FNQ. New contracts
would likely be for a period of three to five years and they may contain
exclusivity,
minimum volume or rights of first refusal clauses.
WILL THE PROPOSED ACQUISITION RESULT IN A SUBSTANTIAL LESSENING
OF COMPETITION OR OTHER PUBLIC DETRIMENTS?
Barriers to entry and expansion posited by the ACCC
key difference between Sea Swift and the ACCC is their view about the height of
barriers to entry and expansion. The ACCC contended
that these barriers are
high and will be increased if the Proposed Acquisition proceeds. The barriers
identified by the ACCC are,
in summary:
(1) The benefits of incumbency arising from reputational
factors (in particular a track record of providing a reliable service in
region) leading to customer loyalty, economies of scale, and staggered timing of
tenders when bidding for incremental customer
(2) A lack of access on reasonable terms and conditions to the Gove Lease
facilities.
(3) Strategic behaviour by incumbents, including low pricing, in response to
attempted entry.
(4) Potential new entrants are likely to incur sunk costs which are not
recoverable on exit, including losses incurred during the
establishment phase
after entry and the costs of acquiring and relocating suitable vessels.
mentioned above, the ACCC submitted that TML’s exit offers a “unique
opportunity” to lower the barriers to entry
and expansion.
Tribunal rejects the ACCC’s position for the following reasons.
ACCC’s position is based on the proposition that an incumbent enjoys a
significant competitive advantage as it is difficult
for new entrants to win
customers because few contracts are large enough to cover the high fixed costs
of providing the service and
customers are often reluctant to switch suppliers
due to the essential nature of the service and the reputation obtained through
their experience of the incumbent’s service.
the intuitive attraction of the ACCC’s proposition, the Tribunal does not
accept that incumbency is a material factor
in this matter so that it is
unnecessary to consider whether or not that factor rises so high as to
constitute a “barrier to
the proposition that it is “easier ... to retain a customer as opposed to
win a customer” can readily be accepted
but only so long as the incumbent
maintains the level of service demanded by a customer and does not raise prices
unreasonably.
until Sea Swift has been operating under the Transferred Contracts for some
time, Sea Swift will not enjoy the trust implied
by the word
“incumbency”; it takes time for the customer’s experience of
reliable service to build that trust.
Sea Swift is not an
“incumbent” under the Transferred Contracts, except in relation to
those contracts where it is currently
providing services as a subcontractor (for
instance, IBIS in FNQ and Port Keats deliveries under the PUMA contract) and
form of incumbency it will have without the Proposed Acquisition.
Otherwise, at the time the Transferred Contracts are transferred
Swift will only have such reputation as may have been derived from the market or
from customer experiences of employing
Sea Swift’s scheduled or charter
services while TML was in the market. It will therefore be on the same
reputational footing
as its competitors. That is not, in any relevant sense,
incumbency such as might create a barrier to entry, even if reputation should
treated as a barrier to entry, which is doubtful. That is the force of
Mr Meyrick’s evidence, which the Tribunal accepts.
the Transferred Contracts Condition obliges Sea Swift not to enforce any
provisions in the Transferred Contracts relating
to minimum volume, exclusivity
or rights of first refusal. Although the ACCC suggested that this benefit is
illusory, it is the
Tribunal’s view that this makes the Transferred
Contracts contestable now and during the term of those contracts.
it is true that some of the Transferred Contracts do not contain exclusivity or
minimum price conditions, most of TML’s
Largest Contracts do contain
exclusivity provisions and contracts which were not exclusive did contain rights
of first refusal to
match a competitor’s bid. With the Transferred
Contracts Condition, TML’s former customers and Sea Swift’s
competitors
will know that the Transferred Contracts will be contestable as a
result of authorisation. They will know, aside from other reasons,
officers of the customers and competitors were told that during the hearing, if
not before. Sea Swift must also ensure that
its obligations under the
Transferred Contracts Condition are published on Sea Swift’s website and
communicated to customers
within 30 days of the Completion Date under the
of TML’s Largest Customers said that operational capability, regularity,
reliability and price are key considerations
for customers in choosing a
scheduled service provider. However, none of them said that incumbency of a
service provider on a particular
route is a key consideration; all are prepared
to consider non-incumbent service providers on the customers' routes when a
is true that the officers of two of the Largest Customers gave evidence that
they generally do not seek scheduled services from
operators other than those
with whom those organisations have contracts during a contract’s term. Mr
Hamilton gave evidence
that customers would be reluctant to change again once
the contracts had been transferred to Sea Swift. The ACCC relied on the fact
that Sea Swift budgeted on retaining the revenue to be derived from the
Transferred Contracts and Mr Readdy said that a “higher
certainty” of achieving this was one of his reasons why Sea Swift entered
into the Deed of Amendment on 17 March 2016.
the officers of TML’s Largest Customers also gave evidence that they do
use other scheduled service providers when
it is convenient, for instance, when
it is necessary to consign freight urgently, after the regular provider’s
service had
sailed or for charter services. These are opportunities for those
other operators to become known to these customers and to build
a reputation for
reliability so that they can compete for the Transferred Contracts.
officers of TML’s Largest Customers also gave evidence of how they will
behave in the knowledge of the Proposed Conditions.
They clearly thought this
situation was different from the normal circumstance where they have chosen a
service provider and entered
into a contract with them. Mr King from ALPA
explained that if the Proposed Acquisition was authorised, he will be able try
Sea Swift, and switch to another operator if Sea Swift does not meet his
requirements. Rio Tinto has already sought alternatives
by way of tender in
case the Proposed Acquisition was not authorised, XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX XXX
XX XXXXX. Mr Copeland of IBIS
confirmed that, if it was not happy with Sea
Swift's service under the contract after it is transferred by TML, then he would
no hesitation in speaking with other providers with a view to obtaining
some or all of his requirements from another provider. All
of this points to
the fact that Sea Swift does not enjoy the benefits of “incumbency”
as submitted by Toll, customers can and have switched from an incumbent
provider. Examples of this include:
(1) TML, as incumbent, lost the Caltex contract; the
Woolworths Gove contract; the Woolworths Weipa contract; the Rio Tinto Weipa
contract; and Rio Tinto Gove charter work, all to Sea Swift. TML also lost work
relating to Port Keats, including Caltex’s
work, to Shorebarge;
(2) Sea Swift, as incumbent, lost the IBIS contract to TML and was only
reappointed as one of two preferred suppliers under the TSIRC
(3) Teras, as incumbent, lost the Northline work to Shorebarge, however it is
not clear which of Teras or Shorebarge is currently
operating that service;
(4) Shorebarge, as incumbent, lost Caltex’s work for Port Keats to Sea
Conlon does not perceive any true advantage to incumbency.
mentioned above it has not always been the incumbent which has survived in a
price war. It is difficult to see the prospect of
a price war as a barrier to
entry since it may be the entrant which instigates it by undercutting the
TML’s Largest Customers have and will continue to have countervailing
power. The evidence is that these customers are
sophisticated and understand
that they control critical volumes and conditions of supply. These customers
have the ability to undertake
competitive tender processes to award work and
otherwise test the market (and generally do so), either formally or informally.
have the ability to threaten other options to constrain their service
providers and they can and do talk to other operators as a
back-up or as a
“stalking horse”. They can and have sponsored, supported or
encouraged new entry in a range of ways that
do not involve financial investment
in a service provider. For example, Caltex encouraged Sea Swift’s entry
and expansion
into the NT market by entering into a base load contract with it.
the ACCC submitted that the Transferred Contracts Condition does not address the
ways in which an incumbent may provide an
incentive to its customers to ship all
of their freight with the incumbent, such as volume discounts. As mentioned
above, the ACCC
suggested that the Transferred Contracts Condition should be
amended to deal with volume discounts. However, the Tribunal considers
volume discounts are a normal and appropriate incident of competition which can
also be offered by competitors. In any event,
the Condition is not required to
address any substantial lessening of competition which would not exist but for
the Proposed Acquisition
because the Tribunal has already accepted that the
outcome of TML’s exit is that Sea Swift will become the provider to
Largest Customers for reasons given elsewhere.
the Tribunal accepts that economies of scale derived from having a number of
customer contracts enhances incumbency and the
staggering of the time contracts
coming up for renewal may contribute to that enhancement.
In the Tribunal’s view, Sea Swift’s
likely position in the without scenario will inhibit competition in both the
run and the long run compared to the position if the Proposed Acquisition
is authorised subject to the Transferred Contracts Condition
(as revised by the
Tribunal). This is because the Transferred Contracts will be contestable during
their term (including extensions
at the option of the customer) which will give
other operators time to calibrate a competitive proposition that they are
either not able or (in the case of Barge Express) not willing to make
to the TML’s Largest Customers on terms likely to be
acceptable to those
customers party to the Transferred Contracts will benefit because they will
experience little disruption from TML’s exit
while being freed from
restrictive contractual provisions such as exclusivity, rights of first refusal
or minimum volume provisions;
they will be able to “try before you
buy” not only Sea Swift’s services, but also services provided by
other operators,
albeit that in the short term it is likely that most client
relationships will be built by Sea Swift’s competitors through
provision of charter services. This encourages incremental entry which imposes
a competitive discipline on Sea Swift which is
unlikely to exist in the
counterfactual. That is so even though in the meantime, Sea Swift will have
been put in a position to build
a relationship with the customer that it does
not currently have.
Gove Lease Undertaking and strategic conduct
indicated at [155] above, the Tribunal accepts that, absent the Gove Lease
Undertaking, a competitive detriment would result from
the Proposed Acquisition
as Sea Swift would have exclusive control of the roll-on/roll-off ramp which is
the most efficient facility
at Gove for scheduled service operations.
the time of the hearing, Toll had not decided what it would do with the Gove
Lease if the Proposed Acquisition was not authorised.
Toll had little appetite
to operate the facility if it was not using it to provide schedule or charter
services and Toll indicated
that it might either sell the lease (which would
require the consent of the lessor) or surrender it.
Readdy’s evidence was that, from Sea Swift’s perspective, access to
the Gove Lease is an important part of the Proposed
Acquisition.
Helms of the Gumatj Corporation gave evidence that he is supportive of the Gove
Lease going to Sea Swift. He has recommended to
the Northern Land Council that
it approach Toll to relinquish the lease at Gove and pass it on to Sea Swift if
authorisation is not
is no evidence that anyone other than Sea Swift has developed a proposal to
acquire the Gove Lease or to operate the facilities
on it. It appears likely
that Sea Swift is the entity both able and willing to operate the facilities at
the Gove Lease either with
or without the Proposed Acquisition.
ACCC submitted that the Gove Lease Undertaking is insufficient to address its
first issue is pricing. The Tribunal accepts that following the transfer or
surrender of the Gove Lease it can be expected that
any operator of the wharf is
likely to impose charges sufficient to make a return on the costs of operating
and maintaining the wharf.
The evidence suggests that many operators found
TML’s charges uncommercial; indeed this is the reason why Sea Swift sought
alternate wharf facilities at the Gove Boat Club.
based on Mr Woodward’s unchallenged evidence, XXXX XXXX XXXXX XXXX XXX
XXXXXX XX XXXXXX XXXXXX XX XXXXXX. While those
charges are higher than fees
charged by operators of wharves in other places (as set out in the submission of
the Department of the
Chief Minister of the NT), the Tribunal has no evidence of
the cost of providing the services in those other places. Mr Hamilton
that the terms of the Gove Lease Undertaking do not make access to those
facilities commercially viable for Shorebarge..
However, there is no evidence
that any other operator of the facilities at the Gove Lease would be able to
charge less than the rates
Sea Swift now says it will charge under the Gove
Lease Undertaking.
Mr Woodward’s evidence, it may well be that running the Gove Lease is only
attractive to an operator of a scheduled service
or some other person who
handles a substantial quantity of freight through Gove. Although Mr Hamilton
said he saw virtue in an independent
stevedoring company holding the lease for
the roll-on/roll-off ramp at Gove, he did not give evidence that anyone was
to put such an arrangement in place. Rio Tinto’s officers made
no suggestion that it had any interest in doing so either,
albeit that that
question was not put to any of those officers.
part of the privatisation of the port of Darwin, the
Ports Management Act
(NT) was passed. This Act introduced a regulatory scheme for the
operation and management of ports in the NT, including price regulation
third party access. It is open to the NT government to apply this scheme to the
Gove Lease. While this fact has been given
little weight by the Tribunal, it is
another avenue for regulation of Sea Swift’s conduct.
of the ACCC’s concerns is that, as operator of the facilities at the Gove
Lease, Sea Swift will have the opportunity
to interfere with other
operators’ cargo activities. The ACCC’s Report suggests that the
facility should not be operated
by Sea Swift because it will have the
“incentive and ability to discriminate against its competitors who use the
Swift operates the Humbug Wharf in Weipa. Since December 2013, it has provided
access to TML; it also provides access to Pacific
Marine Group and Carpentaria
Contracting. As to these operators:
(1) It is Mr Woodward’s evidence that TML has not
had any difficulty obtaining access to the wharf and had not experienced
to berthing schedules outside of normal weather issues.
(2) Pacific Marine Group’s evidence is that it uses the Humbug Wharf
daily, and Sea Swift has been “helpful and amenable”.
(3) Mr Wallin of Carpentaria Contracting suggested in his witness statement that
it had experienced delays in accessing the Humbug
Wharf at times. It needed to
use the wharf to take delivery of goods following their discharge at the wharf
by Sea Swift. This
is not evidence of obstruction by Sea Swift, it is
reflective of commercial timing.
allegations of strategic conduct were made by the ACCC in the course of the
proceedings. The Tribunal has no doubt that Sea
Swift is an aggressive
competitor, however, many of the allegations were based on conduct that
witnesses said they had heard about
or thought might be a risk, but of which
they had no direct experience. It is puzzling why so much hearsay was relied
on. The Tribunal
is not satisfied that the ACCC made out its allegations of
strategic conduct for the reasons given by Sea Swift in its closing submissions.
ACCC has not established that Sea Swift has engaged in the kind of behaviour
which grounds this concern and its submissions do
not provide a basis for the
Tribunal to regard the undertaking as inappropriate. Evidence of conduct
inconsistent with Sea Swift
providing access in accordance with the
non-discrimination provisions in the Gove Lease Undertaking should form the
basis of enforcement
action by the ACCC if it occurs. If the ACCC considers
that its remedies in relation to that undertaking or for breach of the
of authorisation are inadequate, that is a matter for it to take up
with the Federal Government.
the ACCC has related concerns that:
(1) the undertaking is a behavioural undertaking which,
according to Professor King, is a poor substitute for market forces in achieving
competitive price and service outcomes;
(2) the undertaking is less robust or comprehensive that other port undertakings
that the ACCC has accepted in the recent past, which
included “ring
fencing” of competitor information, independent price and non-price
dispute resolution processes for terminal
users, independent monitoring
(including on an ad hoc basis at the request of a terminal user) and periodic
review of the undertaking;
(3) following provision of the draft Determination to the parties on 28 June
2016, the ACCC submitted that the undertaking should
be subject to independent
third party audit provisions as adopted in
, and for the first
time provided the Tribunal with draft clauses.
Tribunal accepts that since the original s 87B undertakings were given by the
Perkins Group, regulatory practice may have moved
on. However, while the
ACCC’s Report and submissions referred to the matters set out in (1) and
(2) above, the ACCC’s
concerns were expressed as concepts without drafting
suggestions and on the primary basis that authorisation should not be granted.
None of the ACCC’s submissions addressed whether there was any difference
in the significance of the ports in relation to
which it had adopted the new and
significantly more detailed style of undertaking. There is no evidence that the
ACCC engaged at
all with Sea Swift about drafting to accommodate provisions of
the kind which the ACCC thought appropriate and found acceptable in
matters, nor did it provide any such drafting to the Tribunal for its
consideration.
would have been appropriate for the ACCC’s concerns to have been aired at
the hearing in a more concrete form which allowed
the Tribunal to assess the
suitability of an undertaking which conforms to the ACCC’s current
practices and addressed its concerns.
The first drafting proposal provided by
the ACCC was on 29 June 2016 when it provided draft provisions relating to third
party audit
used in relation to nationally significant infrastructure. As
submitted by Sea Swift, it is not apparent why the expense of complying
provisions of this kind would be justified having regard to the size and the
scope of the facilities operated at the Gove Lease
compared with, say, an
international terminal.
the Tribunal had before it at the time it was making the decision to grant
authorisation was a form of undertaking which had been
previously accepted by
the ACCC in relation to the Gove Lease, with provisions which would improve the
price at which competitors
could get access to those facilities compared to that
charged by TML and which would, for the first time, cover the roll-on/roll-off
landing ramp, the most appropriate facility for use by scheduled service
Tribunal considered that it was appropriate to authorise the Proposed
Acquisition because of its view of the counterfactual and
the desirability of
securing the range of benefits to remote communities which would be conferred by
the Proposed Conditions (amended
as required by the Tribunal) as well as the
improved conditions of the Gove Lease Undertaking compared with those of the
s 87B undertaking. The Tribunal considered it appropriate to
impose a condition that Sea Swift execute and provide the Gove Lease
Undertaking
to the ACCC.
Correspondence
from the ACCC’s lawyers dated 29 June 2016 suggested that if the Tribunal
were, as specifically provided for
by s 95AZJ(2), to make the Determination with
a condition that Sea Swift execute and give to the ACCC an undertaking under s
in the form proposed by Sea Swift, it remained a matter for the ACCC in the
exercise of its independent discretion as to whether
it would accept such an
undertaking. The Tribunal was therefore put in a position where it might,
acting pursuant to s95AZJ(2),
impose a condition of authorisation which could
literally be fulfilled by Sea Swift executing and proffering the Gove Lease
Undertaking
to the ACCC, but its purpose could be frustrated because the ACCC
might not accept the undertaking. While such an outcome would
appear to the
Tribunal to be inconsistent with the scheme envisaged by s 95AZJ(2), the
Tribunal asked the ACCC to advise, in unequivocal
terms, whether it would accept
the undertaking if given in that form. Following a meeting of the Commission
hastily convened on
1 July 2016, the Tribunal was advised that it would.
Tribunal is grateful that the ACCC took the steps necessary to be able to give
the required advice to the Tribunal. The Tribunal
nonetheless has concerns that
the ACCC’s role of
the Tribunal was, in this case,
impeded by its advocacy of a position in relation to whether or not
authorisation should be granted.
ACCC submitted that the prospect of losses from sunk costs, such as initial
trading losses while a business establishes itself
in a market and in operating
a route during the time taken to establish a reputation, is more likely to deter
entry where a potential
entrant perceives it has a limited prospect of recouping
that investment over time following its entry. It says that in this matter,
this is likely because of:
(1) the need to hold multiple contracts in order to
cover the cost of providing scheduled marine freight services. This is due to
the existence of fixed costs and economies of scale over some ranges of output;
(2) the staggered and infrequent timing with which major contracts come up for
(3) the importance of customer inertia, customer loyalty, reputation and
(4) the expressed customer need for demonstrated reliability; and
(5) a history of aggressive pricing behaviour by market incumbents –
including the recent price war that has driven a major
competitor such as TML
out of the market.
Interestingly,
the ACCC did not accept Sea Swift’s submission that the prospect of
orderly exit (demonstrated if the Proposed
Acquisition was authorised) has the
effect of lowering a barrier to entry by lessening the fear of sunk costs
because recovery of
those costs is more likely in an orderly exit.
Tribunal is troubled by the propositions put by both the ACCC and Sea
ACCC’s method of identifying “sunk costs” as a barrier to
entry does not derive from the significance or magnitude
of the costs themselves
but rather from other factors relevant to the prospects of an entrant’s
success. Those factors primarily
relate to whether incumbency is a barrier to
entry, which is dealt with above.
concepts of barriers to entry and the costs of entry must be carefully
distinguished. Costs of entry are those inevitable costs
of entry, without
which entry could never hope to be successful. Even the incumbent firm will
have had to bear those costs when
it entered the market. A barrier to entry,
one way or the other, will raise its rival’s costs such that it will be
compete, whereas a cost of entry is a commercial reality that is neither
artificial nor the result of conscious strategic actions
taken by the incumbent
to deter entry.
any business venture fails it will, to some extent, not be able to recover the
value of some of its assets and investments in things
like marketing, licence
fees and so on. But this is how business works – entrepreneurs have to
take risks and sink capital
into the assets necessary to operate. This is the
very essence of the competitive process in which success is not guaranteed.
be considered a barrier rather than a cost of entry, a barrier to entry must
give an incumbent firm a lasting commercial advantage
over a potential entrant
such that the would-be entrant hesitates to sink the costs necessary to enter
the market for fear of not
being able to recoup them should it be forced to exit
the market because it cannot overcome the inherent advantages possessed by
incumbent firms.
often than not these sunk costs will be fixed costs. In this matter, an example
might be the acquisition of land-based facilities.
The Tribunal accepts that
the costs of establishing a facility at Gove may constitute sunk costs that
might constitute a barrier
to entry. For example, a new entrant might baulk at
using the limestone wharf because it would be required to contribute to the
$250,000 cost of making the wharf suitable for use. However, most of the costs
of obtaining the requirements to conduct a scheduled
service can be minimised by
leasing land for depots, using common user facilities and chartering vessels.
If entry occurs but the
venture fails, these assets will be simply handed back
to the owners at the end of the lease period. All that has been incurred
annual cost of leasing and operating and some possible break fees, which are
costs of doing business and should not be regarded
as barriers to entry.
the Tribunal’s view, set-up costs in this matter can be regarded as costs
of entry that even the incumbent firm had to incur
when it entered the market,
even though the dollar cost might have changed over time. If all firms, both
existing and a potential
entrant, face these costs then it is incorrect to
regard them as constituting a barrier to entry.
the difference between the concepts of costs of entry and barriers to entry is
of course a matter of degree, the Tribunal finds
that the ACCC conflated the
two, and made little attempt to demonstrate what, if any, of the costs of entry
did in fact constitute
barriers to entry. Further, the Tribunal has accepted
that Sea Swift will most likely be the service provider to TML’s Largest
Customers in the counterfactual and the Proposed Acquisition would most likely
enhance the capacity of Sea Swift’s competitors
to compete for TML’s
Largest Contracts. Accordingly, if sunk costs were a barrier to entry, this
barrier would exist both
with and without the Proposed Acquisition.
Detriment claimed by the MUA
Tribunal accepts that the loss of employment by a class of people as the result
of the Proposed Acquisition is capable of constituting
a public detriment.
MUA submitted that as Sea Swift will not employ TML’s employees in the
Proposed Acquisition, that is a public detriment
which could be avoided or
mitigated in the without scenario because TML’s employees who are not
redeployed by Toll may find
jobs with other operators, because Sea Swift’s
competitors might pick up some of the Transferred Contracts and therefore would
need to employ additional crew. The MUA relies on statements by Messrs Johnson
of Teras and Mr Hamilton of Shorebarge to the effect
that if those companies
were to pick up some of TML’s contracts they may employ some of
TML’s former employees. It also
relies on a suggestion by Mr Hamilton
that if the Gove Lease became available, Shorebarge would support the
establishment of an independent
stevedoring company to employ indigenous staff.
The MUA says that this benefits the remote communities because TML’s crew
includes members of those remote communities who have few opportunities for
employment.
and Sea Swift submit that the position of TML’s employees will be the same
in the with and without scenarios because:
(1) As the MUA accepts, TML employees will be made
redundant or redeployed in both the with and without scenarios. As Mr Woodward
stated at the hearing, that process is already occurring.
(2) Sea Swift is likely to obtain TML’s Largest Contracts in both
scenarios, and accordingly it will have the same or similar
requirements in both cases. While the additional XX shore side staff and XX
maritime staff are likely to be sourced from
Sea Swift’s casual or
part-time employees who were made redundant or part-time when Sea Swift cut back
services in order to
reduce costs, Sea Swift has not ruled out employing former
TML employees if it needs to advertise for staff.
reasons previously given, the Tribunal does not accept that Teras or Shorebarge
would acquire one of TML’s Largest Contracts
in the near term if
authorisation was refused. Accordingly, their expressions of interest in
employing TML’s employees carry
little weight. Of course, in the longer
term, the Transferred Contracts are contestable and it might be that they would
in a position at some time to employ former TML staff to the extent they
have not been redeployed by Toll.
as Mr Hamilton suggested that he would support the establishment of an
independent stevedoring company to operate the Gove
Lease, it is only a
suggestion and despite the fact that the Proposed Acquisition (in some form) has
been in prospect since November
2014 and it has been known to face regulatory
hurdles, there is no evidence that either a consortium of barge operators or
else has made a concrete proposal to take over the Gove Lease and operate
it independently. Toll has indicated that it is not interested
in operating the
facilities at the Gove Lease if it does not provide services through the
facility; the force of Mr Woodward’s
evidence is that as a stand-alone
operation, the Gove Lease facility is expensive to run. Mr Helms has indicated
that the Gumatj
Corporation supports the transfer of the Gove Lease to Sea
Swift. In all of those circumstances, the Tribunal has formed the view
there is no current proposal for the development of an independent stevedoring
company which would warrant the Tribunal declining
authorisation on that
is a cause of regret that TML’s exit will result in the loss of employment
in an area of Australia where it may be difficult
to find employment, especially
for the remote communities. However, the Tribunal accepts the submissions made
by Sea Swift and Toll:
authorisation of the Proposed Acquisition will not result
in any public detriment arising from the retrenchment of TML’s staff
will not be redeployed by Toll in the counterfactual.
considered the future with the Proposed Acquisition and without it and having
regard to the counterfactual and the Tribunal’s
factual findings, the
Tribunal finds that there is no competitive detriment or other public detriment
resulting from authorisation
of the Proposed Acquisition which is not addressed
by the Gove Lease Undertaking.
PUBLIC BENEFITS
Tribunal accepts that the following are key aspects of the market for scheduled
services in the NT and FNQ which are relevant
to considering whether there is a
public benefit to be derived from one or more of the Proposed Conditions:
(1) the fact that there are no road or air services at
an affordable cost or reliability which are substitutable for scheduled services
to remote communities;
(2) the importance to customers of reliability and frequency of scheduled
services due to the essential or perishable nature of much
of the cargo
(3) having regard to the disadvantage faced by a significant proportion of these
of PM & C that
“actions which are likely to cause further disadvantage to these
(4) the limited (and relatively static) demand for scheduled services;
(5) the high fixed costs of providing scheduled services;
(6) the importance of trunk routes for a scheduled service operator;
(7) the counterfactual; and
(8) Sea Swift is most likely to be the provider of scheduled services to
TML’s Largest Customers on the trunk routes with or
without the Proposed
Acquisition. That will occur either by Sea Swift being appointed by those
customers under new arrangements
or by TML subcontracting the performance of its
obligations for the term of the contracts.
were a number of witnesses called by the ACCC who expressed concerns about the
loss of services or price rises if there was
a reversion to one full service
provider to the remote communities and those witnesses gave evidence that they
did not favour authorisation.
These communities were clearly better off during
the period of fierce competition between two full service providers. However it
was readily apparent that these witnesses generally did not know that TML was
going to exit the NT and FNQ whether or not authorisation
was granted. When
they were made aware of this at the hearing, some of the witnesses conceded that
their communities would be better
off with the benefit of the Proposed
Conditions.
Professor King’s critique of the Conditions
on a report by Professor Stephen King, the ACCC challenged the appropriateness
and utility of the Proposed Conditions insofar
as they rely on behavioural
undertakings without structural remedy, noting that such undertakings are a
“poor alternative to
actual competition”.
King’s consideration of the Proposed Conditions was based on the
instructions he received from the ACCC’s solicitors:
see [105] above. As
is apparent from the reasons, the Tribunal does not accept most of the factual
assumptions or assertions as
to competitive detriments set out in his letter of
instruction. That undermines the extent to which the Tribunal can place
on Professor King’s opinions.
Swift submitted that the purpose of the Proposed Conditions was not to bring
occur were a regulator to
regulate the price and availability of a particular service. Rather, they were
designed to provide:
(1) greater access for competitors, through the
Transferred Contracts Condition and, if required by the Tribunal, the Gove Lease
Undertaking;
(2) public benefits for remote communities through the Remote Community Price
Condition and the Remote Community Service Condition.
Tribunal accepts Sea Swift’s submission save that it holds the view that
the Gove Lease Undertaking is required to ameliorate
or remove a competitive
detriment which arises as a result of Sea Swift being the operator of the
facilities under the Gove Lease.
The Tribunal accepted the undertaking offered
by Sea Swift for reasons set out at [273]-[293] above.
Transferred Contracts Condition
ACCC submitted that any benefit conferred by this Proposed Condition is
“uncertain, very limited in scope and will be of
short duration” and
“unlikely to result in any meaningful benefit to the community” and
that it is incorrect to
assume that transfer of the Transferred Contracts to Sea
Swift will result in the preservation of prices determined in a period of
intense competition.
submitted that there is no evidence that favourable pricing for large
corporations such as PUMA, Rio Tinto, and GEMCO is likely
to flow through to the
community. Of the not-for-profit organisations, the ALPA contract commenced in
2011, before the intense competition
between Sea Swift and Toll. The ACCC
conceded that evidence suggests that IBIS was able to negotiate favourable
pricing. The ACCC
submitted that these companies may be able to seek remedies
for breach of contract if TML chooses to walk away and consequently their
financial position is unlikely to be materially different with or without the
Proposed Acquisition.
ACCC also submitted that of the smaller customers, almost 40% of contracts were
entered into before the period of intense competition.
Of the remainder, the
ACCC said it is “meaningful” that Mr Tourish of Gove & Beyond
Pty Ltd (the company which operates
Walkabout Lodge and Tavern at Nhulunbuy) and
Mr Totten of the Maningrida Progress Association expressed concerns about the
notwithstanding their contractual situation, fearing that it would result
in higher prices and lower services, as has happened previously
when there was a
single provider.
Tribunal does not accept these submissions.
in relation to GEMCO and Rio Tinto, the public benefit achieved by the
Transferred Contracts Condition is that any exclusivity
or right of first
refusal in those contracts cannot be relied on by Sea Swift. Without
authorisation subject to this Condition,
there would be no assurance of the
terms under which Sea Swift might be engaged or subcontracted to perform
TML’s obligations,
possibly limiting the contestability of contracts with
the Largest Customers for an indeterminate period.
in relation to PUMA, Mr Donnan has expressed a strong preference for
authorisation. It is Mr Donnan’s evidence that
the favourable pricing
that PUMA secured under its contract with TML was achieved in a tender process
lasting 18 months. The pricing
enabled PUMA to secure the contract with NT
Power & Water because it includes the cost of freight secured by the
contract with
TML. NT Power & Water is a government instrumentality which
provides diesel and gas driven electricity generation and distribution
throughout the remote communities and water and sewerage services in the
Tribunal accepts that NT Power & Water need suffer no price detriment in the
long run, even if XXXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXX with
PUMA. However, that does not mean
that the remote communities served under the NT Power & Water contract would
not suffer disruption
while a new provider is engaged. Unless PUMA can make
arrangements with an alternate supplier quickly, disruption may occur to
to the remote communities for fuel and the equipment necessary to
supply electricity in those communities. Even though other providers
willing to enter the market, PUMA would be at a negotiating disadvantage in
those circumstances. It would certainly not be
in a position to take the time
and care it did during the 2014 tender process. It is most likely that PUMA
would use Sea Swift as
the full service provider most closely resembling TML,
even though Teras and Barge Express might be suitable for some routes. While
PUMA may have a cause of action against TML for any price difference, that may
not compensate it in relation to other terms it might
be required to accept, for
instance in relation to exclusivity or length of contract. Authorisation
enables an orderly transition
for the remote communities of a scheduled service
which supports continuity of electricity supply, while making the PUMA contract
contestable.
in relation to ALPA, Mr King has expressed a strong preference for the Tribunal
to authorise the Proposed Acquisition having
regard to the degree of
disadvantage in the communities ALPA serves. While it is the case that the
current contract was negotiated
before the price war, Mr King expressed concern
that if TML walks away, he will need to find another provider and that may not
possible on the same terms as to price or service levels as ALPA now enjoys.
He is concerned that any disruption to services would
threaten the regular
supply of necessary food and other goods at sustainable prices to the
disadvantaged communities which ALPA serves.
He has indicated that if
authorisation was not granted, he has a preference to XXXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXX
XXXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXX XXXXX
XXX, even though it might be able to provide the
services he needs. However, he can have no assurance about the terms on which
Swift or any other provider might agree to contract and there is no
assurance that that contract would be contestable during its
term in the future
without the Proposed Acquisition.
Mr Woodward has indicated that TML would be unlikely to subcontract the IBIS
arrangement to Sea Swift because of the losses
TML would incur. IBIS is then in
a similar situation as ALPA. That contract was negotiated during the price war
and the Tribunal
accepts the evidence of Mr Copeland of IBIS that the savings
secured under its contract with TML are substantial and they are passed
the communities IBIS services in the Torres Strait and FNQ.
while it is true that if TML XXXXXX XXXXX XXX contracts with IBIS or ALPA or
other similar organisations they may have legal
remedies against TML which would
preserve some of the price benefit which the customers enjoy. However, pursuing
legal remedies
while they seek out one or more other providers would involve
executive time, disruption and expense which may be difficult to either
or justify given the priorities of these organisations which are important to
the well-being of the disadvantaged remote communities
that they serve.
in relation to the Transferred Contracts with smaller community groups and
businesses, the ACCC estimates that 60% have secured
advantageous prices during
the price war which they may not have otherwise secured. Of the other 40%, it
is quite possible that
many would take the same attitude as Mr King; it is a
rational approach as it will give them price and service protection. At the
same time, the contracts will be contestable so that the customer will be free
to negotiate a better arrangement with another provider
if that becomes
Tribunal is satisfied that the assignment of the Transferred Contracts will
minimise disruption to the remote communities who
benefit from those contracts.
For many of those communities it will also preserve costs for scheduled services
at a level which
they can manage or which was achieved during the price war, for
periods up to seven years (depending on the contract). The communities
this benefit highly. Having regard to the need to ensure that remote
commodities at the
best price available, that is a substantial benefit. These are benefits of
which they have no assurance in the
future without the Proposed Acquisition
following TML’s withdrawal of its services. The Tribunal does not accept
that a period
up to seven years is short; there is every prospect that in such a
timeframe a significant competitor to Sea Swift might emerge.
is the Tribunal’s view that the Transferred Contracts Condition confers
public benefits.
Remote Community Service Condition
ACCC’s objections to the Remote Community Service Condition and the Remote
Community Price Condition are summarised at [110]-[111]
is common ground that the frequency and reliability of freight deliveries are
very important matters for remote communities and
that a reduction in the
frequency of services would have consequences for those communities. There is a
substantial body of evidence
that these communities are also highly sensitive to
the price of services because of the disadvantage suffered by a high percentage
of their populations.
ACCC correctly points out that the Remote Community Service Condition only
establishes minimum frequency requirements. There
are no commitments proposed
with respect to other aspects of service, including but not limited to the days
and times of delivery,
the waiting time for freight or the condition of
delivered goods. Sea Swift also did not specify the capacity or type of vessels
which will provide scheduled services post-acquisition.
the defects identified by the ACCC are real, they apply whether or not the
Proposed Acquisition was authorised. The Tribunal
does not accept that the
Remote Communities Service Condition will distort the market or lacks value. If
Sea Swift does not provide
an adequate service to the remote communities, that
will provide an entry opportunity for another operator since the Condition does
not preclude other operators from initiating a service should they wish to do
so. If, some time later, that operator ceases to provide
a service during the
five-year period of the Condition, Sea Swift must resume the service.
ACCC contends that all remote communities will continue to receive services in
the future with or without the Proposed Acquisition
(1) other operators are ready, willing and able to
provide services;
(2) the major contracts require service to all destinations; and
(3) the government is likely to step in if there were interruptions to scheduled
is some force to this submission in that PUMA, ALPA, IBIS and Ergon Energy (a
Sea Swift customer) do require service to nominated
destinations under their
current contracts. However, if the Proposed Acquisition is not authorised and
TML walks away from some
or all of its contracts, it will be a matter for
negotiation with Sea Swift or another operator whether all of those communities
are serviced, the frequency with which they will be serviced and at what price.
In any event, not all of these contracts are for
a period of five years during
which the Condition will apply.
is true that other operators (such as Shorebarge, Teras and Barge Express) have
indicated interest in providing services to some
or more of the Largest Contracts. However their evidence indicates that this
interest is in contracting
very much on their own terms (including price) and
Shorebarge and Barge Express, as well as Sea Swift, have walked away from
unprofitable
routes in the past when it became necessary to cut costs. While a
government may subsidise an essential service to a remote community
commercial provider is willing to provide it, there is no guarantee of how long
it might be before that would occur or the
frequency or prices of any service it
might provide.
the Remote Community Service Condition, the remote communities are assured that,
at a minimum, the services specified in Schedule
3 of the Annexure to the
Determination will be provided by Sea Swift or another operator for a period of
five years. Even if the
ACCC is right in its assessment, the assurance has
value to vulnerable and disadvantaged communities for a period of five years.
That benefit is sufficiently durable and substantive.
Sea Swift does not comply with this Condition it is open to the remote
ACCC has remedies under
s 50 and s 95AZM(6). From its submissions, the ACCC appears to
consider these remedies inadequate, among
other reasons, because the remedies
cannot have the effect of unwinding any structural changes effected by a merger
once it has occurred.
However, the Proposed Acquisition will not effect
structural change which would not substantially occur in any event since TML is
exiting the market and the base load customers will most likely utilise Sea
Swift’s services in preference to its competitors,
at least in the short
term for reasons previously given.
the Condition is not as extensive as the ACCC contends it might or should be,
the Tribunal is satisfied that it will result
in a benefit to the public due to
the assurance it gives to disadvantaged remote communities and is one which is
available only with
authorisation.
Remote Communities Price Condition
Remote Community Price Condition is designed for the benefit of uncontracted
customers. It is summarised at [94]-[95] above.
ACCC has a number of criticisms of this Proposed Condition including
(1) it does not cover some important items such as fuel
or building materials;
(2) the calculation of the Maximum Charge is so complex that it is difficult for
affected communities to discern breach with the
result that it gives them little
(3) the prices which Sea Swift could charge under the Proposed Condition are
significantly above what many customers of Sea Swift
and TML already pay because
of discounts given to regular customers;
(4) it is not likely to constrain Sea Swift’s scheduled prices to
competitive levels;
(5) it is of limited duration;
(6) it does not give “effective, balanced and non-manipulable protection
for non-contract customers from any substantial lessening
of competition
post-acquisition”; and
(7) the ACCC is not is a position to monitor compliance
adequately.
Tribunal accepts that the application of the Maximum Charge is complex which may
make it difficult for customers to establish
whether it is being complied with.
It also affords Sea Swift latitude to increase prices since the capacity to
raise prices is based
on the broadly based national Consumer Price Index, rather
than that which might apply locally and there are a range of other charges
Sea Swift can increase.
is notable that the condition does not cover some essential commodities,
primarily fuel. However, many remote communities derive
significant price
protection in relation to fuel and a range of other essentials because of the
contracts held by PUMA, ALPA and
IBIS, the benefit of which will be preserved
when they are transferred to Sea Swift under the Proposed Acquisition so this
in the protection afforded by the Remote Community Price
Condition is not as significant as it might at first appear. Further, there
no indication that Sea Swift intends to cease its practice of giving discounts
to regular or volume customers; the Tribunal accepts
Mr Bruno’s evidence
that that would be commercially short-sighted.
Tribunal accepts that the Remote Community Price Condition would be inadequate
if the intention was to establish a competitive
pricing regime. That is not the
intention; it is instead designed to set a cap on price rises that Sea Swift may
instigate for a
period of five years. Although it is not a tight
“cap”, the Tribunal has formed the view that the Remote Community
Condition has some benefit which would not exist but for the Proposed
Acquisition. On a stand-alone basis, this Condition might
not confer a benefit
sufficient to justify the grant of authorisation but as part of a package of
Conditions it should be taken into
Toll Commitments
Tribunal accepts that the Toll Commitments give rise to minimal public benefits.
However, the Toll Commitments were offered to
the Tribunal as part of the basis
on which authorisation might be granted. The Tribunal considered that it was
appropriate to make
it a condition of authorisation that TML’s assets be
made available to the market in the manner in which it told the Tribunal
Other asserted benefits
forming its view that the Proposed Acquisition should be authorised, the
Tribunal gave no weight to the other benefits asserted
by Sea Swift and Toll.
The Tribunal was unpersuaded that TML’s orderly exit would have the effect
of lowering barriers to
entry. While there may be benefit to Toll’s
shareholders in exiting via an acquisition, that is not a benefit which
authorisation. The Tribunal also saw no public benefit which would
justify authorisation in the suggestion that the Proposed Acquisition
“foster dynamic efficiency in supporting the evolution of the market to a
more efficient structure”; the Tribunal
did not have to form a view on
what the most efficient structure of the market is in the NT and FNQ.
Tribunal was satisfied that authorisation of the Proposed Acquisition was
justified having regard to the particular facts of this
matter and an
aggregation of circumstances including:
(1) the counterfactual of TML’s exit from the NT
and FNQ in a short timeframe and the Tribunal’s view that Sea Swift would
become the provider to base load customers in the short term so that its
competitors were unlikely to compete effectively for those
customers in that
timeframe. Accordingly, save for competitive detriment addressed by the Gove
Lease Undertaking, there is no competitive
detriment with the Proposed
Acquisition which would not exist without it;
(2) the public benefit being the pro-competitive effect of the Transferred
Contracts Condition by ensuring that those contracts remain
contestable by Sea
Swift’s competitors during their term. It also addresses the entrenchment
of Sea Swift as the provider
to TML’s Largest Customers in the
counterfactual so that in the long term, competition is enhanced;
(3) the public benefit of preservation of price and other terms of the
Transferred Contracts which service providers to remote communities
consider to
be highly desirable because they will flow through to communities which are
subject to substantial social and economic
disadvantage;
(4) the public benefit of assurance to the remote communities that, for a period
of five years, they will continue to receive a regular
scheduled service and
there will be a cap on prices charged for the most common items carried for
uncontracted customers provided
by the Remote Communities Service Condition and
the Remote Communities Price Condition; and
(5) the public benefit of the maintenance of the Gove Lease Undertaking with
provision for lower prices than those currently charged
by TML and extension of
the undertaking to the roll-on/roll-off ramp, the facility most useful to
scheduled service operators at
I certify that the preceding three hundred and forty seven (347) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination
herein of the
Honourable Justice Farrell (Deputy President), Mr RC Davey (Member) and
Professor DK Round (Member)
Dated: 28 July 2016
List of Lay Witnesses
the witness was not called for cross-examination at the
Lay Witnesses
Statement filed by
Brian Kruger
Managing Director
Toll Holdings Ltd
David Jackson
Chief Executive Officer
Toll Resources & Government Logistics
Scott Woodward
General Manager
Toll Energy
Trent Lonsdale
Toll Energy West and National Maritime Manager
Toll Energy
Adam Martin*
Group General Manager of Legal
Darren Rowland*
Commercial Manager
Toll Resources & Government Logistics
Managing Director & Chief Executive Officer
Sea Swift Pty Limited
Pasquale ‘Lino’ Bruno
Chief Operating Officer
Sea Swift Pty Limited
Paul Readdy
CHAMP Ventures Pty Limited & non-Executive Director
Sea Swift Pty Limited
Managing Director
Conlon Murphy Pty Ltd (trading as Barge Express)
Loui Kannikoski
Managing Director
Bhagwan Marine
Managing Director
Pacific Marine Group & Director
Sealink Travel Group
Arthur Hamilton
Managing Director
Shorebarge Pty Ltd
Larry Johnson
Chief Executive Officer
Teras Australia Pty Ltd
Stephen Muller
Chief Executive Officer
MIPEC Pty Ltd
Vance Wallin
Weipa Hire Pty Ltd trading as Carpentaria Contracting
David Slimming
Managing Director
Silentworld Shipping & Logistics Pty Ltd
Summons issued by the Tribunal pursuant to s 105(2) at the request of the
Antony Perkins
Director of Project Development
Qube Ports & Bulk
Former Director Perkins Shipping
Alistair King
Chief Executive Officer
Arnhem Land Progress Aboriginal Corporation
Ian Copeland
Chief Executive Officer
Islanders Board of Industry and Service
Arthur Wong
General Manager, Chief Executive Officer and Director
Seisia Enterprises Pty Ltd
Bruce Donnan
Key Account Manager NT, SA & Kimberley
Puma Energy Australia
Christopher Foord
General Manager
Bamaga Enterprises Ltd
Duncan Griffin
Senior Manager
NT Power and Water Corporation
Greg Williams
Operations Manager
NQ Civil Engineering Contracting
Torres Strait Regional Authority
Northern Peninsula Area Regional Council (member for Seisia)
Chairperson
Seisia Enterprises and Seisia Community Torres Strait Island Corporation
Klaus Helms
Chief Executive Officer
Gumatj Corporation Limited / Gumatj Aboriginal Corporation
Dania Ahwang
Chief Executive Officer
Torres Strait Island Regional Council
Gordon Smith
Regional Manager Service Delivery
West Arnhem Regional Council
Chief Executive Officer
East Arnhem Regional Council
John Tourish
Sole Director
Gove and Beyond Pty Ltd
Alexandra Gibson
Legal Advisor
Northern Land Council
Procurement & Supply Superintendent
Rio Tinto Gove Operations
Michael Luttrell
Supply Lead
Groote Eylandt Mining Company Pty Ltd
Robert Totten
Store Manager
Maningrida Progress Association Inc
Vince Lavery
Service Delivery Manager
Rio Tinto, Weipa & Gove Operations
Bradley Smith
Gove Boat Club
Facility provider
Thomas Mayor
Branch Secretary
Northern Territory Branch of the Maritime Union of Australia
Details of Competitors
Scheduled Services
Charter Services
Landing facilities & depot in home port
Number of vessels suitable for coastal and community
Carpentaria Freight
Provides regular weekly services to Mornington Island
Provides charter services
Karumba and Cairns
2 landing craft vessels: the Torres Venture and Carpentaria
Palm Island Barge
Provides regular passenger and freight services to Palm Island
Provides charter services
2 landing craft vessels: MV Olympic and Lady Fraser
Carpentaria Contracting
Provided a weekly scheduled service between the communities of Weipa and Aurukun
from January 2015 until May 2015
Provided a scheduled service from Cairns to Cape Flattery for one year in 2011
under sub-contract to Silentworld Shipping
Provides charter services
Cairns (adjacent to Sea Swift)
3 dumb barges (non-motorised), 4 tugs
Does not currently provide scheduled marine freight services, but has been
awarded “preferred supplier” status by the
Torres Strait Island
Regional Council to provide a scheduled service
Provides charter services
4 tugs, 2 dumb barges and 3 landing craft: Kaleen, Karribi and
Silentworld Shipping
Provided services from Cairns to Thursday Island and Horn Island in the Torres
Strait; and also to Weipa and Townsville from 2011
Provides charter services
Operational base in the Solomon Islands
Tug and barge set
Northern Territory
Scheduled Services
Charter Services
Landing facilities & depot in home port
Number of vessels suitable for coastal and community
Ezion / Teras
Provides twice weekly services from Hudson Creek (Darwin) to Tiwi Islands.
Provides regular scheduled services to Port Keats, but may have lost that
contract to Shorebarge in May 2016
Provides charter services
East Arm at Darwin
3 landing craft vessels: Lauren Hanson, Bandicoot and Centaur
Provides scheduled services to north east WA from its base in Darwin.
Previously provided scheduled services across East and West
Arnhem. May have
won a contract to provide a regular scheduled service to Port Keats in May
Provides charter services
East Arm at Darwin
2 landing craft vessels: MV Jane Virgo and MV Coomacooma
Barge Express (previously Sealink)
Provides services to the NT communities on behalf of TML pursuant to a time
charter arrangement.
Previously provided regular service to Port
Provides charter services
East Arm at Darwin
4 landing craft vessels including MDT Trader, Sealink Darwin, Bimah
Bhagwan Marine
Provides charter services
East Arm at Darwin
4 landing craft; numerous tugs and barges
Map of NT Scheduled Marine Freight Services
Maps of FNQ and OTSI Scheduled Marine Freight Services
Map of FNQ - Zoomed In
List of destinations serviced by Sea Swift or TML and
applicable large customer contracts
Northern Territory
Destination
Puma Energy/ NT Power and Water Corporation¹
Rio Tinto / Woolworths
Bickerton Island (Milyakburra)
Croker Island (Minjilang)
Elcho Island (Galiwinku)
Garden Point (Pirlangimpi)
Goulburn Island (Warruwi)
Groote Eylandt (Alyangula)
Lake Evella (Gapuwiyak)
(Snake Bay)
¹ Puma Energy is contracted to provide fuel to NT Power and Water
Corporation, and TML currently holds a contract with Puma
Energy for the
delivery of fuel to NT Power and Water
(Bathurst Island)
(Rose River)
(see Nguiu above)
Port Keats (Wadeye)
Ramingining
Far North Queensland
Destination
Caltex / Ergon Energy³
Rio Tinto/ Woolworths
Badu Island
Bamaga/Seisia
Boigu Island
Coconut (Poruma) Island
Darnley (Erub) Island
Dauan Island
² Paru is not listed in the Puma Energy or ALPA contracts but is situated
approximately 1.3km from Nguiu.
Caltex is contracted to provide fuel to Ergon Energy, and Sea
Swift currently holds a contract with Caltex for the delivery of fuel
Energy sites. Sea Swift also holds a contract with Ergon Energy for the
delivery of other freight services, however that
contract is not a key
Hammond Island
Horn Island (Wasaga)
(Moa Island)
Lockhart River
Mabuiag Island
Murray (Mer) Island
Palm Island⁴
Saibai Island
(Moa Island)
Stephen (Ugar) Island
Thursday Island
Warraber Island
Yam (Iama) Island
Yorke (Masig) Island
⁴Note: Deliveries to Palm Island are only as required, typically
every 4-6 weeks.
ANNEXURE 6 - HISTORY OF SCHEDULED SERVICE PROVIDERS IN THE
NORTHERN TERRITORY
Recent history – Northern Territory
Perkins Shipping Group Pty Ltd (Perkins Shipping) was the predominant operator
of NT coastal freight services for 50 years, other
than the Tiwi Island Service
which was owned by the Tiwi Island traditional owners. Apart from Perkins
Shipping, other barge operators
that have been present include an operator named
Barge Express in the late 1970's to early 1990's, Gulf Freight Services in the
1990's. (Note that the “Barge Express” referred to here is a
separate company to the “Barge Express” currently
operated by Mr Ken
Perkins provided coastal and community shipping services to remote communities
and coastal towns, including:
(a) regular barge services to remote Aboriginal communities in the NT, FNQ and
(b) regular fixed-day shipping services to the resource industry townships of
Gove and Groote Eylandt.
For a number of years leading up to the late 1980s, Barge Express serviced some
of the NT locations that Perkins Shipping did not
service. Barge Express
operated in respect of some locations and Perkins Shipping in respect of other
(a) Barge Express went to Minjilang (Croker Island), Maningrida, the Tiwi
Islands and Ramingining;
(b) Perkins Shipping went to Gapuwiyak (Lake Evella), Nhulunbuy (Gove),
Umbakumba, Numbulwar and Alyangula (Groote); and
(c) both companies went to Galiwin’ku (Elcho Island).
In the early 1990s, Perkins Shipping expanded its scheduled service into the
areas previously serviced only by Barge Express. Following
Shipping’s entry into the further routes, Barge Express decided to exit
and was acquired by Perkins Shipping in approximately
1994. Barge
Express’ decision to exit appears to have been the result of it suffering
losses due to Perkins entering its ports,
and the deteriorating volume would not
financially support its continued operation.
During the time Perkins Shipping was operating, a company called Tiwi Barge
provided regular sea freight services to the Tiwi Islands
(Bathurst Island and
Melville Island). Perkins Shipping did not provide scheduled services to the
Tiwi Islands (although Perkins
did carry out spot work to the Tiwi Islands).
In approximately 2002, Gulf Freight Services, which operated a service out of
Karumba in the Gulf of Carpentaria to the Gove Peninsula
and then back to Weipa,
sought to expand its operations to provide scheduled deliveries to some of the
remote NT communities out
of Darwin (including Maningrida, Elcho Island, Gove
and Ramingining). It appears that Gulf Freight had been able to obtain some
contracted work for delivery to those communities.
In around 2003, Gulf Freight Services decided to exit and was acquired by
Perkins Shipping. It appears that the prices quoted by
Gulf Freight Services
were or may have been too low to be sustainable, i.e. too low to cover the costs
of operating the barges (including
vessel costs, labour and fuel) and all the
associated costs involved in providing a liner barge service. Following its
acquisition
of Gulf Freight, Perkins Shipping commenced providing the coastal
freight service to Weipa from Karumba (or from Cairns during the
wet season if
the road to Karumba was closed). In about the mid-2000’s, Perkins
Shipping relocated the origin of its Weipa
service, initially from Karumba to
Townsville, then ultimately to Cairns in order to provide an uninterrupted
weekly scheduled service
On 1 July 2009, Toll acquired Perkins. It was later renamed TML.
From 2009 until around January 2014, TML provided coastal and community shipping
services predominantly in the NT. Its operations
in FNQ were predominantly
limited to servicing the Cairns-Weipa route pursuant to two contracts that it
inherited through the acquisition
of Perkins. TML expanded its services in
FNQ, beyond the Cairns-Weipa route into parts of the OTSI in around early 2014
ad-hoc basis). TML provides scheduled services on both coastal mainland
or ‘trunk’ routes and to a wide range of remote
islands and
In around 2011, Shorebarge (a provider of charter services) expanded into
scheduled services to Troughton Island and Truscott Air
Base (in which it has an
interest) in north east WA, which it provided from Darwin. For a short period
from mid-2011, Shorebarge
provided scheduled services to Port Keats and to
remote communities across East and West Arnhem in the NT. After Sea Swift
the NT in 2013, Shorebarge redeployed its vessels to provide scheduled
services to Truscott, Troughton Island and Kalumbaru in north
east WA, again
from Darwin. The only scheduled service that Shorebarge currently provides is a
fortnightly service from Darwin to
Kalumburu, Troughton Island and Truscott in
the Kimberley region of WA. It plans to commence a weekly scheduled service
from Darwin
to Port Keats through an arrangement with Northline. Although
Shorebarge won that contract, there is a dispute between Mr Johnson
Hamilton about whether that route is currently being serviced by Shorebarge or
Also in around 2011, Ezion/Teras (“Teras”) was formed. It acquired
Top End Barge. To support development of the Port
Melville port, Teras started
running two small barges from the Tiwi Islands to Darwin to provide coastal and
community shipping services.
Teras says that it currently operates weekly
scheduled services on two routes: the Darwin-Port Melville route and the
Darwin-Port
Keats route. As mentioned above, there is a dispute between Mr
Johnson and Mr Hamilton about whether the Darwin-Port Keats route
is currently
being serviced by Shorebarge or Teras.
In late 2013, Sea Swift entered the NT through the acquisition of Tiwi Barge.
Tiwi Barge had operated in the NT for around 40 years
providing a scheduled
service to the Tiwi Islands. Sea Swift’s expansion in the NT in 2013 was
supported and assisted by Caltex,
which awarded its NT Power & Water
contract to Sea Swift. (Note that the ACCC does not agree with the statement
Swift’s expansion in the NT in 2013 was supported and
assisted by Caltex”).
Around 2013, Bhagwan Marine established operations in Darwin when it acquired
Workboats Northern Australia in the NT. Bhagwan Marine
was originally
established in 1998 from Geraldton in WA with a single vessel. Bhagwan Marine
primarily services the oil and gas
industry with project freight work. It does
not provide any scheduled freight services and has no intention of doing so,
there was no other opportunity for Bhagwan’s barges to be used, in
which case it would consider providing scheduled services.
In 2016, Barge Express (formerly Sealink NT) indicated plans to commence a
scheduled service in the NT in competition with Sea Swift
irrespective of the
outcome of Sea Swift’s Application to the Tribunal. Barge Express has not
commenced any scheduled service
despite stating in March 2016 that it intended
to commence a service that month. (Note that this “Barge Express” is
be distinguished from the Barge Express operating in the 1980s).
ANNEXURE 7 – HISTORY OF SCHEDULED SERVICE PROVIDERS IN
FAR NORTH QUEENSLAND
Recent history – Far North Queensland
Over the last thirty years, a number of operators have provided marine freight
services in FNQ.
Sea Swift has operated in FNQ for over thirty years. Having relocated from
Karumba to Cairns in 1987, it commenced transporting
fuel to the Torres Strait.
Sea Swift acquired further vessels over time and, in 1990, commenced
trans-shipments to the OTSI. It
was the first operator to provide scheduled
services to the OTSI.
Jardines Shipping operated in FNQ for some time in the 1990s, providing
scheduled services to various FNQ communities until it was
acquired by Brambles
Shipping in 1999. Brambles Shipping entered FNQ in 1999 with its acquisition of
the business of Jardines Shipping.
Whilst in operation in FNQ, Brambles
Shipping serviced Cairns to Thursday Island, Horn Island, Seisia and the OTSI.
In May 2002,
Sea Swift acquired some of the assets associated with Brambles
Shipping's cargo business, which included vessels, plant and machinery,
as the lease of a Horn Island facility.
Pacific Marine Group, a marine contracting company based in Townsville,
commenced operating in 1991, and continues operating today.
Pacific Marine
Group specialises in marine contracting, commercial diving and vessel and barge
hire, and regularly undertakes contract
freight work throughout the coastal
areas of FNQ.
Endeavour Shipping, an offshoot of Perrot Salvage and Tug, was established in
shipping business in
FNQ. Although Endeavour Shipping had established a line-haul service to the key
destinations of Thursday Island,
Seisia and Weipa, it did not establish a
scheduled service to all OTSI communities. In 2008, Sea Swift acquired
Endeavour Shipping’s
Gulf Freight Services is another operator that provided coastal shipping
services to Weipa (from either Karumba or Cairns) for a
long period. As
outlined above, in approximately 2002, it sought to expand its operations to
provide scheduled services to some
of the NT communities, however, in 2003 it
was acquired by Perkins Shipping.
As a result of its acquisition of Gulf Freight, Perkins Shipping commenced
providing coastal shipping services to Weipa from Karumba.
Toll later acquired
Perkins Shipping in 2009. Until January 2014, Toll’s FNQ operations were
limited to the Cairns-Weipa
route. Toll then expanded into the OTSI in around
January 2014 after securing the IBIS contract, which it has since subcontracted
to Sea Swift.
Another operator, Carpentaria Contracting, a privately owned Weipa business,
began operating services in FNQ in 2005. To date, it
has primarily operated in
Cairns, the Torres Strait and the Gulf of Carpentaria. Carpentaria Contracting
operated a scheduled freight
service from Weipa to Aurukun for around four
months in early 2015.
Palm Island Barge Company, established in 2007, provides a daily return vehicle,
passenger and cargo freight service from Lucinda
(south of Cairns) to Palm
Island. In 2007, Palm Island Barge Company expanded its services to Palm Island
to include a superior
cold chain and dry goods logistical service directly from
Townsville to Palm Island.
Carpentaria Freight, is an operator which commenced a freight service to the
Gulf of Carpentaria Islands of Mornington, Sweers and
Bentinick prior to 2008.
It is currently a road freight and barge service operator located in Karumba.
In addition, Silentworld Shipping entered FNQ in 2010 and provided a scheduled
service from Cairns to Thursday Island. Silentworld
Shipping ceased operating
that scheduled service in late 2012, and Sea Swift acquired one of its tugs and
a barge set.
Diagram of Gove Wharf
Description
Landing ramp (roll-on, roll-off)
Public wharf (only for small fishing vessels)
Heavy lift Wharf (lift-on, lift-off)
Covered lay down
RTF format (42.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format