URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/SSATACSA/2011/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Scott v Carroll [2011] SSATACSA 16 (23 June 2011)
APPLICATION NOS:
XXXXXXXX and
Mr Trevor SCOTT
SECOND PARTY:
Ms Michelle CARROLL
OTHER PARTY:
Child Support Registrar
DECISIONS UNDER REVIEW
A decision made by a Child Support Agency objections officer on 14 March 2011
to disallow Mr Scott’s objection to a decision
made on 10 December 2010 to
refuse to end the child support assessment for Melissa from 29 August 2009
(XXXXXXXX).
A decision made by a Child Support Agency objections officer on 15 March 2011
to disallow Mr Scott’s objection to a decision
made on 6 December 2010 to
accept Ms Carroll’s application to have a child support assessment for
Melissa extended until 24
May 2011 (YYYYYYYY).
The members of the Tribunal were: ZZZZZZZZ, Presiding Member
ZZZZZZZZ, Member
The applications were heard on 30 May 2011 and 10 June 2011.
Mr Scott did not attend the hearing or speak to the Tribunal on 30 May 2011.
The tribunal reconvened on 10 June 2011 and heard from
both Mr Scott and Ms
Carroll. Both spoke to the tribunal by conference telephone.
A representative of the Child Support Registrar did not attend the hearings.
A decision on the matter was deferred following the hearing until 24 June
2011 in order to obtain further information from the Child
Support Agency.
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
On 23 June 2011 the Tribunal decided to affirm the decisions under review.
The applications for review are therefore unsuccessful.
DATE OF DESPATCH:
5 July 2011
REASONS FOR DECISION
Trevor Scott and Ms Michelle Carroll are the parents of Melissa (born 1992).
There had been a child support assessment in place
in relation to Melissa
whereby Mr Scott was the liable parent.
6 December 2010 the CSA accepted an application from Ms Carroll to extend the
child support assessment for Melissa beyond her 18th
birthday (2010)
until the end of her final secondary school year (24 May 2011).
10 December 2010 the CSA refused to end the child support assessment for Melissa
from 29 August 2009 having been advised by Mr
Scott that she had not been in Ms
Carroll’s care since she went overseas on that date.
21 December 2010 Mr Scott lodged objections to the decisions made on 6 December
2010 and 10 December 2010. His objections were
disallowed on 14 March 2011 and
15 March 2011.
Scott then applied to the Social Security Appeals Tribunal (the Tribunal) for a
review of the decisions on 23 March 2011 and 24
March 2011.
hearing of both matters was set down for 30 May 2011. Mr Scott did not attend
that hearing and it was held in his absence. However,
following representations
made to the Tribunal concerning the reasons for Mr Scott’s non-attendance,
the Tribunal reconvened
on 10 June 2011 and continued to hear the matter.
Tribunal and the parties received documents from the CSA in accordance with
section 95(3) of the
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
(folios 1 to 133 and 1 to 149)
Mr Scott and Ms Carroll provided additional material to the Tribunal which was
copied and made available to the other party (folios
A1 to A10 and B1 to B3).
delegate of the Child Support Registrar provided a written submission to the
Tribunal on 16 May 2011 (folios C1 to C2).
the hearing the Tribunal requested further information from the CSA. On 23 June
2010 the Tribunal received a copy of a child
support assessment for the period
22 August 2001 to 1 October 2001, details of the child support agreement
accepted from 2 October
2001 (the original not having been able to be located)
and a copy of a case liability screen showing liabilities assessed from 22
August 2001 to 30 June 2008.
issues for the Tribunal to consider in this matter are:
whether a “terminating event” occurred on 29 August 2009 when
Melissa left Australia or whether Ms Carroll otherwise
ceased to be an eligible
carer of Melissa after that date,
(ii) whether the child support assessment for Melissa should have been
extended until 24 May 2011, and if so, what the basis of the
assessment should
be for the period from 1 January 2011.
INFORMATION PROVIDED AT THE HEARING
The evidence of Ms Carroll
Carroll told the Tribunal that Melissa went overseas to a private school on a
full scholarship on 29 August 2009. She said that
she had paid for the air
fares, and subsequently paid for Melissa to return to Australia on holidays and
for travel on holidays overseas.
told the Tribunal that Melissa required money to meet additional expenses; like
entertainment on weekends, meals with friends,
camping trips, and the sorts of
things young people normally do. She said that she transferred money to Melissa
on a regular basis
to meet those expenses, gave her cash to take back with her
when she came home on holidays, and gave money to a friend to take to
Ms Carroll said that she had provided bank statements in support of her claims
to have provided money to Melissa.
Carroll told the Tribunal that air fares to and from overseas had probably been
more than $10,000 and that travel overseas had
been about $5,000. She provided
had copies of invoices for flights for which she had paid.
Carroll stated that prior to Melissa going overseas, she had bought her a laptop
computer, a camera, and clothes specifically for
said that to enable her to meet the additional expenses related to Melissa, she
had taken additional work teaching at night.
Carroll told the Tribunal that she maintained regular and frequent telephone and
e-mail contact with Melissa, and paid for telephone
calls from Melissa if she
reversed the charges. However, Melissa usually rang quickly and then Ms Carroll
returned her calls. She
said that she usually spoke to and communicated by
e-mail with Melissa at least weekly, although sometimes it was more often.
stated that when Melissa had been ill in early 2010, she had been in telephone
as well as with Melissa, on an
almost daily basis.
Carroll told the Tribunal that she had always been asked by the College to give
any permissions necessary in relation to Melissa.
She said that Melissa also
asked her permission for activities outside the College and that sometimes she
gave such permission and
sometimes she refused it. She said that she provided
more than financial support, but emotional support as well.
said that she travelled overseas in September 2010 to spend time with Melissa,
to visit the College and meet the staff, and to
meet Melissa’s friends.
She said that her family had originally come from overseas but that there were
no close relatives living
Carroll told that Tribunal that the college sent copies of Melissa’s
school reports and all other documentation to her. She
said that Melissa often
sent her draft copies of assignments and other school work for advice and
discussion. She said that she and
Melissa had discussed her choice of subjects
at the college, and were now in discussion which university Melissa would attend
in what degree she would enrol.
Carroll stated that when she and Mr Scott separated there was a verbal
agreement. Then she had signed an agreement that she would
be paid $100 per week
(indexed for inflation) for child support until Melissa turned 18. She said just
before Melissa turned 18 she
was receiving about $132 per week in child support,
but after the agreement ended and the child support assessment began she was
supposed to receive $217 per week.
The evidence of Mr Scott
Scott stated that Melissa had not been in Australia for three years and that Ms
Carroll did not have the requisite nights of care
as specified in the
legislation. He said that together, he and Ms Carroll had care of Melissa for
less than 28% of the nights in
stated that he has an arrangement with Melissa’s school whereby he
receives email communications for annual reports, etc.
He said that the school
provides housing, food, tuition and meets the majority of Melissa’s
expenses. The scholarship is worth
Scott contended that as he had been paying child support of $135 per week, he
had really paid for the airfares. He acknowledged
that he had not provided
Melissa with any money whilst she was overseas.
said that he did not dispute Ms Carroll’s evidence concerning her contact
with Melissa and the school. He told the Tribunal
that he had not been aware
that Melissa had been sick as he did not have her telephone number until a few
months before she finished
school, despite him having asked for her number. Mr
Scott said that despite this, he and his family had contact with Melissa on a
fortnightly basis by telephone and email.
does not dispute that Ms Carroll went overseas, but stated that he could not
afford to go.
asked if Melissa had ever sought his permission in relation to her activities
overseas he stated that she had asked him if she
could stay with his sibling
overseas. He called his sibling and arranged for Melissa to stay. He told the
Tribunal that he did not
know if Melissa was asking his permission to stay in
the overseas country.
Scott asserted that the documentation from the CSA was incomplete as it did not
include details of conversations he had with CSA
staff in August 2009 when he
had advised that Melissa was overseas and that he was prepared to pay her
airfares and pocket money
if Ms Carroll ended the assessment. He said that the
CSA had asked Ms Carroll and that she refused to end the assessment.
stated that when he had first questioned the decision to extend the assessment,
the person he spoke to said that there had been
a terminating event. Mr Scott
stated that he had provided evidence that the school was Melissa’s
also noted that he had not given his permission for Melissa to attend the school
and that he had only been asked to sign papers
for her visa shortly before she
Scott contended that the agreement that was in place should have been
renegotiated. He said that he could not recall if there was
a written agreement
in place prior to Ms Carroll applying to the CSA. He said he and Ms Carroll had
separated in 1996 and that that
there had been a verbal agreement since 2000. He
said that he did not think that the CSA had ever made a formula assessment.
Scott said that the CSA had recently advised him that they would be starting to
take the amount owed from his wages.
DISCUSSION OF EVIDENCE
Tribunal considered the documents provided by Mr Scott, Ms Carroll and the CSA
as well as the oral evidence provided by the parties.
Tribunal finds that Mr Scott’s child support liability commenced on 22
August 2001 from which time he was assessed to pay
child support in accordance
with an assessment made under the child support formula at the rate of $7,969
per annum. From 2 October
2001 child support was payable by Mr Scott in
accordance with a child support agreement that was registered with the CSA on
other facts of this matter do not appear to be in dispute. Melissa is an
Australian citizen. She left Australia on 29 August 2009
to take up a two year
scholarship at a private college overseas. Apart from some periods of holiday in
Australia, she was overseas
until the end of her final school term at the
college on 24 May 2011.
Scott argues that after Melissa’s departure from Australia (and apart from
relatively brief periods during which she returned
to Australia) she was not in
Ms Carroll’s care for the required percentage of nights annually and that
therefore Ms Carroll
was not entitled to receive child support. Mr Scott’s
argument is not that he, as opposed to Ms Carroll, had care of Melissa
August 2009, but rather that she was either in the care of neither of her
parents as she was in the care of the college.
also contends that, because Melissa was on a scholarship that met her costs of
tuition and boarding, he in fact met her other costs
in the by way of the child
support that was paid.
Scott also argued that the CSA ought not to have accepted Ms Carroll’s
application to have a child support assessment for
Melissa extended until 24 May
2011. He does not claim that Melissa was not in full-time secondary education up
until 24 May 2011
but that Melissa was not in Ms Carroll’s care and also,
that he should not be assessed to pay child support in accordance with
formula that is part of the child support legislation, but in accordance with
the agreement that had been in place.
is no dispute that since 29 August 2009 Melissa has been in Ms Carroll’s
physical care overnight for less than 35% of
the time. However, the Tribunal
considered the evidence provided by Ms Carroll with regard to the role she has
played in Melissa’s
life since she left for overseas. This evidence has
included detailed documentation of expenses (including air fares) and the
of financial support.
Tribunal accepts that although the scholarship met the costs of tuition and
boarding it cannot reasonably be regarded as covering
all of the expenses for a
young woman living overseas and away from her parents. The Tribunal is satisfied
that Ms Carroll purchased
necessary items for Melissa (including a computer and
clothing appropriate for an overseas winter) and regularly provided funds for
enable Melissa to meet expenses other than tuition and boarding.
most significant additional expenditures have related to the air-fares to and
from overseas. Mr Scott does not dispute that these
have been met entirely by Ms
Carroll or that, when in Australia, Melissa was largely in her mother’s
Tribunal is also satisfied that throughout Melissa’s time overseas, Ms
Carroll maintained regular and frequent telephone
and e-mail contact with her
daughter and has, where necessary, provided or refused to provide permission for
her daughter to undertake
various activities. She also maintained close contact
with her daughter and the college when Melissa was ill, and went to visit the
college both to spend time with her daughter, and to meet college staff and
Melissa’s school friends.
Carroll has also met quite considerable expenses in relation to Melissa’s
time overseas. The Tribunal is satisfied that during
Melissa’s time
overseas, Ms Carroll continued to exercise care of her, and to make decisions in
relation to her, and to meet
the expenses not covered by the scholarship.
Scott provided tables indicating his assessment of care percentages during
period in which Melissa was back in Australia. By his
estimation, Ms Carroll had
97 nights (26.5%) and he had 13 nights (3.5%) from January to December 2010. His
calculation of the period
from 29 August 2009 to 24 May 2011was that Ms Carroll
had 105 nights (16.5%) and he had 17 nights (2.6%). He contends that care can
only exist when a child is in the physical presence or direct supervision of a
person overnight.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Trevor Scott and Ms Michelle Carroll are the parents of Melissa (born 1992), who
is an Australian citizen.
has been a child support assessment in place in relation to Melissa since 22
August 2001. Child support was initially payable
in accordance with an
assessment made under the child support formula.
2 October 2001 Ms Carroll applied to the CSA for acceptance of a written child
support agreement. That agreement was accepted by
the CSA. From 2 October 2001
child support was payable by Mr Scott to Ms Carroll in accordance with the
29 August 2009 Melissa left Australia to attend a boarding school overseas. The
two year scholarship she received provided for
her tuition and boarding costs.
returned to Australia for holidays from June 2010 to August 2010 and from
December 2010 to January 2011 during which time
she mainly resided with Ms
Carroll had paid Melissa’s travel costs and had given her money to meet
incidental expenses and living costs, and to meet
costs of clothing and travel,
and holidays overseas as well as in Australia.
visited Melissa overseas for a two week period in September 2010.
Carroll provided, and continues to provide, emotional support to Melissa and
assistance with her studies. She has had regular contact
with Melissa throughout
her time overseas, and has provided necessary permissions as required by the
26 November 2010 Ms Carroll applied to the CSA to extend the child support
assessment to the end of the overseas school year in
final school year at the overseas college ended on 24 May 2011.
APPLICATION OF THE LAW
legislation applicable to this matter in the
Child Support (Assessment Act
(the Assessment Act).
Terminating event
Scott sought to have the child support assessment for Melissa ended from 29
August 2009 on the ground that Melissa had ceased to
be in Ms Carroll’s
care because there had been a “terminating event” – that is,
Melissa had left the country
and Ms Carroll’s care.
is not in dispute that Melissa left Australia on 29 August 2009 or that between
that date and the conclusion of her school year
on 24 May 2011 she was resident
outside Australia for all but a period of some three months.
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
defines what is meant by
a “terminating event” in relation to a child of an assessment:
(1) A child support terminating event happens in relation to a
(a) the child dies; or
(b) the child ceases to be an eligible child under regulations made under
subsection 22(1)
(c) the child turns 18; or
(d) the child is adopted; or
(e) the child becomes a member of a couple; or
(f) none of the following subparagraphs applies any longer in relation to
(i) the child is present in Australia;
(ii) the child is an Australian citizen;
(iii) the child is ordinarily resident in Australia; or
(g) the circumstances described in subsection 30AA(1) of the Registration
and Collection Act apply in relation to the child.
this case, Melissa remains an Australian citizen and therefore paragraph
12(1)(f) does not apply. A “terminating event”
as defined in
subsection 12(1) of the Assessment Act did not occur in relation to her.
Scott argues that after 29 August 2009 Ms Carroll had no care of Melissa and was
therefore not eligible to receive child support.
Subsection 12(2AA) of the
Assessment Act provides that a “terminating event” occurs if neither
parent is an eligible
carer and no other person is entitled to be paid child
support. It provides:
(2AA) A child support terminating event
happens in relation to a child if:
(a) both of the parents of the child are not eligible carers of the
(b) there are no non-parent carers entitled to be paid child support in
relation to the child.
Scott did not argue that Melissa was in his care but, rather, that she was not
in Ms Carroll’s care. In effect, he was arguing
that Melissa was not in
the care of either parent and as there was no other eligible carer, the child
support assessment should have
ended from 29 August 2009.
7B of the Assessment Act defines the term “eligible carer”. It
(1) In this Act, eligible carer, in relation to a
child, means a person who has at least shared care of the child.
(2) Despite subsection (1), if:
(a) a person cares for a child; and
(b) the person is neither a parent nor a legal guardian of the child; and
(c) a parent or legal guardian of the child has indicated that he or she
does not consent to the person caring for the child;
then the person is not an eligible carer in relation to the child unless
it would be unreasonable in the circumstances for a parent
or legal guardian of
the child to care for the child.
eligible carer is therefore a person who has at least shared care of the child.
A person has shared care of a child if they have
a care percentage of at least
35% for that child (subsection 5(3) of the Assessment Act).
Mr Scott’s estimation, Ms Carroll had 97 nights (26.5%) and he had 13
nights (3.5%) from January to December 2010. His calculation
of the period from
29 August 2009 to 24 May 2011 was that Ms Carroll had 105 nights (16.5%) and he
had 17 nights (2.6%). However,
Mr Scott was assuming that Ms Carroll only had
care (for the purposes of child support) when Melissa was physically residing
, the CSA’s on-line guide to child support
legislation, notes that:
...in limited circumstances, a person
may have care of a child who is not living with them for a period of time. For
example, a person
can provide care for a child who is at boarding school, in
hospital or in separate accommodation. A person who simply supervises
(for example, a baby sitter, a child minder such as a grandparent, a
schoolteacher) does not provide care. Consideration
is given to who has
responsibility for making arrangements for, and decisions about, the
child’s welfare, as well is who is
meeting the child’s costs, rather
than just the accommodation arrangements themselves. CSA will give weight to
statements from
both parents and any non–parent carers.
the Tribunal is not bound to follow CSA policy it will do so where it is not
inconsistent with the provisions or objects of
the legislation (
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
1979 ALD 60
). One of the objects
of the child support legislation, as set out in section 4 of the Assessment Act
(c) that persons who provide ongoing daily care for
children should be able to have the level of financial support to be provided
for the children readily determined without the need to resort to court
proceedings; and
CSA objections officer found that Ms Carroll was the parent who was responsible
for making arrangements for, and decisions about,
Melissa’s welfare, in
addition to meeting the costs not covered by her scholarship (including,
notably, air fares), while Melissa
was overseas.
Tribunal agrees with this conclusion, and finds on the evidence provided that Ms
Carroll was the person who had ongoing daily
care of Melissa whilst she was at
school overseas. It is appropriate that she receive financial support for her
from Mr Scott.
to the decision made on 10 December 2010, the care for Melissa was assessed as
Ms Carroll having 365 nights (100%) and Mr Scott
having 0 nights (0%). The
Tribunal finds that this continued to accurately reflect the situation between
29 August 2009 and 24 May
accepting that Mr Scott provided some care of Melissa on her return visits to
Australia, his percentage of care was at most 3.5%.
Even if that percentage was
considerably increased it could not reduce Ms Carroll’s percentage of care
to below the 35% required
for shared care nor would it have affected the child
support assessment.
Carroll was therefore an eligible carer because she had at least a 35% care of
Melissa. She was therefore entitled to be paid child
support for Melissa after
29 August 2009 as no “terminating event” (whether by Melissa’s
departure from Australia
or a reduction in the actual care provided by Ms
Carroll) occurred.
Extension of the assessment beyond Melissa’s 18
26 November 2010 Ms Carroll made an application for the child support assessment
for Melissa to continue beyond her 18th
birthday. Section 151B of the
Assessment Act allows an application to be made if a child will still be in
full-time secondary education
after their 18th
birthday. Section 151B
Application for assessment/agreement to continue
beyond child's 18th birthday
(1) If a child turns 18 during a year in which the child is in full-time
secondary education, a carer entitled to child support for
the child may apply
for an administrative assessment, or a child support agreement, in relation to
the child to continue in force
until the last day of the secondary school year
in which the child turns 18.
Note: For full-time secondary education , last day and secondary school
see section 5.
(1A) If a relevant dependent child of a parent turns 18 during a year in
which the child is in full-time secondary education, the
parent may apply for
the relevant dependent child to be taken into account in any relevant
administrative assessment until the last
day of the secondary school year in
which the child turns 18.
(2) The application must be:
(a) made to the Registrar in the manner specified by the Registrar;
(b) in the case of an application under subsection (1) for a child
support agreement to continue in force--signed by both the carer
entitled to
child support for the child and the liable parent in relation to the
Note: Section 150A provides for the Registrar to specify the manner in
which an application may be made.
November 2010 Ms Carroll applied for the child support assessment to continue
until 24 May 2011 the end of the school year overseas.
151C of the Assessment Act provides:
(2) The Registrar must
accept the application if, and only if, the Registrar is satisfied that:
(a) the child has turned 17; and
(b) either:
(i) if the application is made under subsection 151B(1)--an
administrative assessment, or a child support agreement, in relation
child either is in force, or is likely to be in force, on the day before the
child's 18th birthday; or
(ii) otherwise--an administrative assessment that takes the child into
account is in force, or is likely to be in force, on the day
before the child's
18th birthday; and
(c) the child is likely to be in full-time secondary education on the
child's 18th birthday; and
(d) the child's 18th birthday will occur on or before the last day of the
secondary school year; and
(e) either:
(i) the application is made before the child's 18th birthday; or
(ii) there are, in the Registrar's opinion, exceptional circumstances
justifying the making of the application after the child's
18th birthday.
Carroll’s application was received after Melissa had turned 17 years of
age but before her 18th
birthday. An administrative assessment was in
force on the day before Melissa’s 18th
birthday as although the
child support agreement ended on that date there was an underlying child support
assessment in place prior
to the commencement of the agreement. Melissa was
enrolled to be in full-time secondary education on her 18th
which was before the last day of the secondary school year, on 24 May 2011.
151C of the Act provides that the Registrar
accept such an
application. Section 151D sets out the consequences of the acceptance of such an
application. It states:
Application under subsection 151B(1)
for assessment/agreement to continue--consequences of acceptance
Child support terminating event
(1) If the Registrar accepts an application under subsection 151B(1) in
relation to a child, then, in spite of section 12 (which
deals with child
support terminating events):
(a) a child support terminating event does not happen in relation to the
child when the child turns 18; and
(b) a child support terminating event happens in relation to the child on
whichever of the following days occurs first:
(i) the day on which the Registrar is satisfied the child ceased to be in
fulltime secondary education;
(ii) the last day of the secondary school year to which the application
Registrar to take necessary action
(2) If the Registrar accepts the application, the Registrar must
immediately take such action as is necessary:
(a) if the application is to continue an administrative assessment in
force--to take account of the change effected by subsection
(1) to the meaning
child support terminating event
in relation to the child (whether by
amending the assessment or otherwise); and
(b) if the application is to continue a child support agreement in
force--to take account of the change effected by subsection (1)
to the meaning
child support terminating event
in relation to the child (whether by
accepting a subsequent child support agreement or otherwise).
Child to be regarded as aged 17 for purposes of Part 5
(2A) If the Registrar accepts the application, the child is to be taken
to be aged 17 for the purposes of applying Part 5 to the
child throughout the
(a) beginning on the day on which the child turned 18; and
(b) ending on the day on which a child support terminating event (within
the meaning of paragraph (1)(b)) happens in relation to
Date of effect of decision
(3) A decision of the Registrar to grant an application in relation to a
child under subsection 151B(1) takes effect on the day before
the child turns
18, whether the decision is made before, on or after that day.
was therefore no terminating event on the day before Melissa’s 18th
birthday and the administrative assessment that was in force on that day
therefore continued. It was necessary for the Registrar to
make an assessment
using the formula set out in the child support legislation as the agreement
ceased to have effect in 2010.
Scott had contended that had Melissa been at school in Australia she would have
completed her secondary school education by the
end of 2010. However, the
extension of time afforded by subparagraph 151D(1)(b)(ii) means that a
terminating event does not occur
until the last day of the secondary school year
to which the application relates – in this case, 24 May 2011.
decision to extend the assessment and to assess Mr Scott’s liability for
the period to 24 May 2011 in accordance with the
formula in the child support
legislation was therefore correct.
On 23 June 2011 the Tribunal decided to affirm the decisions under review.
The applications for review are therefore unsuccessful.
Presiding Member
5 July 2011
The publication of Social Security Appeals Tribunal child support
decisions is authorised under
subsections 16(2AB)
(2AC) of the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act
Personal particulars of parties to an appeal and their children are
removed to protect their privacy. Names used in all published
decisions are
pseudonyms. Reasons for decisions are published in full (with any information
which may identify involved individuals
to a member of the public removed) to
ensure that the full context and basis for the decision can be understood. The
Social Security
Appeal's Tribunal's decisions in relation to child support
matters demonstrate the application of the Child Support legislation to
individual circumstances of the case being decided. Different fact situations
or subsequent changes to legislation may result
in different outcomes.
The CSA reviews all SSAT decisions to identify opportunities to improve
its services and ensure its processes and policies are robust
and accurate. The
CSA publishes further information about SSAT decisions on their website
www.csa.gov.au/publications/1313.aspx#ssat
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (253 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter