Warner v Insurance Australia Group Services Pty Ltd [2012] FWA 10813 (24 December 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
—Dispute resolution
Anne Warner
Insurance Australia Group Services Pty Ltd
(C2012/5514)
COMMISSIONER BISSETT
MELBOURNE, 24 DECEMBER 2012
Alleged dispute concerning the employer not providing a fair and equitable performance management process.
This is an application by Ms Anne Warner (the Applicant) for Fair Work Australia (FWA) to deal with a dispute arising under the
Insurance Australia Group Enterprise Agreement 2012
(the Agreement).
Prior to dealing with the merits of the claim made by Ms Warner the Respondent, Insurance Australia Group Services Pty Ltd (IAG or
the Respondent) has raised several jurisdictional objections which it says prohibit FWA from dealing with the matter.
IAG has requested that those jurisdictional objections be dealt with as a preliminary matter. I have, in the interests of expediting
the matter, agreed.
IAG’s objections in essence go to three areas. First it says that Ms Warner has failed to articulate the ‘matter’
subject to her application. Second it says that, even if the matter has been articulated, it is a dispute relating to performance
management and therefore is not a matter arising under the agreement. Third it says she has failed to complete all steps in the dispute
settling procedure in the Agreement prior to bringing the matter to FWA and the capacity of FWA to arbitrate the dispute is conditional
on all of the steps in that procedure being completed.
Before considering these matters it is appropriate to note that I have identified an anomaly in the Agreement on which I have sought
separate submissions from the parties to this dispute and those covered by the Agreement. That anomaly may have a bearing on the
resolution of the jurisdictional objections.
The dispute settling procedure
The procedure for resolving workplace issues is at clause 8.1 of the Agreement. That procedure states:
This procedure will ensure that issues or grievances are resolved quickly, fairly and without disruption to business operations. Where
an issue or grievance arises during the term of this Agreement about matters arising under this Agreement or the NES, it will be
settled according to the following procedure:
The Employee should first discuss the matter with their immediate Manager who must make every effort to resolve the matter.
If the matter is not resolved, or if it is not appropriate to discuss the matter with their immediate Manager, the Employee should
discuss the matter with their next level Manager who will attempt to resolve the matter.
Alternatively an Employee can contact their Human Resources representative directly who will work with the Employee and Manager to
attempt to resolve the issue.
If the matter is not resolved at this point the Employee may, if appropriate, notify an employee representative (such as the FSU),
who will discuss the matter further with the relevant Human Resources representative.
If the matter is not resolved it will be brought to the attention of the relevant Head of Human Resources. They or their nominee will
discuss the matter with the Employee/their representative.
(In the case of the FSU, the discussion will involve the FSU National Office).
If the matter is not resolved by the parties in steps 1-4 above, the parties may separately or jointly refer the matter to FWA for
resolution.
Employees may seek guidance and assistance from the FSU or other representative of the Employee’s choice at any stage of this
IAG says that Ms Warner has not undertaken step 4 of the process - that is, she has not referred the matter to the Head of Human Resources
who is then obliged to discuss the issue with the employee. IAG says that as Ms Warner commenced the process it is her responsibility
to ensure each step is taken.
Mr Hamilton, for Ms Warner, says that step 4 of the dispute resolution process does not require that the Applicant initiate step 4,
just that it happens. He says Ms Warner, after a meeting with the State Manager CGU Workers Compensation and a representative from
human resources, waited two weeks for some contact from the Head of Human Resources but none was forthcoming. She said she did send
to the Head of Human Resources her Form F10 when it was submitted.
A reading of step 4 of the process indicates a lack of precision as to who is responsible for this action. Other steps indicate that
the ‘employee should’ do certain things (see steps 1 and 2) but no such direction is given in step 4.
Both steps 2 and 3 indicate involvement of representatives from human resources. When these are read in conjunction with step 4 it
might be taken that the human resources representative engaged at steps 2 and/or 3 is responsible for bringing the matter to the
attention of the Head of Human Resources.
Further it would not appear that step 3 is mandatory. It says that the employee
notify an employee representative and this representative will discuss the matter with human resources. There is nothing in this
step that indicates it is a mandatory process. This suggests that not all steps of the process are mandatory.
In this case the Applicant attended a meeting with the State Manager CGU Workers Compensation and a human resources representative.
She anticipated that, given the non-resolution of the matter, those people would refer the matter to the Head of Human Resources.
Ultimately no-one took responsibility for such a referral.
I do consider however that the Applicant, having instigated the dispute settling procedure and not being content with the progress
of the dispute, must take some responsibility for initiating each step in the process. She is the one who knows whether or not she
is content with an answer given or if she believes the matter must be escalated in order to achieve resolution.
Given the imprecision in the wording of the clause however I can understand her failure to escalate the matter and some responsibility
must rest with others involved for that failure. In any event it is not clear why, if he did in fact receive a copy of the application,
the Head of Human Resources did nothing to intervene to see if the matter could be resolved prior to coming before FWA.
In these circumstances I recommend that the Head of Human Resources or his or her nominee meet with the Applicant and her representative
at the earliest opportunity but no later than 18 January 2013 in an effort to resolve the dispute.
Should that meeting not resolve the dispute - and I strongly encourage the parties to try and resolve it - the matter shall come back
here for arbitration (subject to my findings below).
So as not to delay matters any further it is appropriate that I deal with the other jurisdictional objections raised by the Respondent.
Has Ms Warner identified or articulated the dispute or ‘matter’?
Ms Warner lodged an application for FWA to deal with a dispute on 2 October 2012. In her Form F10 Ms Warner identifies clauses 5.2,
5.4 and 5.8 as those clauses to which her dispute relates. She then sets out in some detail what she says the dispute is about. A
plain reading of that application in conjunction with the clauses of the Agreement to which she refers indicate that the application
of the performance system (clause 5.8) including its impact on her annual remuneration review (clause 5.2) is the matter in dispute.
Ms Warner in fact provides some detail of the issues she has with the way the performance system referred to in clause 5.8 of the
Agreement is being applied in her case. Whilst some of the matters raised in the Form F10 go to submissions as to why the outcome
of the performance system might be wrong it does clearly identify the matter or issue to be the performance system.
In a clarification of the matter in dispute provided by the Applicant on 19 November she says that clause 5.8 places obligations on
IAG with respect to employee development. Further she says that clause 1 of the Agreement obliges the company to provide a healthy
and safe workplace and that, by its actions, IAG is adversely affecting the health of the Applicant.
I find that the Applicant has articulated the matter in dispute. The matter is the Applicant’s right to a performance system
where her performance is assessed against reasonable, relevant and measurable performance expectations/goals. This, she says, has
not occurred.
Is the ‘matter’ a matter arising under the Agreement?
The procedure in clause 8.1 for resolving workplace issues states that where an
arises about
arising under the Agreement the procedure will be followed.
The introductory paragraph to clause 8.1 specifies that ‘[g]rievances regarding Annual Remuneration Review outcomes are only
to be resolved in accordance with the procedure set out in clause 5.4 of this Agreement.’ This is the anomaly I have separately
referred the parties to. Even it is resolved so that the procedure at clause 8 does apply to remuneration review outcomes there is
still a barrier in clause 5.4 to any employee subject to performance management counselling having access to a review of the remuneration
outcome beyond a review by the local manager and/or human resources (clause 5.4(f)). So even if the anomaly is resolved it may not
provide jurisdiction for the outcome of the Applicant’s remuneration review to be subject to arbitration. With respect to the
dispute before me this only becomes an issue subject to the resolution of other matters and is perhaps best revisited after any arbitration
(subject to my findings below) with respect to the Applicant and the performance system itself.
There is, in my mind, no doubt that the issue that Ms Warner raises - the misapplication of the performance system, the lack of objectivity
in the system - is a matter arising under the Agreement at clause 5.8.
IAG says that the matter has consistently been characterised as relating to the ‘performance management system’ and the
performance management system is not a matter arising under the Agreement. IAG says that the performance system at clause 5.8 of
the Agreement is only the system that determines an employee’s remuneration review. This, it says, is clear from the inclusion
of clause 5.8 in
of the Agreement which deals with remuneration. It therefore cannot be considered to extend to performance management, which is the
process the Applicant is going through.
The Applicant says that when she sought information on the policy or process that was being applied in her circumstances she was told
there was none.
My knowledge of this case indicates that whatever the policy is that is being applied to the Applicant an outcome of this has been
that she has received a negative outcome on her remuneration review (in this I do not take it that she has lost wages but that she
has received little or no increase in remuneration). If this is an outcome then the process being applied to the Applicant at the
moment must be that contained in clause 5.8 of the Agreement. If it were not the basis of the effect on her remuneration makes no
As to whether the process at clause 5.8 is or is not the process that is being applied, and if there is a separate performance management
system that the Applicant is subject to, is a matter for determination in any final arbitration.
It is my opinion that clause 5.8 clearly puts the performance system into the realm of the Agreement. The extent to which it is so
should be a matter for evidence and submissions in the determination of the dispute.
Clause 5.8 places obligations on IAG. The Applicant says these have not been met.
I consider that the matters raised by the Applicant with respect to the performance system being applied to her do constitute a dispute
As to the matter relating to the obligations placed on IAG with respect to safety I agree with IAG that this has not been raised prior
to 19 November 2012 and has certainly not been subject to the required steps in the dispute settling procedure. I find that I do
not have jurisdiction to deal with a dispute in relation to clause 1.2 of the Agreement with respect to safety.
Whilst Mr Hamilton had refined the areas in dispute in his letter of 19 November 2012 at my request and in order to expeditiously
deal with the dispute, the safety issue was not raised in the original dispute notification and while the Applicant says the matters
were raised with her manager this is a matter of fact in dispute between the parties.
In conclusion I find that the Applicant has identified the matter in dispute and that it is a matter arising under the Agreement.
To this extent the dispute relates to whether or not IAG has met its obligations under the performance system as set out in clause
5.8(b) of the Agreement with respect to Ms Warner. That is, has the performance of Ms Warner been assessed against reasonable, relevant
and measurable performance expectations/goals?
This is the question that shall be answered in arbitration.
I have indicated above that discussions should take place between the Applicant and her representative and the Head of Human Resources
or his or her nominee by 18 January 2013. I require that the Applicant advise my chambers by noon on 21 January 2013 if the matter
has been settled. If the matter has not been settled I shall issue directions for arbitration of the matter.
COMMISSIONER
Appearances
for the Applicant.
of the Respondent.
Hearing details:
December 20.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR532718>
No downloadable files available