Majestic Selections Pty Ltd v Bushland Flora [2016] APBRO 1 (15 April 2016)
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PLANT BREEDER’S
RIGHTS OFFICE
Majestic Selections Pty Ltd v Bushland Flora
PBR Application: 2008/031
PBR Certificate: 4215
Variety denomination: ‘Lime Tuff’
PBR Grantee: Bushland
Party seeking revocation: Majestic Selections Pty
Delegate: Mr. N. Hulse
Decision Date: 15 April
Catchwords:
– revocation – variety of common knowledge
– breeder – prior sale – rights revoked
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PLANT BREEDER’S RIGHTS OFFICE
Application: 2008/031
PBR Certificate: 4215
Variety denomination: ‘Lime Tuff’
PBR Grantee: Bushland
The application for revocation is
successful.
Subject to appeal, the PBR grant is revoked
This decision to revoke is reviewable by the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal (AAT). Pursuant to subsection 77(1)(b)(xvi) of the
Breeder’s Rights Act, 1994
an application may be
made to the AAT for a review of this decision. The date of effect of the
decision is determined under Subsection
50(6) of the Act and is at the end of
the period in which an application may be made to the AAT or, if an application
is made, when
the AAT application is withdrawn or finally
determined.
Information on applying to the AAT is available at
http://www.aat.gov.au/
application number 2008/031 was filed on 12 February 2008 and, after examination
and publication of the detailed description,
granted PBR on 22 March 2011. The
grantee is Bushland Flora (
). An application for revocation of
the grant under subsection 50(8) of the
Plant Breeder’s Rights Act,
(the Act), was filed by Majestic Selections Pty Ltd (
on 15 May 2015.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Material considered in reaching
Submissions
of grounds for revocation and supporting evidence were provided by Majestic on 3
September 2015 and 21 September 2015.
Bushland submitted their response on 25
November 2015 along with attachments in support provided on 3 December 2015.
Majestic provided
a rebuttal of Bushland’s response to the grounds for
revocation on 30 December 2015 which included reference to a number of
they submitted on 11 December 2015.
reaching my decision consideration was given to the above submissions and
supporting evidence. An index is provided in the Annexure
to this decision and,
where relevant, individual items are referenced in this
Litigation history
is relevant to note that, in substance, the grounds for this revocation action
were also presented in Federal Court Proceeding
VID444/2014 Bushland Flora Vic
Pty Ltd v Majestic Selections Pty Ltd & Anor which was dismissed by consent
on 23 March 2015 (D35).
of the documents presented to the Federal Court were also included in the
submissions of Bushland and Majestic for this revocation
action. However, it
became apparent that two Affidavits presented to the Federal Court, and which
may be highly relevant to this
decision, were not provided in the submissions by
either party in this action for revocation. Consequently, on request, these
documents were provided on 29 January 2015 by Majestic (D190 and
D191) and 15 February by Bushland (D192 and D193).
revoke a PBR
than by an order of the Federal Court a decision to revoke a PBR is determined
under section 50 of the Act. Of relevance in
this case is subsection 50(1)(a):
“50 Revocation of PBR
(1) The Secretary must revoke PBR in a plant variety or a declaration that a
plant variety is essentially derived from another plant
variety if:
(a) the Secretary becomes satisfied that facts existed that, if known before
the grant of that right or the making of that declaration,
would have resulted
in the refusal to grant that right or make that declaration;”
use of “must” in subsection 50(1) clearly establishes that there is
no discretion in revoking a PBR if satisfied that
the grant would have been
decision to grant or refuse to grant is made under subsection 44(1) of the Act
and lists the requirements that must be satisfied
for the right to be granted.
Of particular relevance in this case is subsection 44(1)(b) that requires the
variety to also be registrable
within the meaning of section 43 of the
43(1) of the Act lists the requirements for a plant variety to be
registrable:
“43 Registrable plant varieties
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a plant variety in which an application
for PBR is made is registrable if:
(a) the variety has a breeder; and
(b) the variety is distinct; and
(c) the variety is uniform; and
(d) the variety is stable; and
(e) the variety has not been exploited or has been only recently
exploited.”
Furthermore, subsection 43(2) relevantly states:
“(2) For the purposes of this section, a plant
variety is distinct if it is clearly distinguishable from any other variety
whose existence is a matter of common knowledge.”
A decision by the Delegate on whether to revoke a right is
limited to only those circumstances identified in Section 44 of the Act
reference, also to Section 43). It is not open for me to consider other
circumstances.
is a party to the
International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties
as revised in 1991 (the Convention). Section 10 of the Act provides
that a granting of PBR is appropriate to give effect to the obligations
Australia under the Convention. Consequently, in considering the evidence I also
refer to internationally adopted documents that
provide guidance on the granting
of PBR in accordance with the Convention.
50(1)(a) of the Act refers to being “satisfied” therefore, in
considering the evidence, the standard of proof
I will apply in making a
decision will be that I am satisfied based on a balance of
probabilities.
The application for revocation
document “Grounds for Revocation and covering letter”, received from
Majestic on 21 September 2015, sets out five
grounds (labelled A to E) for the
revocation of PBR on the ‘Lime ‘Tuff” variety. I will consider
each of these
grounds individually.
The variety denominated by the applicant as “Lime
Tuff” was “not a new plant variety” within the meaning of
section 54(2)(a) of the Plant Breeder’s Rights Act 1994 (Cth) (the PBR
54 of the Act relevantly states:
“54 Actions for infringement
(1) An action for infringement of PBR in a plant variety may be begun in the
Federal Court or the Federal Circuit Court only by the
(2) A defendant in an action for infringement of PBR in a plant variety may
apply, by way of counterclaim, for revocation of that
right on the ground
(a) the variety was not a new plant variety; or
(b) facts exist that would have resulted in the refusal of the grant of that
right if they had been known to the Secretary before
the grant of that
is clear that this provision permits a defendant in an infringement action to
counterclaim for revocation.
54 has no relevance to the present consideration.
a Court order under subsection 54(3) revoking the right on ‘Lime
Tuff’ has not been served on the Secretary,
so section 54 affords no basis
for revoking the right.
A is not successful.
The variety “Lime Tuff” was not a registrable
variety within the meaning of section 43(1) of the PBR Act, at the date
filing of the application for PBR or at the date of acceptance of the
application for PBR or at the date of grant of PBR, because
it was not a
distinct variety within the meaning of section 43(2) of the PBR Act;
43(1)(b) of the Act requires that a plant variety must be distinct to be
registrable. Subsection 43(2) clarifies that for
a plant variety to be distinct
it must be clearly distinguishable from any other variety of common knowledge.
Article 7 of the Convention
states “The variety shall be deemed to be
distinct if it is clearly distinguishable from any other variety whose existence
is a matter of common knowledge at the time of the filing of the
application.”
43(8) of the Act sets out some of the requirements for treating a plant variety
as a variety of common knowledge which
are not relevant to this decision.
However, other reasons are also anticipated:
“In addition to any other reason for treating a plant variety as a
variety of common knowledge,”
Internationally
adopted guidelines
set out the
criteria for determining whether a plant variety is a variety of common
knowledge. The plants must meet the definition
and, although not
exhaustive, satisfy at least one of the following conditions;
commercialization of propagating or harvested material of the variety, or
publishing a detailed description;
b) the filing of an application for
the grant of a breeder’s right or for the entering of a variety in an
official register
of varieties, in any country, which is deemed to render that
variety a matter of common knowledge from the date of the application,
that the application leads to the grant of a breeder’s right or to the
entering of the variety in the official register
of varieties, as the case may
c) existence of living plant material in publicly accessible plant
collections.
I consider it is not a requirement for a variety to be sold
under a particular denomination (label) for it to meet the definition
as defined in the Convention or for it to be considered a variety of common
knowledge. The criteria a) to c) are, however,
relevant in determining whether a
variety can be considered a plant variety of common knowledge.
the Majestic submission details are provided of the examination of
plants in situ and the examination of samples of
leaves and shoots. A total of 23 samples were submitted for DNA testing by
Diversity Array Technology Pty Ltd. These included
detailed in the Affidavit of Joseph Jude Murray dated 26 February 2015 (D25 -
paragraphs 50 to 73). Mr Murray collected samples
of existing plants identified
as ‘Little Pal’, ‘Lime Tuff’ and
confertifolia
. These samples were also provided for
phenotypic examination by a botanist, Mr Carr and importantly, for reasons that
will become
apparent later, included a sample of
plants growing
at Kensington Primary School (D25 – paragraph 67).
usefulness of DNA evidence, such as molecular markers, in determining the
distinctness or otherwise of plant varieties is generally
limited. The
internationally accepted position is that DNA tests involving molecular markers
don’t play a direct role in the
decision for granting PBR since generally
there is no correlation necessarily between molecular markers and the expression
of specific
characteristics in plant
. A similar view also
appears to be acknowledged by Professor Justin Oak Borevitz (D23) in the
evidence submitted by Majestic:
“Because the method compares genetic relatedness across the whole
genome without regard for the ordering of markers it cannot
determine the well
mixed ancestral gene pools from recent hybridization events. It cannot identify
new mutations that may differentiate
varieties.”
Consequently,
whilst any two given samples may be very similar in their molecular marker
profile it does not necessarily follow that
they will also be phenotypically
very similar. The DNA evidence provided by Majestic (D17) establishes relative
relatedness of the
material sampled but not necessarily phenotypic similarity.
This fact is also asserted in the Bushland submission (D48 – paragraph
“Bushland Flora therefore submits that that no conclusion as to the
plant variety and or phenotype can be reliably drawn from
the DNA analysis
relied upon by Majestic.”
on the evidence by Professor Borevitz (D23 – page 51) I am satisfied that
the DNA results show that some plants, including
those sourced from Kuranga and
Majestic, are genetically more related to ‘Lime Tuff’ than other
plants sampled. In my
view this adds some weight to the argument that one or
more of these closely related plants
be phenotypically clearly
distinguishable from ‘Lime Tuff’. However, in itself it is not
sufficient to draw conclusions
the material tested.
examination
the Federal Court of Australia Proceedings, the Transcript of Proceedings (D26)
provided by Majestic includes a statement by Mr
Cordiner (for Bushland) in which
he acknowledges the main issue is the provenance of ‘Lime
“MR CORDINER: And there is Mr Paananen on our side, who is a qualified
person. I think Mr Carr sort of sits in the same bucket
looking at both the
qualitative and quantitative aspects of the characteristics of these plants.
They seem to be sitting in those
kind of buckets. I think there is probably
going to be a lot of agreement between them, so your Honour, I actually see a
-what notionally looks like the dispute between the parties narrowing
down quite significantly. And I think one of the main issues
is just going to be
simply the original provenance of the Lime Tuff plant, which will be probably a
factual issue -a factual issue
with the background of the scientific
impossibility of two plants existing out of the air -sorry, coming from
alternative sources
but having the same genome. So the only explanation is one
person got it from the other.”
I consider that the same issue of establishing the factual basis in determining
whether a variety existed prior to the existence
of ‘Lime Tuff’ that
is not clearly distinguishable from ‘Lime Tuff’ is the key to the
matter I have to decide.
expert botanical witness, Mr Geoffrey Carr (D21 and D28), provides an assessment
of the samples collected by Mr Murray
and concludes in his Affidavit of 25
February 2015:
“Conclusions
My view is that
plants identified as ‘Lime Tuff’
and each of the plants (h), (i), (j), (k), (l), (m) and (n) are the same taxon
) and that the morphological
differences between them are slight.
From a horticultural perspective, the plants identified as ‘Lime
Tuff’ and plants (h), (j), (k), (l), (m) and (n) are
equivalents. They all form robust tussocks with very numerous, narrow leaves of
the same yellow-green colour and texture,
both are equally hardy and adaptable
to a wide range of conditions in horticultural applications, and they do not
differ in method(s)
of propagation.
In light of the observations and measurements that I have made, and taking
into account the definition of "plant variety" in the
Plant Breeder's Rights
(Cth), I would not have considered ‘Lime Tuff’ to be a
new plant variety as at 11 February 2008 if the plants (h) and
(j) had been in
existence before that date. As noted above, in relation to plant (i), it was not
possible for me to provide a definitive
comparison to ‘Lime Tuff’
because the plant was in a small pot and appeared to have been maintained in
less than optimum
conditions.”
Carr clarified the report provided in his first Affidavit in a second Affidavit
on 6 March 2015 (D28) concluding that he would
not have been satisfied that
‘Lime Tuff’ was a new variety if the material he identifies as being
similar were in existence
as at 11 February 2008:
“Clarification to my first report
5. In the course of preparing the report in Annexure GWC-4, I carefully
reviewed my first affidavit together with my first expert
report (Annexure
GWC-3). In the course of that review I noticed an omission on page 17 of the
report in the third paragraph under
the heading “Conclusions”.
6. In the first sentence of the third paragraph under the heading
“Conclusions”, I state that “In light of the observations
measurements that I have made, and taking into account the definition of
“plant variety” in the
Plant Breeder's Rights Act
I would not have considered ‘Lime Tuff’ to be a new plant variety as
at 11 February 2008 if the plants (h) and
(j) had been in existence before that
date.” In that sentence, I inadvertently omitted referring to plants (k),
(l), (m), (n).
As I noted in the first and second paragraphs under the heading
“Conclusions”, my view is that each of plants (h), (i),
(l), (m) and (n) are the same taxon, that morphological differences between them
are slight and that plants (h), (j), (k),
(l), (m) and (n) are functional
equivalents. My conclusion in the third paragraph under the heading
“Conclusions”·
should read that I would not have considered
'Lime Tuff' to be a new plant variety as at 11 February 2008 if the plants (h),
(k), (l), (m) and (n) had been in existence before that date. As I noted in
the final sentence, I was not able to provide a definitive
comparison between
plant (i) and ‘Lime Tuff’ due to the condition of plant
Carr’s report, at page 36, includes the following caveat:
“In comparing the plants referred to in this report, one important
caveat is warranted: the expression of the characteristics
of the genotype of
individual plants is a function of its genome (most importantly) interacting
with environmental conditions (nutrient
and water supply and light
availability).”
acknowledge the difficulty in making clear findings when plant material is
obtained from various sources and under varying conditions.
However, Mr
Carr’s thorough investigation of the material available to him and cross
referenced with several sources of ‘Lime
Tuff’ provides strong
evidence that some of the material examined is not clearly distinguishable from
‘Lime Tuff’.
I am satisfied the above findings of Mr Carr
establishes the plants, as identified in his conclusions, are not clearly
distinguishable
from ‘Lime Tuff’. However, it is also necessary to
consider whether any of these plants are plant varieties of common
that existed prior to the PBR application for ‘Lime
(k) in the report of Mr Carr was obtained from the plants at Kensington Primary
School (KPS). Majestic in their submission
provide details of a planting at KPS.
The evidence includes a statement from the Principal at KPS, Mark Ryan (D22),
regarding the
purchase from Kuranga Nursery of Lomandra plants in 2005. Mr Ryan
also states that the plants have remained in situ at KPS ever since.
The sale of
the plants to KPS is evidenced by a tax invoice from Kuranga Nursery dated 12
September 2005 for the sale of 20 plants
Lomandra confertifolia
. I am satisfied that the sale occurred as described and the
plants have remained in situ at KPS.
in their response to the revocation action provide a report by Ian Paananen
(D57) comparing plant material collected from KPS with
‘Lime Tuff’
and concludes:
“Distinct differences were found in the leaf dimensions, length and
width, between plants from the two sites. Given the equivalence
maturity I consider this to be conclusive that the plants
The results were:
“Leaf: length
Kensington P.S.
Lime Tuff (Bushland stock bed)
Std. Deviation
Leaf: width
Kensington P.S.
Lime Tuff (Bushland stock bed)
Std. Deviation
differences in leaf length and width identified in the report are small and are
based on samples from very different locations
and not grown under controlled
trial conditions. Given their quantitative nature and likely environmental
influences I consider that
the small apparent differences between the KPS plants
(the Kuranga variety) and ‘Lime Tuff’ plants are not sufficient
establish conclusively they are clearly distinguishable. Given the lack of any
differences observed in the expression of other
characteristics examined I
consider that it would be very unlikely that a side by side growing trial of
‘Lime Tuff’ with
the Kuranga variety would demonstrate that they are
clearly distinguishable.
In the Bushland submission (D48 - paragraphs 34-36) it is asserted that the
plants supplied by Kuranga Native Nursery to KPS could
not be considered as a
variety of common knowledge. In particular paragraph 35 states:
“Relevantly, Bushland Flora submits that the supplies by Kuranga Native
Nursery relied upon by Majestic including to Kensington
Primary were not typical
in that these plants were not supplies of plants of the Little Pal plant variety
of common knowledge and
supplied by Kuranga Native Nursery during the period in
implies that only one form of ‘Little Pal’ is the plant variety of
common knowledge. However, the label under which
a plant variety is sold is not
a requirement for establishing common knowledge.
note in the Affidavit of Mr Joseph Murray (D25 - paragraph 46) it is stated that
several forms of “Little Pal” exist
“I am aware and have been aware since at least 2005 that there are
several forms of Lomandra Confertifolia subspecies Pallida
sold under the name
"Little Pal" in Australia and that these forms are not all the same. In my
experience working with different
forms of "Little Pal", there are differences
both in the phenotypic characteristics and in the way these plants are initiated
propagated.”
accept that there are several forms of “Little Pal” sold in
Australia and that the Kuranga variety is one example where
plants were sold
under the “Little Pal” label. I acknowledge such practice can cause
confusion in the industry. Nevertheless,
labelling does not, in itself,
determine whether a variety is a plant variety of common knowledge. It is
essentially what the variety
actually looks like that is
am satisfied that plants of
Lomandra confertifolia
sold to KPS on 12 September 2005 (the Kuranga variety) can be considered as
representative plants of a variety. They are of the same
taxon, suitable for
propagation unchanged and can be distinguished from other plant groupings. The
sale of these plants by Kuranga
establishes the Kuranga variety to be a plant
variety of common knowledge as it has been
commercialised.
Whether the Kuranga variety of common
knowledge was in existence at the time of application for ‘Lime
PBR application for ‘Lime Tuff’ was filed on 12 September 2008 and
indicated ‘Lime Tuff’ had not been
sold before that date. The
Kuranga variety was sold to KPS on 12 September 2005 and therefore was in
existence prior to the PBR application
in their response (D48 - paragraph 5), maintain that:
“...‘Lime Tuff’ is a registrable variety as the variety is
clearly distinguishable from any other variety whose
existence was a matter of
common knowledge at the relevant date.”
‘Lime Tuff’ to be a registrable variety it must be clearly
distinguishable from any
variety whose existence is a matter of
common knowledge at the time of filing the application. The reference to
in subsection 43(2) of the Act clearly indicates that the
existing variety of common knowledge does not include ‘Lime Tuff’
the signed declaration by Ian Shimmen (Bushland), dated 25 November 2015, the
following statement is important in understanding
the context:
“In light or the fact that I discovered the Lime Tuff variety in 2005 I
believe any plants which belong to the same taxonomy
(alleged as those supplied
by Kuranga and now relied upon by Majestic) could only have come from seed grown
plants produced by Bushland
Flora. These seed grown plants are not plants
propagated from the selection of the variety Lime Tuff nor were they plants of a
whose existence was a matter of common knowledge at the date of
application for PBR in the Lime Tuff variety. Furthermore, I was
not aware of
the existence of any other plants or plant varieties having the same taxonomy as
the Lime Tuff variety at the time of
making the application for PBR in the Lime
Tuff variety.”
the above statement is it clear that the grantee for ‘Lime Tuff’ is
of the view that any plants sold by Kuranga were
not propagated from ‘Lime
Tuff’. I accept that view.
I do not accept that the Kuranga variety was not an existing variety of common
knowledge prior to the application for ‘Lime
Tuff’. I am satisfied
that the Kuranga variety is not ‘Lime Tuff’ and is therefore an
“other” variety
of common knowledge.
On balance I find that ‘Lime tuff’ was not registrable in the
meaning of subsection 43(b) as it is not clearly distinguishable
from any other
variety whose existence is a matter of common knowledge.
B is successful.
The application for PBR made by the applicant in relation
to “Lime Tuff” did not comply with section 24, section 26(2)(d)
and/or section 43(1)(a) of the PBR Act, in that
applicant or breeder nominated by the applicant did not breed the variety,
either alone or jointly with another person;
did the applicant correctly nominate the breeder, in that the variety was not
bred by the applicant or breeder nominated, or any
related entity of the breeder
or applicant,
was the applicant authorised by the breeder to make the
application,
was the application made jointly with the breeder, or with the consent in
writing of any other person, in particular, the person
that bred the variety, or
the person that discovered the variety;
had the breeder transferred ownership of the variety to the applicant or the
breeder nominated in the application.
declaration of Mr Shimmen (D46) describes the process undertaken in breeding
‘Lime Tuff’. In particular, it is maintained,
that the maternal
parent of ‘Lime Tuff’ is
Lomandra longifolia
“In 2007 I posted a sample of Lime Tuff to the Melbourne Herbarium as I
wanted clarification from a botanist because I hadn't
seen anything like Lime
Tuff before the selection I had made in 2005. The specimen I sent of Lime Tuff
to the Melbourne Herbarium
is unnamed, as at the time I hadn't named my selected
variety. I was and am of the opinion that Lime Tuff did not conform to either
the common traits identifying Lomandra longifolia or Lomandra confertifolia
subsp. pallida Little Pal, and because I had collected
seed from stock plants of
Lomandra longifolia fine leaf and because the offspring was so varied it was of
my opinion that the seedlings
were hybrids of these two species. The Melbourne
Herbarium never supplied me with a written report identifying the Lime Tuff
The specimen I sent of Lime Tuff is recorded unnamed and is referenced
under my name and at the location of Mount Evelyn Nursery.
The specimen I sent of the unnamed Lime Tuff variety is included in with
of 276 listings of Lomandra confertifolia subsp. pallida referenced by the AVH
Australia Virtual Herbarium.
Refer to link
http://avh.ala.org.au/occurrences/6865008c-7ed0-4cc3-802c-82dldbbd2cc8
the declaration of Mr Shimmen an opinion is expressed as to the origin of
‘Lime Tuff’, however, there is no explanation
or apparent
questioning as to the finding of the Melbourne Herbarium in identifying the
specimen as
Lomandra confertifolia
Melbourne Herbarium identification concurs with the finding of Mr Carr
“I have consulted all relevant taxonomic literature on Lomandra in
eastern Australia (Lee 1962, 1966, Lee and Macfarlane 1986;
Standley and Ross
1989; Quirico
1993; Conn 1994)
to reach a view based on the taxonomic keys and
descriptions in the literature as to the taxonomic identity of ‘Lime
and the possibility that it is a hybrid as claimed. Based on the
taxonomic keys and descriptions in the literature as applied to
each of the
plants that I was asked to consider, my conclusion is that all of the plants
(including the ‘Lime Tuff’ plants)
are unambiguously
confertifolia
(Bailey) Fahn subsp.
and, further, that ‘Lime Tuff’ is not the result
of a hybridization:
“From my evaluation of the plants I conclude that hybridization is not
relevant to
. ‘Lime Tuff’. If it were a hybrid it would
express intermediate characters between the putative parents
L. confertifolia
L. longifolia
. The latter is a very different plant
morphologically (although fairly closely related, both belonging in Section
of the genus
: Lee and Macfarlane 1986). No
intermediate characters were evident in any of the ‘Lime Tuff’
material inspected.”
‘Lime Tuff’ is not a hybrid between
Lomandra longifolia
Lomandra confertifolia
and the identification of
the maternal parent in the breeding program is not in doubt, then it follows
that the plant selected to
become ‘Lime Tuff’ could not have
originated from the breeding program. I am satisfied that the breeder undertook
program with the intention of identifying and selecting potential new
varieties. However, the possible source of the plant that was
selected as
‘Lime Tuff’ is unclear to me. Nonetheless, I am satisfied it is
unlikely to have originated from either
Lomandra longifolia
or a hybrid
L. longifolia
L. confertifolia
balance of evidence before me strongly suggests that ‘Lime Tuff’ is
the result of a hybridization between
L. longifolia
confertifolia
. Consequently, as the maternal parent is
maintained to be
L. longifolia
by the applicant, it follows that the
breeder could not have bred ‘Lime Tuff’ as described. Consequently,
in the absence
of evidence to the contrary, if this had been known at the time
of grant the PBR would not have been granted.
C is successful.
The variety was not a
registrable variety as defined in section 43 of the PBR Act, in that at the date
of lodging the application
for PBR in the variety:
been exploited, and that this exploitation was not recent, as defined by section
43(5) and 43(6) of the PBR Act, and
of whether or not the Registrar accepts our evidence that the applicant or the
breeder nominated by the applicant was not
in fact the breeder, the variety was
none the less exploited in a manner other than is allowed by the PBR Act for a
registrable variety,
in that none of the provisions of section 43(7), 43(7A),
43(7B), 43(7C) apply to the circumstances in which the variety was exploited,
whether by the applicant or breeder nominated by the applicant, or by any other
person who could be shown to have breed or exploited
the variety.
in their PBR application stated that they had not sold ‘Lime Tuff’
prior to 12 February 2008. Similarly, Bushland,
in their response submitted 25
November 2015 (at paragraph 5), maintain that ‘Lime Tuff’ is a
registrable variety as
the variety “was not relevantly exploited by
Bushland more than one year before the filing of its application for PBR in the
variety....”
I find no reason to dispute these statements of facts.
in their Grounds for revocation (pages 17- 19) argue that prior sales of plants
indistinguishable from ‘Lime Tuff’
made by Kuranga Native Nursery to
Kensington Primary School and others makes ‘Lime Tuff’ not a
registrable variety. I
have determined under Ground B, the material sold to
Kensington Primary School is another existing plant variety of common knowledge
and that I am satisfied that ‘Lime Tuff’ is not clearly
distinguishable from that variety.
Consequently,
sale of the Kuranga variety is not sale of ‘Lime
D is not successful.
That facts existed that, if known before the grant in
relation to “Lime Tuff”, would have resulted in the refusal of the
Secretary to grant that right, including facts that, in addition to the points
A, B, C, and D above, pertain to:
name of the location at which the variety was bred; and
name of each variety used in the breeding program including, in respect of each
parent variety:
particulars
of the names (including synonyms) by which the parent variety is known or sold
in Australia; and
particulars
of any PBR granted in Australia or in any other contracting party;
description of the manner in which the variety was bred;
that had these facts in relation to the variety
“Lime Tuff” been published in relation to the application and/or
description, other parties would have been sufficiently informed to
enable them to lodge an objection to the application on the basis
abovementioned points A, B, C, and D prior to the grant having been
ground appears to be related to the making of the PBR application and is covered
by Grounds A to D.
have no reason to doubt that the Mr Shimmen undertook a breeding program and
provided details in his application for ‘Lime
Tuff’ that he believed
to be correct. This information was provided in his PBR application in
accordance with section 26 of
E is not successful.
application for revocation is successful. Subject to appeal, the grant is
Index of documents provided in submission of grounds for revocation and
subsequent responses.
Provided by Majestic 3 September 2015
Title/filename
Untitled Extract Pages
Part Evidence in Support_Originating Application_5.8.14
Part Evidence in Support_Statement of Claim_5.8.14
Part Evidence in Support_Defence to Statement of Claim_2.10.14
Part Evidence in Support_Notice of Cross-Claim_2.10.14
Part Evidence in Support_Statement of Cross-Claim_2.10.14
Part Evidence in Support_Particulars of Revocation_2.10.14
Part Evidence in Support_Defence to Cross-Claim_15.10.14
Part Evidence in Support_Summary of Evidence_Robert Paul Thompson_6.2.15
Part Evidence in Support_Summary of Evidence of Evan Philip Clucas_6.2.15
Part Evidence in Support_Summary of Evidence_Francis Rupert Benson_6.2.15
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Darron Samuel Saltzman_20.2.15 (1)
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Nicolaas Van Rooijen_20.2.15
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Jason Paul Carling_23.2.15
_Affidavit of Jason Paul Carling_23.2.15_LomandraMajestic_SNPs_Distance_Matrix_without_new_samples
_Affidavit of Jason Paul Carling_23.2.15_Majestic13Samples_Distance_Matrix_result_new_conditiona~1
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Jason Paul Carling_23.2.15_dendrogram_Majestic_13_plus_4
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Jason Paul Carling_23.2.15_LomandraMajestic_SNPs_FinalSelection
_Affidavit of Jason Paul Carling_23.2.15_LomandraMajestic_SNPs_Distance_Matrix_with_conclusions
Part Evidence in Support_Outline of Evidence of Evan Philip Clucas_25.2.15
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Geoffrey William Carr_25.2.15
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Mark Lawrence Ryan_25.2.15
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Justin Oak Borevitz_25.2.15
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Anna Magdalena Monro_25.2.15
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Joseph Jude Murray_26.2.15
Part Evidence in Support_Transcript_3.3.15
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of of Nicolaas Van Rooijen_6.315
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Geoffrey William Carr_6.3.15
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Darron Samuel Saltzman_6.3.15
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of of Joseph Jude Murray_6.3.15
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Darron Samuel Saltzman_16.3.15
_Affidavit of Jason Paul Carling_16.3.15_Pt 2_Lomandra_Majestic_23_samples_SNP_SelectedMarkers
Part Evidence in Support_Affidavit of Jason Paul Carling_16.3.15_1
Part Evidence in Support_Order of Registrar Burns_18.3.15
Part Evidence in Support_Order of Justice Mortimer_23.3.15
Provided by Majestic 21 September 2015
analysis of picture with regards to tampering
Ball Horticulture - Search- lomandra Lime Tuff
Cancellation of NZ PVR Lime Tuff
Grounds for Revocation and covering letter
Grounds for Revocation and covering letter
Patent_Application_13068593_pg1
Patent_Application_13068593_pg2
PDF_Report_PVR
Provided by Bushland 25 November 2015
Attachment 8 Ian Paananen Kensington vs Bushland Report
Attachment 24 Ian Shimmen Declartion 25-11-2015 (2)
Attachment Index
Bushland Report in Response to Application for Revocation 25th Nov
Provided by Bushland 3 December 2015
2015-12-03_Bushland hardcopy scan received with USB
Attachment 1 SIGNED Statement of Cross-Claim
Attachment 2 SIGNED Notice of Cross-Claim
Attachment 3 Pleading
Attachment 4 P_VID444_2014_540240
Attachment 5 Affidavit of I Shimmen sworn 7 Feb 2015 with Annexs IRS-1 to
IRS-9, IRS-11 to IRS-26 & Conf Annex IRS-10 (stamped)
Attachment 6 Affidavit of A Stewart sworn 5 Feb 2015 with Annexs IAS-1 to
IAS-3 (colour - signed)
Attachment 7 Ian Paananen Report Bushland vs Canbourne Portsea
Attachment 8 Ian Paananen Kensington vs Bushland Report
Attachment 9 Ray Parkers letter
Attachment 10 Affidavit of R Harrison sworn 4 Feb 2015 with Annex RH-1
Attachment 11 Little Pal Label 7 5-5154
Attachment 12 Relevant seeding records
Attachment 13 Relevant tube Plug records
Attachment 14 Total production 14 - 20cm Lomandra potting records Wandin
Attachment 15 Referencing Quanitities Supplied by Majectic
Attachment 16 2000~2015 Little Pal all sales
Attachment 17 All Lomandra Sales to Kuranga
Attachment 18 BushlandFlora28March5JanuarySamples_HummingMatrix - for
Response to Revocation
Attachment 19 Supply form Kuranga to Royal Botanic Gardens Cranbourne
Attachment 20 Majestic Invoice 1405 2658 6080
Attachment 21 60662 Avondale
Attachment 22 The Avenue Blackburn
Attachment 23 Wandin Dam plants
Attachment 24 Ian Shimmen Declartion 25-11-2015
Attachment 25 00005582 Limpinwood Invoice
Attachment 26 Parkers Place Invoices
Attachment 27 00001304 Greenhills propagation
Attachment 28 Portsea Garden Paul Thompson 062
Attachment 29 Lime Tuff production images
Attachment Index
Bushland Report in Response to Application for Revocation 25-11-2015
Majestic Invoices
Provided by Majestic 30 December 2015
2015-12-30_email_attachment_Rebuttal of Bushland's Response(Revised
subsequent to supply of documents)
ATT_01_Kuranga Variety Timeline of Events (2)
ATT_02_Notes on Kuranga Subpoena Documents 20-02-2015 (2)
ATT_03_Facey's Email exchange with various clients (2)
ATT_04_Facey's Email with image Pallida (2)
ATT_05__Facey's Image - Pallida
ATT_06_Facey's Email with image lomlitpal (2)
ATT_07_Facey's Image - lomlitpal (2)
ATT_08_Record of Plantings CBG_20141001 (2)
ATT_09_Photo_Kuranga_Lomandra confertifolia ssp
pallida_GardenSpecimen_EllisGarden_ACT_14-03-2015
ATT_10_Photo_Kuranga_Lomandra confertifolia ssp
pallida_Plants_RW_CBG_DSCN1825_16-10-2014
ATT_11_Photo_Kuranga_Lomandra confertifolia ssp
pallida_Flowers_RW_CBG_122347_16-10-2014
ATT_12_Photo_Kuranga_Lomandra confertifolia ssp
pallida_PottedSpecimen_RW_CBG_084737_29-10-2014
ATT_13_Photo_Kuranga_Lomandra confertifolia ssp pallida Little
Pal_Flower_RW_VTS_08-12-2014
ATT_14_Photo_Benson_Lomandra Little Pal_VTS_08-12-2014
ATT_15_NZ PVR Lime Tuff Authorisation of Agent form - 31436 - Agent
authority (2)
ATT_16_US PP Summary of Evidence (2)
ATT_17_A_Kuranga Litle Pal 008
ATT_17_B_Kuranga Litle Pal 009
Provided by Majestic 29 January 2016
Affidavit of Ian Paananen with Annexures IP-1 with IP-24
Affidavit of L Macartney dated 7 Feb 2015 (with Annexures)
Provided by Bushland 15 Feb 2016
Affidavit of I Paananen affirmed 10 Feb 2015 with Annexs IP-1 to IP-24
Affidavit of L Macartney sworn 7 Feb 2015 with Annexs (stamped) -
Bushland Flora ltr to PBRO 20160215
Ian Shimmen's Statutory Declaration 13th Feb 2016
Source: www/upov.int - TG/1/3
“GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO THE EXAMINATION OF DISTINCTNESS, UNIFORMITY AND
STABILITY AND THE DEVELOPMENT
OF HARMONIZED DESCRIPTIONS OF NEW VARIETIES OF
PLANTS”, 19 April 2002 – page
A definition of plant
variety is given in section 3 of the PBR Act and is consistent with the
definition provided in the
Source: www/upov.int
- TGP/15/1 “Guidance on the Use of Biochemical and Molecular Markers in
the Examination of Distinctness,
Uniformity and Stability (DUS)”, October
RTF format (414 KB)
Signed PDF/A format