Wellesley & Weldon [2013] FMCAfam 283 (28 March 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
WELLESLEY & WELDON
[2013] FMCAfam 283
LAW – Property adjustment – consideration of applicable principles
– question of whether there should be
a splitting order – spouse
maintenance – child support – no special circumstance justifying
Family Law Act 1975
Hickey and Hickey and Attorney-General for the
Commonwealth of Australia
[2003] FamCA 395
(2003) FLC 93-143
(2003) 30 FamLR 355
the marriage of Lee Steere
(1985) FLC91-626
In the marriage of
(1993) FLC92-335
In the marriage of Clauson
[2012] HCA 52
(2012) 293 ALR 70
Russell and Russell
[1999] FamCA 1875
Teal & Teal
[2010] FamCAFC 120
Gyselman and
[1991] FamCA 93
(1992) FLC 92-279
Sheahan and Sheahan
[1993] FamCA 21
Hides and Hatton
(1998) FLC 92-759
MS WELLESLEY
Respondent:
File Number:
WOC 92 of 2011
Judgment of:
Hearing dates:
11 & 12 March 2013
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Willis & Bowring Solicitors
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Johnson Horsley Lawyers
(1) That the husband and wife do all things necessary
and sign all necessary documents to effect a sale of the property at Property
as and from 1 September 2013 and that upon sale of the property the proceeds of
sale be applied as follows:
(a) in payment
of agents commission and costs on sale,
discharge of the mortgage to the National Australia Bank,
(c) in payment
of any rates adjustments payable on settlement provided always that in respect
of any arrears of rates the wife be
liable for such arrears,
(d) in payment
of the balance then remaining as to 70% to the wife and as to 30% to the
(2) That the husband and wife have liberty to apply as to implementation of the
preceding order on short notice.
(3) That pending sale of the property as provided for in Order 1 the husband pay
mortgage instalments in relation to that property
as they fall due and
(4) That pending completion of the sale of the property as provided for in Order
1 the husband pay spousal maintenance to the wife
in the sum of $500 per week
first payment within seven days with such payment to be made by bank transfer to
an account nominated
by the wife within seven days from the date of this
(5) That upon completion of the sale of the property as provided for in Order 1
the husband thereafter pay spousal maintenance to
the wife in the sum of $1000
per week first payment within seven days from the date of completion of the sale
of the property with
such payments to be made by bank transfer to an account
nominated by the wife within seven days from the date of this order and with
such payments to continue for a period of 104 weeks from the date of
commencement.
(6) That there be a splitting order pursuant to
s.90MT(1)(a)
Law Act 1975
that whenever a splittable payment becomes payable in respect
of the husband’s interest in the (omitted) Super Fund, the wife
entitled to be paid an amount calculated in accordance with the regulations,
using a base amount of $117,701 and that there be
a corresponding reduction in
the entitlement the husband would have had but for this order and
(a) this order
binds the Trustee of the (omitted) Super Fund and
operative time is the beginning of the fourth business day after the date of
service of these orders on the Trustee of the
(omitted) Super
(7) That otherwise all applications before the court be dismissed.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
Wellesley & Weldon
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
MS WELLESLEY
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
The Proceedings
are financial proceedings commenced by the applicant wife by application filed
on 7 October 2011.
her amended application filed on 12 July 2012 the wife in summary sought the
following orders:
the home at Property B be transferred to her,
for a period of two years from the date of orders the husband pay mortgage
payments in relation to that property,
at the expiration of a period of two years the wife indemnify the husband in
respect to mortgage payments and outgoings in relation
there be a splitting order in favour of the wife from the husband’s
superannuation in the sum of $117,000,
the husband pay spouse maintenance in the sum of $500 per week,
there be an order for adult child maintenance in respect to the child X in the
sum of $500 per week until he completes his tertiary
there be an order for adult child maintenance in respect of the child Y in the
sum of $500 per week until she completes her tertiary
there be a departure in respect to the husband's child support liability in that
his liability for child support for the children
Z and A be in the sum of $250
per week in each until they complete their secondary education or reach the age
of 18 years whichever
is the latter with such payments to be CPI indexed
trial the husband sought financial orders in terms of the minute of orders
admitted into evidence as Exhibit B and in summary the
orders sought by him are
as follows:
the parties sell the property at Property B and that upon the sale of the
property the net proceeds of sale be divided as to
65% to the wife and 35% to
the husband,
there be a splitting order from the husband superannuation in favour of the wife
in the sum of $63,324,
otherwise orders sought by the wife be dismissed.
22 June 2012 financial orders were made pending further order as
6 July 2012 the husband make repayments on the loan secured by way of mortgage
over the former matrimonial home in the sum of
$600 per week,
husband pay to the wife by way of periodic spouse maintenance the sum of $300
per week first payment being within seven days and
payable weekly thereafter
directly into the wife's nominated bank
wife is presently 50 years of age as is the husband.
parties commenced cohabitation in early 1985 and married on (omitted) 1987.
parties separated in March 2009 at which time the husband left the former
matrimonial home.
are four children are of the marriage, X born on (omitted) 1992, Y born on
(omitted) 1994, Z born on (omitted) 1999 and A born
on (omitted) 2002.
to separation all of the children have remained residing with the wife in the
matrimonial home. The eldest child X is currently
attending (omitted) University
where he is undertaking an (omitted) course. Y completed her year 12 studies in
2012 and is enrolled
as an undergraduate at the University of (omitted).
child Z is in year nine at a selective high school and the child A is in year
five at the local public school.
husband presently spends time with the younger children on a limited basis each
week and for periods of each school holiday. Regrettably
it appears that he is
estranged from the older children with whom he has some telephone contact.
husband’s present child support liability in relation to the younger
children by way of assessment dated 29 August 2012
is in the sum of $526 per
week in addition to which he pays a sum for (omitted) training fees for the
child A. Otherwise the mother
pays for the costs of the younger children
including their costs of accommodation and schooling in addition to which she
support for the elder two children.
Cohabitation
the commencement of cohabitation the parties had minimal assets. Following
marriage the parties resided in a rental accommodation
in (omitted) while saving
for a home deposit.
August 1990 the parties purchased a property at (omitted) for the sum of
$128,000. The purchase price comprised the parties’
joint savings and a
property was sold in 1993 and the parties purchased a property at (omitted) for
the sum of $230,000 with the purchase price comprising
the net proceeds of sale
of the (omitted) property in the sum of $46,500, joint savings and a mortgage of
1997 in the parties sold the (omitted) property and purchased the present
matrimonial home at Property B for the sum of $269,000.
The purchase price
comprised the proceeds of sale of the (omitted) property and a mortgage of
$180,000. The mortgage was refinanced
on occasions for the purchase of a motor
vehicle and renovation costs.
2000 and for the parties borrowed by way of collateral security over the
matrimonial home the sum of $174,057 to purchase an investment
property at
(omitted) for the sum of $167,279. The wife asserts that the purchase of this
property was to secure the children's higher
education costs for the future.
However the precise purpose of the purchase is of little relevance.
(omitted) property was sold in October 2007 and the net proceeds of sale of
$92,401 was deposited to the parties’ joint
account. These funds were
depleted over a period to approximately August 2011 for living expenses,
mortgage payments, credit card
payments and the sum of $10,000 transferred to a
children's education account.
Concession as to contributions
parties gave significant evidence as to the various contributions during
cohabitation including financial, non-financial and
contributions. Sensibly at trial the parties agreed that the contributions made
by each of them at the date
of separation was to be regarded by the court as
equal. Thus the only assessment of contributions necessary is for the period
the date of separation to hearing.
Post separation
children have remained in the primary care of the wife post separation thus
requiring the wife to balance her ability to work
with the care of the children,
particularly the younger children. The husband has offered little assistance to
the wife in this regard
over and above his normal time with the children.
wife is presently employed by (workplace omitted) as a (occupation omitted). She
works between 15 and 20 hours per week earning
a salary of $698 per week gross
for a 15 hour week. Over the Christmas 2012 period she was able to increase her
hours marginally
by reason of assistance afforded to her in the care of the
younger children by the child Y. It is the mother's expectation that her
position will cease by the end of 2013. At present the mother travels a
significant distance for work with such travel taking
her between four and five
hours each day with her health circumstances making this travel for the purposes
of employment extremely
unpleasant.
wife was able in late 2012 and early 2013 to work additional hours on contract
but such work is no longer available to her. The
wife suffers from systematic
lupus symptoms, lower back pain and sciatic numbness which she asserts and the
court accepts prevents
her from undertaking full-time employment even if she was
able to do so over and above her obligation to care for the children of
marriage. The mother engaged with a counsellor in relation to grief issues and
depression in 2011/2012 for a period of three
husband is employed as a (occupation omitted) by various organisations including
(workplaces omitted). Throughout cohabitation
the husband has worked in various
positions as a (occupation omitted).
husband asserts a history of depression. He is presently on appropriate
medication and has more recently consulted a consultant
psychiatrist Dr T. The
husband first consulted his present psychiatrist in August 2012. The husband
provided to his psychiatrist
of a history of severe symptoms of depression that
had been present for some weeks which commenced in the context of ongoing
with his ex-wife. On initial examination his psychiatrist noted major
stresses in the husband's life together with financial issues
and late work
history at four different sites all of which are contributed to the
deterioration of the husband's health. The husband
presented to his psychiatrist
with a depressed affect with melancholic features with the depression scoring in
the severe range.
Dr T noted that the husband had for some years been taking the
antidepressant Sertraline, continued the husband on Zoloft and commenced
a second antidepressant Valdoxan and discussed with the husband the need to
restrict his working hours to a more manageable
target. The husband was reviewed
by Dr T on 4 September 2012, 18 September 2012 and on 6 November 2012.
22 January 2013, the last review by Dr T, the husband's mood was still depressed
but overall without melancholic features. Dr T
opines that the husband's
prognosis for full recovery is somewhat problematic having regard to the complex
origins of the husband's
depressive disorder. The prognosis, says Dr T, is
dependent upon a reasonable resolution and final settlement of the marriage and
to a great extent on factors outside the husband's control such as the attitude
of his children.
T suggests that the husband will need to maintain antidepressant medication for
a further two years and later this year be referred
for more intensive
psychotherapy.
husband presently resides in rental accommodation.
to separation and until May 2010 the parties continued to operate a joint
account to which the wife had access. However
in May 2010 the husband stopped
the wife's access to the joint account and reduced his level of financial
support for the wife's
household to $200 per week. He continued to pay mortgage
payments and for a short period utilities in relation to the home. From
2010 until December 2011 the husband paid child support varying between
$500-$750 per week for the children but he deducted
from such payments monies
expended by the wife that he thought was unwarranted. In December 2011 the
husband commenced paying child
support in the sum of $600 per week and in
January 2012 until August 2012 in the sum of $800 per week.
August 2012 the husband reduced his child support payments to $500 per week at
which time the wife applied for a child support
assessment in relation to the
two youngest children.
the husband paid the major proportion of school fees for the child Y until 2011
and the child A until 2013.
relation to the home mortgage the husband substantially made mortgage payments
from separation until trial save for payments over
the period from 23 August
2011 until 17 January 2012 totalling $7,700 that were debited as against the
pre-payments existing on the
mortgage account as at separation.
husband asserts that he ceased mortgage payments in August 2011 as he could not
afford his child support obligations and to provide
for his legal costs in
relation to these proceedings that to date total some $40,000. At that time the
mortgage was some $40,000
into advance as a consequence of payments made over
overall the effect of the husband's non-payment of various mortgage payments and
various payments made to the mortgage by the
wife since separation has been to
increase the mortgage liability on the home over and above the amount owing at
separation by the
sum of approximately $5,000 allowing for an agreed redraw by
the parties which was applied to repairs and renovations to the property
sum of $10,000.
separation the wife has otherwise maintained the property including part
painting the exterior, together with the gardens and
grounds with little
assistance from the husband.
separation the husband received 2 small inheritances. The first in the sum of
$10,000 was deposited into the parties’
joint account in June 2010 with
those funds being accessed by the wife. The second in mid-2010 in the sum of
$5,000 also deposited
into the parties’ joint account.
husband complains that since separation the wife has continued to draw funds
from the joint account and otherwise but overall
the court considers that the
expenditure of such funds to be justified in that they need not be considered by
the court as a factor
in assessing post separation
contributions.
Property: The Law
approach to the determination of an application under
of the Act is set out in
Stanford v Stanford
[2012] HCA 52.
was observed by Ryan J in
[2012] FamCA 1133
question which ultimately must be answered is whether it is just and equitable
to alter the parties’ rights and
interests in their property. The power to
make a property settlement order must be exercised in accordance with legal
principles,
including the principles which the Act itself lays down. In this
case the parties agree (as do I) that by reason of the manner by
conducted their marriage, which has now irretrievably broken down, it is just
and equitable that their interests and rights
in property are altered; where
they disagree is in relation to what that adjustment should comprise.
Thus, it is
necessary to first, identify the nature of the parties interests in their
property, liabilities and financial resources
at the time of the hearing.
evaluate the contributions made by the parties as defined in
, (b) and (c) and the effect of any proposed order upon the earning
capacity of either party.
I must then
evaluate the matters contained in
insofar as they are relevant, including any other order made under the
Act affecting a party or child and any child support under
Support (Assessment) Act 1989
(Cth) (“CSAA”) that a party to the
marriage is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child
the marriage.
Consideration
of whether it is just and equitable that an alteration of the parties’
interests is made and, if it is, its terms
are required.
question must not be conflated with the outcome of the
deliberations, albeit these may inform the justice and equity
determination.
imposes on the Court an obligation, that as far as practicable, the
orders will finally determine the financial relationships between
the parties
and avoid further proceedings between them.”
the process ordinarily involves a staged process.
court must identify the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in
the property, the liabilities and financial resources
of the parties at the time
of the hearing and then whether it is just and equitable to make a property
settlement order.
a consideration should not be guided by an assumption that the parties rights to
or interests in property are or should be different
from those that then exist.
The question is whether those rights and interests should be altered.
is no presumption that one or other party has the right to have the property of
the parties divided between them or a right
to an interest in marital property
that is fixed by reference to the various matters in
). This consideration addresses the prohibition in
of the Act.
court needs to conclude that it would be unjust or unfair to leave property
rights intact. Such a conclusion can not be informed
by reference to
(2) factors.
many cases this requirement is readily satisfied where the parties are no longer
in a marital or defacto relationship and thus,
for example, the common ownership
or use of property by husband and wife will no longer be possible or the express
or implicit assumptions
that underpinned existing property arrangements such as
the accumulation of assets or financial resources by one for the benefit
have been brought to an end with the relationship.
particular such a circumstance arises where both parties seek adjustive orders
but are unable to agree as to same.
(2) prohibition is overcome the court then considers the contributions
made by the parties as defined in
(4) (a) to (c). The court must then
consider the subjective considerations as to the parties by having regard to the
provisions of
section 75(2)
in so far as they are relevant. Such a consideration
can include arguments as to asserted add backs, alleged waste by a party or
other financial resources that it is contended should be added to the actual
pool as notional property or liabilities.
the light of the reconsideration of the role of
(2) as a threshold question
it would be appropriate for the court to consider the “justice and
equity” of the actual
orders to be made (see
Russell and Russell
[1999] FamCA 1875
(1999) FLC 92-877
Teal & Teal
[2010] FamCAFC 120))
context of the courts obligation to make “appropriate orders” as
provided for in
(1) of the Act.
Question: The Legal and Equitable Interests of the parties in
the course of the trial the parties reached substantial agreement as to the
legal and equitable interests of the parties in
agreed position as to the parties assets and liabilities is as
Joint matrimonial home at Property B $770,000
Wife motor vehicle $ 5,500
Wife savings $ 401
Wife (omitted) shares $ 3,065
Husband savings $ 200
Husband household contents $ 1,000
Wife household contents $ 3,270
Total: $783,436
Mortgage secured would over matrimonial home $375,953
Net: $407,483
Superannuation:
Husband (omitted) Super Fund superannuation fund $193,167
Wife Total superannuation $ 48,948
Total: $242,115
the total asset pool of the parties is in the sum of
was contended by the husband that the court should have regard to his
superannuation entitlement at the sum of $175,595 representing
superannuation entitlement at about the time of separation. However the husband
took from the marriage his earning capacity by
reason of his ongoing employment
as a (omitted) over the years of cohabitation. Subsequent to separation the wife
has managed part-time
employment by reason of further obligation primarily to
care for the children. In this circumstance the court considers appropriate
consider the husband’s accrued superannuation at date of
cohabitation of the parties was over a period of 23 years. Their relationship
produced four children and the primary asset of
the parties being the
matrimonial home remains jointly owned. The common use of this property is no
longer possible. Otherwise there
is a significant disparity in superannuation by
reason of contributions over the period of cohabitation. The underlying
in relation to accruing superannuation benefits is the provision of
retirement benefits for the parties to the marriage. As a consequence
cessation of cohabitation this purpose is no longer a consideration.
all the circumstances the court is satisfied that it is just and equitable to
make and adjustive order under
of the Act.
Contributions of the Parties
referred to above the parties agreed that contributions during cohabitation
should be regarded as equal as at separation. The issue
for the court’s
determination is as to whether there is a disparity in the parties’
respective contributions post separation.
must first be noted that for the purposes of any adjustive order both parties
contended that the court should regard all assets
as one divisible pool. By
reason of the history of the relationship and contributions referred to above
the court is satisfied that
this is an appropriate course.
wife contended that contributions post separation should be regarded as equal.
The husband contended that by reason of his significant
financial contributions
to the household comprising the wife and children post separation particularly
in regard to maintenance of
mortgage payments there should be an adjustment in
his favour to reflect those contributions.
court is not satisfied that the husband’s post separation contributions
should be so recognised. Over the period from separation
to trial the wife has
shouldered the major burden of parenting the children of the marriage and
maintenance of the home and household
comprising the wife and the children. The
husband’s capacity to make significant financial contributions is a
capacity in terms
of income earning capacity that accrued to him during the
relationship.
the husband contended that appropriate recognition should be afforded to 2 small
inheritances received by him after separation
and paid into the parties’
joint bank account. In the overall scheme the inheritances represent a very
modest factor in terms
of contribution and are mostly offset by the
husband’s failure to continue mortgage payments and over a period of about
months, such failure resulting in an increase in mortgage debt even
allowing for an agreed redraw for renovation purposes of $10,000
smaller capital sums paid into the mortgage by the wife from the parties’
joint account.
all of the circumstances the court is satisfied that overall contributions as
between the parties should be regarded as equal.
Section 75(2)
Considerations
considering the contribution-based entitlements of the parties court is required
to consider the various factors set out in
section 75(2)
of the Act.
this regard the applicant wife sought a further adjustment in her favour of 25%.
It was contended that this adjustment reflected
the parties’ disparity in
income, the wife’s continuing primary parenting obligation in relation to
the youngest two
children, the husband’s ongoing child-support obligation
and by reason of
section 75(2)(o)
the wife’s obligation to provide ongoing
care and financial assistance for the two older children who are both at
University.
husband’s contention was that a proper consideration of the
section 75(2)
factors would lead the court to an adjustment in favour of the wife of 20%. The
relevant factors in the husband’s contention
being the health of the
parties, the disparity in income, the wife’s continuing care for the two
youngest children of the marriage.
court has had regard to all of the factors in
section 75(2)
and is satisfied
that in all the circumstances an adjustment in favour of the wife as to 20% is
just and equitable.
Just and Equitable Order
the wife is thus entitled to 70% of the pool available for division and the
husband of 30%.
a division entitles the wife to a sum of $454,719.
wife contended that she should receive a most significant proportion if not all
of the equity realisable on sale of the matrimonial
that there should be an order for sale of the home with the property to be
placed on the market for sale
no earlier than 1 September 2013.
the court agree to the wife’s contention the result would be that the
husband would be left with in effect his superannuation
accrued during
cohabitation and until hearing and little else in recognition of a marriage of
court is cognisant of the purposes behind the superannuation splitting scheme
when introduced. It is open to the court to make
appropriate provision by way of
superannuation splitting subject to orders being just and equitable. Both
parties are presently 50
years of age and have some years in the workforce ahead
of them. It is clear that the husband will continue to accrue superannuation
a much greater rate than that of the wife even if she returned to full-time
employment.
the husband still has many years until he is able to access his superannuation
entitlement as does the wife. As a consequence
the court considers it
inappropriate in all the circumstances to leave the husband as it were
superannuation rich but asset poor.
No doubt he will seek to purchase
accommodation for himself and such of the children who spend time with him. The
reality of him
being able to do so at least in the short term will be limited by
his financial capacity to meet other obligations such as the child
the court is not satisfied that is appropriate to offset the husband’s
superannuation on a dollar for dollar basis
with the equity in the matrimonial
years into the future.
all of the circumstances the court is satisfied that the husband should receive
a modest sum of capital from the proceeds of sale
of the home.
the overall percentage entitlements of the parties be applied to the estimated
net proceeds of sale of the matrimonial home
the husband would receive
approximately $118,000 and the wife approximately $275,800. Such an adjustment
would then require an appropriate
adjusted splitting order from the
husband’s superannuation to the wife.
court is satisfied it is appropriate that the overall entitlements of the
parties be applied to the proposed net proceeds of sale
of the matrimonial home
and that the remaining assets including superannuation be adjusted in a like
wife presently has in her position or entitlement the
Wife motor vehicle $ 5,500
Wife savings $ 401
Wife (omitted) shares $ 3,065
Wife household contents $ 3,270
Wife Total superannuation $ 48,948
Total: $ 61,184
Husband has:
Husband savings $ 200
Husband household contents $ 1,000
Husband (omitted) Super Fund superannuation fund $193,167
Total: $194,367
facilitate an overall adjustment of these assets a mathematical splitting order
in the sum of $117,701 in favour of the wife is
called for. Having regard to the
components of this discreet pool of assets the court is not satisfied that the
mathematical splitting
order should be reduced or discounted.
Accordingly
orders to be made by the court will facilitate a sale of the matrimonial home at
a time as agreed between the parties
with a division of the net proceeds of sale
as to 70% to the wife and as to 30% to the husband and that further there will
be a splitting
order in the sum of $117,701 in favour of the wife from the
husband’s fund. Otherwise the parties shall retain other assets
in their possession or to which they are presently entitled.
Spouse Maintenance
Family Law Act 1975
sets out the relevant provision in relation
to the right to maintenance.
provides that a party to a marriage is
a liable to maintain the other party, to the extent that the first mentioned
party is reasonably
able to do so, if, and only if, that other party is unable
to support herself or himself adequately whether:
reason of having the care and control of a child of the marriage who has not
attained the age of 18 years;
reason of a each or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful
employment; or
any other adequate reason
having regard to any relevant
matter referred to in
subsection 75(2).
regard to the matters set out above in the court’s reasons for judgment,
the court is comfortably satisfied that the
wife is unable to support herself
adequately by reason of having the care and control of the younger children of
the marriage and
by reason of her health.
court finds that the wife’s present income is in the sum of $701 per
wife’s expenses as set out in her financial statement excluding
entertainment, hobbies and holidays are in the sum of $1,279
per week. Thus
leaving a shortfall of $578 per week. This figure does not include the present
mortgage payments which are in the
sum of $600 per week or her rental obligation
subsequent to sale of the matrimonial home which the court is satisfied will be
the order of about $600 per week.
the wife’s shortfall is thus in the sum of $1,180 per week. In addition
the wife has an obligation to maintain the children
of the marriage to the
extent that the children’s costs are not met by the husband’s child
support obligation. Otherwise
the wife has the obligation in relation to the two
eldest children who are both at University and remain substantially residing in
the matrimonial home.
the event of a sale of the matrimonial home the wife will receive a not
insignificant capital sum which would be available to her
to invest should she
choose to rent accommodation for herself and the children.
a conservative figure of $250,000 available to the wife following sale invested
at an interest rate of 5% as suggested during
submissions, would result in an
investment income to the wife of about $250 per week which of course would be
liable to the impost
of income tax.
husband’s capacity to meet an obligation to pay spouse maintenance was the
subject of detailed cross-examination. The court
is satisfied that the
husband’s income after tax comprises the sum of $1,955 together with sums
totalling $618 per week received
by him on a tax-free basis. Thus his available
income is in the sum of $2,573 per week.
recently the husband has ceased his casual work at (workplace omitted). It was
contended by the wife that the court should have
regard to this additional
income capacity that historically was in the sum of about $187 per week. The
court is not satisfied that
it should do so by reason of the medical evidence
available particularly from the husband’s treating psychiatrist who
recommended
that the husband scale back his work hours as a result of which the
husband ceased his additional work at this (workplace omitted).
was conceded by counsel for the husband that the husband’s reasonable
expenses comprised:
(omitted) Life $ 11
Child Support $ 524
Adjusted Part N Expenses $ 561
Total: $1,366
the husband’s mathematical capacity to meet a spouse maintenance
obligation is in the sum of $1,207 per week.
husband continues to make mortgage payments on the matrimonial home and will be
required to do so pending sale of the property.
However on sale his capacity to
meet an obligation for spouse maintenance will be as stated.
court has had regard to each of the relevant factors in
section 75(2)
satisfied that pending sale of the matrimonial home the husband by way of
spousal maintenance should be required to pay mortgage
payments on the home as
they fall due and payable together with the further sum of $500 per week and
that upon sale of the matrimonial
until much later this year or indeed early in 2014 the sum of $1,000 per week
period of two years.
should the wife assert an ongoing need for spousal maintenance she will of
course be able to make application in appropriate
circumstances to vary the
order by extending the time of its operation.
Child Support Departure and Adult Child Maintenance
submissions counsel for the wife abandoned the wife’s claim for orders for
adult child maintenance for the two eldest children
of the marriage.
as to child support the wife abandoned the substance of her child support
application presumably having regard to the quantum
of the present
administrative assessment. The wife in submissions sought a child support
departure order to extend the operation
of the current assessment until such
time as the subject children attain the age of 18 years or complete their
secondary education
whichever is the latter.
current child support assessment is operative until 21 November 2013. The
assessment that comprises Annexure A to the wife’s
affidavit filed on 15
February 2013 reveals that the husband’s liability is assessed on a
taxable income of $221,533. As explained
in the assessment the figure used as
the husband’s taxable income includes gross reportable fringe
order to obtain a departure from an administrative assessment the ''three step
process'' as explained in
Gyselman and Gyselman
[1991] FamCA 93
(1992) FLC 92-279
79,064 must be followed:
Whether one or more grounds of departure in 117(2) is established.
it is ''just and equitable'' within the meaning of
particular order.
it is otherwise proper within the meaning of
to make a particular
first step of the ''three stage process'' identified in
Gyselman and
[1991] FamCA 93
(1992) FLC 92-279
at 79,064 is to establish a ''ground'' for
departure under
section 117.
A ''ground'' can only be established under
the facts and circumstances of the case amount to ‘‘special
circumstances’’ as required by
expression ''special circumstances'' was considered by the Full Court in
Gyselman and Gyselman
[1991] FamCA 93
(1992) FLC 92-279
at p.79,065. The Court said:
is not possible to define with precision the meaning of that term, as a
generality it is intended to emphasize that the
facts of the case must establish
something which is special or out of the ordinary. ... That is, the intention of
the Legislature
is that the Court will not interfere with the administrative
formula result in the ordinary run of cases. ... In Savery’s case
FLC 92-131] (p 77,897), Kay J ... said that ''special circumstances'' were
''facts peculiar to the particular case which
set it apart from other cases''.
Sheahan and
[1993] FamCA 21
(1993) FLC 92-375
the Full Court said at p 79,884 that
''relevant facts of the particular case must be considered to determine
whether they constitute special circumstances which ... if
not taken into
account, would result in injustice or undue hardship to any
is clear that in determining whether special circumstances are demonstrated in a
particular case all of the circumstances of the
case must be considered. As was
stated by the Full Court in
Hides and Hatton
(1998) FLC 92-759
only must the Judge apply the three stage process under
, (4) and (5)
in relation to the circumstances of the parties as they existed in the child
support year in question, but also in relation
to the present circumstances of
the parties (if at all relevant). For example, it may well be necessary in a
particular case in addition
to considering the circumstances of the parties in
the past child support year in question, also to consider the present capacity
of the payer to meet a new assessment, and/or the impact on a payee of any
credit in the payer's favour which might be created by
a departure from an
assessment for an earlier child support year. ''
this matter both parties are PAYE salary earners. To the extent that the husband
receives non-taxable fringe benefits in respect
to a portion of his employment
the child support legislation ensures that the gross fringe benefits payable are
included in his income
for the purposes of child-support assessment.
future years the husband’s income may or may not vary but an
administrative assessment will issue based upon his taxable
income from time to
time. In the event that the wife for whatever reason seeks a departure from the
administrative assessments then
they will be dealt with by the child support
agency in the usual way.
all the circumstances the court cannot identify nor indeed was it suggested in
submissions on behalf of the applicant wife that
a special circumstance existed
that would facilitate the court embarking upon a child support
determination.
Accordingly
the wife’s application for child support departure as modified at hearing
will be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
three (103) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Foster
Date: 28 March 2013
RTF format (204 KB)
Signed PDF/A format