General Aviation & Airports Association and Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications, Sport and the Arts (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 180 (7 November 2025)
General Aviation & Airports Association and Department of
Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications, Sport
Arts (Freedom of information)
[2025] AICmr 180 (7 November 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of Rocelle Ago, General
Manager Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian
Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
General Aviation and Airports Association
Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development,
Communications, Sport and the Arts
Decision date
Freedom of Information —
Respondent to process request following removal of practical refusal reason claim
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the internal review decision of the Department of Infrastructure, Transport,
Regional Development, Communications,
Sport and the
(the Department) of 3 October
2023. In considering the Department’s indication that it is able to
process the request, I substitute
my decision that a practical refusal reason
does not exist.
30 days of this decision:
the Department
must now process the applicant’s request as revised on 10 August
the Department
must advise whether it has fully implemented my decision.
decision sets aside the internal review decision of the Department in
circumstances where the Department initially submitted
but no longer maintains
that a practical refusal reason exists.
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
17 July 2023, the applicant applied to the Department for access to Essendon
Airport Sale Agreement 1996 and related documents
and policies including
policies recommending a ‘light-hands’ approach, undertakings to
tenants, tender valuation and
28 July 2023, the Department provided the applicant with a s 24AB notice stating
that it intended to refuse the request under s
24AA(1)(a)(i) of the FOI Act on
the grounds that a practical refusal reason exists, as processing the request
would substantially
and unreasonably divert the resources of the Department from
its other operations.
10 August 2023, the applicant responded to the s 24AB notice by revising the
scope of their request. They sought the Essendon Airport
sale agreement 1996,
and Federal Airport Corporation and Commonwealth policies relating to hangar
tenants and leases at Essendon
Airport, including those in place over November
30 August 2023, the Department issued a primary decision which refused the
applicant’s revised request under s 24(1) of the
FOI Act on the basis
that, after undertaking a request consultation process with the applicant under
s 24AB, a practical refusal
reason still existed.
1 September 2023, the applicant sought internal review of the Department’s
3 October 2023, the Department issued an internal review decision affirming the
primary decision.
17 November 2023, the applicant sought IC review of the Department’s
decision under s 54L of the FOI Act.
the course of the IC review,
Department advised the OAIC that it is able to process the request.
an IC review of an access refusal decision, the Department bears the onus of
establishing that their decision is justified or that
I should give a decision
adverse to the IC review applicant (s 55D(1)).
on the information before me, including the Department’s advice that it
has elected to process the request, I am satisfied
that the practical refusal
reason no longer exists.
Department must now process the applicant’s request and notify the
applicant of its decision within 30 days of receipt of
Rocelle Ago
General Manager, Freedom of
Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian Information
Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Whether a practical refusal reason exists (ss 24 and
Section 24 of the FOI Act
enables an agency or Minister to refuse access to a document where the agency
has undertaken a request consultation
process in accordance with s 24AB of the
FOI Act, and after that process the agency or Minister is satisfied that the
practical refusal
reason still exists.
Subparagraph 24AA(1)(a) of the FOI Act lists the following practical refusal
(1) For the purposes of section 24, a practical refusal reason exists in
relation to a request for a document if either (or both)
of the following
(a) the work involved in processing the request:
(i) in the case of an agency--would substantially and unreasonably divert
the resources of the agency from its other operations;
(ii) in the case of a Minister--would substantially and unreasonably
interfere with the performance of the Minister's functions;
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
Accessing your information
If you would like access to the information that we hold about you, please
FOIDR@oaic.gov.au
information is available on the
information
page on our website.
The Department of
Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts
became the Department of Infrastructure,
Transport, Regional Development,
Communications, Sport and the Arts by Administrative Arrangements Order dated 13
On the question of the
processing deadlines that now apply, see
Fletcher and Prime Minister of
In submissions, the Department
provided an alternative date of 15 August 2023 for its receipt of the
applicant’s revised scope.
I have relied upon the date identified in its
signed original decision of 30 August 2023.
Following a direction
made by the Information Commissioner under s 55(2 )(e)(ii) of
the FOI Act.
RTF format (22.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format