Reference by APRA AMCOS (Stan Summons) [2023] ACopyT 2 (5 July 2023)
Reference by APRA AMCOS (Stan Summons)
[2023] ACopyT 2
File number:
CT 1 of 2021
The Tribunal:
(PRESIDENT)
Date of decision:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– application
by Stan to issue summonses to other Respondents – where summonses objected
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Date of hearing:
Determined on the papers
Counsel for Stan Entertainment Pty Ltd:
Ms A Campbell
Solicitor for Stan Entertainment Pty Ltd:
MinterEllison
Counsel for The Walt Disney Company (Australia) Pty Ltd:
Ms J M Beaumont SC
Solicitor for The Walt Disney Company (Australia) Pty Ltd:
Solicitor for Netflix, Inc.
Simpsons Solicitors
Solicitor for Network Ten All Access Pty Ltd:
Mr A Stewart of Baker McKenzie
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 1 of 2021
REFERENCE BY:
AUSTRALASIAN PERFORMING RIGHT ASSOCIATION
LIMITED ABN 42 000 016 099
AUSTRALASIAN MECHANICAL COPYRIGHT
OWNERS’ SOCIETY LIMITED ABN 78 001 678 851
PERRAM J (PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
in the form of the amended proposed summonses provided to the Tribunal on 7 June
2023 issue to The Walt Disney Company (Australia)
Pty Ltd, Netflix, Inc. and
Network Ten All Access Pty Ltd, returnable on 3 August 2023 at 4.00 pm.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
PERRAM J (PRESIDENT):
reasons deal briefly with the proposed issue of summonses to a number of
The summons to Disney
seeks the issue of a summons to The Walt Disney Company (Australia) Pty Ltd
(‘Disney’) in the form of an amended
proposed summons provided to
the Tribunal. The summons seeks the production of 11 categories of documents. In
its submissions, Disney
did not object to categories 7, 8, 9 or 11. In its
submissions, Stan did not press category 4. The categories in dispute are
1-3, 5-6 and 10.
Categories 1-3
are as follows:
statements (in an audited form if available), including income statements and
balance sheets, for each financial year of
the Period for the entity (or group
of entities):
(a) that provide the Service in Australia; and or
(b) incur the costs for the Service in Australia.
periodic financial results for the Service in Australia (including those
relating to revenue, subscriber numbers and costs) during
the Period in the form
reported to management.
the extent not included in the documents produced in answer to categories 1 and
2, any document recording the quantum and or basis
for any inter-company charge
payable by the Company to a related body corporate in relation to the Service in
submits that these categories are relevant to its case that it is in a different
financial position to the other Respondents
who are international subscription
video on demand (‘SVOD’) providers, including because it is unable
to cross-subsidise
its costs over other business units. The parties have already
agreed that one of the issues to be resolved in the reference –
– is this question:
What are the differences between Stan and other SVODs and is it reasonable for
Stan to be licensed under a different scheme or fee
having regard to those
differences?
submits that Stan has proffered no evidence for its position. Since its evidence
is not yet on this is an underwhelming submission.
I do not accept that the
categories sought are not relevant to an issue before the Tribunal and I would
decline to determine Issue
16 in Disney’s favour and find, as it invites
me to, that Stan’s contentions about Issue 16 cannot succeed. Nor am I
persuaded that the fact that Disney makes some of the information sought
publicly available provides any reason to set aside the
categories. Categories
1-3 will therefore stand.
5 is in these terms:
documents authored or created by, for, or on behalf of, board members, senior
management or executives containing budgets or forecasts
regarding the revenue,
subscribers or costs of the Service in Australia for the current and future
financial years.
relevance objection is rejected since the material is plainly relevant to Issue
16. Concerns about confidentiality
are sufficiently addressed by the
confidentiality regimes which exist in the proceeding. Disney says that the
words ‘budgets
or forecasts ... for the current and future financial
years’ could pick up budgets or forecasts which may be outdated. That
provide a reason to oppose their tender or for an expert to reflect negatively
on their forensic value. It has no place in a
debate such as the present.
Category 5 will stand.
6 is in these terms:
the Period, any document(s) recording the annual amounts paid by the Company (or
a related entity) for content for the Service
in Australia, where the amount
shall be calculated to the extent applicable, in accordance with the definition
of Content Costs in
the Stan Proposed Licence.
this is relevant to Issue 16. The relevance objection is rejected.
Disney’s additional complaint that the original category
was not limited
to the Service ‘in Australia’ falls away in light of Stan’s
amended proposed summons, which adds
these words.
am also not persuaded that this category is crippled by a lack of clarity.
Category 10
category is in these terms:
the last two quarters (and to the extent not produced under category 9), any
document recording:
(a) the total gross subscription revenue for the Service in Australia as
reported to APRA AMCOS;
(b) the total licence fee payable by the Company to APRA AMCOS; and
(c) the total reduction to that licence fee as a result of the application of
the formula in Schedule 3 of the Netflix Proposed Licence.
original objections to category 10 have been accommodated by changes made by
Stan which are reflected in the current
form of category 10. Consequently, none
remain and the category will stand.
summons will issue to Disney in the form of the proposed amended
The summons to Netflix
seeks the issue to Netflix, Inc. (‘Netflix’) of a summons in the
form of an amended proposed summons provided to
the Tribunal. The summons also
seeks the production of 11 categories of documents. No objection is taken to
categories 8-11. Stan
does not press categories 4 and 7. The categories in
dispute are therefore categories 1-3, 5 and 6.
Categories 1-3, 5 and 6
categories are as follows:
statements (in an audited form if available), including income statements and
balance sheets, for each financial year of
the Period for the entity (or group
of entities):
(a) that provide the Service in Australia; and or
(b) incur the costs for the Service in Australia.
periodic financial results for the Service in Australia (including those
relating to revenue, subscriber numbers and costs) during
the Period in the form
reported to management.
the extent not included in the documents produced in answer to categories 1 and
2, any document recording the quantum and or basis
for any inter-company charge
payable by the Company to a related body corporate in relation to the Service in
documents authored or created by, for, or on behalf of, board members, senior
management or executives containing budgets or forecasts
regarding the revenue,
subscribers or costs of the Service in Australia for the current and future
financial years.
the Period, any document(s) recording the annual amounts paid by the Company (or
a related entity) for content for the Service
in Australia, where the amount
shall be calculated to the extent applicable, in accordance with the definition
of Content Costs in
the Stan Proposed Licence.
contends that documents produced under these categories are not relevant to any
issue in the proceeding. However, as I have
explained above in relation to
Disney’s relevance objection to similar paragraphs of the summons
addressed to it, they are
relevant to Issue 16. I reach the same conclusion
here. Confidentiality concerns in relation to category 5 can be managed by the
regimes currently in place, as I have explained. Complaints as to burden have
also not been made out. The categories will stand.
summons will issue to Netflix in the form of the proposed amended
The summons to Network Ten All Access
summons seeks the production of 11 categories of documents. Category 4 is not
pressed. Network Ten All Access Pty Ltd (Network
Ten All Access) adopted
Disney’s submissions. It did not identify the actual categories challenged
but I infer the challenge
is to categories 1-3, 5-6 and 10. Having rejected
Disney’s submissions objecting to categories 1-3, 5 and 6, I also reject
Network Ten All Access’s position on these categories. I would allow these
categories in relation to Network Ten All Access.
10 stands in a different position. Whilst Disney objected to category 10 in
Stan’s initial proposed summons to it,
this was resolved, in its case, by
an amended form of the summons to which no objection was taken. However, there
was no corresponding
amendment to Network Ten All Access’s summons. Thus a
live dispute about category 10 lives on for Network Ten All Access. The
consists of Network Ten All Access adopting a submission which Disney does not
make to a category Network Ten All Access does
not identify. I propose to treat
whatever this is as a relevance objection which I will reject on the basis of
addition to adopting Disney’s submissions, Network Ten All Access made its
own submission about the definition of ‘Service’:
[3]. Here the
point was that by using that definition the summons would seek irrelevant
material. The categories which would seek
irrelevant material were not
identified but I will proceed on the basis that it is all of them. The relevance
argument, as best I
was able to discern it from [3], was that the former Ten All
Access service (in effect the predecessor to the Paramount+ service)
was charged
on a sui generis basis compared to other SVODs. It followed that it could be of
limited relevance to the issues in the
reference. It is far too early to be
making determinations of this kind. The fact that it was in a sui generis
position makes it
relevant to Issue 16.
Ten All Access also submitted that its associated entities’ business
activities were varied and wide ranging. I do not
see how this makes the
documents sought less relevant to Issue 16.
summons will issue to Network Ten All Access in the form of the proposed amended
I certify that the preceding twenty-two (22)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination of the
constituted by the Honourable Justice Perram
(President)
Dated: 5 July 2023
RTF format (319 KB)
Signed PDF/A format