Lackey & Mae [2013] FMCAfam 284 (4 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2013] FMCAfam 284
FAMILY LAW – Long-term acrimony between
parents – adverse influence of Father’s family – denigration
Court, the ICL, the Mother, the litigious process and the Department of
Community Services in “Facebook postings” (a
form of cyber-bullying)
– considerations regarding breach of s.121 Family Law Act and publication
of Court proceedings –
responsibilities of Court to self-represented
litigant – best interest considerations for young children –
Application
to re-open in the light of further abuse by Father and paternal
family and further risk assessment of the children (and the Mother)
Department of Community Services – principles concerning application to
‘re-open’ – consideration
of contravention penalty in the
context of parenting orders generally – restraint on publication –
issues relating to
‘scandalising the Court’ – request to
Marshal of the Court to investigate possible breach of s.121 and if appropriate
make arrangements with police and Director of Public Prosecutions for
prosecution.
Family Law Act 1975
(3)(a)-(m),
(9)(g) & (11),
Abduramanoski v Abduramanoski
[2005] FamCA 88
(2005) 33 Fam LR 1
(2005) FLC 93-215
AON Risk Services
Australia Ltd v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR 175
[2006] NSWSC 826
(2006) 235 ALR 587
Bing! Software Pty Ltd v Bing Technologies
Pty Limited (No.2)
[2008] FCA 1761
Re Colina; Ex parte Torney
[1999] HCA 57
(1999) 200 CLR 386
Collu & Rinaldo
[2010] FamCAFC 53
Litigants in Person Guidelines
[2001] FamCA 348
(2001) 27 Fam LR 517
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
Goode v Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
(2007) 36 Fam LR 422
Inspector-General in Bankruptcy v Bradshaw
[2006] FCA 22
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
[2007] FamCA 1496
(2007) FLC 93-353
Kiefer v Kiefer
[2008] FamCAFC 197
(2009) 40 Fam LR
Lee v Professional Services Review Committee No.292 (No.2)
Londish v Gulf Pacific Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 470
(1993) 45 FCR 128
[2009] FamCAFC 92
(2009) 41 Fam LR 483
Maluka v Maluka
[2011] FamCAFC 72
(2012) 45 Fam LR
Mazorski v Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
(2008) 37 Fam LR 518
MHC v Y & Y
[2006] FamCA 610
(2006) 35 Fam LR 456
Moose & Moose
[2008] FamCAFC 108
Prentice & Bellas
[2012] FamCA 108
(2012) 47 Fam LR 262
Marriage of Schwarzkopff; Fitzgibbon v Barker
(1992) 16 Fam LR
Shaeffer v Jacobs
[2011] FamCAFC 119
(2011) FLC 93-468
Sigley v Evor
[2011] FamCAFC 22
(2011) 44 Fam LR 439
Smith v NSW Bar Association
[1992] HCA 36
(1992) 176 CLR
Re South Australian Telecasters Ltd
[1998] FamCA 117
(1998) 23 Fam LR
Stephens v Stephens (& Anor) (Enforcement)
[2009] FamCAFC 240
(2009) 42 Fam LR
Summitt & Summitt & Ors (Re-opening)
[2009] FamCA
Xuarez & Vitela
[2012] FamCA 574
J.D. Heydon,
Cross on Evidence
(Ninth Australian Edition) (Sydney:
Lexis Nexis Butterworths, 2013)
Respondent:
File Number:
CAC 987 of 2009
Judgment of:
Hearing dates:
21 September 2012; 21 March 2013
Date of Last Submissions:
29 October 2012; 26 March 2013
Delivered at:
Orders pronounced on:
28 March 2013 (reasons provided on 4 April 2013)
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Ms E.M. Swart
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Legal Aid ACT
Counsel for the Respondent:
Self Represented
Solicitor/Advocate for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Solicitors for the Independent Children’s Lawyer
Capon & Hubert Lawyers, Canberra
THE COURT ORDERS THAT
(1) All previous orders be discharged.
(2) The Mother have sole parental responsibility for the children,
born [in] 1999,
born [in] 2002,
, born [in] 2007 and
born [in] 2008 (“the children”).
(3) The children live with the Mother.
(4) The child [W] spend time with her Father in accordance with her wishes.
(5) The children [X], [Y] and [Z] spend time with their Father supervised by an
accredited professional supervision agency at such
times as may be available
through the supervision agency and such time to occur on not more than one
occasion per fortnight.
(6) The Father have sole responsibility for arranging time with the children
under Order 5 and is responsible for any costs involved
in arranging such
supervision as required by Order 5.
(7) The children communicate with their Father by telephone each Sunday between
6:00pm and 7:00 pm with the Father to initiate the
call AND for the purpose of
this order conversations with the children are to occur on a speaker phone with
the Mother or her partner
to monitor the conversation.
(8) Each parent will refrain from making any negative or derogatory comments to
or in the presence of the children concerning the
other parent, and to use their
best endeavours to ensure that no other person (including members of their
respective families) denigrates
or comments adversely on the other parent.
(9) The Father be restrained from making contact with the children except in
accordance with these Orders and is further restrained
from allowing any other
member of his family or any agent of the Father from making contact with the
children unless agreed in writing
by the Mother.
(10) For the next three years, the Father, and all members of his family, are
restrained from making any reports to the Department
of Community Services and
to the police in relation to any allegation of abuse involving the children.
(11) The Father, the paternal Grandmother Ms M and the paternal great aunt, Ms C
are restrained from publishing or otherwise distributing
any material, by
electronic means or otherwise, relating to these proceedings, the children, the
Mother or any member of the Mother’s
immediate family including but not
limited to publication on Facebook or other social media site.
(12) The Father immediately remove from “Facebook” all references to
these proceedings, including but not limited to
all references to the children,
the Mother’s name, the Father’s name, the names and any details of
any of the solicitors
(and the firms for which they work) and the barristers who
represent, or who have represented, the Mother and/or the Father in parenting
proceedings pursuant to the
Family Law Act 1975
(“the Act”),
the name and any details of the Independent Children’s Lawyer and the firm
for which he works, and
all references to judicial officers of this Court [or
the Family Court of Australia] in respect of decisions or determinations they
are said to have made or not made, all references to any review by the
Department of Community Services or the police concerning
any matter or person
involved in the current proceedings.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED THAT
(13) In relation to the contravention application,
filed 20 July 2012, the Father’s pleas of ‘contravention admitted
with reasonable excuse’ are rejected. The Court formally notes that,
in the event that there is any further contravention
established against the
Father, he is at risk of incurring a penalty of a bond, or other more severe
(14) Pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
of the Act, the reasons for judgment delivered
today be approved for publication to the (a) the Marshal of this Court and (b)
necessary, Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police and all such police
officers and persons as the Commissioner might reasonably
(15) Pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
of the Act, all affidavits filed and exhibits
admitted in these proceedings be made available to (a) the Marshal of this
(b) if necessary, to the Australian Federal Police.
(16) The Court requests that, for the next 2 years from the date of these
orders, the Marshal of the Court periodically monitor social
in particular) for any “postings” by the Father or
members of the paternal family, that might refer to any person (including
children) or any matter that has been the subject of the current
proceedings.
IT IS DIRECTED THAT
Marshal of this Court take all such steps as might be required so as to ensure
that any breach of
section 121
of the Act revealed by the material specified in
paragraph 12 of these Orders is investigated fully and, if appropriate,
prosecuted.
Marshal of this Court is also respectfully requested, for the next two years, to
monitor (or to authorise the Australian Federal
Police to do so) Facebook and
any other electronic communication regarding any relevant reference to the
current proceeding, and
if such is found, to investigate it and refer it to the
Australian Federal Police for possible prosecution.
THE COURT REQUESTS THAT
(i) The independent Children’s Lawyer make a copy
of these reasons available to Dr S and to Ms O.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
Lackey & Mae
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
March, Orders were pronounced. The reasons that
follow explain the context and foundation for them. Because of their length,
the number of discrete issues, to facilitate their digestion (so to speak),
they proceed according to the following structure:
Background &
Issues [2] – [8]
Facebook Postings &
Family Law Act
[Recent] Procedural History [27] – [33]
Orders Sought [34] – [36]
Evidence of the Mother [37] – [64]
Evidence of the Father [65] – [104]
Evidence of Family Consultant [105] – [126]
Application to Re-open [127] – [139]
The Legislative Pathway [140] – [158]
Conclusion [159] – [165]
Background & Issues
unfortunately, no ‘kindly light’ led these parties in the course of
their marriage. Similarly, and equally unfortunately,
no such light is evident
in the period since their separation. Indeed, this parenting matter, which
involves four children ([W],
born [in] 1999; [X], born [in] 2002; [Y], born [in]
2007; [Z], born [in] 2008), is one that should properly be described as a form
of tribal warfare. This is so because the Father and his family have waged a
relentless battle against the Mother for many years.
example, over the last few years, there have been approximately 34 notifications
against the Mother to the Department of Community
Services (“DOCS”
or “the Department”) and the NSW Police. None of the notifications
and allegations of abuse
against her have [ever] been established. Yet the
Father and his family continue to assert, and believe vehemently, that the
has abused (and continues to do so) the children – sexually and
documents from the Department, it was confirmed that, on the past history of
notifications, the family (
the Mother – and which-ever
combination of children are with her at the time) could expect to have the
Department or the police
knock on her door approximately every two months. To
state what should be obvious, but is not: no family could reasonably expect
live a relatively peaceful or ordered existence in such circumstances.
in her 2010 report (Exhibit E), psychiatrist, Dr S, listed (at pp.42-43) the
myriad of allegations made by the Father and
or his family, and concluded:
“In short, there is virtually no criminal activity that they [the paternal
family] haven’t
alleged that the Mother has done. I got the impression
that they believed this to be the case, however there was also an element
they ‘throw enough mud, some of it will stick.’”
the Father’s written submissions (filed 15
October 2012), he maintained the accuracy of, and the foundation for, the
notifications to DOCS and the police in relation to the
Mother. At paras.21 and
27 of those submissions, Mr Mae said: “He [the Father] views that his
children have been abused is
] by his extended family ... The
] family have never made up allegations against
[the Mother] that weren’t true there has always been a concern for the
children’s welfare when it comes to Ms
Lackey’s parenting.”
From these comments, the history of the matter, and the expert and other
evidence noted below,
I have no confidence at all that the Father (or his
family) will desist in the unremitting, relentless and ruthless pursuit of the
Unfortunately,
I am fortified in this miserable (almost baleful but certainly doleful)
assessment in the light of two reports, one
from psychiatrist Dr S (Exhibit E),
and the other from a highly experienced family consultant, Ms O (Exhibit D).
Both confirm the
concerted, guerrilla-like, efforts of the Father and his family
against the Mother. Their actions, even on the comments of the Mother’s
eldest daughter, [V] (who is not the subject of this proceeding), are telling
against them. As recorded in Dr S’s report (p.26),
[V] said: “She
believed that while under the influence of the paternal Grandmother and paternal
Aunt [Ms C], that ‘you
could change completely.’ She said: ‘I
hated my Mother when I was with them. Later I realised it wasn’t true. You
don’t realise when you’re with them. It’s
[V]’s comments are recorded in Dr S’s report, which (as noted above)
was prepared for earlier proceedings in 2010.
O’s report was prepared in April 2012. Unfortunately, in the result,
little has changed between the assessments of Dr S
and Ms O: the pursuit of the
Mother, the continued notifications to DOCS and the police, and the harassment
of her by the Father
and his family, has continued unabated. All the while
protesting that his focus is on the best interests of the children, the Father
and his family are either unwilling and/or unable to see the on-going
devastation the crusade against the Mother continues to wreak
on the children.
Accordingly, the protective responsibilities of the Court are particularly in
focus in this proceeding.
‘Facebook Postings’& Breach of
Family Law Act
unfortunate and increasing feature of modern litigation, particularly but not
exclusively in family law, is the use of ‘social
media’. While it
can be used for good, often it is used as a weapon, either by one or both of the
parties, and or by their
respective supporters. It is a veritable
‘Aladdin’s Cave’ which parties (and lawyers) readily and
regularly explore
for (invariably incriminating) “evidence” to be
used in litigation. As a weapon, it has particularly insidious features.
Unfortunately, in the context of this matter, ‘netiquette’ was not
on display, and in fact, it could only be a nothing
more than a euphemism for
outlandish electronically-fomented
example, it seems often to be the case that people will put on such media
(particularly but not only
) comments that I suspect they would
not say directly to the person against or about whom such remarks are directed.
In this regard,
such remarks are, in my view, a form of cyber-bullying. Often,
they are very cowardly, because those who ‘post’ such
derogatory,
cruel and nasty comments (regularly peppered with disgusting language and
equally vile photographs) appear to feel a
degree of immunity; they think they
are beyond the purview or accountability of the law, and that they need not take
any responsibility
for their remarks. They inhabit the cyber-sphere and operate
as ‘Facebook rangers’ who ‘hit and run’ with
their petty
and malicious commentary, and seem to gloat (or be encouraged) by the online
audience that waits to join the ghoulish,
jeering crowd in the nether-world of
cyber-space. To a significant degree, such conduct has been on display
Father’s family has made a number of “postings” on Facebook in
the course of these proceedings which (a) denigrate
the Court, the ICL and the
litigious process (including investigations undertaken by DOCS and the police),
and (b) detail and comment
critically on information regarding the proceeding,
and in particular, information that can only have been taken from affidavits
[recently] filed.
solicitor for the Mother wrote to the Father (copied to the ICL) on
September 2012 (Exhibit F) to point out the terms,
import and risk of penalty for any breach of
Family Law Act
(“the Act”) regarding the publication of details of the
current proceedings. Pre- and post- this warning, the Father
and or his family
have commented on and provided certain details of the proceedings
Facebook. Those details could have come only from the material filed with the
Court. Only the Father could have had access to it.
It follows that he must be
the source of the information regarding the proceedings posted on Facebook by
members of his family and
Court has before it (Exhibits C1 & C2) copies of pages produced from
Facebook. In those entries, the Father and or his family
(a) criticise me, as
the presiding judicial officer, (b) similarly disparage the role and
effectiveness of the ICL, (c) repeatedly
criticise the Court (the references are
invariably and inaccurately to the “Family Court”), (d) criticise
the experts
who have provided reports, (e) criticise DOCS, and (f) in a somewhat
more restrained way, criticise the NSW Police – but not
universally so.
Among other criticisms, the Father and or his family (and “friends”)
bluntly claim that all those just
named have effectively been duped by the
Mother and that, in fact, she is a regular [sexual and physical] abuser of the
the light of these “postings”, those responsible for the postings on
Facebook could, and likely are, in breach of
of the Act (as indicated by
the solicitor for the Mother) and are also likely to have placed themselves at
further risk of possible
contempt proceedings more generally.
relevantly provides (emphasis
who publishes in a newspaper or periodical publication, by radio broadcast or
or by other electronic means, or otherwise disseminates to the
public or to a section of the public by any means, any account of any
proceedings, or of any part of any proceedings
, under this Act that
identifies:
(a) a party to the proceedings;
a person who is related to, or associated with, a party to the proceedings or
is, or is alleged to be, in any other way concerned
in the matter to which the
proceedings relate; or
(c) a witness in the proceedings;
of an offence punishable, upon conviction by imprisonment for a period not
exceeding one year.
relation to ‘contempt’,
of the Act relevantly
In spite of any other law, a court having jurisdiction under this Act may punish
a person for contempt of that court.
Where a natural person is in contempt, the court may punish the contempt by
committal to prison or fine or both.
convenient point of reference for such matters is the decision of Nicholson CJ
Re South Australian Telecasters
involved an application for an injunction to prevent a television program being
screened because of the risk of identifying
the children in a matter currently
before the Family Court of Australia. His Honour also considered the
circumstances where the
disaffected parents disparaged an earlier decision of
the Court. In the result, an injunction was granted. His Honour observed,
firstly at [35], the following basal principle, which I gratefully
problem that seems to me to emerge in the present case is not the identification
of the parties so much as the fact that
the identification of the parties almost
inevitably would involve a similar identification of the children. It is my
view that the
interests of children should be protected by this court and that
they should not be the subject of a program which enables them to
be identified
and perhaps held up to either ridicule or curiosity or some kind of notoriety,
by reason of their unfortunate circumstances....
his Honour considered whether the proposed segment in the television program
might constitute contempt. After referring to
the earlier Full Court decision
Schwarzkopff
, Nicholson CJ considered the High Court decision in
Gallagher v
sufficient to note the following from
Gallagher v Durack
principles which govern that class of contempt of court which is constituted by
imputations on courts or judges which are calculated
to bring the court into
contempt or lower its authority had been discussed by this court in
R v Fletcher; Ex parte Kisch
R v Dunbabin; Ex parte Williams
was decided and the judgment of
Rich J in the last-mentioned case is consistent with what had been said in
the earlier decisions.
The law endeavours to reconcile two principles, each of
which is of cardinal importance but which in some circumstances, appear
in conflict. One principle is that speech should be free, so that everyone has
the right to comment in good faith on matters
of public importance, including
the administration of justice even if the comment is outspoken, mistaken or
wrong-headed. The other
principle is that “it is necessary for the
purpose of maintaining public confidence in the administration of law that there
shall be some certain and immediate method of repressing imputations upon courts
of justice which, if continued, are likely to impair
their authority”: per
R v Dunbabin; Ex parte
the same place, the High Court also said:
authority of the law rests on public confidence, and it is important to the
stability of society that the confidence of the public
should not be shaken by
baseless attacks on the integrity or impartiality of courts or judges. However,
in many cases, the good
sense of the community will be a sufficient safeguard
against the scandalous disparagement of a court or judge, and the summary remedy
of fine or imprisonment “is applied only where the court is satisfied that
it is necessary in the interests of the ordered
and fearless administration of
justice and where the attacks are unwarrantable”:
R v Fletcher; Ex
parte Kisch
, per Evatt J.
South Australia Telecasters
, Nicholson CJ had noted, at [40], comments
Schwarzkopff
(a “contempt case”) that spoke of
“scandalising the Court” by publications that not only detracted
authority and influence of the Court’s decisions but also
‘excited misgiving as to the integrity, propriety and impartiality
to the exercise of the judicial office.’
recently, Forrest J dealt with a case that involved a parent establishing a
website on which he posted, among other things, disparaging
and identifying
remarks about the parties and the lawyers involved. His Honour granted
injunctions ordering the Father to remove
the identifying details from the
website. Forrest J also directed the Marshal of the Court to investigate the
Father’s website
for possible breaches of
and, if so determined, to
ensure that any breach was prosecuted. His Honour also requested the Australian
Federal Police to take
all steps reasonably required to investigate whether any
indictable offences had been committed.
considering matters of jurisdiction in the granting of an injunction (
at [50] – [51]), Forrest J said, at [55] (emphasis
particularly insidious nature of the publication that I consider brings it
within the “exceptional circumstances”
referred to by the Full Court
if the inherent power is being relied [on] is the fact that it is published on
the internet and remains
published and thereby available for any person,
anywhere in the world, to access it quickly and easily at any time of the day or
night on an ongoing basis. Publication on the internet is quite different to
one off publication in a television or radio program
or in a newspaper article
where the publication is limited in time and place. The internet was not nearly
as widely known, understood
or used at the time the Full Court determined Gibb
and Re Schwartzkopff [sic]. Whilst trial on indictment before a jury might be
considered as the more appropriate means of dealing with punishment for breaches
I am satisfied that continuous publication on the internet of
material that offends the section and impacts upon the welfare of children
are subject to the jurisdiction of the Court is able to be restrained by
injunction and should be.
Respectfully
and gratefully I adopt his Honour’s comments.
J commented further, at [56] - [58]:
Furthermore,
in my view at least, the content that is published clearly contemptuously
scandalises this Court....
the Court has to consider that the good sense of the community might be a
sufficient safeguard against the damage these
attacks can do to the rule of law
in this country, in the specific context of this case, where I am satisfied, at
least, that the
publication otherwise contravenes
and identifies the
particular proceedings in this Court, I am satisfied that the continuous
contemptuous scandalising of this Court
should be restrained.
another aspect to this insidious publication that I consider is also relevant to
determining that there is a need for injunctive
restraint. I am satisfied that
the continued public attack on the integrity of all of the lawyers involved in
representing the Mother
and the children in this case is deliberately intended
to intimidate them into ceasing to act for the Mother or the children and
as a deterrent to others from so acting. As such, I consider it is a further
attack on the proper administration of justice
in respect of which the right to
be legally represented is a fundamental cornerstone. The Mother is entitled to
respond to the substantive
and interim applications of the Father and to engage
legal representation free from the pressure of knowing that any solicitor or
barrister who acts for her will be subject to the type of scurrilous attacks the
Father makes through the published content on his
website. So too, in my view,
is the ICL.
the facts of this matter, and in the light of Forrest J’s comments in
Xuarez & Vitela
, in my view, orders similar to those made by his
Honour are warranted here. In the light of such orders I do not propose to
further the subject of ‘contempt.’
in the light of the Father’s (and that of his family) unremitting,
unreformed and unenlightened conduct, it is essential
that the Mother and the
children be protected as much as possible from further insidious and corrosive
is also disturbing is that the Father sees himself as the “victim”
in the litigation (and in the relationship with
his former Wife), and that
“the system” has let him and the children down. He also contends
(submissions, para.21) that
the children would be better off in foster care than
being in the care of their
tawdry bluntness and lack of insight of such a statement, particularly in the
light of the two expert reports before the Court,
speaks for itself – and
alarmingly so.
confirmed that orders will be made in relation to the ‘Facebook
postings’ and their referral to the Marshal for
investigation, it is time
to return to the substantive parenting matters.
[Recent] Procedural History
the children the subject of the Application filed by the Mother in the Local
Court in [omitted] (NSW) on 22
February 2012, and the
later filed Contravention Application, filed in the same Court (also by the
Mother) on 20
July 2012, are: [W] (born [in] 1999),
[X] (born [in] 2022), [Y] (born [in] 2077), and [Z] (born [in] 2008). Both
applications were
ultimately transferred to this Court.
way of very brief background, I note that parenting proceedings were originally
commenced in May 2009, interim orders were made
in July 2009, a Form 4 Notice of
Risk of Abuse was filed by the Father in February 2010 (with various allegations
of sexual abuse
made against the Mother), yet ultimately, following a trial,
final orders were made by consent in November 2010.
final orders, in general terms, provided for week-about care of the children,
certain orders in relation to counselling for
the parents, and a formal
restraint in relation to notifications to the police and to DOCS.
January 2012, [X] commenced living primarily with his Father. In February of
that year, [Y] commenced kindergarten but was removed
from that school by her
Father. Also in February, the Father sought a recovery order in the [omitted]
Local Court to have [W] returned
to his care. This was not granted and [W]
continues to live with her Mother.
February until July 2012, there are a number of instances where [X] was not made
available by his Father to spend time with his
Mother. In July, with her
solicitor having previously written to the Father warning of the risk of an
application (and costs), the
Mother filed a contravention on
July. On 31
Father filed a further Form 4 Notice of Risk of Abuse, in which he retailed
essentially the same allegations of abuse against
the Mother, which had
previously been found by DOCS and the Police to be unfounded. As on the first
occasion when such abuse allegations
were found to be without substance, the
same result occurred on this occasion.
is difficult not to see the filing of the Form 4 as some sort of retaliatory
action on the Father’s part.
what follows, I (a) set out the orders as sought by each of the parties and the
independent children’s lawyer (“ICL”),
(b) detail such
evidence (affidavit and oral) as there is, (c) consider the reports of Dr S and
Ms O (as well as the material contained in the extensive report/file
provided by the Department of Community Services pursuant to
Law Act 1975
(“the Act”), which became Exhibit B), (d) outline
relevant principle, and (e) discuss and determine the orders –
light of the written submissions provided by the parties and the ICL –
that the Court considers to be in the best interests
of the children in
accordance with
of the Act.
Orders Sought
Orders Sought:
1. That the
Mother have sole parental responsibility for the children, [W], born [in] 1999,
[X], born [in] 2002, [Y], born [in] 2007
and [Z], born [in] 2008.
2. That the
children live with the Mother.
child [W] spend time with her Father in accordance with her wishes.
4. That the
children [X], [Y] and [Z] spend time with their Father supervised by an
accredited professional supervision agency at
such times as may be available
through the supervision agency and such time to occur on not more than one
occasion per fortnight.
5. That the
Father have the sole responsibility for arranging time with the children under
order 4 and is responsible for any costs
involved in arranging such supervision
as required by order 4.
6. That the
children communicate with their Father by telephone each Sunday between 6:00pm
and 7:00 pm with the Father to initiate
the call AND for the purpose of this
order conversations with the children are to occur on a speaker phone with the
Mother or her
partner to monitor the conversation.
each parent will refrain from making any negative or derogative comments to the
children concerning the other parent or other
family members of the parent and
will not allow any other person to do so.
8. That the
Father be restrained from making contact with the children except in accordance
with these orders and is further restrained
from allowing any other member of
his family or any agent of the Father from making contact with the children
unless agreed in writing
by the Mother.
9. That the
Father, the paternal Grandmother Ms M and the paternal great aunt, Ms C are
restrained from publishing or otherwise distributing
any material relating to
these proceedings, the children, the Mother or any member of the Mother’s
immediate family including
but not limited to publication on Facebook or other
social media site.
other Orders as the Court considers appropriate.
Father’s orders sought are as follows:
children live with me and spend time with their mother on weekends and [W] has
the opportunity to see me as she wishes
2. When the
children are in [Ms Lackey]’s care on the week end I be allowed contact
via telephone if need be
3. That the
children be allowed to see my family as my mother and father are getting older
and my mother who suffers from cancer
love and adore the children and would
like to be able to see them
Lackey] has the children and needs to go away then I be given the opportunity to
keep them if she can’t take them
5. That the
girls be allowed to play with the twin cousins at school as there not allowed by
their mother who are all in kindergarten.
6. The same
for [X] live with me and spend time with his mother on weekends.
7. That [Ms
Lackey] be allowed to contact the children if and when they are with me
parents are able to go to school functions sporting events and any other
make her own decision to stay where she pleases as I do understand the need for
friends and social gatherings for girls
ICL’s orders sought
previous parenting Orders be discharged.
2. That the
child of the marriage [W] (DOB [omitted] 1999) live with the Mother and spend
time with the Father in accordance with
her wishes.
3. That the
child of the marriage, [X] (DOB [omitted] 2002) live with the Father.
4. That the
children of the marriage [Y] (DOB [omitted] 2007) and [Z] (DOB [omitted] 2008)
live with the Mother.
5. That the
Mother have sole parental responsibility for decisions regarding major issues
concerning the children [W], [Y] and [Z].
6. That the
Father have sole parental responsibility for decisions regarding major issues
concerning the child [X].
7. That the
Mother spend time with [X] as follows:
alternative weekend from 5.00 pm Friday until the 5.00 pm Sunday.
half of each of the NSW Term holidays being the first half of such holidays in
odd numbered years and the second half
of such holidays in even numbered
3.00 pm on Christmas Eve until 3.00 pm on Christmas Day with the Mother in odd
numbered years.
3.00 pm on Christmas Day to 3.00 pm on Boxing Day in even numbered
further or other times as agreed.
8. That the
Father spend time with [Y] and [Z] as follows:
period of twelve months from the date of these Orders, supervised contact at an
appropriate contact centre either in Canberra
or Wagga or in the alternative by
a supervisor who is regarded as suitable by the Mother in the [omitted] area.
The Father to pay
for such supervision.
end of the period in 8 a. above, proof of the successful completion of the
course in order 15 below and the attendance
at counselling as required by Order
alternative weekend from 5.00 pm Friday until 5.00 pm Sunday.
ii. For one
half of each of the NSW Term holidays being the first half of such holidays in
odd numbered years and the second half
of such holidays in even numbered
3.00 pm on Christmas Eve until 3.00 pm on Christmas Day with the Mother in odd
numbered years.
3.00 pm on Christmas Day to 3.00 pm on Boxing Day in even numbered
further or other times as agreed.
changeovers to occur at the MacDonald’s Family Restaurant at
there be no telephone contact between the parties and the children unless the
children initiate the relevant telephone calls.
the Father do all things necessary to ensure that [X] attend counselling as
required by DOCS (NSW) and that the counselling
only cease for [X] when the
relevant counsellor or organisation undertaking the counselling supplies to the
Independent Children’s
Lawyer a letter indicating that such counselling is
no longer necessary.
the Mother do all necessary to ensure that [Y] and [Z] attend counselling as
required by DOCS (NSW) and that the counselling
only cease for [Y] and [Z] when
the relevant counsellor or organisation undertaking the counselling supplies to
the Independent Children’s
Lawyer a letter indicating that such
counselling is no longer necessary.
the Father and Mother each be entitled to attend any school function ordinarily
attended by parents and to receive any newsletters,
notices, reports and
photographs at his or her expense.
Father and Mother be and are hereby restrained from:
Denigrating the other parent in the presence or hearing of the children and from
permitting any other person to do so.
Discussing any issues relating to the proceedings in the hearing or presence of
the children or from permitting any other person
to do so, other than the
provision of a simple explanation to the children of their time with the other
c. Questioning the children or
continuing a conversation with the children about their time with the other
parent or from permitting
any other person to do so.
18. That the Father commence attending a parenting after separation course
with an approved organisation within six months of the
date of these Orders. On
completion of the course he is to supply to the ICL a copy the certificate of
his successful completion
of the course.
19. That the Father attend upon a Counsellor who is experienced in family
dispute matters for at least four sessions, commencing
within 30 days of the
date of these Orders and that he provide to the Counsellor a copy of Dr
S’s Family Report and Ms O’s
Family Report prior to the commencement
of such counselling to enable the Counsellor to explore with the Father the
issues raised
by those Reports. The Counsellor is to provide a brief written
report to the ICL indicating the matters that have been discussed
and whether
the Counsellor considers that the Father requires further counselling.
20. That the Mother, if the Mother determines to do so, is allowed to
relocate away from [omitted] with the children who are in her
care, namely [W],
[Y] and [X].
21. That four weeks prior to any such move the Mother and Father are to
personally attend a Family Dispute Resolution Conference
to be facilitated by
the ACT Legal Office to determine what time the children should spend with each
person if is practically impossible
to continue Orders 7 and 8 above following
the Mother’s move.
22. That the Father be and is hereby restrained for a period of three years
from the date of these Orders from allowing the children
[Y] and [Z] to
associate with his Mother, Ms M and Aunt Ms C.
Evidence of the Parties
The Mother: Ms Lackey
the outset of the Mother’s evidence she confirmed that, in summary, her
orders sought are that (a) all four children of the
relationship, [W], [X], [Y],
and [Z], should live with her, (b) she have sole parental responsibility for the
children, and (c) the
Father spend time with the children supervised. The
Mother also confirmed that she sought a formal restraint against the Father
bringing the children into contact with members of the paternal family.
first substantive matter addressed in her oral evidence related to the most
recent allegations of abuse (particularly sexual abuse)
of the children and the
reports to the Department of Community Services (“DOCS”) and JIRT
(the Joint Investigation Response
Team). The Mother confirmed that she only
learnt of the most recent notification on 25
2012. She confirmed that she was contacted by a person from the Department who
informed her that she was currently at the
high school interviewing [W], the
eldest of the four children.
Lackey then recounted what she knew of the sequence of events following
[W]’s interview. The Mother noted in particular
the detailed allegations
in relation to [X] and then in relation to her two youngest children, [Y] and
[Z]. I note that the allegations
relate only to the three youngest children and
do not [directly] concern
Mother confirmed that she had been provided by the police with a DVD-CD of a
record of interview. That recording ultimately became
an exhibit in the
proceedings. The Mother confirmed that she had been advised that subject to
hearing from DOCS within the next
day or so she had been advised that as far as
the members of JIRT were concerned there would be no criminal charges and the
would be closed.
Mother was advised by an officer from JIRT of the finalisation of their inquiry
September, which is to say, shortly before the
commencement of this [further] trial. Part of the confirmation of the
information
from JIRT was that they had essentially formed a view, according to
the Mother’s report of events, that the allegations made
were the same as
the allegations that were made against her in 2010, following which consent
orders were made by the Court in that
next subject of the Mother’s evidence, which was by way of update, related
to a series of entries that had been posted on
Facebook – to which I have
earlier referred. The Mother confirmed that she had only learnt of these
entries courtesy of a
[genuine, as opposed to a ‘Facebook’] friend
and that the entries she had seen related to events in early September 2012,
including what was in the Mother’s documents filed with the Court. The
Mother printed out the entries on Facebook. They became
exhibits C1 and
in particular the Mother’s evidence in which she confirmed that the
Facebook entries had no restriction on them, which
was to confirm that they were
available for all to
relation to the child, [X], while he has been living for the last while with his
Father, Ms Lackey confirmed that she wished to
have [X] live with her,
essentially as a protective measure so that he was with all the other children
and equally to ensure that
he not be subjected to the ongoing [malign] influence
of the paternal family. In relation to the Court’s earlier 2010 orders,
Ms Lackey confirmed that the order for equal shared parental responsibility had
simply not worked between her and Mr Mae.
her evidence, she said that there had been, from her perspective, some respite
in the open warfare between her and Mr Mae’s
family for the period that Mr
Mae lived in [omitted] before he returned to [omitted], and the parties had
worked reasonably well
together for that brief period of time. However, Ms
Lackey confirmed that upon the Father returning to [omitted], and therefore
being in much closer proximity to his family, the relationship between Mr Mae
and herself had completely broken down.
pre-empting matters too greatly that are considered later in these reasons, this
assessment by Ms Lackey, in my view, was
readily borne out in the later evidence
from Mr Mae. I should also note that Ms Lackey’s evidence is that while
been some testing times in her parenting of [X], she denied that she
lacked control with
the course of a series of questions from Mr Mae, and in the light of Ms
Lackey’s earlier evidence that she was less than
expert in the use of a
computer, including her use of Facebook, Mr Mae confirmed that he could see Ms
Lackey’s Facebook postings.
The Mother thought that she had secured her
Facebook page from access by Mr Mae and his family. Mr Mae’s candour was
appreciated
– but I suspect not by
in the course of the Mother’s cross-examination, and by reference to her
affidavit evidence, she advised that she had been
told by police that Mr Mae had
confirmed [to the same police officer who spoke with the Mother] that the
actions, and notably the
notifications to DOCS and the police, was his
“payback” for her keeping the
answer to a series of questions from the ICL, Ms Lackey noted the following.
in seeking to follow the Court’s 2010 orders, particularly in relation to
taking [X] to counselling, Ms Lackey said that
while-ever [X] was in her care
she ensured that he attended counselling, but that whenever [X] was in his
Father’s care, his
attendance at counselling appointments did not take
Ms Lackey said that she attended, for example, the relevant intake session with
Relationships Australia, but that Mr Mae did
also confirmed that because [X] did not attend counselling when in his
Father’s care the booking for him with the
counsellor ultimately
confirmed that she was not notified by the Father that he had, in fact,
immunised the two youngest children. Such basic
communication, I observe, is
and should be a standard feature of a parenting relationship where an order for
equal shared parental
responsibility has been ordered. In this case it was but
one of many negative instances that confirmed, in my view, that the order
equal shared parental responsibility should be discharged and an order for sole
parental responsibility should be made in the
Mother’s favour.
in the Mother’s view, [X] needed to have continued counselling. This is
confirmed by the expert evidence before the
in relation to a series of 2010 orders to which the ICL referred and directed Ms
Lackey’s attention, it was clear that
there was only partial compliance
with them, not least in relation to the order that required the parties
themselves to attend joint
and separate counselling for the purposes of
facilitating the operation of the orders then made.
of the few areas in which Ms Lackey and Mr Mae’s evidence was very similar
was that they both agreed that they rarely talk
to each other. Ms Lackey said
that the relationship between her and Mr Mae had now deteriorated to such a
stage that she did not
think that it could be repaired. She described it as
“completely broken
response to a question from the Bench, she considered that a communication book
may help. Although she would do anything, she said,
to assist and facilitate the
parenting relationship between the parties, it was so badly damaged that –
as I have already indicated
– the parties rarely talk at all anymore.
of the more important parts of Ms Lackey’s evidence, from my perspective,
concerned her now improved (and improving) relationship
with [W]. While not
completely repaired, Ms Lackey said that it had taken the better part of 12
months or thereabouts for her relationship
with [W] to reach a stage where it
was now reasonably good. I inferred from this and other evidence that Ms Lackey
anticipated that
it would take a similar period of time, at least, for her
relationship with [X] to get back onto a relatively even
of the remainder of the Mother’s evidence related to particular incidents.
For example, there was a contest with Mr Mae
over whether or not [Y] should or
should not attend school.
short, I accept the account of that event given by the Mother. Indeed, I should
be taken to prefer her account of events where-ever
there is any difference
between her evidence and that of Mr Mae. Moreover, in my view it is unnecessary
to go into the detail of
many incidents according to the evidence of the parties
because there is sufficient other evidence, particularly in the reports of
report and similar documents, before the Court that obviate the
need to dissect the particular detail of each of the instances that
recounted in the affidavit
includes, up to a point, the discussion in the course of cross-examination by
the ICL in relation to the Mother’s eldest
child, [V], and [V]’s
comments recorded in Dr S’s
some understatement, but with measured ‘matter-of-factness’, the ICL
read from the documents produced by JIRT. The
section read out in Court by the
ICL, from a document dated 25
August 2012 (from page
4 of 6), stated as follows:
33 reports on file for this family dating from 25 June 2007 to 27 July 2012
which are to physical, other, sexual, indecent
acts, molest, sexual penetration,
child inappropriate sexual behaviour, physical, hit, kick, strike, risk of
physical harm/injury,
medical treatment not provided, legal guardian issues,
inadequate supervision for age and adequate shelter or homeless, inadequate
nutrition, risk of sexual harm or injury.
ICL put all of these matters to the Mother. She confirmed that all of those
allegations had been levelled against her since 2007
yet, at the same time, the
Mother confirmed that she had never been contacted by DOCS and/or the police in
relation to the children’s
safety. The Mother also confirmed that from her
notifications and allegations had on the
Mother also confirmed that she was unaware that there had been an assessment
done by DOCS, dated 31
August 2012, which confirmed
that the children were safe with their
commenting on the relative emotional and psychological health of the children,
in my view, Ms Lackey was insightful about her assessment
of her son [X] where
she said, in one part of her cross-examination, that while the two youngest
female children are needy, simply
by virtue of their young age, [X] is probably
at the same emotional level as his younger
assessment was both insightful, and in many ways, was confirmed by the
assessments made by the experts, Dr S and Ms O.
of particular moment, from my perspective, was the Mother’s evidence that
if Mr Mae returned to the [omitted] area, and
therefore, was somewhat more
removed from the influence of his family, she thought that things could settle
down between the parties
in the interests of the children. No less significant
was the fact that
Ms Lackey still exhibited a somewhat positive disposition
towards, and still spoke somewhat positively about, Mr Mae. And all of
the context of the terrible and unrelenting strain and hostility towards her by
the Father and his family.
dealing with the matter in much detail because it is considered later, the same
was not the case when Mr Mae gave evidence.
On multiple occasions, he referred
to Ms Lackey’s evidence as complete lies, and in an alarming comment, he
confirmed on a
couple of occasions that the children would be better off placed
in care than to live with their Mother, if the Court determined
children should not live with their Father. Such matters I return to
the end of her evidence, the Mother again confirmed, that it was her view, and
in the best interests of the children, that
(a) the four children should live
with her so that they had a stable home and had the support of each other, as
well as being protected
from the malevolent (my word) influence of the paternal
family, and (b) for a significant period of time, the Father’s time
the children should be supervised at a ‘contact centre’. The
supervision obviously would also apply to any members
of the Father’s
The Evidence of Mr Mae
first part of the evidence from Mr Mae related to him formally being charged
with the contraventions that were alleged by the
Mother, specifically in
relation to specific instances where he withheld the children from spending time
with their Mother. In relation
to each of those charges, he confirmed that each
of the contraventions had taken place but in his view, it was with reasonable
have previously noted that I give every possible allowance for
Mr Mae being
a self-represented litigant. However, I note, at the outset, that his attention
to detail in the documents that he filed
in relation to (a) parenting orders,
(b) the contravention, and (c) his attempt to seek a recovery order from the
Local Court in
[omitted], was less than helpful. A simple, and somewhat
inconsequential, example will suffice. He said that he did not receive
documents or notices from the Court. He therefore challenged the address to
which court documents had been sent. This was
so notwithstanding that they had
been sent to the address that Mr Mae himself had recorded (
hand-wrote) on documents filed with the [omitted] Local Court.
he said that he did not have time to attend to preparation for the trial. While
I understand that he is a self-represented
litigant, and that he was attempting
to secure legal aid funding (which application, he said, was unsuccessful), he
works casually
[omitted]. He is also on social welfare benefits. In my view, he
is anything but “time-poor”, which is to say that,
evidence, he has very significant time available to do what-ever he wishes.
Reasonable preparation for the trial in relation
to seeking parenting orders for
his children should have been a greater priority than it appeared to be.
example of inattention to basic detail concerned the serious disclosures made
against the Mother. On the basis of his material
filed as well as his oral
evidence, it was unclear whether or not those disclosures took place on
July 2012. While
little may turn on such detail, given that the disclosures were (and are) such a
significant concern to the Father
[and his family] I would have expected that
his attention to the detail of such an important matter was greater than it was.
is important.
being a self-represented litigant, I remind myself of the importance of ensuring
that, to the requisite degree possible,
all proper assistance from the Court
should be provided, for example, to explain procedures relevant to the
litigation and clarify
the substance of
submissions.
the degree appropriate, I have also sought to give every reasonable concession
or allowance in favour of Mr Mae.
Father’s evidence was given over a significant period of time. I note the
following by way of summary of it.
in relation to Dr S’s report, he confirmed that he did not read all of
This was and
remains especially curious, if not slightly alarming, because this was a report
prepared by an eminent psychiatrist
and used in the proceedings in 2010. Thus,
by any measure, Mr Mae has had a very significant period of time in which to
to digest the detailed comments of Dr S.
in his evidence, he confirmed however that he never, in fact, received a copy of
Dr S’s report. Rather, it remained with
his former lawyer. This then led
to various questions being asked of him as to why, if he was so interested in
the best interests
of his children and their welfare, he did not try to obtain a
copy of the report from his former solicitors. It was pointed out
to him that
the report had been released to the parties, as well as to their lawyers, and to
no substantive answer as to why he did not ask his former lawyer for a copy of
Dr S’s report.
Mae then confirmed that the most recent allegations that he had raised with DOCS
against the Mother were very similar to those
that had been raised, and found to
be without substance, in 2010. However, following a series of questions both
from the Bench and
Mr Mae confirmed that, in his view, the reason
why the 2010 allegations were unsubstantiated was because there was insufficient
However, he contended that he now has sufficient evidence, based upon
the more recent disclosures by the children against their
Mother, for the
notifications to be confirmed or established.
he confirmed - and on more than one occasion - that he does not accept Dr
S’s assessment that the children are at no
risk with their Mother; he does
not accept the assessment by Ms O to similar effect; nor does he accept the
assessments made either
in 2010, or in 2012, by DOCS or by JIRT that the
children are not at any risk in their Mother’s care. Indeed, he goes
by saying that not only does he not accept the findings of all of these
experts and/or expert bodies, but that the abuse of the children
by the Mother
[in fact] occurred in 2010 and that it continues to
say the least, this is a deeply concerning, if not gravely alarming, assessment
by the Father: the fact that he cannot, and will
not, accept, over such a period
of time, with such a significant number of assessments, by such a significant
number of experts,
that there is no risk to the children in their Mother’s
care. In my view, this shows a very disturbing lack of insight and
willingness to accept uncontroverted evidence. To maintain such a stance in the
light of such evidence, in my view, confirms
that either he has, and/or his
family have, such a poisonous relationship with the Mother that they will go to
any lengths to destroy
her so as to ensure that the children abide in the
Father’s care.
evidence is also relevant to the Father’s plea in relation to the
contravention, namely that he had ‘reasonable excuse’
with-holding the children from spending time with their Mother, as ordered. In
my view, the ‘reasonable excuse’ plea
is not, and cannot be
sustained. Accordingly, I do not accept the Father’s pleas in relation to
the contraventions alleged
against him.
glimpse of the caustic relationship between the parties comes from the
Father’s answer to questions about whether or
not he speaks with the
children about their Mother while they are in his care. He simply said that he
doesn’t do so “because
I don’t like her and I do not wish to
mention her in my
Further, in the same place,
Mr Mae said, in answer to a question about
whether or not he wishes the children to love and respect their Mother, that
that was “their
then led to an exploration of matters with Mr Mae, which, to say the least, was
both perplexing and troubling. This is in relation
to his contention that his
children are “free spirits.” He continued, “They can make
their own decisions within
reason.” However, upon further examination,
the parameters or ambit of what was “within reason” was extremely
flexible. In short, however, Mr Mae’s phrase “within reason”
simply and clearly meant ‘whatever Mr Mae agreed
acceptable’; if there was anything that Mr Mae did not agree with in terms
of the wishes or decisions made or proposed
by the ‘free-spirit’
children, then that was unacceptable.
example, it was put to him that if a four-year old wished to do as he or she
wished, he said that there was no difficulty with
that. Indeed, he said, in
relation to the children generally, “If they tell me what they want, then
I will go about making
it happen.” This extended, for example, to
four-and-a-half-year old [Y] saying that if she didn’t want to go to
Mr Mae was not going to make her go to
in relation to questions about filling out enrolment forms and such things, he
confirmed that he did not ask any questions of
the Mother because “there
was quite a few questions I didn’t get around to because I forgot
Again, attention to basic detail was missing.
the second day of the trial, the Court revisited with Mr Mae the findings of
JIRT, DOCS, Dr S and Ms O that there was no risk to
the children being in their
Mother’s care. Again he confirmed that he did not accept any of the
findings that were made by
any of the authorities. He also confirmed that none
of his family accepted the reports and recommendations of the experts, or the
findings and recommendations of either JIRT or
Mae stated that he did not undertake any anger management course, as previously
directed, because he did not believe that he had
an anger problem, and that he
still does not have an anger problem. He also confirmed that in relation to [X]
not attending further
counselling, he thought that it was [X]’s decision
not to do so. Again, I observe that, in my view, to allow such a young
has been assessed by experts such as Ms O and Dr S as being troubled and
fragile, to determine - without parental guidance
- not to continue with
counselling was a significant dereliction of parental responsibility.
of this said, Mr Mae confirmed that he had more recently arranged for [X] to see
a psychiatrist in [omitted], although he confirmed
that he had not notified the
Mother of this intended course, nor of any
appointment.
the first of a number of occasions in relation to the Father contending that all
matters set out in the Mother’s affidavit
material were lies, there was an
exchange between learned Counsel for the Mother and Mr Mae that related to a
series of text messages
between Ms Lackey and Mr Mae involving their daughter
[W]. Together with text exchanges between [W] and Mr Mae, these are set out
the transcript, and are noted below.
quite going into all the detail of them, my assessment of those text messages is
that Mr Mae’s response to his daughter
was close to puerile. By this I
mean that he was responding to a young adolescent girl, his daughter, in a way
that put all responsibility
for the repair of their relationship on her
shoulders. In my view, he took little or no initiative to seek to restore the
relationship
with his daughter at all.
in relation to one incident recorded in the Mother’s trial affidavit at
para.54, where, at a changeover, Mr Mae went
to get the police to force [W] to
come with him, but which, ultimately, led to (a) the police advising Mr Mae to
let her stay with
her Mother and which, ultimately, (b) [W] seeking medical
assistance the following day because of her distress, Mr Mae, with significant
reluctance and significantly after the event, acknowledged that he may have
handled the matter better and that it was not appropriate
to bring the police
into a changeover with a young adolescent girl here. Not surprisingly, the
Father’s action on this occasion
did little to promote let alone to heal
his already fractured relationship with his daughter.
note in passing that Mr Mae confirmed that he did not look at any of the records
of the Department that were produced to the Court.
In part, I understand and
accept his misunderstanding that he thought he could only look at those
documents on one particular day
rather than them being made available for the
parties and the lawyers more generally.
should note too, and in particular, that I do not accept his
suggestion/submission that, in large measure, the way the case and
were [being] conducted, it seemed [to him] to be something of a secret
proceeding in which information was being kept from
him and/or that it had a
predetermined result to ensure that the children were removed from him.
my view, allowing every concession in favour of Mr Mae being a self-represented
litigant, he took very little initiative in order
to prepare, in any reasonable
way, for the current proceeding which only tended to make his claim that he had
the children’s
best interests have something of a hollow ring to it. I
accept his desire to have the children live with him. However, his approach
everything, to put it as charitably as possible, was lackadaisical in the
might also mention here that approximately mid-morning on the second day of the
hearing the ICL had been contacted by a legal officer
from the Department who
confirmed that the JIRT inquiry was found to be unsubstantiated and, therefore,
there would be no further
action taken, either by JIRT or by DOCS, in relation
to the most recent notifications against the Mother.
it was noted, and put to Mr Mae, that he was the only one who provided any
affidavit material in support of his
application.
confirmed that he had not called his Aunt (a lady whose name featured
prominently in the Facebook postings previously referred
to), nor did he call
any other member of his family. He said that he did not do so because firstly,
he had left it “too long”
(by which I understood him to mean that he
had left it too late to organise) and secondly, he said that there was nothing
to defend. He said: “We stand by what we’ve said and
that’s how it is.” While not said with particular defiance,
nonetheless it exhibited a rather defiant yet self-absorbed attitude that he and
his family would continue to defy both process and
evidence, and continue to
berate, harass and falsely accuse the Mother. In this context again, Mr Mae
confirmed that everything
that was in the affidavits of the Mother were all
Mother submitted that in the absence of any evidence from the Father’s
family, an appropriate, adverse inference can and
view, on the evidence before the Court, such an inference is warranted.
Mr Mae said that he did not really get the time to get around to putting any
affidavits together in support of his application.
It was in relation to, or in
the light of, evidence of this kind that led me earlier to comment on his very
lackadaisical (and clearly
inappropriate) preparation for the
view, the Father had more than sufficient time to attend to preparation for the
hearing. In my view, had he wished to do
so, he would have, and could have,
prepared his case without undue difficulty. Over the course, and with the
benefit, of two hearings,
separated by some considerable period of time, I found
him to be a not unintelligent person but someone who seemed to lack much
to do anything, or perhaps more accurately, a person who, more often
than not, did the bare minimum in relation to most things.
Indeed, there was
something of an oscillation in his capacities or approach: such was dictated by
a certain benign indolence, on
the one hand or, if it concerned the Mother, a
certain deliberate, almost malign antagonistic force, on the other.
another instance involving [W] and her strained relationship with her Father,
there was cross-examination of Mr Mae in relation
to him returning to her a
laptop. To say the least, in my view, again Mr Mae showed a remarkable lack of
insight in taking any relevant
step to repair the relationship with his
daughter. Indeed, his response, in the course of the trial, was nothing short
of childish.
Effectively, he had refused to return [W]’s laptop because,
he said, the Mother would ultimately use it. In my view this
clearly shows (if
more be needed) that he has such a venomous focus on the Mother, and that he is
prepared, deliberately or otherwise,
to use the children as pawns in a
hate-filled game against Ms Lackey.
notwithstanding the multiple times where the Father said that the Mother’s
affidavit material is comprised of
nonetheless,
in the course of cross-examination, when taken through a series of texts and
other messages, he confirmed the accuracy
of the material that was set out in
the Mother’s trial
area of incongruity in the Father’s evidence was that although he wishes
to have the children live full-time with him,
and if at all possible, spend no
time with the Mother, he acknowledged that it was more likely than not that the
children would end
up spending time with their Mother. Therefore, he proposed
that they spend either every second, or if practicable, every weekend
It was pointed out to him how curious it was that, as he asserted, he continues
to believe that the children were/are
abused by their Mother, sexually and
otherwise, yet he nonetheless proposes that they spend time with their Mother
regularly on weekends.
To this he said that, “In my own personal beliefs I
would love to have the children live with me and never see their Mother”
but otherwise thought that it would be less likely that the abuse would occur
when they were with her [only] for short periods of
relation to a series of questions put to him by the ICL, Mr Mae said that he
signed the 2010 orders even though he disagreed with
them. He confirmed also
that the shared care arrangement, which had been in place for a short time after
those orders were made,
did not and does not
begrudgingly he conceded that he had not complied with a number of the orders
made by the Court, which were put to him in
sequence by the
detail them here.
did concede, in my view with a small amount of insight, that the ongoing
allegations against the Mother could or would, more likely
than not, have [some]
negative impact upon the children. However, his solution in this regard was
simply to try “to take them
alarming, and respectfully, almost vile comments that the children were better
off being placed in care than being in the care
of their Mother, was something
that was explored at a little length, including [again] (a) his non-acceptance
of Dr S’s report
and (b) his recognition, up to a point, (or rather, his
assertion) that the children are influenced in each
confirmed further, after having contacted [W]’s school, that her schooling
was “pretty good”. This might be
taken to suggest that, at least in
relation to [W], her living with her Mother and attending school regularly has
had a positive
influence upon [W]’s life.
was at least this consistency with Mr Mae’s evidence: he confirmed that
upon the ICL advising the Court on the last day
of the trial that the further
allegations that had been raised against the Mother had been found by the
Department and the police
to be unsubstantiated, he said that he still did not
believe it.
Indeed, it was put to him from records produced by DOCS that on the basis of the
history of notifications given to the Department,
that this family could expect
the Department to knock on the family’s door or the police about once
every two months.
state what should be obvious, but patently, it is not: this cycle of
notification and investigation is both alarming and appalling,
Father confirmed that he did not trust the Mother on
confirmed that he could not work cooperatively with her, nor would he accept any
limit on his (or his family’s) ability
to make reports to DOCS or the
police. He confirmed that his current relationship with his current wife was
and that he did not need any counselling. This was so, in
circumstances where it was put to him that he had three previous relationship
is convenient, and important, here to note the following from the ICL’s
written submissions. At para.41, he said:
seems to be more interested in harming the Mother. The sexual allegation issues
have been proved on two occasions to
be not substantiated yet the Father cannot
accept the findings. He said in evidence that he would prefer the children to
go to foster
care than live with the Mother. This could be construed as him
being a protective Father but in the context of this case, it is
submitted, that
this statement is illustrative of the measures that the Father will go to
undermine the Mother and her role as a
Respectfully,
and unfortunately, I agree with these comments.
Evidence of Ms O
the outset of her evidence, Ms O was provided with an update of recent material
and events, and specifically in relation to the
levelled against the Mother. She was advised that those allegations had been
determined by the Department
(and the police) to be without foundation.
Especially in the light of the recent notifications, Ms O confirmed that ongoing
notifications
to the Department were likely to cause damage to the children. She
also said that even though the Department had recommended that
the children
should undergo counselling to help them deal with the ongoing allegations, she
would be hesitant to support such a course
at the moment. As she said, the most
important thing was for the allegations to
considering further Ms O’s oral evidence, I note the following from her
April 2012 Report (Exhibit D). It provides both
important context and detailed
relation to [W], Ms O recorded, at paras.8.2 and 8.4:
uncertain why she had to see me. [W] told me that she would like to live with
her Mother and see her Father occasionally.
She was not sure how often she
would actually like to see her Father. [W] explained that at her Mother’s
she had her singing
and her sport as well as her school friends. [W] had just
commenced Year 7.
brightened when I asked her about her Mother’s new partner telling me that
she liked him. On the other hand she told me
that she did not like Ms K [Mr
Mae’s Wife] very much. She said Ms K has accused both her and her Mother
of trying to break
her and her Father up. [W] complained that she felt her like
Ms K left her out and paid her less attention than the other children.
the session [W] said another reason that she did not like Ms K was because they
got in trouble if they called her anything
other than “Mum”. [W]
said no one could replace her mum. [W] said her Mother’s partner
respected her calling
him [first name omitted], recognising he was not her
O also noted, at paras.8.6 and 8.7:
began living with her Mother, [W] said that her Father had become a bit cranky
at her. She said she would be scared how
her Father’s extended family
might react if she went back now to live with him or if she saw them.
Court was to tell her that she was to go and live with her Father, [W] told me
that she would run away. She became quite
upset and told me “I really
don’t want to go back, not yet”....
relation to [X], Ms O observed, at paras.8.13, 8.15 and 8.16 (emphasis
Confidently,
he told me that he wanted to live with his Father but still wanted to visit his
Mother. [X] explained that he wanted
to live with his Father because “I
just do”. He said that he did not really have a reason.
that he would be sad if he was made to live with his Mother. He told me he got
on really well with his Mother’s new
partner, Mr T and liked baby [name
omitted]. Happily [X] told me he and [V] now spent a lot of time together and
got on really well
now that there was just them at home without his other
common measure of children’s anxiety, [X] scored on the borderline of the
clinical range. This was concerning and suggested
he needed further
counselling.
need not detail here the brief discussion that Ms O had with [Y], and that,
because of her even younger age, Ms O did not speak
with [Z]. She did, however,
speak with [V], who is Ms Lackey’s daughter from an earlier relationship.
As previously noted,
she is not formally the subject of the current proceeding.
Ms O noted the following in her Report, at paras.8.21, 8.24, 8.25 and
assured me she loved and missed her Mother but said she had a lot of violence
growing up with her Mother....
she did not want to resolve her relationship with her Mother until Court was
finished....
thought Mr T [Ms Lackey’s partner] was a really good person. She said she
had always got along with him and really
missed him.
again reiterated she did not want to be vindictive towards her Mother but rather
to tell me what was best for the children.
She anticipated her Mother would
“go ballistic” when she learned what she had said. [V] argued that
[W] was being unfair
to their Father.
Ms O’s Evaluation: Report of April 2012
note the following further matters from Ms O’s Report in relation to the
children (including [V]), and the parties.
in relation to [V], Ms O said, at
presented as a demanding, extraverted [sic] teenager loudly aligned with her
stepFather. Her upbringing has been very disrupted
and her successively strong
alignments firstly to her Mother as described in Dr S’s report and now to
her stepFather reflect
her insecure attachment history early in life and the
disruptions and displacements she has experienced since. It was unfortunate
that [V] has dropped out of school and to be hoped Mr Mae encourages her to
pursue some study. Given his history this appears unlikely
and [V] is clearly
at risk of establishing inappropriate, violent relationships and early
relation to [W], Ms O said, at para.9.3:
[W] was now
strongly aligned with her Mother. Her wish to live in [omitted] at her age was
understandable. [W]’s affront
at having to call his Father’s
fiancée “Mum” was very understandable. ... Her anger at her
Father for offering
to reject Ms K [the Father’s Wife] in her favour was
perhaps commendable and represented an ability to recognise the shallowness
her Father’s attachments and behaviour. Encouragingly [W] was not an
anxious girl and her musical achievements should enhance
her self-esteem. As
with any girl her age in this society, she requires careful supervision and
guidance which she will undoubtedly
in relation to [X], the Report records, at para.9.4:
impressed as a very needy, anxious boy keen for his parents’ attention and
approval. Any sexual acting out and behaviour
problems at school should be
viewed in the light of his history of exposure to conflict and disruption as
well as separation from
his Mother. His anxiety would have been aroused by
hearing heated arguments between his parents and little in their behaviour since
separation would have allayed his fears....
comments on the parties themselves included remarks in the context of actions
taken by the parties, especially those by Mr Mae,
which involved the younger two
children, [Y] and [Z]. For example, at para.9.6, Ms O said:
Mae’s actions around the time of separation in withholding [Y] and [Z] in
particular from their main attachment figure,
their Mother, were most damaging.
It was hard to see how Mr Mae’s actions around the time of separation paid
any attention
at all to the needs of young children to maintain a relationship
with their Mother regardless of what sins he thought she had
relation to the Father, Ms O said, at para.9.8:
Mae tried to present as concerned for the children, it was hard to see him in a
very sympathetic light. ... He did not seem
to consider providing financially
for his children to be a high priority and certainly had not considered what
values he should be
portraying to them. Some of Mr Mae’s criticisms of
his ex-wife’s care of [W] seemed somewhat hypocritical, since he
[V] to come to the Court in a very low cut top, very high heels and tight jeans
and to behave in a generally flirtatious
and demanding manner. He criticises
[W]’s use of Facebook and yet met his new partner
Ms Lackey, Ms O noted, at para.9.12:
explained how Ms Lackey’s early history of domestic violence had impacted
on her adult personality. She was ill equipped
for parenting and was not
assisted by Mr Mae’s or his family’s criticisms. To her credit
however Ms Lackey has engaged
in counselling and parenting courses and reflects
on how best to manage her children. By all accounts her current relationship is
a supportive one which assists her. Wisely Ms Lackey has promoted Mr T as an
adult friend to her children and they both have decided
not to have any joint
children given the number of children they already have. Ms Lackey emphasised
the importance of Mr Mae having
a key role in their children’s
O confirmed that, in her view, the parties were incapable of maintaining a
shared parenting arrangement for the children. She
also considered (at
para.9.13) that [X] is a “very needy and anxious boy.”
her recommendations at the time of the Report, Ms O suggested that [W] and the
younger two children live with their Mother, and
that [X] live with his Father,
but spend every second weekend with his Mother.
Ms O’s Oral Evidence
O confirmed that when she interviewed [X] he was very clear in his view that he
wanted to see his Mother regularly. She also confirmed
that she formed a view
in April 2012 that the parents were incapable of cooperating and noted that the
been narrated to her seemed to be little more than
confirmation of this.
was also concerned that if [X] continued to see other counsellors, there was a
risk of some sort of “systems abuse”,
and there would be a high risk
of pathologising
confirmed that in her view, it seemed clear that the Mother sought to put the
interests of the children first.
she commented that if [X] was to stay with his Father, it would more than likely
limit the development of his relationship with
his Mother.
if he stays with his Father, it would limit or prevent the flourishing of his
relationship with his sister [W], who is
of a similar age to him.
O confirmed that it was essential, particularly for the younger children, but
equally for the others, too, that they needed the
stability of being in one
household or the other, and she also confirmed that, in her view, from her
observations and the other material
that she had read, for example, in relation
to Mr Mae’s treatment of the incident of [Y] going to school, it showed a
capacity and understanding of what would have benefited his young
generally, Ms O thought that Mr Mae’s parenting capacity and commitment
was limited.
particular concern to Ms O was the fact that the children continued to be
embroiled in and were exposed to the ongoing conflict
between the parents. It
had reached a stage where she agreed with the proposition that it would be
important for the time of the
children to spend with their Father to be
supervised because of the children’s exposure to the ongoing negativity
towards their
Mother in the Father’s household.
primary reservation that Ms O indicated, if the Court ordered that [X] return to
live with his Mother, would be how to deal with
the transition. She opined that
it was more likely than not that it would be a very difficult transition
Respectfully I agree with Ms O. There was some further discussion between Ms O
and the ICL in relation to the children’s regular,
if not constant,
exposure to pressure from the Father’s family. She indicated her concern
that this continued to
Further Evidence: Application to Re-open
an application by the Mother to have the matter re-listed, an oral application
was subsequently made on 21
March [2013] to re-open
and, if granted, to adduce further evidence. This related to (a) an incident
involving the Father and the
Mother’s partner, which was said to have
taken place in front of the children, at the [omitted], and which also involved
in particular, and (b) concerns expressed by the Department in relation to
the welfare of the children (and the Mother). Those concerns
are set out in two
reports that were admitted into evidence (initially the admission was
provisional to give the Father the opportunity
to make written submissions
relation to the application, I will first set out very briefly relevant
principle, then refer to the matters most recently put
before the Court.
whether by reference to the High Court decision in
Smith v NSW Bar
Association
, the decision of Murphy J in
Summitt & Summitt & Ors
(Re-opening)
, or the Full Court decision in
Stephens v Stephens (&
Anor) (Enforcement)
(relying upon the decision of Austin J in
), the principles are generally
my part, in addition to the cases to which I have referred, the Federal Court
decision of Kenny J in
Inspector-General in Bankruptcy v Bradshaw
sufficient to note the Full Court’s citation in
J’s summary of considerations from
ASIC v Rich
the nature of
the proceeding
whether the
occasion for calling further evidence ought reasonably to have been
the importance
of the issue on which the further evidence is sought to be adduced
the degree of
relevance and probative value of the further evidence
the prejudice to
the other party
interest in the timely conclusion of litigation
the explanation
offered for not having called the evidence
completeness, I note the following from the High Court decision in
NSW Bar Association
. There, at pp.266-267, Brennan, Dawson, Toohey and
Gaudron JJ, said (internal citation omitted):
It is again
necessary to distinguish between the considerations which may bear on a decision
to re-open and the processes involved
in reconsideration once a case has been
re-opened. If an application is made to re-open on the basis that new or
additional evidence
is available, it will be relevant, at that stage, to enquire
why the evidence was not called at the hearing. If there was a deliberate
decision not to call it, ordinarily that will tell decisively against the
application. But assuming that that hurdle is passed,
different considerations
may apply depending on whether the case is simply one in which the hearing is
complete, or one in which
reasons for judgment have been delivered. It is
difficult to see why, in the former situation, the primary consideration should
not be that of embarrassment or prejudice to the other side. In the latter
situation the appeal rules relating to fresh evidence
may provide a useful guide
as to the manner in which the discretion to re-open should be exercised. But
those considerations bearing
on re-opening are not decisive of the question
whether, a matter having been re-opened by reason of error, further evidence can
might be taken from this decision, as noted by the Full Federal Court in
Londish v Gulf Pacific Pty Ltd
, that the primary considerations are (a)
whether judgment has yet been delivered, and (b) whether the interests of
justice require
the matter to be
turn now to the application and to the new, late-breaking evidence.
the result, the Mother did not formally press the Application to re-open, but
did seek to have admitted the two reports provided
by a Counsellor (Ms S), who
works for the Child Protection Counselling Service at the [omitted] Community
Health Centre ([omitted]
Health District), to which I have earlier
my view, in cases that require the Court to make orders in the best interests of
children and where judgment has not yet been delivered,
it is a procedurally
more appropriate course at least to re-open (even on the Court’s own
motion) provisionally or for clearly
defined, limited purposes. Thus here, the
purposes are (a) to allow the tender of the most recently prepared reports
(together with
a letter from last October from the Mother’s solicitor to
the Father – Exhibit J), and (b) to allow the Father to put
submissions to the recent reports.
the Mother did not formally press the application to re-open, on the
Court’s own motion, it should be taken that the matter
was provisionally
re-opened for the limited purposes just noted.
Court made orders which gave the Father an opportunity to make written
submissions in relation to these reports. He confirmed
that he had evidence that
established that they are “false.” Mr Mae subsequently provided
written submissions.
my view, the Father’s submissions are a narrative of factual contest.
They are unsworn. A number of the matters he recounts
relate to events clearly
long before matters canvassed in the reports of Ms S.
regard to the recent reports, and to the written submissions of the Father, in
my view, they do nothing more than to confirm
that (a) there are significant
therapeutic matters involving the Mother and the children that require on-going
attention, and (b)
Mr Mae again contests evidence from a state-based agency (the
Child Protection Counselling Service). They add nothing to the evidence
presented at trial, other than to confirm that there remains alarming
uncertainty and conflict between the parties, which has continued
the negative
impact on the children. Accordingly, I do not propose to consider further the
reports or the Father’s submissions.
Consideration via the Legislative Pathway
addition to the signal Full Court judgments in
Goode v Goode
subsequently in
Keach & Keach
a convenient overview of the
legislative parameters and considerations under
of the Act to which the
Court must have regard is provided by Brown J in
set out below [3] – [6] from her Honour’s judgment and respectfully
adopt it for its succinct outline of relevant
sections (and principles) of
provisions in the
Family Law Act 1975
(the Act) relating to children rest on
twin pillars. The first is the importance to children of having a meaningful
relationship
with both parents; the second is the need to protect children from
physical and psychological harm. These are stressed in
which sets out
the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the
primary considerations in
deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children
which are the paramount consideration. In
determining where those best interests
lie, the Court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out
is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her
parents to have equal shared parental responsibility
for him or her
The presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the
time a child spends with each parent. The presumption
does not apply if there
are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the
child or family violence. The
presumption may be rebutted if the Court finds
that it would not be in the best interests of the child for it to
presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental
responsibility, the court must consider whether spending
equal time with each
parent would be in the child’s best interests
(s.65DAA(1))
and, if no such
order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with
each would be in the child’s
best interests
(s.65DAA(2)).
Honour also made important observations about “meaningful” as that
term is used in
of the Act in the context of what is comprehended by a
“meaningful relationship.” At [20] - [26], her Honour outlined
range of relevant considerations. I set them out below, and again respectfully
(and gratefully) adopt Brown J’s observations,
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Bill Revised Explanatory
Memorandum (2006) refers to the concept of
a meaningful relationship on a number
of occasions. At para 52 it noted that the primary factors mirror the first two
objects set
out in the new s 60B and that the objects are elevated to
primary considerations as they deal with important rights of children and
encourage a child-focused approach. The paragraph
elevation of the object relating to the benefit to the child of having a
meaningful relationship with both parents is consistent
with the introduction of
a presumption in favour of equal shared parental
responsibility.
the concept of a meaningful relationship is closely tied with the introduction
of the presumption of equal shared responsibility,
and the passage links the
concept of a meaningful relationship with the objects of the Division. The
objects use the words “meaningful
involvement”.
para 128, discussion of a meaningful relationship is again linked to
discussion of the presumption of equal shared parental
responsibility, the
explanatory memorandum noting:
government considers that it is important to ensure that a child has a
meaningful relationship with both parents and that both
parents participate in
decisions about the child. The presumption of equal shared parental
responsibility is not a presumption of
50:50 joint custody. The presumption
relates solely to the decision making responsibilities of both parents. New
section 65AA inserted
by Item 31 is the provision dealing with the time a child
spends with each parent and the circumstances where the court should consider
equal time arrangements.
When considering s 65DAA, the explanatory memorandum states
(at [196]–[199]):
Subsection 65DAA(2) recognises that an equal time arrangement will not be
appropriate in some cases but that the court must
consider other arrangements
that promote a meaningful relationship. This provision places an obligation on
the court in situations
where there is equal shared parental responsibility and
equal time is not appropriate, to consider whether it would be in the best
interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend
substantial and significant time with both parents. This
is intended to ensure
that in making parenting orders related to time that the court focuses not just
on the substantial quantity
of time that is spent with each parent, but also on
the significant type of time. The note in this section emphasises that the best
interests of the chid remain the paramount consideration for parenting orders.
This is set out in s 60CA by item 9.
Section 65DAA (2) — (4) is intended to ensure that the courts consider
arrangements that are much more than “1
weekend a fortnight and half of
the holidays” or an 80:20 arrangement. It is intended to ensure a focus
both on the amount
of time and the type of time. It would include both day time
that the focus be on ways that both parents are able to develop a meaningful
relationships with their children and share important
events including everyday
time with the child. It recognises that in order to have a meaningful
relationship and to share equal
shared responsibility that this would generally
involve “both” parents spending both substantial and significant
with their children.
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary on Historical Principles, Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1993, defines “meaningful”
as “full of meaning or
expression; significant; amenable to interpretation; having a recognisable
function in a language or
sign system; able to function as a term in such a
system”. “Meaning” is defined as “having intention or
chiefly with a qualifying adverb (as well-meaning)”. A second
definition is “conveying or expressing meaning or thought;
expressive,
meaningful, significant; suggestive”. These definitions are repeated and
further fleshed out in the Oxford English
Dictionary, 2nd ed, Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1989. It defines “meaning” (in generalised use) as
“significance”.
The examples provided take the matter
no further.
Macquarie Dictionary, 4th ed, Macquarie University Press, Sydney, 2005,
defines meaningful as “full of meaning; significant”.
definitions of meaning, the relevant one defines the word as “expressive
or significant: a meaning look”.
these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the
context of “meaningful relationship”,
is synonymous with
“significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for
“important” or “of
consequence”. I proceed on the
basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of
the object and
principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement
is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child.
qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive [sic] one. Quantitive [sic]
concepts may be addressed as part of the process
of considering the consequences
of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility
and the requirement
for time with children to be, where possible and in their
best interests, substantial and
significant.
Parental Responsibility
61DA of the Act provides for a presumption of equal shared parental
responsibility when making parenting orders. The presumption
does not apply,
among other things, in circumstances where the evidence satisfies the Court that
it would not be in the best interests
of the child for the parents to have equal
shared parental responsibility for the
this case, the Mother, and the ICL, seek an order that she have sole parental
responsibility. The Father seeks an order for equal
shared parental
responsibility.
my view, the evidence makes plain that it is not in the children’s best
interests that their parents have equal shared parental
responsibility. Among
other things, the parental relationship is nigh on unworkable. It is hostile in
the extreme. The Mother
should have sole parental responsibility for all of the
order for sole parental responsibility precludes the necessity for the Court to
consider the terms of s.65DAA.
“Pathway” Considerations
the basic contours of the legislative pathway, I note the following. Unless
otherwise required, I should be taken to follow,
in order, the sequence of
considerations in s.60CC(3). In relation to the conclusions reached in relation
to each particular matter
noted, I should be taken to make a formal finding in
favour of, or against, one or other of the parents.
views of the children have been set out earlier in these reasons. Summarily,
based on earlier evidence and subject to later evidence,
the girls ([W], [Y] and
[Z]) all wish to remain with their Mother. Of course, the views, such as they
have been expressed or articulated
in some other way, by the two younger
children ([Y] and [Z]) are of little weight because of their age.
are different considerations that apply in relation to [X]. First, as recorded
in Ms O’s report, he wishes to live with
his Father and spend time with
his Mother. However, Ms O also noted her concerns about the
“neediness” of [X] and his
general vulnerability. As well, she
noted the risk to him spending time with his Mother if he continues to live with
his Father,
which is to say that his Father will not facilitate such time.
evidence is that the girls all have a good relationship with their Mother, with
[W]’s continuing to grow. There is also
evidence that [X] has a good
relationship with both parents. The two most recent reports from Ms S (Exhibits
I1 and I2) suggest
that the girls have some anxiety in relation to their Father.
[W]’s relationship with him is even more complex. On the one
loves him, but has experienced difficulty and now quite some estrangement from
him. Indeed, the latest reports suggest
that there is now significant difficulty
between [W] and her Father (although still acknowledging that she loves him), as
with the paternal family.
have already recounted, and will not do so again, the very significant discord
between the parents, and the negative impact that
has had, and continues to do
so, on the parenting relationship. Accordingly, whether in terms of
s.60CC(3)(c) in its “old
form”, which refers to “the
willingness and ability of each of the child’s parents to facilitate and
a close and continuing relationship between the child and the other
parent”, or in its current manifestation, which refers
to a parent having
taken (or failed to take) the opportunity to participate in making decisions
spend time with and to communicate with the
child, in my view, the evidence confirms significant limitations on the part of
the Father.
These same comments apply, and for the same reasons, to the
consideration of s.60CC(3)(i).
her oral evidence, Ms O confirmed that, if there was to be a transition of [X]
to live with his Mother, this would likely be a
difficult exercise. I infer
from this that some ‘therapeutic assistance’ will be necessary, at
least for [X], and possibly
involving his Mother.
two most recent reports from Ms S refer to a range of therapeutic assistance
involving the girls – [W], [Y] and [Z]. That
is likely to – and
should – continue.
the evidence, the biggest problem is the enormous gulf that has developed
between the parties and its impact on the children.
The evidence confirms that
there is a real danger in moving from one parental camp to the other. There is
doubtless, and properly
so, concern on the part of the children in not seeing
their Father. However, there is, in my view, always the greater risk of the
children being (a) embroiled further in the on-going litigation between their
parents, and (b) subjected to further scrutiny and
hostility by the paternal
family, with the certain consequence of more reports against the Mother.
practical difficulty with the orders to be made by the Court, in particular the
period of supervised time only with the Father
and the children, is a necessary
consequence of the actions of the Father and his family. The children need to
be protected.
all of the circumstances, the material needs of the children seem not to be a
concern, certainly on the Mother’s side, which
is also to confirm that she
is able to provide for them. Some concern was raised with the Father’s
capacity to so provide,
and his significant dependence on his family to assist
him with the children. However, I do not make any formal finding in this
in my view, with the assistance of the Child Protection Counselling Service in
[omitted], the Court can and should be reasonably
well assured that the proper
attention to the parenting of the children by the Mother will take place. For
reasons already given,
particularly because of the paternal family’s less
than benign approach to all things concerning the family dynamics, I have
significant concerns about the Father’s capacity to provide for the
children in terms of the matters contemplated and required
under s.60CC(3)(f)
am advised that there has been a recent incident that involved some alleged
violence. It is the subject of police proceedings in
the [omitted] Local Court.
However, because no evidence of it is formally before the Court, and although it
is referred to in the
recent report(s) from Ms S, I do not propose to consider
such matters.
the degree that any trial court can be confident (or diffident) that the orders
made are the least likely to lead to the institution
of further proceedings, the
history of this matter suggests that there is little confidence that there will
be a complete cessation
of hostilities. However, I am firmly of the view that
the orders are (a) in the best interests of the children, and (b) are likely
least to quell any immediate or medium-term enthusiasm by the Father and his
family to engage in conduct that is litigious or
prosecutorial of the Mother
which will necessarily involve the children.
regard to the matters already addressed in these reasons, particularly in
relation to s.60CC(3)(c) (in its former and or in
its current form) and
s.60CC(3)(i), in my view, that discussion is sufficient for the purposes of what
was formerly embraced by s.60CC(4),
but which section has now been
number of final matters require attention here.
the ICL indicated, if the Mother so wished, that she be permitted to relocate
from the [omitted] area. I understand the motive
behind the ICL’s
‘suggestion.’ However, because there is no formal application from
the Mother in this respect,
I cannot and do not say anything more about it.
in relation to the contravention, because the orders made are as sought by the
Mother, in my view, they are sufficient to
deal with that application. The
orders need only confirm that the Father’s pleas of ‘contravention
admitted but with
reasonable excuse’ are not accepted. Further, there
will be a notation that, in the event of any further contravention by
Father, and if established, there is a risk that, at least, he will be placed on
in addition to the orders as sought by the Mother, further orders requesting the
Marshal to investigate the Facebook postings
and any related activities (and any
consequential action in the light of that investigation) should also be made,
including reference
to any possible prosecution.
in addition to requesting the investigation of Facebook postings involving the
Father and or his family and the possible
infringement of s.121, I also request
the Marshal to monitor Facebook for the next 2 years for any similar postings by
and his family and their “cyber-friends.” He should have
access to any of the documents filed, or exhibits used, in
the proceedings.
basic decencies, such as simple civility, have not been evident in the lives of
the parties towards each other. Such adverse,
negative conduct has clearly had
a damaging impact on the children. From now on, the parents have to decide what
model they wish
to provide for their children. Will it be lives based on
civility, care, justice in dealing with others, and compassion –
recognises the basic human dignity of each person. Or will it be – as it
often seems to have been the case so far –
lives based on pettiness,
revenge, bickering, lack of respect, laziness and lack of truth. One course
will lead, over time and with
[almost heroic] effort, to fulfilment and lives of
relative peace. The other will be – as it has been – utterly
destructive.
The choice is theirs. The consequences of wrong or continuing
poor choices is more danger and damage to the children. Decency
and civility
are not without cost; but so too are the destructive forces that have been all
too strongly on display here for many
years. It is time for change.
my view, the Court’s protective responsibilities must take precedence
here. The evidence clearly and painfully shows that
the children have been
subjected to relentless processes of investigation by the police and by the
Department because of the unfounded
accusations by the Father and or his family
against the Mother, but which necessarily have embroiled the children in every
investigation.
The orders of the Mother (and similarly those proposed by the
ICL, which essentially vary only in relation to the residence of [X])
most appropriate in all the circumstances. In my view, they are in the best
interests of all the children. Those orders
should be made.
certify that the preceding one hundred and sixty-eight (168) paragraphs are a
true copy of the reasons for judgment of Neville FM.
Date: 4 April 2013
At para.6.11 of
Ms O’s detailed Report (Exhibit D – discussed further below), Mr Mae
is recorded as having acknowledged
that the allegations of abuse against Ms
Lackey had been investigated and not substantiated, and further, that the
situation between
the parties “had settled down.” This
acknowledgment in April 2012 obviously stands in stark contrast to what he put
in his written submissions in October 2012. Further, in his oral evidence, the
Father recanted from the concession he made to Ms
At the time of
the hearing, [V] was somewhat estranged from her Mother and lived with Mr Mae.
At the time of the application to
re-open (March 2013) it was confirmed by all
parties that [V] was no longer living with the Father, that she had returned to
with the Mother, and that she was shortly to take possession of a house,
provided by the NSW Government, and planned hereafter to
independently.
Macquarie Dictionary
(Fourth Edition) defines
“netiquette” as “the code of good manners which has evolved
for users of the
S.121(3) refers to various matters that may be taken to “identify a
person”; s.121(5) provides that an offence against
this section is an
indictable offence; s.121(8) provides for the procedural requirement of the
written consent of the Director of
Public Prosecutions for prosecuting any
relevant offence; and s.121(11) defines, among other things, “electronic
The formal process of a prosecution under s.121 is noted by
Forrest J in
Xuarez & Vitela
[2012] FamCA 574
, which in turn
refers to Murphy J’s judgment in
Prentice & Bellas
[2012] FamCA 108
Fam LR 262.
relation to contempt generally in the context of family law litigation and the
operation of s.112AP, see the discussion by the
Full Court in
Abduramanoski v
Abduramanoski
[2005] FamCA 88
(2005) 191 FLR 360
(2005) 33 Fam LR
[1998] FamCA 117
(1998) 23 Fam
Save for the recent, helpful decision of Forrest J in
[2012] FamCA 574
, there would appear to have been few cases that have
considered Nicholson CJ’s comments in
Re South Australian Telecasters
the Marriage of Schwarzkopff; Fitzgibbon v Barker
(1992) 16 Fam LR 539.
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR
p.243. See also the further High Court discussion concerning contempt in family
law litigation in
Re Colina; Ex parte Torney
[1999] HCA 57
(1999) 200 CLR
generalised description of the improper and inappropriate conduct of the Father
and his family, Exhibit J is a letter from
the Mother’s solicitor to the
Father, dated 24
October 2012, which refers to the
Father’s family taking photographs of the younger children outside their
child-care facility.
This conduct, like all other parts of the guerrilla
warfare, must
cheap, if not vile, submission was earlier repeated in the Father’s oral
evidence, noted
orders set out here are those sought by the ICL at the time of the hearing.
However, the ICL confirmed that, in the light of,
for example, the latest
reports from Ms S, he in fact supported that all children should live with the
Transcript at 9-11. Hereafter, all transcript references will be simply to
“T” followed by the relevant page
the discussion at T
As an observation only (already noted), and subject to comments earlier noted by
Nicholson CJ in
South Australian Telecasters
: in my view, the use of
so-called ‘social media’ in this way (
to make adverse,
denigrating comment) is a form of cyber bullying whereby those who perpetrate it
seek to do so without apparent fear
of reprisal. However, such action is
cowardly as well as being [potentially] contemptuous. Perpetrators of
‘cyber bullying’
are not willing to put their comments formally
before the Court to have them properly examined or challenged. They are, in my
childish, ‘Facebook rangers’ who seek to wound with their
words, and do so with reckless disregard of any consequence.
If they are
properly investigated, and or ultimately charged, they might change their tune
and take some responsibility for their
‘updated’ report pursuant to s.69ZW of the Act was prepared and
provided to the Court in late March. In turn, it
was provided to the parties,
albeit very recently. It is sufficient to note that the covering letter from
the Department confirmed
that the most recent reports were deemed to be
“non risk of harm and therefore did not require further assessment.”
updated report from the Department also principally comprises the reports of
Ms S, which are already formally before the Court.
In such circumstances, and
in the light of the evidence before the Court, I do not propose taking this
latest material from the Department
this regard, see
Re F (Litigants in Person Guidelines)
[2001] FamCA 348
(2001) 27 Fam LR
discussed further by the Full Court (Bryant CJ, Kay & Boland JJ) in
MHC v Y & Y
[2006] FamCA 610
(2006) 35 Fam LR 456
– [53], and again in
Kiefer v Kiefer
[2008] FamCAFC 197
(2009) 40 Fam LR 295 (Bryant
CJ, Finn & Mushin
this evidence is located at T 83
See, for example, among other place, T 85, 87-89 &
107. For a further discussion of Mr Mae’s responses to Dr S’s 2010
report, and also his assessment of the children
being able to do what they wish,
see T 111-112.
I should note that neither party provided any evidence from either of their
respective partners. Such information as there is about
the parties’
partners, came from the children and their comments to Ms O, noted
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298.
Cross on Evidence
Australian Edition) (ed. J.D. Heydon) (Sydney: Lexis Nexis Butterworths, 2013)
comments here about [V] must now be seen in the context of her somewhat recent
move from her Father’s residence back to
live with her Mother, and her
intention shortly to live
independently.
two reports, dated 20
February and
March 2013, from Ms S, became Exhibits
Smith v NSW Bar Association
[1992] HCA 36
(1992) 176 CLR 256
Summitt & Summitt
& Ors (Re-opening)
[2009] FamCA 365
Stephens v Stephens (& Anor)
(Enforcement)
[2009] FamCAFC 240
(2009) 42 Fam LR 423
ASIC v Rich
[2006] NSWSC 826
(2006) 235 ALR
Her Honour’s summary has been followed by Collier J in
Software Pty Ltd v Bing Technologies Pty Limited (No.2)
[2008] FCA 1761
by Katzmann J in
Lee v Professional Services Review Committee No.292
[2010] FCA 1490
Stephens v Stephens
[2009] FamCAFC 240
(2010) 42 Fam LR 423
. In the same place,
the Full Court also noted the importance to consider the High Court’s
observations in
AON Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian National
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR
Londish v Gulf Pacific Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 470
(1993) 45 FCR 128
pp.138-139.
Goode v Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
(2007) 36 Fam LR 422
Keach & Keach
[2007] FamCA 1496
Mazorski v Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
(2008) 37 Fam LR
Honour’s remarks, in relation to the “twin pillars” and in
relation to “meaningful relationship”,
have been consistently cited
with approval by the Full Court, for example in
Moose & Moose
[2008] FamCAFC 108
McCall v Clark
[2009] FamCAFC 92
(2009) 41 Fam LR 483
[2011] FamCAFC 22
(2011) 44 Fam LR 439
Shaeffer v Jacobs
[2011] FamCAFC 119
(2011) FLC 93-468
Maluka v Maluka
[2011] FamCAFC 72
(2012) 45 Fam LR
J’s remarks in this regard were endorsed by the Full Court in
[2008] FamCAFC 108
(2008) FLC 93-375
, and even more recently by a
differently constituted Full Court in
McCall & Clark
[2009] FamCAFC 92
(2009) 41 Fam LR
& [121]. More recently still, a further Full Court in
[2010] FamCAFC 53
, similarly endorsed Brown J’s
particular, see s.61DA(2) and s.61DA(4).
RTF format (504 KB)
Signed PDF/A format