Mining and Energy Union v Stanmore SMC Pty Ltd [2025] FWC 2886 (13 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 2886
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Dispute resolution
Mining and Energy
Stanmore SMC Pty Ltd
(C2025/2373)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT LAKE
BRISBANE, 13 NOVEMBER 2025
Alleged dispute about any matters arising under the enterprise agreement
– incentive scheme – whether terms of agreement
allow for payment to
be reduced for part-time work, periods of unpaid leave, and periods of
workers’ compensation – dispute
arbitrated – terms of scheme
do not allow bonuses to be reduced in those circumstances – dispute
March 2025, the Mining and Energy Union (the
application pursuant under
Fair Work Act 2009
) seeking to resolve a dispute with Stanmore SMC Pty Ltd (the
dispute relates to the incentive scheme in Appendix 2 of the
Stanmore Poitrel
Mine Enterprise Agreement 2022
’). By way of background, to be eligible for the
scheme, the employee must be employed as at 31 December and they must meet
minimum eligibility period of three months’ service. The bonus is paid in
February or March of the calendar year. The target
incentive payment is
$16,000.00. The incentive payment is calculated on operational and individual
criteria. The issue which arises
in this dispute is whether the incentive
payment can be pro-rated for periods of unpaid leave or part-time
Applicant made the Application pursuant to clause 21 of the Agreement. Clause 21
of the Agreement states:
21 Issue Resolution Procedure
(a) All issues arising out of the interpretation or application of this
Agreement or in relation to the NES shall be dealt with according
procedure and at the local level to the maximum extent possible. Other issues,
such as those arising in the course of employment,
may be dealt with under this
procedure by mutual agreement. Either party may nominate a representative
(including legal representative)
choice to represent them at any stage of this procedure (including before
the FWC, whose decisions will be binding on the parties).
(b) There will not be any stoppage of work either by the Company or
Employees whilst the procedure is being followed.
(c) When a matter arises,
it shall, in
the first instance, be discussed between the Employee and the immediate
supervisor;
if the matter
remains unresolved, it shall be referred for discussion between the Employee
(and, if applicable, a representative of
their choice) and the relevant
department manager (or their nominated representative);
if the matter
remains unresolved, it shall be referred for discussion between the Employee
(and, if applicable, a representative of
their choice) and a senior officer of
the Company; and/or either party may refer the matter to private mediation or
arbitration.
The mediator, or arbitrator (as applicable) will be selected by the
Company, and the Company will be responsible for their costs;
if the matter
remains unresolved, either party may refer the matter to FWC.
(d) By agreement, the parties may bypass any of these steps.
(e) Subject to subclause 21(f), provided that all the above steps have
been exhausted, the FWC may conciliate the matter or where
conciliation does not
resolve the matter,
(f) In the circumstances set out in clause 18.2(g) or by agreement under
clause 21(g), the FWC may conciliate the matter, or where
conciliation does not
resolve the matter,
(g) The role of the Employee’s representative will not detract from
their primary
responsibility which is to do the job they are employed to do at the
(h) Employees may dispute any disciplinary action, but only at a local
i.e., not beyond the General Manager.
parties attempted to resolve the dispute on 14 April 2025 through a conciliation
which was unsuccessful. Following the conciliation
conference, I issued
directions and listed the matter for arbitration by hearing on 18 July 2025. The
applicant was represented by
Mr Chris Newman. The Respondent was represented,
with leave, by Mr Jamie Wells of Mills Oakley.
satisfied that I have the jurisdiction to arbitrate the dispute in accordance
with 21(f) of the Agreement.
The Dispute
Agreement sets an annual Incentive Scheme for the calendar year, which provides
for bonuses of up to $16,000 in addition to the
employees’ salary. The
terms of the scheme are set out below.
dispute relates to four MEU members who are noted in the questions for
determination. Those members took leave or were absent
from the workplace during
periods of 2023. The Respondent adjusted their bonus relative to their
attendance at the workplace during
the year and reduced the incentive amount on
a pro-rata basis for periods of non-attendance. The factual circumstances are
straightforward.
The MEU summarised the factual matrix as
1. Adriana Coombes had her incentive payment reduced to $7,527.35 due to
taking 108 days of unpaid leave, including 70 days of parental
2. Sharlene Cameron had her incentive payment reduced to $8,000 due to an
absence from work whilst on workers' compensation between
1 January and 1 July
3. Anthony Mills had his incentive payment reduced to $9,732 due to unpaid
leave for a knee operation in 2023
4. Chloe MacPherson had her incentive payment reduced to $5,150.68 due to
taking 130 days of unpaid leave for parental responsibilities.
Coombes and Ms Macpherson also worked part-time during the relevant period.
Questions for determination
questions to be determined before me are as follows:
1.Does the Enterprise Agreement provide for the incentive payment to be paid
on a pro rata basis in relation to hours worked, other
than where an employee
commenced employment part way through the relevant year?
2.In particular:
Enterprise Agreement allow for the incentive bonuses paid to Ms Coombes and Ms
Macpherson to be reduced due to their part-time
arrangements?
Enterprise Agreement allow for the incentive bonus paid to Ms Coombes, Ms
Macpherson and Mr Mills to be reduced due to approved
unpaid leave that was
Enterprise Agreement allow for the incentive bonus paid to Ms Cameron to be
reduced due to absences from the workplace whilst
Compensation?
Relevant Agreement Clauses
2 of the Agreement sets out the incentive scheme:
POITREL MINE INCENTIVE SCHEME
The objectives of the
Incentive Scheme
Employees by rewarding them for company performance within the accountability of
their role and alignment with Stanmore Values.
base each Employee’s incentive payments on the achievement of high
performance and meeting intended objectives.
The Incentive Scheme will provide for an individual
payment of $16,000 per annum (
target incentive payment
), as follows:
Organisational objectives (70%).
The organisational objectives will be
reflected in the Mine’s KPIs.
The Mine’s KPIs will account for 70% of the target incentive payment.
The Mine KPIs (including the number and focus of them,
the measures and their
weightings) are determined by the Company (at its discretion) and may include:
(a) Mine specific targets (note: safety performance is to be assessed on the
performance of Employees (as defined in this agreement)
only); and / or
(b) Company specific targets (is Poitrel Mine tonnage per annum)
In February / March each financial year the Mine KPIs will be communicated to
Individual objectives (30%)
. Individual objectives will account for
30% of the target incentive payment.
The individual objectives will be notified to the Employee at the beginning
of each financial year.
For duration of the EA, the criteria will be the following:
(a) an Employee is not directly, or indirectly, responsible for any safety
incident, at the Poitrel Mine during the incentive year
(safety incident is
defined as equipment damage)* (10% of the 100% which makes up the 30% percent of
(b) an Employee completes one ‘Take 5’ per rostered shift) (10% of
the 100% which makes up the 30% percent of the 100);
(c) an Employee has no performance management or disciplinary issues during the
incentive year (10% of the 100% which makes up the
30% percent of the 100).
* Acts of God (including, for example falling rocks which damage equipment)
would not be included in these occurrences
The amount payable for the individual objectives will be determined by the
Company considering each Employee’s overall performance
and alignment
against their job objectives, individual KPIs, behaviours and Charter Values in
the relevant financial year.
Performance calculation
Mine and individual employee performance will be measured as at 31 December
each year against the applicable KPIs for the relevant
financial year. This
calculation, as it applies to each Employee, will determine the annual incentive
payment that each Employee
will be paid (provided they are employed at the Mine
at the date of payment – refer below).
The annual incentive payment for each Employee is the sum of the Mine’s
performance against its KPIs (70% of the target incentive
payment) plus the
Employee’s individual performance (30% of the target incentive payment),
multiplied by the target payment
of $16,000pa.
The annual incentive payment under the Incentive Scheme will be made in a
single payment to employees in February / March.
Employees who leave before payment
To be eligible for the annual incentive payment under the Incentive Scheme,
an Employee must be employed at the Mine at the date the
annual incentive
payment is paid or must have been employed at the mine as at 31 December in the
year that the incentive payment
is paid. An Employee is not entitled to a
pro-rata / partial incentive payment under the Incentive Scheme when he/she
ceases to be
employed at the Mine before 31 December that year.
Employees who join part way through year
An Employee who joins the Mine part way through the year will be entitled to
participate in the Incentive Scheme after an initial
qualifying period of
employment of three months. KPIs for new Employees will be established in
consultation with and notified to
the Employee during that period. Annual
incentive payments to Employees who join the Mine part way through the year are
on a pro-rata basis according to their length of service in that
Transitional arrangements
For the period commencing 1 July 2022 and ending 31 December 2022
Incentive Period
), the Company will honour the incentive scheme outlined
in Appendix 2 of the
BHP Billiton Mitsui Coal Pty Ltd Poitrel Mine Enterprise
Agreement 2019
Incentive Scheme
As to eligibility, an Employee is eligible to qualify for a payment under the
Incentive Scheme if they were employed at the Poitrel
Mine as at 31 December
An Employee who commences employment during the Incentive Period is eligible
to qualify for a pro rata payment under the Incentive
Scheme, provided they were
employed at the Poitrel Mine on or before 30 September 2022.
The Company:
(a) commits to:
communicating
KPIs to eligible employees on or before 30 October 2022; and
any payments (subject to the maximum payment amount set out below) within 4
weeks of a ‘Yes’ vote for this Agreement;
(b) confirms
Incentive Scheme will operate until 31 December 2022, after which time the
replacement scheme in this Agreement will apply;
Employee is not entitled to a pro-rata / partial incentive payment under the
Incentive Scheme if they are not employed at the Poitrel
Mine on 31 December
amounts paid under the Incentive Scheme will be paid at the absolute discretion
of the Company; and
maximum payment amount will be $8,000 per Employee.
7(c) of the Agreement states:
(c) Part-time and temporary Employees will receive a pro rata annualised
Annual Salary
and entitlements to leave provided for in this Agreement, based on the
proportion of time they work compared to a full-time Employee.
18.9 of the Agreement states:
18.9 Leave Without Pay
Where an Employee has exhausted their personal/carer’s leave
entitlements and requires leave for medical reasons, an Employee
may apply for
leave without pay which will be approved at the discretion of the Company. An
Employee will not be required to take
annual leave or long service leave prior
to applying for leave without pay in these circumstances.
Relevant Law
Principles of construction
Full Bench in
AMWU v Berri Pty
provides the
principles regarding the construction and interpretation of clauses within the
Enterprise Agreement which state the following:
“1. The construction of an enterprise agreement, like that of a
statute or contract, begins with a consideration of the ordinary
meaning of the
relevant words. The resolution of a disputed construction of an agreement will
turn on the language of the agreement
having regard to its context and purpose.
Context might appear from:
(i) the text of the agreement viewed as a whole;
(ii) the disputed provision’s place and arrangement in the
(iii) the legislative context under which the agreement was made and in which
it operates.
2. The task of interpreting an agreement does not involve rewriting the
agreement to achieve what might be regarded as a fair or just
outcome. The task
is always one of interpreting the agreement produced by parties.
3. The common intention of the parties is sought to be identified
objectively, that is by reference to that which a reasonable person
understand by the language the parties have used to express their agreement,
without regard to the subjective intentions or
expectations of the
4. The fact that the instrument being construed is an enterprise agreement
made pursuant to Part 2-4 of the FW Act is itself an important
consideration. It may be inferred that such agreements are intended to establish
binding obligations.
5. The FW Act does not speak in terms of the ‘parties’ to
enterprise agreements made pursuant to Part 2-4 agreements,
rather it refers to
the persons and organisations who are ‘covered by’ such agreements.
Relevantly s.172(2)(a) provides
that an employer may make an enterprise
agreement ‘with the employees who are employed at the time the agreement
is made and
who will be covered by the agreement’. Section 182(1) provides
that an agreement is ‘made’ if the employees to
be covered by the
agreement ‘have been asked to approve the agreement and a majority of
those employees who cast a valid vote
approve the agreement’. This is so
because an enterprise agreement is ‘made’ when a majority of the
employees asked
to approve the agreement cast a valid vote to approve the
6. Enterprise agreements are not instruments to which the
Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) applies, however the modes of textual
analysis developed in the general law may assist in the interpretation of
agreements. An overly technical approach to interpretation should be
avoided and consequently some general principles of statutory
construction may
have less force in the context of construing an enterprise
7. In construing an enterprise agreement it is first necessary to
determine whether an agreement has a plain meaning or it is ambiguous
susceptible of more than one meaning.
8. Regard may be had to evidence of surrounding circumstances to assist in
determining whether an ambiguity exists.
9. If the agreement has a plain meaning, evidence of the surrounding
circumstances will not be admitted to contradict the plain language
10. If the language of the agreement is ambiguous or susceptible of more
than one meaning then evidence of the surrounding circumstance
admissible to aid the interpretation of the agreement.
11. The admissibility of evidence of the surrounding circumstances is
limited to evidence tending to establish objective background
facts which were
known to both parties which inform and the subject matter of the agreement.
Evidence of such objective facts is
to be distinguished from evidence of the
subjective intentions of the parties, such as statements and actions of the
parties which
are reflective of their actual intentions and
expectations.
12. Evidence of objective background facts will include:
(i) evidence of prior negotiations to the extent that the negotiations tend
to establish objective background facts known to all parties
and the subject
matter of the agreement;
(ii) notorious facts of which knowledge is to be presumed; and
(iii) evidence of matters in common contemplation and constituting a common
assumption.
13. The diversity of interests involved in the negotiation and making of
enterprise agreements (see point 4 above) warrants the adoption
of a cautious
approach to the admission and reliance upon the evidence of prior negotiations
and the positions advanced during the
negotiation process. Evidence as to what
the employees covered by the agreement were told (either during the course of
the negotiations
or pursuant to s.180(5) of the FW Act) may be of more
assistance than evidence of the bargaining positions taken by the employer
bargaining representative during the negotiation of the agreement.
14. Admissible extrinsic material may be used to aid the interpretation of
a provision in an enterprise agreement with a disputed
meaning, but it cannot be
used to disregard or rewrite the provision in order to give effect to an
externally derived conception
of what the parties’ intention or purpose
15. In the industrial context it has been accepted that, in some
circumstances, subsequent conduct may be relevant to the interpretation
industrial instrument. But such post-agreement conduct must be such as to show
that there has been a meeting of minds, a consensus.
Post-agreement conduct
which amounts to little more than the absence of a complaint or common
inadvertence is insufficient to establish
understanding.”
recently, the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia stated the principles
applicable to the interpretation of an enterprise
agreements in
Cook University v Ridd
“(i) The starting point is the ordinary meaning of the words, read
as a whole and in context.
(ii) A purposive approach is preferred to a narrow or pedantic approach
— the framers of such documents were likely to be of
a “practical
bent of mind”. The interpretation “turns upon the language of the
particular agreement, understood
in the light of its industrial context and
(iii) Context is not confined to the words of the instrument surrounding
the expression to be construed. It may extend to “...
the entire document
of which it is a part, or to other documents with which there is an
association”.
(iv) Context may include “... ideas that gave rise to an expression
in a document from which it has been taken”.
(v) Recourse may be had to the history of a particular clause “Where
the circumstances allow the court to conclude that a clause
in an award is the
product of a history, out of which it grew to be adopted in its present
(vi) A generous construction is preferred over a strictly literal
approach, but “Awards, whether made by consent or otherwise,
should make
sense according to the basic conventions of the English language. They bind the
parties on pain of pecuniary penalties”.
(vii) Words are not to be interpreted in a vacuum divorced from industrial
realities but in the light of the customs and working conditions
particular industry.”
[references omitted]
Applicant’s Submissions
Applicant submits that there is no ambiguity in the wording of the
Applicant submitted that the scheme does not contain a metric for assessing
attendance nor do the words of the incentive scheme
permit a reduction in
incentive scheme where an employee takes leave without
Applicant notes that the Agreement provides for the incentive payment to be
pro-rated in one circumstance: if the employee commences
working at the mine
partway through the year. The Applicant further notes that the qualifying period
to be eligible to participate
in the incentive scheme is based on three
months’ service, rather than three months’ work at the mine.
Applicant further notes that the intent of the scheme is to provide transparency
so employees can understand what is required
of them in order to receive the
bonus. The Applicant stated that by introducing attendance as a criteria, the
Respondent undermines
the transparency of the scheme.
Applicant submits that it is incorrect for the Respondent to compare the
position of an employee who has not commenced work at
the mine and who have not
commenced their period of service, with employees whose service continues while
they are on unpaid leave.
The Applicant principally submits
that incentive scheme is a bargain which was struck in negotiations and that the
Respondent should
address its concerns through bargaining for the next
Respondent Submissions
Respondent submits that the Applicant’s interpretation of the incentive
scheme would lead to anomalous outcomes. The Respondent
submits that
The employee on unpaid maternity leave for the whole year contributes nothing
to the company’s performance under the organisational
objectives. Nor will
have they have advanced the goals of the individual objectives; there will have
been no performance at
all to assess.
Respondent submits that both the organisational and individual objectives are
related to the work which the employee performs.
When an employee works, they
contribute to the mine’s output and its organisational objectives. The
Respondent submits that
it would be a anomalous for an employee who is absent
from work to receive full credit for not causing a safety incident, as that
would reward the employee for doing nothing.
the Respondent argues that the fewer shifts an employee is rostered on, the
fewer Take 5s which an employee performs and
consequently the employee makes a
lesser contribution. The Respondent argues that, regarding performance
management, that the objective
must be assessed according to how much work the
employees perform without performance management or disciplinary issues, rather
a mere absence of performance management or disciplinary issues.
Respondent primarily argues that the incentive scheme cannot be given its plain
meaning as contended for by the MEU, as when read
in context with the objectives
of the incentive scheme and its clear industrial purpose, that would create
incoherent and anomalous
the hearing, the Respondent also argued that a term may be implied into the
agreement consistent with the Respondent’s
interpretation.
Consideration
Is there an ambiguity in the incentive scheme?
starting point in interpreting the Incentive Scheme are the objectives in
Appendix 2. Those objectives reveal the objective intention
Employees by rewarding them for company performance within the accountability of
their role and alignment with Stanmore Values.
base each Employee’s incentive payments on the achievement of high
performance and meeting the intended objectives.
the objectives in context with the rest of Appendix 2, the first objective
relates to the organisational criteria, and the
second objective relates to the
individual criteria.
note the first objective is stated to “Motivate Employees”, which
suggests some desired action on the part of the employee.
This accords with the
definition of “incentive” from the Macquarie Dictionary, which is
“that which incites or
stimulates action”.
second objective states that the incentive payments are intended to be
“directly base[d]” on achieving high performance
and meeting the
intended objectives. “High performance” is, of course, a subjective
assessment. It is therefore necessary
to have some frame of reference to assess
performance. That frame of reference is the individual objectives which comprise
of the target bonus payment.
employer is required under the terms incentive scheme to communicate the mine
KPIs and individual objectives to employees in February
or March of the calendar
year. I therefore accept the MEU’s argument that the scheme is predicated
on employees being assessed
on criteria of which they have been informed. If the
employee was not aware that a certain criterion was being assessed, this would
not accord with the objective purpose of the scheme, as an employee cannot be
incentivised to meet an objective of which they are
individual assessment criteria are set out in clear language. Subparts (a) and
(c) are phrased in the negative – the employee
is required to
directly or indirectly be responsible for a safety incident and
performance management or disciplinary issues in the incentive year. The
assessment criteria do not specify that an employee
is only counted as meeting
these criteria if they are at work during the relevant time period.
second assessment criterion in paragraph (b) is to complete one Take 5 per
rostered shift. This only assesses the period in which
the employee is
undertaking rostered shifts during the year.
assessment of the employee’s performance with respect to the relevant
criteria is carried out by the company.
note that the last sentence of the individual objectives section does not appear
to accord with the rest of the scheme. That sentence
The amount payable for the individual objectives will be determined by the
Company considering each Employee’s overall performance
and alignment
against their job objectives, individual KPIs, behaviours and Charter Values in
the relevant financial year.
context, this sentence is incongruous. The objectives of the scheme base the
incentive payments on the employees meeting the “intended
objectives”. Factors such as “overall performance” and
“behaviours” are not otherwise referred to in
the scheme. Further,
the scheme does not permit the introduction of new factors into the assessment
because the 30% individual objectives
component is clearly broken down into
three discrete criteria weighted at 10% each. I consider it likely that this
last sentence
is an unintended inclusion from the previous BMA Agreement which
applied at the Poitrel mine. I note the Respondent representative
advised during
the hearing that he was not aware that any other criteria had been used in the
assessment of the individual objectives.
I recommend that the parties address
this drafting issue in the next round of negotiations.
the heading, “Payment”, the performance calculation is described as
The annual incentive payment for each Employee is the sum of the Mine’s
performance against its KPIs (70% of the target incentive
payment) plus the
Employee’s individual performance (30% of the target incentive payment),
multiplied by the target payment
of $16,000pa.
calculation is effectively as follows:
((Mine KPIs Met / 70) + (Individual Objectives Met / 30)) / 100 ×
16,000.00 = Employee incentive payment
incentive payment provides for a pro-rata payment where an employee joins the
mine part way through the calendar year. However,
an employee will not be
eligible for any amount under the incentive scheme unless they meet an initial
qualifying period of three
months’ employment. The KPIs are then notified
to the Employee. The employee will receive a pro-rata incentive payment for
service of more than three months, but less than 12 months.
not convinced by the Respondent’s argument that the terms of the scheme
are ambiguous and cannot be ascribed a plain meaning.
Although I accept that the
last sentence of the individual objectives section creates some confusion, the
scheme can otherwise be
interpreted according to its plain
I observe that the criteria for assessment under the scheme are clear and
defined. The language of the scheme permits only
two variables in the incentive
calculation (with an exception for employees who join partway through the year):
the mine KPIs and
the individual objectives. If the individual objectives were
specified to be at the discretion of the employer, the outcome would
different. However, here, there are three discrete, set criteria for the
individual objectives. It was open for the employer to
introduce a third
variable when negotiating the agreement, being the employee’s attendance.
They did not do so.
the Commission must take the Agreement as it is, rather than substituting how it
ought to be written. The Respondent states,
correctly, that the purpose of
incentive schemes generally is to motivate action by the employees. However, the
wording of the scheme,
in order to achieve its intended result, is a matter for
the parties. In this case, the individual assessment criteria set something
low barrier to entry. There are many cogent industrial reasons why an employer
may have a bonus scheme like this, such as to
secure a yes vote to the agreement
or for employee retention. It is not the role of the Commission to second-guess
the clear objective
criteria laid down by the parties, because the Respondent
feels that the scheme is not motivating high performance as well as it
I observe that the task of interpretation of an enterprise agreement is not to
arrive at an outcome that seems “fair”.
Insofar as the Respondent
suggests that the relevant employees are being rewarded “for work they did
not perform”, I
consider that this is an appeal to perceptions of
accept the MEU’s position that the incentive scheme does not explicitly,
in the wording of Appendix 2, or otherwise in the
Agreement, allow for the
incentive payment to be pro-rated on the basis of unpaid leave or part-time
employment. Clause 7(c) only
explicitly states that part-time employees will
receive a pro rata annualised salary and entitlements. The Respondent argues
the Agreement is also
explicitly inconsistent with their
interpretation. I have difficulty with this argument in that, in a binding
enterprise agreement
between the employer and employee, one would expect a
provision which retrospectively disentitles employees from full payment under
the scheme to be made explicit.
I accept that the meaning of the word “motivate” and
“incentive” suggest a positive action is desired
on the part of the
employee, I do not accept that it is inconsistent with objective purpose of the
scheme for employees to be paid
an incentive scheme for a period in which they
have been on unpaid leave or work part-time. The scheme is not directly linked
an employee’s attendance at the mine. For example, an employee who
works overtime and works more time than others does not
receive a higher payment
under the incentive scheme. The incentive assessment is qualitative rather than
quantitative.
relation to the Respondent’s arguments regarding implied terms, I tend to
prefer the view that terms should not be implied
into enterprise agreements
using the test from
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v Shire of Hastings
180 CLR 266, given the rigorous statutory provisions which apply to
ensure that the employees have understood and genuinely agreed
to the terms of
the Agreement and given an agreement, when in force, applies in the same way as
an Award or Statute.
Even if I were
to find that I could imply a term into the Agreement using the
BP Refinery
test, I would not do so as I do not consider it to be necessary.
Accordingly,
I find that the answers to the questions posed for arbitration are as
the Enterprise Agreement provide for the incentive payment to be paid on a pro
rata basis in relation to hours worked, other
than where an employee commenced
employment part way through the relevant year?
particular:
Enterprise Agreement allow for the incentive bonuses paid to Ms Coombes and Ms
Macpherson to be reduced due to their part-time
work arrangements?
Enterprise Agreement allow for the incentive bonus paid to Ms Coombes, Ms
Macpherson and Mr Mills to be reduced due to approved
unpaid leave that was
Enterprise Agreement allow for the incentive bonus paid to Ms Cameron to be
reduced due to absences from the workplace whilst
Compensation?
Appearances
C Newman for the Applicant
Wells of Mills Oakley for the Respondent
AMWU v Berri Pty Ltd
James Cook University v
[2020] FCAFC 123
Applicant Submissions [17]
Applicant Submissions
Automotive, Food,
Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union” known as the
Australian Manufacturing Workers’
Union (AMWU) v Skilled Engineering
[2003] FCA 260
[12]-[14], [18].
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government
RTF format (531 KB)
Signed PDF/A format