URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/2011/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dasreef Pty Ltd v Hawchar [2011] HCA 21 (22 June 2011)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GUMMOW, HAYNE, HEYDON, CRENNAN, KIEFEL AND BELL JJ
DASREEF PTY LIMITED APPELLANT
NAWAF HAWCHAR RESPONDENT
Dasreef Pty Limited v Hawchar
[2011] HCA 21
22 June 2011
Appeal dismissed with costs.
On appeal from the Supreme Court of New South Wales
Representation
D F Jackson QC with T G R Parker SC and D T Miller for the appellant (instructed
by Moray & Agnew Solicitors)
B M Toomey QC with F Tuscano and M A Kumar for the respondent (instructed by
Slater & Gordon Lawyers)
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
Dasreef Pty Limited v Hawchar
Evidence – Admissibility – Opinion evidence – Section 79(1) of
Evidence Act
(NSW) provided that rule excluding evidence of opinion
did not apply where "a person has specialised knowledge based on the person's
training, study or experience" and person's opinion "wholly or substantially
based on that knowledge" – Respondent sued appellant
in Dust Diseases
Tribunal of New South Wales – Respondent claimed he was negligently
exposed to unsafe levels of silica while
working for appellant – Witness
gave evidence about approximate level of respirable silica to which respondent
may have been
exposed – Opinion treated as admissible to found calculation
of numerical or quantitative level of exposure to respirable silica
Whether opinion admissible for that purpose – Requirements for
admissibility.
Procedure – Specialist tribunal – Dust Diseases Tribunal of New
South Wales – Ability of judge constituting Tribunal
to draw on experience
as member of specialist tribunal when making findings of fact –
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act
(NSW) required Tribunal to apply rules
of evidence –
Section 25B
provided exception subject to various
requirements – Trial judge drew on "experience" that silicosis usually
caused by very
high levels of silica exposure in concluding that respondent's
silicosis caused by exposure to silica –
Section 25B
neither invoked nor
complied with – Whether trial judge entitled to draw on "experience" in
making finding of fact.
Procedure – Objection to admissibility of evidence – Evidence taken
on voir dire – Trial judge did not rule on
objection at conclusion of
voir dire – Desirability of ruling on objection to admissibility as soon
as possible.
Words and phrases – "based on the person's training, study or experience",
"basis rule", "opinion rule", "specialised knowledge",
"specialist tribunal",
"voir dire", "wholly or substantially based on that knowledge".
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act
Evidence Act
Dust Diseases Tribunal Rules (NSW), r 9.
GUMMOW, HAYNE, CRENNAN, KIEFEL AND BELL JJ. Nawaf Hawchar, the respondent
in this appeal, suffers from silicosis. He
worked for the appellant ("Dasreef")
as a labourer and then as a stonemason for a little over five and a half years
between 1999
and 2005. Before he immigrated to Australia in 1996,
Mr Hawchar had worked for about a year in a family stonemasonry business in
Lebanon. From time to time between 2002 and 2005 he did some private
stonemasonry work. In all those undertakings he was exposed
to silica dust.
2004, Mr Hawchar was diagnosed with scleroderma. In May 2006, he was
diagnosed with early stage silicosis. In October 2007,
he began proceedings
against Dasreef in the Dust Diseases Tribunal of New South Wales claiming
damages for personal injury: his
contracting scleroderma and silicosis. His
central allegation was that, while working for Dasreef, he had been exposed to
levels of silica dust. He alleged breach of statutory duty, negligence
and breach of contract. The evidence he called at the trial
of the proceeding
included opinion evidence from several witnesses, among them Dr Kenneth
Basden, a chartered chemist, chartered
professional engineer, and retired senior
lecturer in the School of Chemical Engineering and Industrial Chemistry at the
of New South Wales.
the trial of the proceeding, the Tribunal (Judge Curtis)
scleroderma is not a dust disease but that, by
Diseases Tribunal Act
(NSW) ("the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act
Tribunal had jurisdiction to determine Mr Hawchar's claim for provisional
damages and further damages on account of his contracting
scleroderma as claims
ancillary or related to the claims he brought in respect of silicosis.
Nevertheless, Mr Hawchar sought and
obtained an order, at trial, dismissing
his claim for damages for scleroderma. Evidently he took this course in order
to preserve
entitlements he had under the
Workers Compensation Act
(NSW) in respect of his disease of scleroderma. It is not necessary, however,
to explore this aspect of the matter any further.
respect of his claim for damages for contracting silicosis the Tribunal found
Dasreef 20 in 23 parts responsible for Mr Hawchar's
silicosis, the balance
of responsibility resting with his work in Lebanon and the work he had done in
Australia on his own account.
The accuracy of this apportionment of
responsibility was not in issue in the appeal to this Court. The Tribunal
entered judgment
for Mr Hawchar against Dasreef for damages in an amount of
$131,130.43, together with an order pursuant to
Dust Diseases
Tribunal Act
that an award of further damages may be made with respect to
certain silica-related diseases.
appealed to the Court of Appeal of New South Wales against the whole of the
orders made by the Dust Diseases Tribunal. The
Court of Appeal (Allsop P,
Basten and Campbell JJA)
Dasreef's appeal in relation to certain questions of costs, remitting those
questions to the Tribunal for reconsideration, but otherwise
dismissed Dasreef's
Mr Hawchar was working for Dasreef there was an applicable
prescribing the maximum permitted exposure to respirable silica. The standard
was expressed as a time weighted average (or "TWA")
concentration of
of air to which a person was exposed
over a 40 hour working week.
central question that Dasreef agitated in the Court of Appeal was whether the
primary judge had "erred in admitting evidence
of Dr Basden as to the
numerical level of respirable silica dust in [Mr Hawchar's] breathing
zone". Dasreef further alleged that
the primary judge had "erred in relying on
his 'experience' as a 'specialist tribunal'". The primary judge had said, in
his reasons
for judgment, that he could rely on that experience to conclude that
Mr Hawchar's silicosis had been caused by exposure to silica
dust. Dasreef
advanced some other grounds of appeal but they need not be noticed.
Court of Appeal
Dasreef's complaints about the admissibility of Dr Basden's evidence and
also rejected
Dasreef's challenge to the primary judge's ability to rely on his experience as
a judge in a specialist court.
reasons will demonstrate that Dr Basden's evidence was not admissible to
establish that Mr Hawchar's exposure to silica dust
in the course of
working for Dasreef was greater than the level prescribed as the maximum
permissible level of exposure. To the
extent to which Dr Basden expressed
an opinion about the numerical or quantitative level (in the sense explained
later in these reasons)
of respirable silica dust to which Mr Hawchar was
exposed in the course of working for Dasreef, his evidence was not "wholly or
substantially
based on" "specialised knowledge based on [his] training, study or
experience"
These reasons will further demonstrate that the Court of Appeal was wrong to
conclude that the primary judge was "permitted", as
into account my experience that this disease [silicosis] is usually caused by
very high levels of silica exposure".
despite the wrongful reception of evidence and the primary judge's impermissible
reliance on experience as a judge in a specialist
court, the Court of Appeal
should have dismissed Dasreef's appeal against the primary judge's findings that
Dasreef was liable to
Mr Hawchar for damages for negligently exposing him
to dangerous levels of silica dust. The Court of Appeal should have reached
that conclusion because there was no dispute, whether at trial, on appeal to the
Court of Appeal, or in this Court, that Mr Hawchar
suffers from silicosis
or that silicosis is a disease caused only by exposure to silica dust. And
there was uncontested evidence
at trial from an expert pathologist (Professor
Henderson) that, based on the period of latency of Mr Hawchar's disease,
Mr Hawchar's
exposure to silica had been intense and was attributable to a
history of exposure to silica dust over a period of about six years
beginning in
explain the bases for these conclusions, it is necessary to say something first
Tribunal, next the decision
of the primary judge, and then the decision of the Court of Appeal. Against
that background it will
be necessary to examine
(NSW) ("the
Evidence Act
"). Finally, it will be necessary to say
something about the use by the Dust Diseases Tribunal of evidence given, and
opinions formed,
in cases other than the case under particular
consideration.
The trial – Dr Basden's report
solicitors for Mr Hawchar retained Dr Basden to provide a report
addressing three questions:
"i) During the period of Mr Hawchar's employment by [Dasreef], was it
reasonably foreseeable that an employee exposed to silica dust
could suffer a
silica-related injury?
procedures could an employer have taken to materially reduce the risk of
the employer had carried out these steps as outlined in (ii) above to materially
reduce the risk of injury, would [Mr Hawchar's]
risk of injury have been
minimized?"
To assist Dr Basden in preparing his report, Mr Hawchar's solicitors
gave Dr Basden a copy of the statement of claim and statement
particulars that had been filed in the matter, a photograph of a mask of the
of Mr Hawchar
wearing that mask, a photograph of Mr Hawchar demonstrating the use of a
hand-held powered masonry cutting disc and
a photograph of the Dasreef working
the introduction to his written report, Dr Basden described the
circumstances which he understood to lie behind the questions
he had been asked.
Although lengthy, it is desirable to set out the relevant section of the
introduction in full.
"Mr Hawchar is suffering from silicosis allegedly contracted through the
inhalation of silica bearing dust, while in the employment
of the defendant
[Dasreef] between 21 October 1999 and May, 2005. During this period
Mr Hawchar was employed as a stone worker who
was involved in cutting and
laying stone, usually sandstone. Depending on the nature of the job,
Mr Hawchar on a daily basis spent
from one hour to all day cutting stone,
usually sandstone, and generally by power tools. This operation generated large
of airborne dust. While performing this work, Mr Hawchar at all
times wore a mask provided by his employer, but he alleges that
dust penetrated
these masks because of gaps between them and his face.
Mr Hawchar also alleges that about 20 to 30 times each year during the
period of his employment he worked within a plastic enclosure
or 'tent', erected
to minimize the spread of fugitive dust to neighbouring properties. One side of
this enclosure or tent was fitted
with an exhaust fan to remove the dust
therefrom, but nevertheless Mr Hawchar claims that in spite of this the
enclosure only served
to concentrate the dust in his working / breathing zone.
He further alleges that due to the increased concentration of dust he would
to take a break approximately every hour because of troubled
breathing."
The evidence given at trial did not accord in every respect with this
description of the circumstances. In particular, the number
of occasions on
which Mr Hawchar worked within a plastic enclosure or "tent" was said to be
fewer than the 20 to 30 times each year
recorded by Dr Basden. For present
purposes, however, nothing turns on these differences.
his report, Dr Basden identified two commonly adopted procedures which
could have been employed, but were not, as means of reducing
Mr Hawchar's
exposure to dust: the "employment of wet cutting, in which a jet of water is
directed to the junction between the cutting
wheel and the stone being cut", and
the "provision of an exhaust hood close to the source of the dust ... connected
to an industrial
sized 'vacuum cleaner' at its outlet end to capture the
collected dust".
also expressed the opinion with respect to the masks provided by Dasreef "that
the types of respirator supplied to Mr Hawchar
were totally inadequate by
the criteria officially in force at the time concerned". He concluded that "if
wet cutting associated
with a quite portable suction ventilation system adjacent
to the cutting site had been employed, along with the provision of an
appropriate
PAPR [powered air-purifying respirator] type of respirator, it is
almost certain that Mr Hawchar would have suffered no injuries
This aspect of Dr Basden's evidence was not contradicted and showed what
steps could have been taken to avoid the consequences
of intense exposure to
silica dust.
a section of his report entitled "selection of respiratory protection devices",
Dr Basden wrote about the level of dust concentration
generated in
Mr Hawchar's breathing zone when he was using a cutting wheel. Again,
although the relevant part of the section is
lengthy, it is desirable to set it
out. It read:
"The actual dust concentrations generated in Mr Hawchar's breathing zone,
which would be no more than 50 or 60 cm from the cutting
indicated by the photograph supplied ...), presumably were never measured with
the appropriate instruments while work was
in progress. However, it most
certainly would not be from half to two
ten-thousandths
of a gram per
cubic metre of air, but more realistically would be of the order of a thousand
or more times these values or even approaching
gram, or thereabouts,
per cubic metre. (Only once can I recall actually observing sandstone being
dry-cut in the open air by portable
powered angle grinders, at a monument being
erected at the entrance to a country town in NSW. Each of the two operators was
by dense clouds of highly visible fugitive dust, and neither was
wearing a respirator of any type! In the case of Mr Hawchar, the
[Dasreef] found it necessary to erect a 'tent' fitted with an exhaust fan 'to
attempt to minimize the dust pollution caused
to neighbouring properties when
the stone was being cut', which indicates the production of considerable
quantities of visible dust).
It should be noted that not all of the dust in the
visible clouds being generated by the cutting wheels would be in the
'respirable'
size range, which means an equivalent aerodynamic diameter (EAD) of
below 4 µm. The actual clouds would consist of particles
from about 20 or
perhaps 30 µm downwards, as larger ones will settle rapidly by gravity and
not remain in the airborne state.
However, a considerable proportion of the
size distribution of the suspension would be 4 µm and below, and hence
would constitute
the 'respirable' fraction of the dust cloud." (emphasis in
Considerable
attention was given, both at trial and on appeal to the Court of Appeal, to this
passage from Dr Basden's report. Several
observations may be made about
it. First, Dr Basden did not, in this section of his report or elsewhere,
attempt to offer any calculation
of the levels of respirable silica dust to
which Mr Hawchar had been exposed at work. He did offer the opinion that
the dust concentrations
generated in Mr Hawchar's breathing zone, when
operating a cutting wheel as indicated in a particular photograph, "most
would not be from half to two
ten-thousandths
of a gram per
cubic metre of air, but more realistically would be of the order of a thousand
or more times these values or even approaching
gram, or thereabouts,
per cubic metre". He related that to the respirable dust (that is, dust
particles having an equivalent aerodynamic
diameter of below 4 µm) by
saying that "a
considerable proportion
of the size distribution of the
suspension would be 4 µm and below, and hence would constitute the
'respirable' fraction of the
dust cloud" (emphasis added). He did not, in his
written report or elsewhere, identify what he meant by "a considerable
proportion".
The trial – a voir dire but no ruling
for Dasreef objected to the reception of any part of Dr Basden's report.
The primary judge took evidence from Dr Basden
as on a voir dire. Counsel
for Dasreef cross-examined Dr Basden, at some length, with a view to
demonstrating that Dr Basden did
not profess to have expressed any opinion
based on his specialised knowledge, experience, training or study about the
amount of dust
Mr Hawchar would have inhaled during his time with Dasreef.
And Dr Basden agreed with a number of questions put to him by counsel
Dasreef to the general effect described.
the end of the voir dire the primary judge did not rule on the admissibility of
Dr Basden's evidence. As a result, Mr Hawchar,
as plaintiff, did not
know what evidence led in support of his claim had been found by the primary
judge to be admissible. And Dasreef,
as defendant, did not know, before it
decided what if any evidence it should call, what was the evidence that it had
to meet. That
result is unsatisfactory. As a general rule, trial judges
confronted with an objection to admissibility of evidence should rule
objection as soon as possible. Often the ruling can and should be given
immediately after the objection has been made
and argued. If, for some pressing
reason, that cannot be done, the ruling should ordinarily be given before the
party who tenders
the disputed evidence closes its case. That party will then
know whether it must try to mend its hand, and opposite parties will
evidence they must answer.
is only for very good reason that a trial judge should defer ruling on the
admissibility of evidence until judgment. This was
not such a case. Yet the
primary judge did defer ruling on the disputed evidence in this matter until
judgment. And because that
is what the primary judge did, the evidence of
Dr Basden was used for purposes for which it was not admissible and for
which it may
be doubted that Mr Hawchar had sought to tender it.
The primary judge's use of the evidence
his reasons for judgment, the primary judge recorded that counsel for Dasreef
had raised more than 70 objections to the expert
evidence called on
Mr Hawchar's behalf at trial. The primary judge
"[r]ather than address the merit of each objection" he would recite the
qualifications of each expert and attempt to summarise
in each case the
reasoning process of the expert.
primary judge
Dr Basden had admitted that "he could not express a numerical opinion about
Mr Hawchar's exposure to respirable silica, that
he could not express an
opinion about the amount of dust that Mr Hawchar would have inhaled during
his time with Dasreef and could
not express a numerical opinion about the
time-weighted average of Mr Hawchar's exposure to silica". The primary
judge set out several
questions and answers given by Dr Basden in the
course of the voir dire. Read as a whole, however, the answers given by
in the course of the voir dire show that the statements he had
made in his written report and in the course of the voir dire, to
that the amount of respirable silica in Mr Hawchar's breathing zone would
have been 500 or 1000 times greater than the
permissible levels of exposure,
provided, as Dr Basden put it, "only a ballpark to justify the reason I was
recommending the protection
factor of about a thousand for the use of a VAPR
[sic PAPR] respirator. That was the purpose of it."
despite Dr Basden's estimates being proffered with this limited purpose,
the primary judge sought to calculate the levels of
silica dust to which
Mr Hawchar had been exposed in the course of working for Dasreef. The
primary judge
reasons for judgment:
"A simple calculation may be made upon the basis of Mr Hayek's [a
proprietor of Dasreef] evidence that a man engaged in cutting stone
through the
course of one day would use the angle grinder for approximately 30 to 40
minutes, and Dr Basden's opinion that during
this time he would be exposed
to dust concentrations at least 1000 times greater than the permissible limit of
... Accepting for the moment that the P2
mask provided to Mr Hawchar fitted perfectly and provided a protection
factor of 50, the
concentration of respirable particles within the respirator
when cutting was 1000 ÷ 50 x 0.2 mg/m
The standard TWA of 0.2 mg/m
permits the accumulation
of 40 hours x 0.2 mg/m
. If a man is exposed for 30 minutes on each of
five days to a concentration of 4 mg/m
his cumulative
weekly exposure is 2.5 hours x 4 mg/m
. The TWA of this exposure over 40 hours is then
÷ 40 = 0.25
. This exceeds the permissible limit. If he were
exposed for 40 minutes each day his TWA rises to 0.33
is to be observed that the calculation made by the primary judge took
given by a witness of the length of time "a man engaged in
cutting stone" would use the angle grinder and coupled that with the proposition
that it was "Dr Basden's opinion that during this time he would be exposed
to dust concentrations
1000 times greater than the permissible
limit" (emphasis added). The dangers of building estimate upon estimate to
yield some apparently
precise calculation of the time weighted average exposure
to respirable silica are evident. Several premises necessarily underpin
of those estimates in this way. Unless each of those premises has been exposed
in the course of argument for consideration
by the parties there are serious
risks not only that the calculation pretends to an accuracy it does not have but
also that the parties
are not afforded procedural fairness.
the present case, however, there was a more deep-seated problem. Was there
admissible evidence before the primary judge that
during the whole of the time
Mr Hawchar was using an angle grinder to cut stone in the course of working
for Dasreef he was exposed
to dust concentrations at least 1000 times greater
than the permissible limit? In the passage from his reasons for judgment that
has been set out, the primary judge implicitly answered that question in the
affirmative. It was that question which was central
to the first way in which
Dasreef put its appeal to the Court of Appeal.
Dasreef's appeal to the Court of Appeal
appealed to the Court of Appeal as of right.
Diseases Tribunal Act
provided, so far as now relevant, that:
"(1) A party who is dissatisfied with a decision of the Tribunal in point of law
or on a question as to the admission or rejection
of evidence may appeal to the
Supreme Court.
(2) The Supreme Court may, on the hearing of any appeal under this section,
remit the matter to the Tribunal for determination by
the Tribunal in accordance
with any decision of the Supreme Court and may make such other order in relation
to the appeal as the
Supreme Court sees fit."
regard to what the primary judge had said in his reasons, argument in the Court
of Appeal naturally
on the footing that the critical question concerning the admissibility of
Dr Basden's evidence was whether "he had the relevant expertise
an opinion concerning the measurement of silica dust in the way he did". Having
passage from Dr Basden's written report that is set out earlier in these
reasons, the Court of Appeal
that the cross-examination of Dr Basden had "revealed that his opinion was
not based on a precise measurement or a view expressed
with precision, but
rather an estimate drawn from his experience". The Court of Appeal
"From the debate reflected in the evidence of Dr Basden, his reasons for
coming to the opinion are clear: his experience and specialised
allowed him to say that given that dusts have a consistent fraction of
respirable content and that given Mr Hawchar was
working in clouds of
silica as the evidence revealed, an inexact estimate of the concentration of
respirable silica dust was what
he said it was – a thousand times the
acceptable level of the standard."
The Court of Appeal
the opinion as "contestable and inexact" but went on to
"it was then for someone qualified as an expert to say that his estimate was
worthless, or of little weight, or for some other
reason unreliable" and
lack of reasoning did not make his opinion inadmissible".
the second issue pressed by Dasreef – whether the primary judge was right
to rely on experience he had gained in hearing
evidence and deciding other cases
in the Dust Diseases Tribunal – the Court of Appeal
that the primary judge had not acted illegitimately. The Court of Appeal
point as concluded by its earlier decisions in
ICI Australia Operations Pty
Ltd v Workcover Authority of New South
JLT Scaffolding International Pty Ltd (in liq) v
indicated at the outset of these reasons, consideration of the admissibility of
Dr Basden's evidence directs attention to
Evidence Act
and opinion evidence
Section 79(1)
Evidence Act
must be understood in its statutory context.
Section 76(1)
Evidence Act
provides that "[e]vidence of an opinion
is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact about the existence of which
the opinion
was expressed". That exclusionary rule is referred to in the
Evidence Act
as "the opinion rule". Subsequent provisions of the
Evidence Act
provide a number of exceptions to the opinion rule.
Section 79(1)
"If a person has specialised knowledge based on the person's training, study or
experience, the opinion rule does not apply to evidence
of an opinion of that
person that is wholly or substantially based on that
knowledge."
Section 76(1)
expresses the opinion rule in a way which assumes that evidence of an opinion is
tendered "to prove the existence of a fact". That
manner of casting the rule
does not, as might be supposed, elide whatever distinction can be drawn between
"opinion" and "fact" or
invoke the very difficult distinction which sometimes is
drawn between questions of law and questions of fact. It does not confine
expert witness to expressing opinions about matters of "fact". Rather, the
opinion rule is expressed as it is in order to direct
attention to why the party
tendering the evidence says it is relevant. More particularly, it directs
attention to the finding which
the tendering party will ask the tribunal of fact
to make. In considering the operation of
it is thus necessary to
identify why the evidence is relevant: why it is "evidence that, if it were
accepted, could rationally affect
(directly or indirectly) the assessment of the
probability of the existence of a fact in issue in the
proceeding"
That requires identification of the fact in issue that the party tendering the
evidence asserts the opinion proves or assists in
be admissible under
the evidence that is tendered must satisfy two
criteria. The first is that the witness who gives the evidence "has specialised
based on the person's training, study or experience"; the second is
that the opinion expressed in evidence by the witness "is wholly
substantially based on that knowledge". The complaint which Dasreef made at
trial, on appeal to the Court of Appeal and on appeal
to this Court was that
Dr Basden did not express an opinion about the numerical or quantitative
level of exposure to respirable silica
encountered by Mr Hawchar in working
for Dasreef that was an opinion based on any specialised knowledge
Dr Basden had that was based
on his training, study or experience.
expression "numerical or quantitative level" requires explanation. It is used
in these reasons in the sense of assigning a value
capable of use in a
calculation of the kind the primary judge made. In his written report
Dr Basden spoke of the operator of an
angle grinder being exposed to dust
"of the order of a thousand or more times" the permissible levels. In one sense
that was a numerical
or quantitative assessment of the level of exposure to
silica dust during the particular operation. But it was not, and was evidently
not intended to be, an assessment which could form the foundation for a
calculation of the time weighted average level of exposure
of a particular
worker. So much is evident from Dr Basden's use of the phrase "of the
order of" as an expression of approximation.
explained earlier in these reasons, it may greatly be doubted that
Dr Basden sought to express an opinion about the numerical
or quantitative
level of respirable silica to which Mr Hawchar had been exposed. On the
voir dire he denied that this was what he
was trying to do. Read as a whole,
Dr Basden's written report is better understood as offering an opinion
have been taken to prevent Mr Hawchar contracting
he was exposed to respirable silica at levels as much as
1000 times greater than permissible levels. And in Dr Basden's evidence
the voir dire, that was what he said he was doing. But as also explained
earlier in these reasons, that was not how the primary
judge or the Court of
Appeal used Dr Basden's evidence. Both the primary judge and the Court of
Appeal took his evidence as expressing
an opinion about the numerical or
quantitative level of exposure encountered by Mr Hawchar. That is, his
evidence was taken as expressing
an opinion that could found the calculations
made by the primary judge of the time weighted average level of respirable
which Mr Hawchar had been exposed. If that opinion was
expressed, was it an opinion based on specialised knowledge Dr Basden had
that was based on his training, study or experience?
order for Dr Basden to proffer an admissible opinion about the numerical or
quantitative level of Mr Hawchar's exposure to silica
dust it would have
been necessary for the party tendering his evidence to demonstrate first that
Dr Basden had specialised knowledge
based on his training, study or
experience that permitted him to measure or estimate the amount of respirable
silica to which a worker
undertaking the relevant work would be exposed in the
conditions in which the worker was undertaking the work. Secondly, it would
have been necessary for the party tendering the evidence to demonstrate that the
opinion which Dr Basden expressed about Mr Hawchar's
exposure was
wholly or substantially based on that knowledge.
this case, demonstration of those matters could come only from evidence given by
Dr Basden. That is why, in
HG v The Queen
, Gleeson CJ pointed
out that, "[b]y directing attention to whether an opinion is wholly or
substantially based on specialised knowledge
based on training, study or
experience, [s 79] requires that the opinion is presented in a form which
makes it possible to answer
should be unnecessary, but it is nonetheless important, to emphasise that what
was said by Gleeson CJ in
(and later by Heydon JA in the
Court of Appeal in
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v
is to be read with one basic proposition at the forefront of consideration. The
admissibility of opinion evidence is to be determined
by application of the
requirements of the
Evidence Act
rather than by any attempt to parse and analyse
particular statements in decided cases divorced from the context in which those
were made. Accepting that to be so, it remains useful to record that
it is ordinarily the case, as Heydon JA said in
that "the expert's evidence must explain how the field of 'specialised
knowledge' in which the witness is expert by reason of 'training,
experience', and on which the opinion is 'wholly or substantially based',
applies to the facts assumed or observed so as
to produce the opinion
propounded". The way in which
is drafted necessarily makes the
description of these requirements very long. But that is not to say that the
requirements cannot
be met in many, perhaps most, cases very quickly and easily.
That a specialist medical practitioner expressing a diagnostic opinion
her relevant field of specialisation is applying "specialised knowledge" based
on his or her "training, study or experience",
being an opinion "wholly or
substantially based" on that "specialised knowledge", will require little
explicit articulation or amplification
once the witness has described his or her
qualifications and experience, and has identified the subject matter about which
the opinion
is proffered.
that was not this case.
gave evidence of his training, study and experience. He did not give evidence
asserting that his training, his study or
his experience permitted him to
provide anything more than what he called a "ballpark" figure estimating the
amount of respirable
silica dust to which a worker using an angle grinder would
be exposed if that worker was using it in the manner depicted in the photograph
of Mr Hawchar or a video recording Dr Basden was shown. Indeed, in
his written report, Dr Basden had pointed out that he had seen
an angle grinder in this way only once before. And he gave no evidence that he
had then, or on any other occasion, measured
directly, or sought to calculate
inferentially, the amount of respirable dust to which such an operator was or
would be exposed.
was, in these circumstances, no footing on which the primary judge could
conclude that a numerical or quantitative opinion
expressed by Dr Basden
was wholly or substantially based on specialised knowledge based on training,
study or experience.
to submissions on behalf of Mr Hawchar, this analysis does not seek to
introduce what has been called "the basis rule":
a rule by which opinion
evidence is to be excluded unless the factual bases upon which the opinion is
proffered are established
by other evidence. Whether that rule formed part of
the common law of evidence need not be examined. It may be accepted that the
Law Reform Commission's interim report on
denied the existence of such a common law rule and expressed the intention to
refrain from including a basis rule in the legislation
the Commission proposed
and which was later enacted as the
Evidence Act
(Cth) and the
Evidence Act
(NSW). What has been called the basis rule is a rule
directed to the facts of the particular case about which an expert is asked
proffer an opinion and the facts upon which the expert relies to form the
opinion expressed. The point which is now made is a
point about connecting the
opinion expressed by a witness with the witness's specialised knowledge based on
training, study or experience.
failure to demonstrate that an opinion expressed by a witness is based on the
witness's specialised knowledge based on training,
study or experience is a
matter that goes to the admissibility of the evidence, not its weight. To
observe, as the Court of Appeal
did, that what Dr Basden said about the
volume of respirable dust to which Mr Hawchar was exposed over time was "an
estimate" that
was "contestable and inexact" no doubt did direct attention to
its worth and its weight. But more importantly, it directed attention
exactly Dr Basden was saying in his evidence and to whether any numerical
or quantitative assessment he proffered was admissible.
And if, as the Court of
his opinion on that matter lacked reasoning, the absence of reasoning pointed
(in this case, inexorably) to the lack of any sufficient
connection between a
numerical or quantitative assessment or estimate and relevant specialised
Dr Basden's
evidence was not admissible to found the calculation made by the primary judge
of the level of respirable dust to which
Mr Hawchar was exposed.
The "specialist" court
Consideration
of whether the primary judge could draw on evidence led in other cases "to take
into account [his] experience that
this disease [silicosis] is usually caused by
very high levels of silica
must begin with the relevant provisions of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act
of that Act provided that:
"(1) Any evidence that would be admissible in proceedings in the Supreme Court
is admissible in proceedings before the Tribunal.
(2) Except as otherwise provided by this Part or the rules, evidence is not
admissible in proceedings before the Tribunal if it would
not be admissible in
those proceedings by virtue of subsection (1).
(3) Historical evidence and general medical evidence concerning dust exposure
and dust diseases which has been admitted in any proceedings
before the Tribunal
may, with the leave of the Tribunal, be received as evidence in any other
proceedings before the Tribunal, whether
or not the proceedings are between the
same parties."
It follows that, subject to whatever is specifically provided by other
provisions of
of the Act, or by the
proceedings in the Tribunal are governed by the rules of evidence. Those rules
do not permit the Tribunal to take into account,
in deciding one case, evidence
given in other cases between different parties or findings of fact made in other
cases between different
Section 25B
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act
provides an important qualification to that
general rule. That section provides:
"(1) Issues of a general nature determined in proceedings before the Tribunal
(including proceedings on an appeal from the Tribunal)
may not be relitigated or
reargued in other proceedings before the Tribunal without the leave of the
Tribunal, whether or not the
proceedings are between the same parties.
(1A) If an issue of a general nature already determined in proceedings before
the Tribunal (the
earlier proceedings
) is the subject of other
proceedings before the Tribunal (the
later proceedings
issue is determined in the later proceedings on the basis of the determination
of the issue in the earlier proceedings,
the judgment of the Tribunal in the
later proceedings must identify the issue and must identify that it is an issue
of a general
nature determined as referred to in this section.
(2) In deciding whether to grant leave for the purposes of subsection (1), the
Tribunal is to have regard to:
(a) the availability of new evidence (whether or not previously available),
(b) the manner in which the other proceedings referred to in that subsection
were conducted, and
(c) such other matters as the Tribunal considers to be relevant.
(3) The rules may provide that subsection (1) does not apply in specified
kinds of proceedings or in specified circumstances or (without
limitation) in
relation to specified kinds of issues.
(4) This section does not affect any other law relating to matters of which
judicial notice can be taken or about which proof is
Rule 9(1) of the Dust Diseases Tribunal Rules (NSW) provides that "[a]
party who intends to rely in any proceedings on the determination
proceedings of an issue of a general nature ... must ... file and serve on all
other parties notice of that intention".
Rule 9(2) makes plain that, even
if no party gave notice of intention to rely on the earlier determination of a
general issue, the
Tribunal may do so on its own motion. But, in such a case,
s 25B(1A) obliges the Tribunal to identify the issue in its judgment
identify that the issue was an issue of a general nature determined as referred
to in s 25B.
party relied on s 25B as justifying the course taken by the primary judge
in the present matter. The primary judge did not identify
the issue of whether
very high levels of silica exposure were the usual cause of silicosis as a
general issue that had been determined
in earlier proceedings.
may be the position with respect to other tribunals, the statutory requirement
that, subject to certain limited exceptions,
none of which was engaged here, the
Dust Diseases Tribunal apply the rules of evidence compels the conclusion that
the primary judge
erred when he said that he was permitted to take his
experience into account in determining what caused Mr Hawchar's silicosis.
To the extent to which earlier decisions of the Court of Appeal concerning the
Dust Diseases
hold to the contrary, they should be overruled. Under the rules of evidence the
primary judge was permitted to take account of matters
not proved in evidence in
this case only if they were matters of which judicial notice could be taken. It
was not suggested that
the causes of silicosis were matters for judicial
Conclusion and orders
these reasons, the Court of Appeal was wrong to conclude that the evidence of
Dr Basden was admissible for the purposes for which
that Court and the
primary judge used it. Further, the Court of Appeal was wrong to conclude that
the primary judge was entitled
to take account of his experience as a member of
a "specialist" court in determining what caused Mr Hawchar's silicosis.
Those errors
having been established, it by no means follows, however, that the
Court of Appeal was bound to set aside the orders of the primary
judge and remit
the matter for rehearing.
will be recalled that
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act
that on the hearing of an appeal the Court of Appeal was empowered to "remit the
matter to the Tribunal for determination
by the Tribunal in accordance with any
decision" of the Court but that the Court of Appeal was further empowered to
"make such other
order in relation to the appeal" as it saw fit. In the present
case, where there was undisputed expert evidence that Mr Hawchar
suffering silicosis, that the short latency of the disease suggested that
Mr Hawchar's silica exposure had been intense and that
the silicosis was to
be attributed to a history of exposure to silica dust over a period of about six
years beginning in 1999, coupled
with the evidence of readily available means of
avoiding injury, the Court of Appeal should have concluded that Dasreef's appeal
against the finding that it was liable to Mr Hawchar be dismissed. This
Court should now make the orders which the Court of Appeal
should have made.
That is to be achieved in this case by dismissing Dasreef's appeal to this
Court, with costs.
J. This appeal primarily concerns reception of expert opinion evidence under
Evidence Act
(NSW) ("the
has near-equivalents in
The relevant statutory provisions
relevant provisions are as follows.
Section 55(1)
"The evidence that is relevant in a proceeding is evidence that, if it were
accepted, could rationally affect (directly or indirectly)
the assessment of the
probability of the existence of a fact in issue in the
proceeding."
"(1) Except as otherwise provided by this
, evidence that is relevant in a
proceeding is admissible in the proceeding.
(2) Evidence that is not relevant in the proceeding is not
admissible."
Section 57(1)
"If the determination of the question whether evidence adduced by a party is
relevant depends on the court making another finding
(including a finding that
the evidence is what the party claims it to be), the court may find that the
evidence is relevant:
(a) if it is reasonably open to make that finding, or
(b) subject to further evidence being admitted at a later stage of the
proceeding that will make it reasonably open to make that
then set out various exclusionary rules – exceptions to the
rule that relevant evidence is admissible.
sets out exclusionary rules relating to opinion.
Section 76(1)
"Evidence of an opinion is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact about
the existence of which the opinion was
expressed."
Section 79(1)
"If a person has specialised knowledge based on the person's training, study or
experience, the opinion rule does not apply to evidence
of an opinion of that
person that is wholly or substantially based on that
knowledge."
"Evidence of an opinion is not inadmissible only because it is about:
(a) a fact in issue or an ultimate issue, or
(b) a matter of common knowledge."
of the Dictionary to the
defines "opinion rule" as meaning
the expression "opinion" is not defined. A meaning commonly given to it is "an
inference drawn or to be drawn from observed
and communicable
This meaning will suffice for present purposes, although it must not be taken to
suggest that the observation of data does not itself
and sometimes
"The court may refuse to admit evidence if its probative value is substantially
outweighed by the danger that the evidence might:
(a) be unfairly prejudicial to a party, or
(b) be misleading or confusing, or
(c) cause or result in undue waste of
Section 136
"The court may limit the use to be made of evidence if there is a danger that a
particular use of the evidence might:
(a) be unfairly prejudicial to a party, or
(b) be misleading or confusing."
Difficulties with expert opinion evidence
construction of
is important for several reasons.
for generations judges have complained about the partiality of expert opinion
witnesses. In 1843 Lord
in 1873 Sir George Jessel
their "bias". Indeed many litigation lawyers can doubtless recall instances of
experts who say one thing in one case and
a contradictory thing in another, each
time to the supposed advantage of the party paying them. In 1849 Lord Cottenham
1876 Sir George Jessel
attention to the skewed manner in which experts are selected, as each side
rummages through a group of experts until the most
favourable one is found. In
1935 Lord Tomlin complained of the propensity of experts to offer opinions on
matters which are questions
– or, as Lord Justice Auld said more recently, to give opinion evidence
"masquerading as expert evidence on or very close to
the factual decision that
it is for the court to
1986 Judge Posner complained of expert opinion
"was the testimony either of a crank or, what is more likely, of a man who is
making a career out of testifying for plaintiffs in
automobile accident cases in
which a door may have opened; at the time of trial he was involved in 10 such
cases. His testimony
illustrates the age-old problem of expert witnesses who
are 'often the mere paid advocates or partisans of those who employ and pay
them, as much so as the attorneys who conduct the suit. There is hardly
anything, not palpably absurd on its face, that cannot now
be proved by some
so-called "experts."'"
"Many experts are willing for a generous (and sometimes for a modest) fee to
bend their science in the direction from which their
fee is coming. The
constraints that the market in consultant services for lawyers places on this
sort of behaviour are weak ...
The judicial constraints on tendentious expert
testimony are inherently weak because judges (and even more so juries ...) lack
or experience in the relevant fields of expert
knowledge."
there is the delay and expense caused by the disproportionate volume of expert
evidence. Lord Woolf MR identified a troubling
"A large litigation support industry, generating a multi-million pound fee
income, has grown up among professions such as accountants,
architects and
others, and new professions have developed such as accident reconstruction and
care experts. This goes against all
principles of proportionality and access to
justice. In my view, its most damaging effect is that it has created an ethos
is acceptable which has in turn filtered down to smaller cases. Many
potential litigants do not even start litigation because of
the advice they are
given about cost, and in my view this is as great a social ill as the actual
cost of pursuing litigation."
tendency of experts to dominate proceedings creates numerous other perils for
the integrity of the trial process. One is that
experts, who ex hypothesi know
much more about their fields of expertise than judges and juries do, and who
know of that vast disparity,
will take over the conduct of cases and exert
excessive influence over their outcomes. Another is that experts, no doubt
contemptuous,
often justifiably, of the ignorance of the lawyers, will appoint
themselves as advocates for the party calling them. Another is
that experts
render their evidence less than useful by giving it in a form conventional in
their discipline but not conforming to
the rules of
Another is the tendency of experts to drift into giving the courts reasons why
they should accept or reject the evidence of lay
witnesses on matters of primary
and very importantly, there is increasing concern about the risk of injustice
that may flow from unsatisfactory expert
The stricter the admissibility requirements for
tenders, the greater the
chance that evidence carrying that danger will be excluded.
The admissibility issue
evidence was that the "actual dust concentrations generated in [the
respondent's] breathing zone ... most certainly would not
be from half to two
ten-thousandths
of a gram [0.05 to 0.2mg] per cubic metre of air, but
more realistically would be of the order of a thousand or more times these
values or even approaching
gram, or thereabouts, per cubic metre"
(emphasis in original). The trial judge used it as an integer in calculations
the conclusion that the time weighted average of the respondent's
exposure to dust while working for the appellant, assuming he was
exposed for
30 minutes on each of five days per week, was
, which exceeded the limit of
in the relevant Australian standard. That was
a pleaded particular of a breach of statutory duty going to breach of the
appellant's
duty of care to the respondent. But was that evidence admissible?
The respondent's position
respondent submitted that the evidence was admissible, because there was no
"basis rule" in
The expression "basis rule" can be used in a variety of
senses. By it the respondent referred to, but denied the existence of,
requirements. He summed them up as the need to prove "the facts, the
assumptions and the reasoning which are the basis of
the opinion." First, the
respondent denied any requirement that the expert disclose the "facts" and
"assumptions" on which the expert's
opinion was founded. It is convenient to
call that requirement the "assumption identification" rule. Secondly, the
respondent denied
any requirement that the "facts" and "assumptions" stated be
proved before the evidence was admissible. This requirement is often
"basis" rule, following the usage of the Australian Law Reform Commission ("the
Commission")
But it is convenient to refer to it below as the "proof of assumption" rule.
Thirdly, the respondent denied any requirement that
there be a statement of
reasoning showing how the "facts" and "assumptions" related to the opinion
stated so as to reveal that that
opinion was based on the expert's
It is convenient to call this requirement the "statement of reasoning" rule.
short, the respondent submitted that the admissibility of expert opinion
evidence tendered under
required the establishment of a relevant field of
expertise, required that the witness be expert in that field, and required the
statement of opinion – but no
evidence tendered met those requirements but had the dangers to which
applied, the position could be remedied by orders under those sections.
common law position is relevant to the construction of
Common law in relation to assumption identification rule
authorities.
There is no doubt that the assumption identification rule
exists at common law. Expert evidence is inadmissible unless the facts
the opinion is based are stated by the expert – by way of proof if the
expert can admissibly prove them, otherwise
as assumptions to be proved in other
ways. Thus Dixon J said that the assumptions of fact on which an expert opinion
to be "adverted to by the
There is much authority for that
proposition in
the Australian Capital
the Northern
and the Federal Court of
It has the extrajudicial support of
G J Samuels
of the assumption identification rule.
The rule facilitates the operation
of the proof of assumption rule and other rules of admissibility. It helps to
distinguish between
what the expert has observed and what the expert has been
ensure that the expert is basing the opinion only on relevant
ensure that experts do not pick and choose for themselves what aspects of the
primary evidence they reject, what they accept,
how they interpret it and what
the court should
to ascertain whether there is substantial correspondence between the facts
assumed and the evidence admitted to establish
Common law in relation to the proof of assumption rule
authorities.
There is also no doubt that the proof of assumption rule
exists at common law. An expert opinion is not admissible unless evidence
been, or will be, admitted, whether from the expert or from some other source,
which is capable of supporting findings of fact
which are sufficiently similar
to the factual assumptions on which the opinion was stated to be based to render
the opinion of value.
There is authority for the rule in this
the Federal Court of
in New South
in the Australian Capital
The Victorian Court of Appeal (Ormiston, Vincent and Eames JJA), speaking of a
proposition that an expert opinion without any evidentiary
inadmissible, said: "The situation requires no elaborate exposition of the
legal principles nor is the extensive citation
of authority required with
respect to such a basic
proposition."
However, in ALRC 26, the Commission
"It has been implied in some cases and asserted in some academic writing that
there is a rule of evidence that for expert opinion
testimony to be admissible
it must have as its basis admitted evidence. The better view is that there is
no such rule. Were it
to exist, it would not be possible to have opinion
evidence which had as a significant component the opinions or the statements of
others. This would preclude the tendering of evidence whose value is dependent
upon material not before the court and, therefore,
difficult for it to assess.
While this would have its advantages, it would fail in its inflexibility to take
account of the normal
means by which experts generally form their opinions
– by means of reports of technicians and assistants, consultation with
colleagues and reliance upon a host of extrinsic material and information that
it would be an endless and unfruitful task with which
to burden the
is no common law rule that expert opinion evidence cannot be received unless
there exists already "admitted" evidence. It
suffices if it can be seen that
the appropriate evidence will be admitted later. Statements suggesting the
stem from a time when it was commoner than it is now for a party not to call
expert evidence until all the other evidence in that
party's case had been
the Commission's criticism is undercut by one qualification to the proof of
assumption rule. Under a common law exception
to the hearsay rule, experts may
give evidence of hearsay matters which go to demonstrate their expertise –
what is said in
the published or unpublished works they have read, what has been
said to them in discussions they have had with colleagues, what
impressions they
have gained from their general
In any event, the criticism goes more to the question whether the rule is
satisfactory, not to the present question of whether it
exists at common
respondent rightly accepted that the Commission was wrong to deny or doubt the
existence of the proof of assumption rule.
is necessary to deal with the Commission's six reasons for denying the existence
of the proof of assumption rule. Five can be
dealt with briefly; the sixth
calls for fuller discussion.
authorities.
First, the Commission criticised a statement of the proof of
assumption rule in the 12th edition of
Phipson on Evidence
saying that it was "most dubious" whether the four cases cited supported
passage had appeared in the first 11 editions as
has also appeared in the last five
The appearance of the passage in so many editions of
, which has
been in constant use among the profession for over a century in numerous common
law jurisdictions, and has passed through
the hands of many highly experienced
editors and assistant editors, without recorded criticism from judges,
barristers or other authors,
is a significant pointer to the existence of the
The second reason given by the
Milirrpum v Nabalco Pty
inconsistent with the rule. Yet in fact Blackburn J's reasoning was devoted to
establishing that there was no need to prove
the expertise of expert witnesses
by evidence complying with conventional rules of admissibility.
English cases?
Thirdly, the Commission said that two English
unclear as to whether the rule
This is an exaggeration. The cases do in truth support the rule.
United States position at common law.
Fourthly, the Commission conceded
that the basis rule "may well have been the common law position in the United
There is actually no doubt about
Wigmore stated that in a hypothetical question put to an expert containing the
factual assumptions on which the expert opinion
is to be based, "the data to be
assumed are those which it is expected or claimed by the party the jury will
subsequently adopt as
true"; and hence the question "
must not include data
which there is not a fair possibility of the jury
A question which offends that prohibition is open to objection, and an opinion
offered in answer to that question is inadmissible.
Canadian position.
Fifthly, the Commission relied on a Canadian case,
Wilband v The
But on the present point that case was later substantially
v Watson: the facts and the judgment.
Sixthly, the Commission said that in
"the High Court took the view that the consequence of not proving the factual
basis is that the opinion may be of 'little or no value'
not that it would be
inadmissible. No basis rule of admissibility [ie proof of assumption rule] was
laid down by the High Court.
It did state, however, that a trial judge can
properly refuse to admit evidence of statements made to [the expert witness] on
he bases his opinion where it is apparent that other evidence to prove the
truth of those statements will not be
Ramsay v Watson
, Watson claimed that he had been made ill by reason of
his employer's failure to protect him against injury from inhaling lead
and lead oxide fumes. He succeeded before a jury at trial and before
the Full Court of the Supreme Court of New South Wales. One
ground advanced in
the employer's appeal to the High Court concerned a government medical officer.
He gave evidence that he had
examined 21 other employees who had worked at that
workplace and "observed" that they did not have symptoms of lead poisoning. The
High Court (Dixon CJ, McTiernan, Kitto, Taylor and Windeyer JJ)
"Counsel for the defendant wanted him to go further. He sought to get from the
witness not only what he
had observed
, but also what each of the men
had told him
apparently hoped to strengthen or complete the evidence of the witness that in
his opinion
those other men had not been affected by lead, or not affected to a
serious degree, by proving that each when questioned had said
that his health in
the past had been good, and perhaps to elicit also other statements they had
made. Counsel for the plaintiff
objected on the ground that, if these matters
were admissible, they could not be proved by hearsay and that the men themselves
be called."
In particular, an objection was put to any question about what history each
employee gave the medical officer. The High Court said
that the history was not
admissible as part of the res gestae, but
"A sounder argument for admitting evidence of what the men had told the
examining doctor might have been that it was part of the
material on which he
formed the opinion that he gave in evidence. When a physician's diagnosis or
opinion concerning his patient's
health or illness is receivable, he is
ordinarily allowed to state the 'history' he got from the patient. ... This,
is quite a different matter from the rule last discussed [ie the res
gestae rule]. That, in cases where it applies, makes statements
made to anyone
concerning present symptoms and sensations admissible as evidence that those
symptoms and sensations, in fact, existed.
This makes all statements made to an
expert witness admissible if they are the foundation, or part of the foundation,
of the expert
opinion to which he testifies; but, except they be admissible
under the first rule [ie the res gestae rule], such statements are
not evidence
of the existence in fact of past sensations, experiences and symptoms of the
patient. Hearsay evidence does not become
admissible to prove facts because the
person who proposes to give it is a physician."
High Court then made the statement on which the Commission
"[I]f the man whom the physician examined refuses to confirm in the witness box
what he said in the consulting room, then the physician's
little or no value
, for part of the basis of it has
The High Court
"Each case depends on its own facts. In this case counsel for the defendant
sought to get the examining doctor to recount things
he had been told by those
he examined. Yet he did not undertake to call them as witnesses. Indeed he
made it clear that he did
not intend to do so. His Honour in his summing-up
told the jury that the medical evidence was that none of the twenty-one men had,
when examined, exhibited any symptoms of lead poisoning. The appellant
nevertheless complains, because it seems that the respondent's
counsel had
suggested to the jury that they might discount this evidence, as they did not
know the past medical history of the men.
This comment, the appellant suggests,
could not have been made had the doctor been allowed to tell the jury what they
had told him.
His Honour, however, could properly refuse to admit evidence of
this, it having been made apparent that the men would not be
Ramsay v Watson
, the factual basis of the expert opinion was established
by the witness's personal observation of the 21 employees. The rejected
evidence was evidence of the histories given by way of supposed reinforcement,
the need for which was later confirmed by the failure
of the expert opinion to
sway the jury. The High Court was thus not dealing with a case where the expert
witness's opinion depended
wholly on a factual basis which was not established.
Its analysis is, with respect, instructive nonetheless.
yet uncalled evidence suffices.
First, the High Court did not see it as a
barrier to the admissibility of the evidence about the employees' histories that
the employees
had not given evidence of them before the expert witness entered
the witness box. Subsequent evidence from the 21 employees of those
would have sufficed. Ideally, expert evidence will always be called after the
primary evidence tendered to prove the assumptions
on which the expert evidence
rests. That is because at that point it will be clearer what is truly in
dispute factually, it will
be easier to estimate what evidence may be accepted
by the jury, and it will be easier to put hypothetical questions of a realistic
kind to witnesses in answer to which they can state opinions based on the
factual case proffered by the party calling them, and say
how, if at all, their
opinions would be modified if that case were not fully accepted or were
rejected. But in practice it is frequently
not possible or convenient to call
the expert evidence at the end of the tendering party's case.
makes plain that expert opinion evidence is unaffected by the fact
that the primary evidence has not yet been given to support the
assumptions on
which the opinion rests. The admissibility of the expert evidence can be
secured by counsel undertaking to call the
primary evidence later. Hence the
proof of assumption rule does not cramp the party calling the expert witness by
imposing an impracticably
rigid order of witnesses.
procedure conforming with
Ramsay v Watson
was explained thus by the
Queensland Court of Appeal in
"Mr Jones was a properly qualified clinical psychologist. He was,
relevantly, an expert whose opinion might be admitted into evidence.
could be accepted, however, the factual basis for the opinion had to be
explained to the court. Mr Jones had to recount
the facts on which he
based his opinion. To do that he had to give in evidence the history he took
from the complainant about his
symptoms and what led up to them.
Mr Jones's rehearsal of those facts would not prove them but once he had
said what he understood
the facts to be on which he formed his opinion that
opinion could be
provisionally
admitted into evidence. If the facts were
proved by someone who had knowledge of them, in this case the complainant, the
would be admitted
unconditionally
. [If] the facts were not
on which the admission depended would be unsatisfied
and the opinion could not be acted on by the tribunal of
possibilities.
A second important aspect of
Ramsay v Watson
High Court's refusal to enunciate any absolute rule about the precise impact of
an absence of primary evidence on the admissibility
of expert evidence based on
it. "Each case depends on its own facts." There are innumerable ways in which
there may be a disconformity
between the facts assumed by the expert as the
basis for the opinion, and the facts eventually accepted by the trier of fact.
the party tendering the expert opinion has called primary evidence which, if
accepted, would correspond substantially with the factual
basis assumed, but the
trier of fact rejects the primary evidence, in whole or in part, the question is
not one of admissibility,
but only of weight. That is because questions of
admissibility
ought not to arise once the evidence is closed: by the time it is closed, all
evidence that is to be considered by the trier of
fact will have been admitted,
and any other evidence tendered will have been rejected. "Parties should know,
before addresses are
taken, the final state of the evidence, whether the trial
be by judge and jury or judge
Rulings on admissibility must thus generally be made before the evidence closes.
But that is only a minimum position. The superior
practice requires rulings
that party's case is closed,
so as to allow the opposing party, if the
defendant, the opportunity to consider whether to make a no case submission, and
all opposing parties to consider whether evidence should be called and,
if so, what. The traditional position is even more desirable:
subject to the
judge's entitlement to take a little time to consider difficult objections, "a
party is entitled to have questions
of admissibility determined as they
Only in that way can the opposing party know whether and how to cross-examine
the tendering party's witnesses, and what documents
to tender through them.
the tendering party will fail to ensure sufficient conformity between the
assumed and the primary facts because the tendering
party never intends to call
evidence of the primary facts. Sometimes it will fail because while its
tenders, if accepted, would
go some distance towards establishing the primary
facts, they do not go far enough, even if accepted, to establish their
a party tendering the opinion of an expert contends that all the evidence of the
primary facts that could be tendered has already
been admitted, the court's task
in deciding the admissibility of the opinion is relatively simple. It is to
assess whether, assuming
the evidence of the primary facts is accepted, it will
lead to findings sufficiently similar to the factual assumptions on which
expert opinion was stated to be based to render it of value. That task is
easier when carried out in the light of actual evidence
as distinct from a
perhaps imperfect prediction of what the evidence may turn out to be. If, on
the other hand, the evidence of
the primary facts already admitted, even if
accepted, would not lead to the necessary findings, the admissibility of the
expert evidence
may depend on the giving of an undertaking by the tendering
party to call another witness. It is good practice for counsel opposing
of the opinion evidence to draw attention, at the time of tender, to any
significant gap between the primary facts assumed
by the expert and the evidence
so far received in an attempt to establish those facts, and to seek rejection of
the expert evidence
unless an appropriate undertaking to fill the gap is
or no value".
What, then, is the meaning of the High Court's words: "[I]f
the man whom the physician examined refuses to confirm in the witness
he said in the consulting room, then the physician's opinion may have little or
no value, for part of the basis of it has
a tendering party refuses in advance to give an undertaking to attempt to comply
with a condition of admissibility, the court
should reject the tender. When
their Honours in
Ramsay v Watson
said that the trial judge "could
properly refuse to admit evidence of [what the 21 employees told the doctor], it
having been made
apparent that the men would not be called", they were not
referring to a discretion: the trial judge "could properly" refuse to
evidence because it is proper to reject inadmissible evidence.
the other hand, where an undertaking is given in advance that an attempt will be
made to comply with a condition of admissibility,
the court may choose to admit
the evidence conditionally, ie provisionally, in the manner described in
What if that attempt is frustrated by the refusal or failure of the witness
called in fulfilment of that undertaking to come up
to proof? It may not be
right to exclude it if there has been only a partial failure to fulfil the
undertaking. But if, at the
close of the tendering party's case, the party
opposing the tender draws attention to the continuing gap between the primary
assumed by the expert and the evidence called to prove them, and to the
failure of the tendering party to fulfil the undertaking
to close that gap, it
may be the duty of the court to reject the evidence even if it has been
conditionally admitted. That duty
will exist if, to use the High Court's
language, the missing "basis" which has left the gap is so great that the
expert's opinion
has "no value" – that is, no probative value –
because in that event it cannot have any relevance and it is therefore
inadmissible. If it has very "little" value, the same may be true. If it has
some value, it may be relevant. But it may be at
risk of exclusion in exercise
of a discretion in criminal cases, and, if one exists in civil cases at common
law, in civil cases
too, to exclude evidence the probative value of which is
outweighed by its prejudicial effect. It would be strange if opinion evidence
which is inadmissible because the tendering party failed to offer an undertaking
would become admissible where the tendering party
did offer an undertaking to
call the supporting evidence but did not fulfil it. In those circumstances a
trial judge would be entitled
to reverse an earlier ruling admitting the
evidence in reliance on the undertaking.
It is not true to say that
Ramsay v Watson
held that a failure to prove the assumed factual basis of an expert opinion goes
only to weight, not admissibility. It is not true
to say that no "basis rule of
admissibility" was laid down. The Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia
correctly cited
Ramsay v Watson
"The proposition that an expert's opinion based upon certain assumptions which
are not ultimately proved in evidence is irrelevant
is a fundamental principle
of the law". Irrelevant evidence is inadmissible.
of the proof of assumption rule.
The function of the proof of assumption
rule is to highlight the irrelevance of expert opinion evidence resting on
assumptions not
backed by primary evidence. It is irrelevant because it stands
in a void, unconnected with the issues thrown up by the evidence
reasoning processes which the trier of fact may employ to resolve
If the expert's conclusion does not have some rational relationship with the
facts proved, it is irrelevant. That is because in
not tending to establish the
conclusion asserted, it lacks probative capacity. Opinion evidence is a bridge
between data in the
form of primary evidence and a conclusion which cannot be
reached without the application of expertise. The bridge cannot stand
primary evidence end of it does not exist. The expert opinion is then only a
misleading jumble, uselessly cluttering up the
evidentiary scene.
The statement of reasoning rule at common law
authorities.
At common law there is no doubt that an expert opinion is
inadmissible unless the expert states in chief the reasoning by which the
conclusion arrived at flows from the facts proved or assumed by the expert so as
to reveal that the opinion is based on the
expert's expertise. The court does
not have to be satisfied that the reasoning is correct: "the giving of correct
expert evidence
cannot be treated as a qualification necessary for giving expert
But the reasoning must be stated. The opposing party is not to be left to find
out about the expert's thinking for the first time
cross-examination
92 Sir Owen Dixon, speaking extrajudicially, said: "courts cannot be expected
to act upon opinions the basis of which is
unexplained."
R v Jenkins; Ex parte
Fullagar J quoted that statement with approval, and added that expert scientific
witnesses should be asked to "explain the basis
of theory or experience" on
which their conclusions
On appeal Rich and Dixon JJ approved what Fullagar J had
The witness must explain the basis of theory or experience because the court is
not limited to examining the conclusion or the
expertise of the expert witness:
it must look to the "substance of the opinion
expressed."
Since choosing between conflicting experts depends in part on "impressiveness
and cogency of
their "processes of reasoning" must be
In short, as the Victorian Court of Appeal (Winneke P, Charles and Chernov JJA)
"[T]he jury must be able to evaluate the strength of [expert opinion] evidence
by reference to its factual or scientific basis.
Whether it can properly do so
is a matter initially for the judge in determining whether that evidence is
admissible. ... [T]he
admissibility of [expert opinion] evidence must depend
upon the judge's satisfaction that the jury can, on the basis of material
before them, properly and reasonably evaluate the differing opinions expressed
and make a responsible determination as to which
of them is to be
preferred."
of the statement of reasoning rule.
The rule protects cross-examiners by
enabling them to go straight to the heart of any difference between the parties
without the delay
of preliminary reconnoitring. It also aids the court in a
non-jury trial, because at the end of the trial it is the duty of the
give reasons for its conclusions. And it aids jurors, because at the end of the
trial they have the duty of assessing the
rational force of expert evidence. If
there is not some exposition of the expert's reasoning it will be impossible for
to compose a judgment stating, and for the jurors to assemble, reasons
for accepting or rejecting or qualifying the expert's conclusion.
"The process of inference that leads to the [expert's] conclusions must be
stated or revealed in a way that enables the conclusions
to be tested and a
judgment made about the reliability of
As Lord Cooper, the Lord President, said in
Davie v Magistrates of
"The value of [expert opinion] evidence depends ... above all upon the extent to
which [the expert's] evidence carries conviction
[T]he defenders went so far as to maintain that we were bound to accept the
conclusions of [an expert witness]. This view I must
firmly reject as contrary
to the principles in accordance with which expert opinion evidence is
. ... [The] duty [of expert witnesses] is to furnish the Judge
or jury with the necessary scientific criteria for testing the accuracy
conclusions, so as to enable the Judge or jury to form their own independent
judgment by the application of these criteria
to the facts proved in evidence.
... [T]he bare ipse dixit
of a scientist, however eminent, upon the
issue in controversy, will normally carry little weight, for it cannot be tested
by cross-examination
nor independently appraised, and the parties have invoked
the decision of a judicial tribunal and not an oracular pronouncement by
is sometimes said that these words deal with weight only, not admissibility.
But this is contradicted by the Lord President's
use of the word "admitted".
and the assumption identification rule
respondent contended that the three common law rules just discussed were not
taken up in
respondent relied on denials by Branson J that the first rule existed in
relation to
tenders. In
Quick v Stoland Pty Ltd
her Honour said
did not contain a provision reflecting the common law rule that the
admissibility of expert opinion depends upon "proper
of the factual basis of the
The word "disclosure" is a reference to the first rule. The word "proof" is a
reference to the second rule. In
Sydneywide Distributors Pty Ltd v Red Bull
Australia Pty
she repeated her denial that the common law rule requiring "proper disclosure"
had been adopted in the
. In support she referred to the Commission's
proposal to "refrain from including" the second rule in its draft
However, as Austin J correctly pointed out in
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v
in that passage the Commission was not speaking of "disclosure" of the factual
basis, only "proof" of it.
respondent's riposte to Gleeson CJ.
The respondent asserted that there was
no reference in terms to the first rule in
Gleeson CJ, however, rested
the continued existence of the first rule on an implication from the terms of
"An expert whose opinion is sought to be tendered should differentiate between
the assumed facts upon which the opinion is based,
and the opinion in question.
... [T]he provisions of
will often have the practical effect of
emphasising the need for attention to requirements of form. By directing
attention to whether
an opinion is wholly or substantially based on specialised
knowledge based on training, study or experience, the section requires
opinion is presented in a form which makes it possible to answer that
The respondent riposted by going so far as to submit that, even if it did not
appear on the face of the opinion that it was based
on specialised knowledge,
the opinion was admissible. He also submitted, less ambitiously, that the
requirement that the opinion
be "wholly or substantially based" on the expert's
"specialised knowledge based on the person's training, study or experience" was
"susceptible of proof by a simple evidentiary statement." The respondent went
on: "Proof that the requirement has been met can
be given in the document
required by rules in all the Australian Courts, or it can be given in evidence
in chief or it can be given
in cross examination or it can be decided ... by a
." Whether the opinion actually was wholly or substantially
based on the witness's knowledge was a matter to be investigated in the
cross-examination. It was a matter that went only to whether the expert's
opinion had sufficient weight to be accepted.
Hence there was no need to state
the assumed facts.
respondent's riposte is not correct. The requirement that the opinion be based
wholly or substantially on specialised knowledge
is an explicit precondition of
admissibility. Like other preconditions under
, it is to be established by
the party tendering the evidence. It is to be established in examination in
chief (during the trial
or on the voir dire), not in cross-examination or in
non-evidentiary documents required by rules of court for other purposes.
Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia has rightly rejected the
respondent's
So has the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales: it held
that the links between the expert's training, study
and experience and the
opinion should be spelt out unless they are apparent from the nature of the
specialised
And in this Court, Gleeson CJ, in dealing with an expert whose opinion was not
based on specialised knowledge but on "a combination
of speculation, inference,
personal and second-hand views as to the credibility of the
complainant"
"[I]t is important that the opinions of expert witnesses be confined, in
accordance with
, to opinions which are wholly or substantially based on
their specialised knowledge. Experts who venture 'opinions' (sometimes merely
their own inference of fact), outside their field of specialised knowledge may
invest those opinions with a spurious appearance of
authority, and legitimate
processes of fact-finding may be
subverted."
The authorities.
Branson J's view that
tenders need not comply
with an assumption identification rule is not, apart from one passage in this
specifically supported by the authorities in any
Almost all courts in which the question has been considered have revealed
disagreement with her Honour's
That does not mean that the omission of any assumption, however obvious or
insignificant, results in exclusion of the opinion.
Harrington-Smith v
Western Australia (No
Lindgren J stated: "perhaps it cannot be said that in all cases evidence of
expert opinion will be inadmissible if an expert does
not separately list all
the factual assumptions underlying his or her report". For example, it has been
said that the requirement
that expert witnesses reveal all the assumptions on
which they proceeded does not extend to basic assumptions about human nature,
human anatomy, atmospheric conditions on earth, the working of a market economy,
and obvious reasoning about the dating of information
and the provenance of
But these qualifications do not undercut the proposition that the articulation
of all significant factual assumptions is a precondition
to admissibility when
expert evidence is tendered under
That proposition is sound in principle. For the reasons given by Gleeson
CJ, the proposition has textual support. A construction
as abolishing
the common law rule should be rejected because silence about the factual
assumptions being made would have very unsatisfactory
consequences. First, the
court may not be able to understand the opinion so as to decide what weight to
Secondly, the court will not be able to assess whether it corresponds with the
facts which the court finds at the end of the
Thirdly, the court will not be able to assess whether the opinion is one wholly
or substantially based on the expert's
Fourthly, there would be unacceptable difficulties for the cross-examiner, who
should not have to perform, in the dark, particularly
in relation to lengthy and
complex expert opinion evidence, the "task of teasing out in cross-examination
all the circumstances that
the witness had in
Fifthly, the cross-examining party should not be left at a disadvantage in
deciding whether and how to meet the evidence. Sixthly,
the respondent's
construction reduces the chance of the parties getting to grips, or at least
getting to grips quickly. It would
thus cause trials to become slower, more
complicated and more costly. The respondent's submissions failed to refute
these points.
and the proof of assumption rule
respondent's submissions.
Is an opinion tendered under
inadmissible
unless there was evidence, admitted or to be admitted before the end of the
tendering party's
capable of proving matters sufficiently similar to the assumptions to render the
opinion of value? The correct answer is in the
affirmative. The respondent
answered in the negative. He relied on some remarks of Gaudron J in
and on various Federal Court
authorities
He accepted that if the expert's assumptions were wrong the opinion based on
them would have no relevance. He accepted that sometimes
expert evidence might
be provisionally admitted subject to relevance (ie depending on whether the
assumptions were established).
But he submitted that even when
cross-examination and other forensic testing rendered evidence either worthless
or much reduced
in significance, it did not become inadmissible. The respondent
relied on the absence of any words in
retaining the common law rule and on
the Commission's stated intention to "refrain from including a [proof of
assumption] rule in
legislation"
authorities.
Support for the respondent can be found not only in the
Federal Court cases on which he relied, but in
and also in judgments of Dowd
the other hand, other Federal Court cases
And, as noted
the Full Federal Court recently asserted roundly and rightly: "The proposition
that an expert's opinion based upon certain assumptions
which are not ultimately
proved in evidence is irrelevant is a fundamental principle of the
There are other cases which hold, say or assume that the respondent's contention
respondent relied on
Guide Dog Owners' & Friends' Association Inc v Guide
Dog Association of New South Wales &
But it is immaterial. It contains dicta about lay opinion evidence tendered
It does not deal with expert opinion evidence tendered under
There is conceptually a radical distinction between
witnesses speak, for example, of age, speed, weather or emotional state, while
it may be desirable from the point of view of
weight for them to indicate
whatever identifiable and communicable perceptions of primary fact cause them to
reach a conclusion,
it is often hard for them to do so. Hence it can be
"necessary", within the meaning of
, that their rolled-up
opinions, based on unidentifiable or incommunicable perceptions of primary fact,
be received "to obtain an
adequate account or understanding of [their]
perception of the matter or event." A
opinion often has utility despite
not being supported by evidence of the "primary facts". To insist on proof of
primary facts would
in many instances nullify that utility. Instances where a
opinion unsupported by evidence of the "primary facts" has utility are
difficult to imagine and rare.
The respondent, like the Federal Court cases on which he relied, placed
determinative significance on what was said by the Commission
Interpretation Act
permit ALRC 26 to be taken into account in interpreting
purposes listed in
"(a) to confirm that the meaning of the provision is the ordinary meaning
conveyed by the text of the provision (taking into account
its context in the
or statutory rule and the purpose or object underlying the
or statutory
rule ...), or
(b) to determine the meaning of the provision:
(i) if the provision is ambiguous or obscure, or
(ii) if the ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of the provision (taking into
account its context in the
or statutory rule and the purpose or object
underlying the
or statutory rule ...) leads to a result that is manifestly
absurd or is unreasonable."
what purpose did the courts and the respondent refer to ALRC 26 – to
confirm the ordinary meaning of
, or to determine the meaning of
view of its ambiguity or obscurity, or to determine its true meaning in view of
the manifest absurdity or unreasonableness of
the ordinary meaning? The cases
relied on by the respondent do not say. Nor did the respondent.
ordinary meaning of
, taking into account its language, its context in the
), the function of the
(which is the efficient
and rational regulation of trials from an evidentiary point of view), and the
unreasonable results which
a contrary construction would produce, is that it
does not abolish the common law proof of assumption rule. Failure by the
party to comply with the proof of assumption rule makes the opinion
evidence irrelevant. The court may find the opinion relevant,
however, if the
evidence already tendered of the primary facts, taken with further evidence to
be admitted at a later stage, makes
it reasonably open to make a finding that
they exist:
the respondent submitted that the Commission was wrong to conclude that there is
no proof of assumption rule at common law,
he also submitted that it followed
from the Commission's decision "to refrain from including a [proof of
assumption] rule" in its
draft Bill that the legislature had abolished that
rule. The conclusion does not follow. The Commission's reasoning has misled
both itself and some of its readers. A decision to refrain from including what
was thought to be a rule which does not exist at
common law does not demonstrate
abolition of a rule which does in fact exist at common law. The Commission
wrongly thought that
there is no proof of assumption rule at common law. On
that hypothesis, as the Commission correctly saw, the question was whether
should recommend that the legislature should enact one, and it decided not to
make that recommendation. In fact there is a proof
of assumption rule at common
law, and the question for the Commission thus should have been whether to
recommend that it be abolished
by legislation. To abolish it by legislation
would have called for specific language. The Commission's misapprehension of
law, and hence of its task, has resulted in a failure to have enacted
specific language ensuring that
tenders need not comply with a proof of
assumption rule.
respondent asked: "Does
provide for the common law proof of assumption
rule?" That was not the correct question. The correct question was: "Does
abolish that rule?" The
is far from being a complete code. It often
deals with complex and important subjects, like expert evidence, in very general
Sometimes the
changes the previous law. Sometimes it repeats it.
At many points it assumes the continuance of the common law. An example is
common law exception to the hearsay rule permitting experts to rely on the
writings of others in the relevant area of expertise
as a basis for their
says nothing about that rule, the Full Federal Court, correctly,
did not approach the issue by asking whether
provided for the permissible
reliance of experts on other expert works, but simply held that nothing in
has abolished
does not in express terms state that experts must articulate the
factual assumptions on which their opinions are based. But the
vast bulk of
authority holds that that principle applies in relation to tenders under
presents a significant contrast with
reflects the desire of
the Commission to abolish what it saw as two unsatisfactory common law
Acting on that desire, it recommended specific language eventually used by
Parliament to abolish those rules. The Commission's
misconception about the
common law led it not to adopt that technique in relation to the proof of
assumption rule.
Inconvenience
of proof of assumption construction?
The authorities on which the
adopted the familiar technique which sees it as legitimate to favour one
construction of legislation because of the disadvantages
of others. Those
authorities adopted an argument advanced by the Commission about the
unsatisfactoriness of a proof of assumption
rule. The argument was that the
rule would eliminate much material from sources normally open to experts in
their professional lives.
The Commission relied on a passage in Fauteux J's
judgment in the Canadian case of
Wilband v The
"to form an opinion according to recognized normal psychiatric procedures, the
psychiatrist must consider all possible sources of
information, including
second-hand source information, the reliability, accuracy and significance of
which are within the recognized
scope of his professional activities, skill and
training to evaluate. Hence, while ultimately his conclusion may rest, in part,
on second-hand source material, it is nonetheless an opinion formed according to
recognized normal psychiatric procedures. ...
The value of a psychiatrist's
opinion may be affected to the extent to which it may rest on second-hand source
material; but that
goes to the weight and not to the receivability in evidence
of the opinion, which opinion is no evidence of the truth of the information
evidence of the opinion formed on the basis of that
information."
The Commission criticised any proof of assumption rule as requiring proof of the
"reports of technicians and assistants, consultation
with colleagues and
reliance upon a host of extrinsic material and information". This "would be an
endless and unfruitful task with
which to burden the
the Commission's words refer to the sources of the witness's expertise in
training and experience, in works of authority and research,
in conversations
with colleagues, and in all the witness's past dealings with problems similar to
that involved in the litigation?
If so, the proof of assumption rule does not
render that material inadmissible.
the Commission's words refer to dealings the expert has had with others, or
contributions by others to the expert's report, in
relation to his or her
evidence about the problem involved in the litigation? If so, the proof of
assumption rule does not prevent
evidence being given, for example, of the
calculations performed by the assistants to expert accountant witnesses, even
assistants did not give evidence.
the Commission's words refer to the opinions of fellow experts about the case in
issue, or the observations by fellow experts,
professional persons who are not
experts and other lay witnesses of primary facts to do with the case in issue?
If so, it is clear
that at common law the evidence is
inadmissible
G J Samuels put the following justification for rejecting:
"subsidiary expert opinions [consisting] of reports of other experts, amounting
to their unsworn findings or observations, those
others not being called in the
proceeding. In such cases, there will be no evidence of the truth of the
material, nor of the competence
of the authors to make the findings. This is a
situation which often arises in the Courts where a doctor is asked to express an
opinion based in part upon the reports of radiologists, or asked to express a
conclusion based upon pathological reports or upon
myelograms, ECG's and the
like. It would seem that in no case could such material be used as a basis for
a further opinion. That
is on the assumption of course, that proof of it is not
ultimately to be introduced. This would be so although the expert was to
his opinion not solely upon the reports of others but upon that material coupled
with his own direct knowledge by
examination."
The Commission did not demonstrate why that was wrong. Its prediction that the
proof of assumption rule would burden the courts
with an "endless and unfruitful
task" came strangely from a body which denied or doubted the existence at common
law of the proof
of assumption rule, and was therefore disabled from pointing to
adverse experience. The rule has not in fact proved excessively
burdensome.
And it is easier for counsel and for triers of fact to deal with evidence in the
open than with shadowy untendered material.
Unnecessariness
of proof of assumption rule?
The other reasons given by the Commission for
its proposal to refrain from including a proof of assumption rule in the draft
legislation
do not cast doubt on the reasonableness of a construction
acknowledging its survival. One was put
"[I]n most cases the important facts on which the opinion is based will be
established by other evidence. Parties are under strong
tactical pressure to do
On this reasoning, virtually no rules of evidence would be needed at all. It is
reasoning at odds with the slackness and arrogance
revealed in modern times in a
great many expert reports.
of proof of assumption rule to be insisted on oppressively?
Another reason
given by the Commission
"To place parties in a position where they can insist on proof of all the bases
of the opinion, including that which is not contested,
would introduce costly,
time consuming and cumbersome procedures."
What are the "costly, time consuming and cumbersome procedures" that the proof
of assumption rule "
It has existed for centuries without any difficulties the Commission was able to
point to. The Commission spoke of parties insisting
on proof of "all the bases
of the opinion, including that which is not
If part of the basis is not contested, ex hypothesi there is no need for proof
of it, at least in civil cases, and a party cannot
insist on proof of it. If it
is contested in good faith, subject to the court's power to compel admissions, a
party can insist on
proof of it, and it is not unreasonable that a party should
be able to do so.
the Federal Court of Australia it has been said that, if
tenders depended
on compliance with a proof of assumption rule, "the smooth running of trials
involving expert evidence could be
expected to be interrupted by the need to
explore in detail, in the context of admissibility, matters more properly
considered at
the end of the trial in the context of the weight to be attributed
These have been described as "practical difficulties" which "should not be
underestimated."
Those complaints overlook a key distinction. It is a distinction between the
need for the party tendering an expert opinion to establish
that the other
evidence (tendered or yet to be tendered) taken at its highest
is capable of
the expert's factual assumptions, on the one hand, and, on the
other hand, the need for the tendering party to persuade the trier
accept that the evidence tendered to support the factual assumptions
does support them
. And it is necessary to set against any practical
difficulties caused by the proof of assumption rule a competing consideration.
That is whether the reception of evidence which turns out to be useless because
the assumptions on which it rests are unproven does
not create countervailing
difficulties – costs burdens, unduly long trials, the risk of misleading
the trier of fact, and unnecessary
Sufficiency
of discretionary power of exclusion?
The Commission argued that, while a
proof of assumption rule would have advantages, any corresponding disadvantages
which might flow
from its absence could be overcome by a discretionary power of
exclusion (now to be found in
This technique eschews the primary
technique of a rule of strict inadmissibility, and instead falls back on a
weaker device. Expert
evidence is expensive. For defendants in particular, it
is necessary to know with reasonable certainty before the trial begins whether
the expert evidence tendered by the moving party is admissible. If it is, it
may be necessary to incur the expense of meeting it.
If it is not, that expense
can be avoided. To make the criterion of admissibility turn not on the
satisfaction of a rule but on
the invocation of a discretion is to abandon the
to seek to secure the "advantages" of a proof of assumption rule which
putatively did not introduce is inefficient.
of proof of assumption rule removes a safeguard against useless expert evidence.
To admit evidence of the primary facts that is of weak probative value is
one thing. To admit expert evidence that is of weak probative
value because the
expert's assumptions about the primary facts are not supported by evidence
capable of establishing those primary
facts is another. Whether evidence of
primary facts will in fact be accepted is often not a question that can be
answered at the
moment of tender. Usually it can only be answered after it has
been considered in relation to all the other material evidence of
primary facts.
On the other hand, whether evidence of primary facts, taken at its highest, is
capable of corresponding with the expert's
assumptions is a question which can
be answered at the moment of tender. An expert witness's high qualifications
and impeccable
intellectual processes will produce only useless evidence unless
there is a link between the opinion and a version of the primary
possible by the evidence. A proof of assumption rule is a significant safeguard
against the dangerous consequences of
experts giving opinions which fail to mesh
with the concrete factual controversies before the court.
advantages of a proof of assumption rule.
A construction of
does not require establishment at the time of tender that there either has been,
or will be, evidence admitted capable of proving
the assumed facts permits more
expert opinion evidence to be received. It permits postponement of the
difficulties by seeking to
solve them as questions of weight at a later time
– even as late as the end of the
But increasing the amount of this type of evidence is not necessarily valuable.
It may be unfair to the opposing party. It is
indecisive. Its indecisiveness
inflicts uncertainties on the parties. The additional evidence received may
have a cloud over it
for the rest of the trial.
contrast, a proof of assumption rule diminishes the risk of clouds. It
encourages early and decisive rulings. Early and decisive
rulings are
important, both for the party opposing tender and for the tendering party.
the point of view of the party opposing tender, it is vitally important to know
what evidence is or is not in, and how much
utility expert opinion evidence is
likely to have. That knowledge affects decisions about cross-examining the
witnesses called by
the tendering party; decisions by defendants whether or not
to submit that there is no case to answer; decisions whether or not to
particular categories of evidence; and, if rulings are delayed until after the
close of the trial, decisions about what is to
be said in address. A practice
of deciding whether a proof of assumption rule has been complied with at the
time when expert opinion
evidence is tendered avoids a dilemma for
cross-examiners. One horn of the dilemma is that to cross-examine a witness
evidence which may later be rejected or treated as useless carries
the risk of giving it a foothold in the record which it lacked
at the time of
the tender. The other horn of the dilemma is that, if the opposing party avoids
that danger by not cross-examining
on the expert evidence, there is a risk that
it will be accepted despite its feebleness. It is a dilemma which
cross-examiners should
not have to face.
the point of view of the tendering party, it is desirable that the admissibility
of expert opinion evidence tendered by that
party be clear by the moment when
the case for that party closes. It is undesirable that expert opinion evidence
admitted in that
party's case should later be held – perhaps as late as
the time of judgment – to be subject to such doubts about its
weight that
it lacks utility. It is undesirable that its admissibility be in suspense until
a time after the tendering party's case
has closed. If the admissibility of
expert opinion evidence which is tendered and conditionally admitted is not
finally ruled on
until after the case for the tendering party is closed, and the
evidence is then rejected, or its weight has become so questionable
useless, the tendering party may have lost an opportunity to repair the position
before its case closed, either by calling
further witnesses or tendering further
documents, or by recalling witnesses who had already been in the box. The
capacity of tendering
parties who are the prosecution or the plaintiff to reopen
their cases rests on a discretion in the court which may not be favourably
exercised; their capacity to tender evidence in reply is constricted by fairly
strict rules, particularly in criminal cases.
There are yet further difficulties in relation to jury trials. If
evidence is rejected when tendered, the jurors are not confused
by it, for they
will ordinarily be absent during the debate about the tender:
. If circumstances change and evidence once rejected becomes admissible, it
can be re-tendered successfully. Again there is no risk
of jury confusion.
However, considerable confusion can flow where, although opinion evidence is
admitted conditionally, later it
becomes apparent that the condition is not
satisfied. The evidence must be removed from the record, otherwise there would
difference between conditional and unconditional admission. The same
problems arise where opinion evidence is admitted, not on any
formal condition,
but simply in the expectation that at some time after the tender of the opinion
evidence, witnesses will be called
to establish the factual assumptions on which
the opinion was pronounced, but that expectation is disappointed. In either
the jury will have heard evidence which is inadmissible. Should it be
struck out? Should it be withdrawn from the jury? Should
the jury be directed
that the issue to which the expert's evidence was directed no longer arises?
Should the jury be told not to
consider the expert's evidence? Should the jury
be told to disregard the expert's evidence on the ground that the factual basis
has not been
All these courses are possible. Each course is less attractive than a regime
having a proof of assumption rule and a practice
of rejecting the tender until
it has been satisfied.
what is to be done with any evidence that was called in relation to that
conditionally admitted but inadmissible evidence, whether
it was elicited by the
cross-examination of the party opposing tender or tendered by that party in its
own case? That problem is
reduced if decisive rulings about compliance with a
proof of assumption rule are made.
Conclusion.
A construction of
which holds that there is no proof of assumption rule
in relation to
tenders is difficult to reconcile with the practical
exigencies pursuant to which parties conduct their cases. It is necessary for
trials to be conducted in a businesslike and efficient way. That is a matter of
context pointing to the view that there is a proof
of assumption rule with which
those tendering expert opinion evidence must comply by reason of
read against the background of the common law.
and the statement of reasoning rule
relation to
tenders, need the expert's reasoning be disclosed? The
appellant submitted that it does, and stressed it as the crucial thing adverse
to admissibility in this case. In contrast, the respondent directed rather less
attention to this rule than to the first two.
There is ample authority supporting the view that it is not enough for
evidence tendered under
merely to state the expert's qualifications in a
field of expertise and the conclusion. It is necessary to avoid the insidious
that the trier of fact will simply accept the opinion without careful
evaluation of the steps by which it was reached, and hence
the evidence must
state the criteria necessary to enable the trier of fact to evaluate that the
expert's conclusions are
The evidence must reveal the expert's reasoning – how the expert used
expertise to reach the opinion
It is not enough for evidence tendered under
merely to state the expert's
qualifications in a field of expertise and the conclusion. Admissibility does
not depend on the reasoning
being accepted as correct; that is a matter for
consideration at the end of the trial. But admissibility does depend on the
being stated.
In principle, that line of authority is correct. There is nothing in
which suggests that the corresponding common law rule has been abolished. And
the language of
positively supports its continuance: without a statement
of the expert's reasoning it is not possible to say whether the opinion
wholly or substantially based on the specialist knowledge claimed.
The interdependence of the controverted requirements
the respondent denied that the three requirements existed in relation to
tenders, his submission was put as a single submission accepting that, if they
existed, they comprised an interdependent and integrated
regime. That was a
negative perception, but a powerful one.
Owen Dixon, speaking extrajudicially, drew a distinction between an "intuitive
judgment", which might be valuable in diagnosis
and treatment, and "reasoned
explanation" for it when its conclusions were controverted, as they usually will
be in adversarial
The distinction is important. A reasoned explanation is vital for both a trial
judge who has to write a judgment turning on the
clash between competing
opinions and a jury which has to employ reason in dealing with that clash. The
contents of a reasoned explanation
will depend on applying the specialised
knowledge of a witness to the circumstances of the case. It will not be
possible to appreciate
the application of the specialised knowledge to the
circumstances of the case without knowing what assumptions are being made by
witness about the circumstances of the case, most or all of which the witness
will often not personally be able to prove. A
reasoned explanation of the
application of the specialised knowledge to the circumstances of the case will
be useless unless the
assumed facts involved in that reasoning are facts which,
if the evidence is accepted, are capable of being proved by it.
short, the utility of receiving expert opinions rests in what the trier of fact
can make of them. If the assumed facts are not
stated, no reasoning process can
be stated and the opinion will lack utility; if there is no evidence, called or
to be called, capable
of supporting the assumed facts, no reasoning process,
even if stated, will have utility; and even if there are facts both assumed
capable of being supported by the evidence, they will lack utility if no
reasoning process is stated. In each instance, a lack
of utility results in
irrelevance and inadmissibility.
view of the close interrelationships between the three common law requirements
it would be strange if the first and third continued
in relation to
tenders, as is almost universally agreed, but not the second.
The evidence was inadmissible
trial judge did not rule on the appellant's objection to admissibility before
the end of the respondent's case. Indeed he never
explicitly ruled on it at any
stage, though his detailed discussion of and reliance on the particular
witness's evidence indicated
an implicit overruling of the objection. The trial
judge erred in not ruling on the objection at the end of the voir dire, or, at
the latest, at the end of the respondent's case.
that procedural error on one side, was the trial judge correct to overrule the
witness had some training, study or experience which led him to have some
specialised knowledge. He did not, however, explain
what elements of his
training, study or experience led him to possess specialised knowledge of a kind
which enabled him to reach
the conclusion that a cloud of silica dust liberated
when cutting or grinding stone contained 200mg/m
respirable silica, or even as much as 1g/m
evidence of only one casual observation of an angle grinder in operation. He
gave no evidence of ever having measured
respirable silica dust. He gave no
evidence of having measured dust concentrations, or the respirable fractions of
those concentrations,
arising from the type of work the respondent was doing.
He did not explain how he had reasoned from his specialised knowledge, on
basis of lay descriptions of how the respondent worked and photographic records
of how that type of work was done, to his estimate
of the dust concentrations
inhaled by the respondent. Accordingly the evidence was inadmissible.
The "specialist" court
trial judge erred in relying on his experience as a "specialist tribunal" in
other cases in order to conclude that silicosis
is usually caused by very high
levels of silica exposure.
one thing, the trial judge did not notify the parties in advance of his
intention to rely on that experience even if it were
otherwise open for him to
This failure was a course which the respondent conceded in this Court was
questionable.
it was not open to the trial judge to rely on that experience because the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act
(NSW) did not permit him to take it into
account. His experience was not "[h]istorical
and general
" (emphasis added) within the meaning of
legislation. No "issue of a general nature" which had been the subject of an
earlier "determination" was identified within
the meaning of
consideration took place of the factors listed in
which are relevant to
leave being granted to re-litigate or re-argue issues of a general nature
determined in proceedings by the
Tribunal pursuant to
Rule 9(1) of
the Dust Diseases Tribunal Rules (NSW) requires a party intending to rely on a
s 25B determination to give notice of
that intention. No party gave
notice. Rule 9(2) permits the Tribunal to rely on a s 25B determination on its
own motion, but this
did not permit the trial judge to sidestep the limits in,
and safeguards surrounding, s 25B by relying on his own experience. The
conclusion to which the trial judge's experience led him was not sufficiently
notorious to permit the trial judge to take
judicial notice of it pursuant to
trial judge relied on
JLT Scaffolding International Pty Ltd (in liq) v
to justify the course he took. The case does not permit that course. Kirby P
said that a generalist appellate court like the Court
of Appeal of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales ought to exercise "a degree of care" in substituting
its opinion on questions of
medical causation and the aetiology of incapacity
for that of a specialist tribunal like the Compensation Court of New South
That caveat is entirely distinct from what the trial judge did and does not
justify it.
upholding the validity of the trial judge's approach, the Court of Appeal in
this case relied, apart from the
which did no more than quote from the
ICI Australia
Operations Pty Ltd v WorkCover Authority of New South
That case does not support the trial judge's approach. The trial judge inferred
from his experience that silicosis is usually caused
by very high levels of
silica exposure, and inferred from the fact that the respondent has silicosis,
that the levels of silica exposure
in his case were very high. That is, the
trial judge relied on his experience to find that there had been a specific
breach of duty,
and that it had caused the respondent's condition. That is not
the process which the Court of Appeal approved in the
Court of Appeal in that case was looking to the use of experience in assessing
what the ordinary risks of particular employment
were – "the potential
incidents of the worker's employment, not to its actual
The Court of Appeal was not approving the use of experience to decide whether
there had been a specific breach of duty and what its
causative effect in the
particular case was. The Court of Appeal in the
case started with
what Jordan CJ said in
Tame v Commonwealth Collieries Pty
in relation to the capacity of the Workers' Compensation Commission to take into
account its general knowledge of silicosis to conclude
"that the conditions of
employment did not expose the worker to the ordinary risks of such employment
but that the general evidence
showed that they left him exposed to some risk of
inhaling silica dust." The Court of Appeal then extended Jordan CJ's statement
from the Workers' Compensation Commission to the Dust Diseases Tribunal.
Similarly, in
GIO General Ltd v ABB Installation & Service Pty
a decision of the Court of Appeal relied on in the
case, the question
was not one of causation in fact, but a statutory question about whether a
worker had been exposed to the risk
of contracting mesothelioma by working in an
atmosphere in which asbestos fibres were actually
appellant submitted:
"it is not necessary in the present case to decide whether [the
case] was correct in deciding that the former Workers' Compensation Commission
could rely upon its earlier experience in determining
a question of the capacity
of certain working conditions to give rise to the condition of silicosis. Nor
is it necessary to decide
whether [the
case] was correct in extending
this line of authority to the Dust Diseases Tribunal in spite of the statutory
differences between
the Tribunal and the former Commission. It is sufficient to
say that neither decision provides any support to the idea that a specific
of breach of duty could be decided in such a way in the present
That submission is correct. It follows that the authorities relied on by the
Court of Appeal did not justify what the trial judge
did. Whether they, and the
authorities referred to in them, are correct need not be decided in this appeal,
since neither party
argued that they were not.
Court of Appeal supported the trial judge by contending that he was saying no
more than that his experience helped him to understand
That contention was not defended by the respondent in this Court and is not
sustainable as a matter of construction.
appellant contended that if its arguments had the measure of success they have
enjoyed to the extent set out above, the matter
should be remitted to the Court
respondent contended that the appeal should be dismissed because the errors of
the trial judge were harmless in the sense that
the trial judge's conclusion
could be supported for other reasons given by him.
reasons alone, however, are not clear enough to show the correctness of that
course. That course might be correct in the light
of the evidence that underlay
some of the trial judge's reasons. However, this Court was not taken to the
underlying evidence in
sufficient detail to make it easy confidently to decide
the issue: indeed it was taken to virtually none of that evidence. Accordingly
the matter should be remitted to the Court of Appeal.
Nawaf Hawchar v Dasreef Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWDDT 12.
Dasreef Pty Ltd v Hawchar
[2010] NSWCA 154.
Occupational Health and Safety
Regulation (NSW), cl 51(1), (2)(a).
[2010] NSWCA 154
Allsop P, Basten and Campbell JJA agreeing.
[2010] NSWCA 154
Evidence Act
Evidence Act
[2009] NSWDDT 12
[2009] NSWDDT 12
[2009] NSWDDT 12
[2009] NSWDDT 12
[2010] NSWCA 154
[2010] NSWCA 154
[2010] NSWCA 154
[2010] NSWCA 154
[2010] NSWCA 154
[2010] NSWCA 154
[2010] NSWCA 154
[2010] NSWCA 154
[2010] NSWCA 154
[2004] NSWCA 55
; (2004) 60 NSWLR 18 at 62-65
per McColl JA.
Unreported, 30 March 1994
at 12 per Kirby P.
Evidence Act
[1999] HCA 2
; (1999) 197 CLR 414 at 427
[1999] HCA 2.
[2001] NSWCA 305
; (2001) 52 NSWLR 705 at 743-744
[2001] NSWCA 305
; (2001) 52 NSWLR 705 at 744
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 417
[2010] NSWCA 154
[2009] NSWDDT 12
Dust Diseases Tribunal
For example,
ICI Australia
Operations Pty Ltd v Workcover Authority of New South Wales
[2004] NSWCA 55
; (2004) 60 NSWLR
GIO General Ltd v ABB Installation & Service Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWCA 118
; (2000) 19 NSWCCR 720 at 730
Evidence Act
(Cth) operates in federal courts. The legislation also has equivalents in
Evidence Act
), Norfolk Island (
Evidence Act
and Victoria (
Evidence Act
). In the Australian Capital Territory
Evidence Act
(Cth) will continue to apply until the
2011 (ACT) comes into force.
Allstate Life Insurance Co v
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd (No 5)
(1996) 64 FCR 73 at 75
per Lindgren J.
Agfa-Gevaert AG v AB Dick
[1989] USCA7 541
; 879 F 2d 1518 at 1523 (7th Cir 1989);
Milam v State Farm Mutual
Automobile Insurance Co
[1992] USCA7 891
; 972 F 2d 166 at 170 (7th Cir 1992).
Hannes v Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth) (No 2)
[2006] NSWCCA 373
; (2006) 205 FLR 217 at 288
The Tracy Peerage
10 Cl & F 154 at 191 [8 ER 700 at 715].
Lord Abinger v Ashton
(1873) LR 17 Eq 358 at 374.
Miller Steamship Co Pty Ltd
v Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd
[1963] SR (NSW) 948 at 963.
Re Dyce Sombre
[1849] EngR 498
Mac & G 116 at 128
ER 1207 at 1212].
Thorn v Worthing Skating
(1876) reported as a note to
Plimpton v Spiller
(1877) 6 Ch D
412 at 416.
British Celanese Ltd v
Courtaulds Ltd
(1935) 152 LT 537 at 543.
Review of the Criminal
Courts of England and Wales: Report
(2001) at 574 [133].
Chaulk v Volkswagen of
America Inc
[1987] USCA7 242
; 808 F 2d 639 at 644 (7th Cir 1986). The quotation is from
Keegan v Minneapolis & St Louis RR
78 NW 965 at 966 (Minn 1899).
Indianapolis Colts Inc v
Metropolitan Baltimore Football Club Limited Partnership
[1994] USCA7 949
; 34 F 3d 410 at 415
(7th Cir 1994).
Access to Justice: Final
Report to the Lord Chancellor on the civil justice system in England and
(1996) at 137 [2].
The Commonwealth v
[2001] HCA 56
; (2001) 208 CLR 1 at 62
[2001] HCA 56
Gleeson CJ, Gaudron,
Gummow and Hayne JJ said the practice of "mixing ... disparate elements" such as
"evidence of historical and
other facts, ... expert opinions ... and ...
advocating the claimants' case" was "a practice which has obvious difficulties
and dangers."
For American criticisms see
Kaye, Bernstein and Mnookin,
The New Wigmore: A Treatise on Evidence –
Expert Evidence
, 2nd ed (2011) at 8-34 [1.3]-[1.4.2].
See, for example, Ligertwood
and Edmond,
Australian Evidence: A Principled Approach to the Common Law and
the Uniform Acts
, 5th ed (2010) at 615-617 [7.46]; Redmayne et al, "Forensic
Science Evidence in Question", [2011]
Criminal Law Review
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 417 [750] ("ALRC
It is possible to state this
requirement more elaborately. But the formulation set out in the text will
suffice for the purposes
of deciding this appeal.
HG v The Queen
[1999] HCA 2
; (1999) 197 CLR 414 at 433
[1999] HCA 2.
[1949] HCA 59
; (1949) 79 CLR
442 at 462;
[1949] HCA 59.
See also at 456 per Latham CJ.
[1975] QB 834
National Justice Compania Naviera SA v Prudential Assurance Co Ltd
("The Ikarian Reefer")
[1993] 2 Lloyd's Rep 68 at 81.
Steffen v Ruban
84 WN (Pt 1) (NSW) 264 at 268-269.
[2005] QCA 472
; [2006] 2 Qd R
SASR 440 at 442;
Hillier and Carney v Lucas
[2000] SASC 331
; (2000) 81 SASR 451 at 491-492
, [314], [317] and [321];
Flavel v South Australia
[2008] SASC 333
; (2008) 102 SASR
Pollock v Wellington
(1996) 15 WAR 1 at 4.
Forrester v Harris Farm Pty
(1996) 129 FLR 431 at 438.
Milirrpum v Nabalco Pty
(1971) 17 FLR 141 at 162.
Trade Practices Commission v
Arnotts Ltd (No 5)
(1990) 21 FCR 324 at 327-330;
Arnotts Ltd v Trade
Practices Commission
(1990) 24 FCR 313 at 349-353;
Quick v Stoland Pty
[1998] FCA 1200
; (1998) 87 FCR 371 at 373-374;
Daniel v Western Australia
[2000] FCA 858
178 ALR 542 at 546
Sydneywide Distributors Pty Ltd v Red Bull Australia
[2002] FCAFC 157
; (2002) 55 IPR 354 at 357
"Problems Relating to the
Expert Witness in Personal Injury Cases", in Glass (ed),
Seminars on
, (1970) 139 at 145.
Steffen v Ruban
84 WN (Pt 1) (NSW) 264 at 268-269.
[1975] QB 834
SASR 440 at 443;
Arnotts Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
(1990) 24 FCR
313 at 352;
Hillier and Carney v Lucas
[2000] SASC 331
; (2000) 81 SASR 451 at 492
Hillier and Carney v
[2000] SASC 331
; (2000) 81 SASR 451 at 492
Commissioner for Government
Transport v Adamcik
[1961] HCA 43
; (1961) 106 CLR 292 at 298;
[1961] HCA 43
John Holland (Constructions) Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 58
; (1985) 59 ALJR 844 at 846;
[1985] HCA 58
; 62 ALR 85 at
[1985] HCA 58
Palmer Bruyn & Parker Pty Ltd v Parsons
[2001] HCA 69
208 CLR 388 at 433
[2001] HCA 69
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
108 CLR 642 at 648-649;
[1961] HCA 65).
Arnotts Ltd v Trade
Practices Commission
(1990) 24 FCR 313 at 350-351;
Quick v Stoland Pty
[1998] FCA 1200
; (1998) 87 FCR 371 at 373;
Daniel v Western Australia
[2000] FCA 858
; (2000) 178
ALR 542 at 546
King v Great Lakes Shire
(1986) 58 LGRA 366 at 371;
(1990) 49 A Crim R 243
(1997) 97 A Crim R 70 at 79, n 15.
R v Haidley
[1984] VicRp 18
; [1984] VR
229 at 234 and 250-251;
(1989) 42 A Crim R 393 at 400;
[2000] VSCA 16
; (2000) 1 VR 1 at 25-26
[2007] VSCA 202
; (2007) 17 VR 153
R v Marijancevic
[2009] VSCA 135
; (2009) 22 VR 576 at 594
[1975] Qd R 1
R v Gardner
[1980] Qd R 531 at 535;
Bromley Investments Pty Ltd
v Elkington
[2002] QSC 427
; (2002) 43 ACSR 584 at 593
[2005] QCA 472
; [2006] 2 Qd R 69
Sych and Sych v Hunter
(1974) 8 SASR 118 at 119;
(1974) 8 SASR 102 at 109-110;
[2005] SASC 422
; (2005) 93 SASR 237 at 245
and 247 [31];
Flavel v South
[2008] SASC 333
; (2008) 102 SASR 404 at 421
Pownall v Conlan Management
(1995) 12 WAR 370 at 377 and 390;
Pollock v Wellington
15 WAR 1 at 3;
Koushappis v Western Australia
(2007) 168 A Crim R 51 at
61-62 [47]-[50];
Director of Public Prosecutions (WA) v Mangolamara
[2007] WASC 71
; (2007) 169 A Crim R 379 at 403-404
and 406 [162];
Woods v Director
of Public Prosecutions (WA)
[2008] WASCA 188
; (2008) 38 WAR 217 at 268
Forrester v Harris Farm Pty
(1996) 129 FLR 431 at 438.
R v Ahmed Din
WLR 680 at 686; [1962] 2 All ER 123 at 127;
English Exporters (London) Ltd v
Eldonwall Ltd
[1973] Ch 415 at 421;
[1975] QB 834 at 840;
R v MacKenney
(1980) 72 Cr App R 78 at 81;
[1983] 1 WLR
126 at 131; [1983] 1 All ER 364 at 368;
R v Theodosi
[1993] RTR 179 at
R v Jackson
[1996] 2 Cr App R 420 at 422-423.
Russell v HM Advocate
1946 JC 37 at 44;
Forrester v HM Advocate
1952 JC 28 at 35 and 36;
Blagojevic v HM Advocate
1995 SLT 1189 at 1192.
Bevan Investments Ltd v
Blackhall & Struthers (No 2)
[1978] 2 NZLR 97 at 123.
(1968) 67 DLR
(2d) 619 at 624-625;
[1989] 1 SCR 1337 at 1346-1347.
[2002] VSCA 176
. See also Samuels, "Problems Relating to the Expert Witness in Personal
Injury Cases", in Glass (ed),
Seminars on Evidence
, (1970) 139 at 147.
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 417 [750]. A
cross-reference given to vol 2, App C at 179 [107] reveals that among the
writing" was Pattenden, "Expert Opinion Evidence Based on Hearsay",
Criminal Law Review
85 at 88. ALRC 26 recommended the enactment
of a Bill containing cll 66(1) and 68. Clause 66(1) corresponded with
s 76, and cl 68
had similarities to s 79. The Final Report contained a
clause closer to s 79, but it did not add to what ALRC 26 said about the
law rule: Australia, The Law Reform Commission,
, Report No 38,
(1987) at 82-84 [148]-[151].
In other places ALRC 26 was
less definitive: Australia, The Law Reform Commission,
No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 78-79 [161] and 198 [362]-[363].
For example,
R v Haidley
[1984] VicRp 18
; [1984] VR 229 at 234.
Borowski v Quayle
[1966] VicRp 54
VR 382 at 386-387;
English Exporters (London) Ltd v Eldonwall Ltd
Ch 415 at 420;
[1983] 1 WLR 126 at 129; [1983] 1 All ER 364 at
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 78 [161], n 362; vol
2, App C at 179 [108], n 112, referring to
Phipson on Evidence
ed (1976) at [1209].
The four cases are the
Gardner Peerage
case (see le Marchant,
Report of the Proceedings of
the House of Lords on the Claims to the Barony of Gardner
[1838] EngR 710
; (1838) 5 Cl & F 670 [7 ER 559];
Re Dyce Sombre
[1849] EngR 498
Mac & G 116 [41 ER 1207]; and
R v Staunton
September 1877. Two other cases referred to by Phipson,
Thornton v The Royal
Exchange Assurance Co
(1790) Peake 37 [170 ER 70] and
Cullingworth
, 17 November 1896, are also not against the
ed (1892) at 261 (see also at 264); 2nd ed (1898) at 364 (see also at 367-368);
3rd ed (1902) at 345 (see also at 349); 4th ed
(1907) at 361 (see also at 365);
5th ed (1911) at 369 (see also at 373-374); 6th ed (1921) at 391 (see also at
396-397); 7th ed (1930)
at 379 (see also at 384-385); 8th ed (1942) at 385
(see also at 390); 9th ed (1952) at 408 (see also at 413); 10th ed (1963) at
(see also at [1310]); 11th ed (1970) at [1297] (see also at
[1308]-[1310]).
13th ed (1982) at [27-14] (see
also at [27-56]); 14th ed (1990) at [32-14]; 15th ed (2000) at [37-16]; 16th ed
(2005) at [33-16];
17th ed (2010) at [33-18]. (In the later editions the
passage has been adjusted to reflect statutory changes in English law in civil
cases.) The first and fourth of the authorities were referred to in all
editions, the second in all editions since the third, and
the third in all
editions since the sixth.
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 2, App C at 180 [108].
(1971) 17 FLR 141 at
[1975] QB 834
R v MacKenney
(1980) 72 Cr App R 78 at 81.
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 2, App C at 180-181
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 2, App C at 179 [107].
Cleary (ed),
McCormick's
Handbook of the Law of Evidence
, 2nd ed (1972) at 33; Judge Learned Hand,
"Historical and Practical Considerations Regarding Expert Testimony", (1901) 15
Harvard Law Review
40 at 53-54, n 2.
Evidence in Trials
at Common Law
, Chadbourn rev (1979), vol 2 at 947 [682] (emphasis in
original). See also Kaye, Bernstein and Mnookin (eds),
The New Wigmore: A
Treatise on Evidence – Expert Evidence
, 2nd ed (2011) at 153-154
(1966) CanLII 3 (SCC)
; [1967] SCR 14 at 21. See
Australia, The Law Reform Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol
1 at 198 [363].
[1982] 2 SCR
R v Lavallee
[1990] 1 SCR 852 at 895-896 and 899-900. See
generally Bryant, Lederman and Fuerst (eds),
The Law of Evidence in
, 3rd ed (2009) at 834-849 [12.159]-[12.192]. See below at
[112]-[115].
[1961] HCA 65
; (1961) 108 CLR 642 at 649.
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 2, App C at 180 [108]
(footnote omitted).
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
108 CLR 642 at 646-647 (emphasis added).
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
108 CLR 642 at 648-649.
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
108 CLR 642 at 649 (emphasis added).
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
; (1961) 108 CLR 642 at 649.
[2005] QCA 472
; [2006] 2 Qd R 69 at 79
per Chesterman J (Williams and Jerrard JJA concurring) (emphasis added).
There are exceptional and
often unsatisfactory instances where evidence is admitted "subject to
relevance", or subject to some specific
objection, giving the judge power to
reject evidence even after the close of both parties' cases.
Aktiebolaget Hässle
v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 59
; (2002) 212 CLR 411 at 443
per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron,
Gummow and Hayne JJ;
[2002] HCA 59.
International Harvester
Co of Australia Pty Ltd v McCorkell
[1962] Qd R 356 at 358-359 per Philp
[2005] QCA 472
; [2006] 2 Qd R 69 at 79
see above at [82].
Eric Preston Pty Ltd v
Euroz Securities Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 11
; (2011) 274 ALR 705 at 724
per Jacobson, Foster
and Barker JJ – a proposition true both at common law and in relation to s
Arnotts Ltd v Trade
Practices Commission
(1990) 24 FCR 313 at 351.
Commissioner for
Government Transport v Adamcik
[1961] HCA 43
; (1961) 106 CLR 292 at 303 per Menzies J.
Lewis v The Queen
(1987) 88 FLR 104 at 124.
"Science and Judicial
Proceedings", in
Jesting Pilate
, (1965) 11 at 18, approved in
[1970] SASR 256 at 260. Just before that statement, Sir Owen said
that one duty of the expert witness was "to give his own inferences
and opinions
and the grounds upon which they proceed
" (emphasis added). Immediately
after the statement quoted in the text, Sir Owen said:
"However valuable intuitive judgment founded upon experience may be in
diagnosis and treatment, it requires the justification of
explanation
when its conclusions are controverted.
explanation
requires care and forethought – qualities the presence of
which is not always transparently visible in expert evidence." (emphasis
It was certainly not visible in the challenged evidence in this case,
whether given on the voir dire or as part of the trial –
full as it was of
obscurities, contradictions, and denials of matters necessary to its
admissibility.
[1949] VicLawRp 51
; [1949] VLR 277 at 303.
[1970] SASR 256 at 259-260;
R v Haidley
[1984] VicRp 18
; [1984] VR 229 at
(1994) 75 A Crim R 522 at 531;
VR 411 at 426 [19];
Police v Barber
[2010] SASC 329
; (2010) 108 SASR 520 at 539
Morrison v Jenkins
[1949] HCA 69
; (1949) 80 CLR 626 at 637 and 641 respectively;
[1949] HCA 69.
Holtman v Sampson
[1985] 2 Qd R 472 at 474.
Monroe Australia Pty Ltd
(1995) 65 SASR 16 at 27, quoting
Sotiroulis v Kosac
80 LSJS 112 at 115.
Arnotts Ltd v Trade
Practices Commission
(1990) 24 FCR 313 at 349.
(2002) 4 VR 411 at 426
Pownall v Conlan
Management Pty Ltd
(1995) 12 WAR 370 at 390 per Anderson J.
1953 SC 34 at 39-40
(emphasis added). These passages have been much cited: for example
[1965] NZLR 405 at 409;
(1991) 93 Cr App R 161 at
O'Kelly Holdings Pty Ltd v Dalrymple Holdings Pty Ltd
(1993) 45 FCR
145 at 155;
R v Gilfoyle
[2001] 2 Cr App R 57 at 67 [24];
[2004] 2 Cr App R 520 at 539 [36].
[1998] FCA 1200
; (1998) 87 FCR 371 at 373-374
(emphasis added).
[2002] FCAFC 157
; (2002) 55 IPR 354 at 357
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 417 [750].
[2005] NSWSC 149
; (2005) 190 FLR 242 at 312
HG v The Queen
[1999] HCA 2
197 CLR 414 at 427
(footnote omitted).
Ocean Marine Mutual
Insurance Association (Europe) OV v Jetopay Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 1463
; (2000) 120 FCR 146 at
Cadbury Schweppes Pty Ltd v Darrell Lea Chocolate Shops Pty
[2007] FCAFC 70
; (2007) 159 FCR 397 at 420
Adler v Australian
Securities and Investments Commission
(2003) 179 FLR 1 at 138 [631]-[632].
HG v The Queen
[1999] HCA 2
197 CLR 414 at 428
HG v The Queen
[1999] HCA 2
197 CLR 414 at 429
HG v The Queen
[1999] HCA 2
197 CLR 414 at 433
per Gaudron J.
There is a suggestion by
Weinberg and Dowsett JJ in
Sydneywide Distributors Pty Ltd v Red Bull
Australia Pty Ltd
[2002] FCAFC 157
; (2002) 55 IPR 354 at 379
that a failure to identify
the relevant assumptions will not necessarily prevent the initial reception of
the evidence, but it is
vague and innominate. The suggestion was concurred in
Noetel and Quealey
[2005] FamCA 677
; (2005) FLC 93-230 at 79,800
CJ and Boland J, who said that what Branson J and Weinberg and Dowsett JJ meant
"[G]enerally questions of admissibility of expert evidence ... should not be
the prime determinant of the admissibility of that evidence,
but rather the
relevance of the evidence to the issue in dispute, the specialized skill and
knowledge of the expert and whether the
report is based on such skill and
knowledge."
The proposition that questions of admissibility should not be the prime
determinant of admissibility is novel. In
Daniel v Western Australia
[2000] FCA 858
; (2000) 178 ALR 542 at 546
R D Nicholson J recorded Branson J's view, but
the challenge to the evidence in that case did not depend on its validity, and
references to "factual basis" at 550 [30] suggest that his Honour thought it
invalid. At 546 [16] it was said that Emmett J "relevantly
agreed" with Branson
Quick v Stoland Pty Ltd
[1998] FCA 1200
; (1998) 87 FCR 371. It is true that at 379
he said he agreed with her Honour's analysis of the "scheme" of the legislation,
the extent to which he agreed with the detail of what she said is doubtful,
not least because in
Cadbury Schweppes Pty Ltd v Darrell Lea Chocolate Shops
[2007] FCAFC 70
; (2007) 159 FCR 397 the Full Court (Black CJ, Emmett and
Middleton JJ) said that its failure to deal with a question about the
need for evidence of assumed facts, which the primary judge had denied,
on the ground that it had not been argued on appeal "should
not necessarily be
taken as endorsement of the correctness of the view adopted by the primary
judge" (at 411 [58]). This does not
suggest complete agreement with
Branson J's views in
In this Court, see
[1999] HCA 2
; (1999) 197 CLR 414 at 427
, 428 [41] and 453 [137];
Bruyn & Parker Pty Ltd v Parsons
[2001] HCA 69
; (2001) 208 CLR 388 at 433
other courts, see, for example,
Idoport Pty Ltd v National Australia Bank Ltd
[2001] NSWSC 123
Rhoden v Wingate
[2002] NSWCA 165
; (2002) 36 MVR 499 at 500
and 517-518 [61]-[62];
Neowarra v Western Australia (No 1)
[2003] FCA 1399
; (2003) 134
FCR 208 at 217-218
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission v Vines
[2003] NSWSC 1095
; (2003) 48 ACSR 291 at 301
James v Launceston
City Council
[2004] TASSC 69
; (2004) 13 Tas R 89 at 93
Australian Retailers
Association v Reserve Bank of Australia
[2005] FCA 1707
; (2005) 148 FCR 446 at 563
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWSC 149
; (2005) 190 FLR
Hevi Lift (PNG) Ltd v Etherington
[2005] NSWCA 42
; (2005) 2 DDCR 271 at
BHP Billiton Iron Ore Pty Ltd v National Competition Council
[2007] FCAFC 157
; (2007) 162 FCR 234 at 273
Paino v Paino
[2008] NSWCA 276
; (2008) 40 Fam LR 96 at 112
[2003] FCA 893
; (2003) 130 FCR 424 at 429
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWSC 149
; (2005) 190 FLR 242 at 288
Further, the "facts" which are part of the material on which the witness's
specialised knowledge is based lie outside the assumption
identification rule:
NutraSweet Australia Pty Ltd v Ajinomoto Co Inc
[2005] FCA 1524
; (2005) 224 ALR 200 at 207
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWSC 149
; (2005) 190 FLR 242 at 312
HG v The Queen
[1999] HCA 2
197 CLR 414 at 428
Harrington-Smith v Western Australia (No 2)
[2003] FCA 893
; (2003) 130 FCR 424 at 428-429
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWSC 149
; (2005) 190 FLR 242 at 312
HG v The Queen
[1999] HCA 2
197 CLR 414 at 427
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v
[2005] NSWSC 149
; (2005) 190 FLR 242 at 313-314
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Vines
[2003] NSWSC 1095
; (2003) 48 ACSR 291 at 301
per Austin J;
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWSC 149
; (2005) 190 FLR
Rhoden v Wingate
[2002] NSWCA 165
; (2002) 36 MVR 499 at 499-500
and 517-519 [60]-[63];
Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWCA 152
; (2005) 218 ALR 764 at 794
[1999] HCA 2
; (1999) 197 CLR 414 at 433
Quick v Stoland Pty
[1998] FCA 1200
; (1998) 87 FCR 371 at 373-374;
Sydneywide Distributors Pty Ltd v Red
Bull Australia Pty Ltd
[2002] FCAFC 157
; (2002) 55 IPR 354 at 357
Neowarra v Western
Australia (No 1)
[2003] FCA 1399
; (2003) 134 FCR 208 at 215-218
Dog Owners' & Friends' Association Inc v Guide Dog Association of New South
Wales & ACT
[1998] FCA 480
; (1998) 154 ALR 527 at 531);
Sampi v Western Australia
[2005] FCA 777
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 417 [750].
Jango v Northern
Territory (No 4)
[2004] FCA 1539
; (2004) 214 ALR 608 at 612
Cadbury Schweppes Pty
Ltd v Darrell Lea Chocolate Shops Pty Ltd
[2006] FCA 363
; (2006) 228 ALR 719 at 722
Gambro Pty Ltd v Fresenius Medical Care Australia Pty Ltd
[2007] FCA 1828
; (2007) 245 ALR
Bodney v Bennell
[2008] FCAFC 63
; (2008) 167 FCR 84 at 107
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW) v Tong
[2004] NSWSC 689
; (2004) 151 A Crim R 296 at 303-304
Brown v Iontask Pty
(2002) 24 NSWCCR 231 at 241 [62];
Hevi Lift (PNG) Ltd v
Etherington
[2005] NSWCA 42
; (2005) 2 DDCR 271 at 280-281
. The Court of Appeal did not
accept Walker CCJ's views: see at 294 [84].
Cadbury Schweppes Pty
Ltd v Darrell Lea Chocolate Shops Pty Ltd
[2007] FCAFC 70
; (2007) 159 FCR 397 at 411
Black CJ, Emmett and Middleton JJ said their failure to address the question,
which was not put in issue on the appeal, "should not
necessarily be taken as
endorsement of the correctness of the view adopted by the primary judge." At
420 [108] their Honours said:
"If the opinion is based on ... facts that are
clearly not going to be proved, the opinion is likely to be valueless." Expert
evidence which can be seen at the moment of tender to be valueless is
irrelevant: that is so despite the words "if it were accepted"
in s 55(1) and
despite s 57(1). It is therefore inadmissible.
BHP Billiton Iron Ore Pty
Ltd v National Competition Council
[2007] FCAFC 157
; (2007) 162 FCR 234 at 273
Greenwood J, with whom Sundberg J concurred "generally", said that it "seems"
that the "absence of proven foundation facts" does
not affect admissibility, but
"little or no weight will be given to such an opinion", and "the central point
may simply be the question
of admissibility, not weight". An opinion which can
be seen at the time of tender to be of no weight is irrelevant and inadmissible.
Eric Preston Pty Ltd v
Euroz Securities Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 11
; (2011) 274 ALR 705 at 724
per Jacobson, Foster
and Barker JJ.
Velevski v The
[2002] HCA 4
; (2002) 76 ALJR 402 at 411
[2002] HCA 4
; 187 ALR 233 at 246;
[2002] HCA 4
Gleeson CJ and Hayne J said that apart from facts of which an expert can give
admissible evidence, the expert "witness can give
evidence only by reference to
facts which will have to be established otherwise." Among the others are
Idoport Pty Ltd v National Australia Bank Ltd
[2001] NSWSC 123
[2001] NSWCA 473
; (2001) 53 NSWLR 664 at 681-682
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Adler (No 1)
(2001) 20 ACLC 222 at 225-226 [19];
TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd v Anning
[2002] NSWCA 82
; (2002) 54 NSWLR 333 at 359-360
Adler v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
(2003) 179 FLR 1 at 136-138 [624]-[632];
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Vines
[2003] NSWSC 1095
; (2003) 48 ACSR 291 at 300-301
James v Launceston City Council
[2004] TASSC 69
; (2004) 13 Tas R 89 at 93
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWCA 152
; (2005) 218 ALR
764 at 786-794
[1998] FCA 480
; (1998) 154 ALR 527 at
There are detailed
references to or quotations from the passage quoted at [67] above in
Stoland Pty Ltd
[1998] FCA 1200
; (1998) 87 FCR 371 at 373-374,
Sydneywide Distributors Pty
Ltd v Red Bull Australia Pty Ltd
[2002] FCAFC 157
; (2002) 55 IPR 354 at 357
Neowarra v Western Australia (No 1)
[2003] FCA 1399
; (2003) 134 FCR 208 at 215-216
Section 3(3) provides:
"Without limiting the effect of, and subject to,
Interpretation Act 1987
, material that may be used in the interpretation
of a provision of this Act includes any relevant report of a Law Reform
laid before either House of the Parliament of the Commonwealth before
the provision was enacted."
ALRC 26 was tabled in the Parliament of the Commonwealth on 21 August
See above at [69].
Bodney v Bennell
[2008] FCAFC 63
; (2008) 167 FCR 84 at 108
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 194 [354], 196-197
[359] and 412 [743]. See also Australia, The Law Reform Commission,
, Report No 38, (1987) at 84 [151].
See notes 139 and 140.
(1966) CanLII 3 (SCC)
; [1967] SCR 14 at 21. This
was quoted in Australia, The Law Reform Commission,
, Report No
26, (1985) vol 1 at 198 [363], summarised by it at 417 [750], and quoted by
Sundberg J in
Neowarra v Western Australia (No 1)
[2003] FCA 1399
; (2003) 134 FCR 208 at
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 417 [750].
WLR 126; [1983] 1 All ER 364. Hence where scientific tests are run by
assistants of an expert witness and the expert relies
on those tests, the
assistants must be called:
R v Jackson
[1996] 2 Cr App R 420 at 424.
"Problems Relating to the
Expert Witness in Personal Injury Cases", in Glass (ed),
Seminars on
, (1970) 139 at 147.
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 198 [363].
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 198 [363]. See also
at 417 [750].
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 198 [363] (emphasis
Australia, The Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 26, (1985) vol 1 at 198 [363].
Sydneywide Distributors
Pty Ltd v Red Bull Australia Pty Ltd
[2002] FCAFC 157
; (2002) 55 IPR 354 at 359
Australian Retailers
Association v Reserve Bank of Australia
[2005] FCA 1707
; (2005) 148 FCR 446 at 564
Weinberg J.
Sydneywide Distributors
Pty Ltd v Red Bull Australia Pty Ltd
[2002] FCAFC 157
; (2002) 55 IPR 354 at 358
also at 357 [9], 358-359 [15]-[16] and 379 [87].
See Wigmore,
Evidence in
Trials at Common Law
, Tillers rev (1983), vol 1 at 702-731 [14]-[14.1] and
847-855 [19].
Hannes v Director of
Public Prosecutions (Cth) (No 2)
[2006] NSWCCA 373
; (2006) 205 FLR 217 at 289
Ocean Marine Mutual
Insurance Association (Europe) OV v Jetopay Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 1463
; (2000) 120 FCR 146 at
Idoport Pty Ltd v National Australia Bank Ltd
[2001] NSWSC 123
Harrington-Smith v Western Australia (No 2)
[2003] FCA 893
; (2003) 130 FCR 424
James v Launceston City Council
[2004] TASSC 69
; (2004) 13 Tas R 89 at 93
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[2005] NSWSC 149
; (2005) 190
FLR 242 at 314-316
Hevi Lift (PNG) Ltd v Etherington
[2005] NSWCA 42
2 DDCR 271 at 294
[2006] NSWCCA 167
; (2006) 65 NSWLR 681 at 715
Rylands v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 106
; (2008) 184 A Crim R 534 at 547-548
Ideal Image Development Corporation Inc
[2009] FCA 1177
; (2009) 261 ALR 1 at 8-9
Noza Holdings Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2010] FCA 990
; (2010) 273 ALR 621 at
and 628 [23]. The Court of Appeal in this case did not deny the
requirement:
Dasreef Pty Ltd v Hawchar
[2010] NSWCA 154
at [39]-[44].
"Science and Judicial
Proceedings", in
Jesting Pilate
, (1965) 11 at 18.
See, in another but related
Woods v Multi-Sport Holdings Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 9
; (2002) 208 CLR 460 at 511
[2002] HCA 9.
Unreported, New South Wales
Court of Appeal, 30 March 1994 (Kirby P, Mahoney and Priestley JJA).
[2009] NSWCA 15
; (2009) 74 NSWLR 419 at 430
[2004] NSWCA 55
; (2004) 60 NSWLR 18 at 62-65
ICI Australia Operations
Pty Ltd v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
[2004] NSWCA 55
; (2004) 60 NSWLR 18 at 58
; see also at 63 [221] and 64 [232].
(1947) 47 SR (NSW) 269 at
[2000] NSWCA 118
; (2000) 19 NSWCCR 720.
[2000] NSWCA 118
; (2000) 19 NSWCCR 720 at 724
, 730-731 [34] and 732 [38].
Dasreef Pty Ltd v
[2010] NSWCA 154
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (428 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter