of Ferrari S.p.A. [2020] ADO 3 (14 July 2020)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
OF A DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Request for examination of design number 201910301 in the name of Ferrari
Nicholas Barbey
REPRESENTATION:
Phillips Ormonde Fitzpatrick
Examination of a design under
Designs Act 2003
considered – design new and distinctive over
the prior art base – certificate of
examination to issue
On 18 January 2019, Ferrari S.p.A. (‘
’) filed an application under the
’) to register the following design
Design number
: 201910301
Product name
: Car and Toy-Car
Priority date
: 26 July 2018 (EUIPO numbers 005515632
& 005515392)
Representations
For brevity, only the
representations showing the Design applied to the car have been reproduced.
Representations of the Design applied
to the ‘toy-car’ have been
omitted given they are identical.
Statement of Newness and Distinctiveness (‘SoND’):
Those features of the car and toy-car depicted in the representations that
are new and distinctive are the shape and/or configuration.
The wheels and tyres
shown in the representations are not part of the design and are to be
disregarded when considering the overall
impression of the design. The design
may be in mirror image, with the car and toy- car being right-hand drive, rather
than left-hand
Design was registered on 28 February 2019 and examination of the Design was
subsequently requested by the Owner. On 31 May 2019,
a first examination report
issued raising grounds for revocation. The examination report asserted that the
Design was not distinctive
because it was substantially similar in overall
impression to the following designs (collectively
’) in the prior art base:
design number 201516956 (priority date 26 June 2015)
‘The Ferrari 488 Spider Convertible Revealed’
(published 30 July 2015)
MR Collection Models (published 25 September
Owner filed written submissions on 26 November 2019 responding to the first
examination report. The Owner clarified that the Citations
all relate to the
Ferrari 488 Spider which was released in 2015 and is an earlier model of the
Design. The Owner submitted that the
Design was new and distinctive over the
Citations due to the prominent differences in visual features such as the side
bonnet, front bumper, fenders and the general body contour of the
respective designs. The Owner asserted that these differences provide
with a ‘completely different appearance’ to the
28 November 2019, a second examination report issued which maintained the
Citations as bases for revocation. Unpersuaded by the
written submissions, the
examiner explained that the SoND ‘does not identify the particular
features that [the Owner] now assert
confer distinctiveness in the present
design against the cited design[s]’ and reiterated that, for the purpose
of distinctiveness,
more weight is to be given to the similarities between the
designs than to the differences.
The examiner maintained that the similarities between the respective
designs ‘are very clear’ and asserted that the Design
‘refinement of the existing designs’ which is not substantially
different in overall impression to the Citations.
The Act s 19(1).
29 November 2019, the Owner filed a request to be heard on this examination
matter. A hearing was scheduled and the Owner was invited
to submit further
submissions and/or evidence by 12 March 2020. The Owner duly filed written
submissions (‘
Submissions
’) together with the declaration of
Anthony Moss dated 11 March 2020 with Annexures AM-1 to AM-5 (‘
Declaration
a delegate of the Registrar of Designs, I heard this matter in Canberra on 19
March 2020. Chris Schlicht and Peter Wassouf of Phillips
Ormonde Fitzpatrick
appeared by video conference on behalf of the Owner.
Legislative framework
to s 63(1) of the Act, a registered design must be examined if any person
requests, or a court orders, the Registrar to do
so. Examination of a design
requires the Registrar to consider whether a design should be revoked because,
inter alia, it is not
a ‘registrable design’.
‘registrable design’ is a design that is ‘new’ and
‘distinctive’ when compared with the ‘prior
for the design as it existed before the priority date of the design.
The ‘prior art base’
is defined in s 15(2) of the Act which relevantly
Registrable designs
prior art base
for a design (the
) consists of:
(a) designs publicly used in Australia; and
(b) designs published in a document within or outside Australia; and
(c) designs in relation to which each of the following criteria is
(i) the design is disclosed in a design application;
(ii) the design has an earlier priority date than the designated design;
(iii) the first time documents disclosing the design are made available for
public inspection under section 60 is on or after the
priority date of the
designated design.
constitutes a ‘new’ and ‘distinctive’ design is defined
in s 16 of the Act which relevantly provides:
Designs that are
identical or substantially similar in overall impression
(1) A design is new unless it is identical to a design that forms part of the
prior art base for the design.
Ibid s 65(2)(a).
Ibid s 15(1).
(2) A design is distinctive unless it is substantially similar
in overall impression to a design that forms part of the prior art
base for the
design (see section 19).
design is ‘new’ unless it is an exact copy of a design that forms
part of the prior art base. It follows that the absence
of a single visual
feature, irrespective of its significance, in either of the designs under
comparison will be sufficient to establish
that the design is
determine whether a design is ‘distinctive’, the decision maker must
assess whether the design is substantially similar
in overall impression to any
design that forms part of the prior art base by reference to the factors
prescribed in s 19 of the Act.
This provision relevantly
Factors to be considered in assessing substantial
similarity in overall impression
(1) If a person is required by this Act to decide whether a design is
substantially similar in overall impression to another design,
the person making
the decision is to give more weight to similarities between the designs than to
differences between them.
(2) The person must also:
(a) have regard to the state of development of the prior art base for the
design; and
(b) if the design application in which the design was disclosed included a
statement (a
statement of newness and distinctiveness
) identifying
particular visual features of the design as new and distinctive:
(i) have particular regard to those features; and
(ii) if those features relate to only part of the design--have particular
regard to that part of the design, but in the context of
the design as a whole;
(c) if only part of the design is substantially similar to another design,
have regard to the amount, quality and importance of that
part in the context of
the design as a whole; and
(d) have regard to the freedom of the creator of the design to innovate.
(3) If the design application in which the design was disclosed did not
include a statement of newness and distinctiveness in respect
of particular
visual features of the design, the person must have regard to the appearance of
the design as a whole.
(4) In applying subsections (1), (2) and (3), the person must apply the
standard of a person who is familiar with the product to which
relates, or products similar to the product to which the design relates (the
standard of the informed user
to the Moss Declaration, the declarant is a director of Ultimate Driving Tours
’), a company which provides luxury adventure
travel and event management services. UDT offers multiday tours known as
experiences’ wherein clients drive supercars rented by UDT
from manufacturers such as Lamborghini, Porsche and the Owner. The
conducts these tours and states that he has a thorough knowledge of
supercars in order ‘to help clients understand that different supercars
offer different experiences’.
declarant observes that his clients are interested in driving the most modern
vehicles and that their appreciation of supercars
is affected by the aesthetic
qualities of the vehicles. As such, the declarant monitors new vehicle launches
and regularly drives
supercars to keep abreast of developments in the
high-performance car market.
declarant also conducts client engagement events on behalf of various car
dealerships. In this capacity, the declarant is required
to explain the features
and specifications of vehicles to both existing and prospective customers. The
Moss Declaration also details
the declarant’s background in the motoring
industry prior to his role with UDT. Relevantly, the declarant was a committee
of the New South Wales Porsche motoring club and an organiser of various
Australian motoring events. The declarant states that his
comprehensive
understanding of the specifications and performance of a wide range of vehicles
enabled him to fairly categorise vehicles
for the motoring events he
declarant identifies the designs depicted in the Citations as being the
Owner’s ‘488 Spider’ vehicle model and
the Design as being the
Owner’s ‘488 Pista Spider’ vehicle model. The declarant
categorises both vehicle models
as being supercars. This motor vehicle
subcategory comprises of ‘high-performance street legal sports cars’
typically at the highest price range for vehicles and are produced in
limited quantities.
declarant’s view, there are numerous visual differences in the designs
depicted in the Citations when compared to the
Design. These differences provide
the Design with a ‘more aggressive and powerful’ overall appearance
than the designs
shown in the Citations. As such, the declarant concludes that
the overall appearance of the respective designs are ‘very
different’.
The Citations
the outset, I am satisfied that each of the Citations was published in a
document before the Design’s priority date. As
such, the Citations form
part of the prior art base for the Design.
Moss Declaration, [5].
Moss Declaration identified the designs exhibited in the Citations as displaying
the same design – namely, the Owner’s
‘488 Spider’
vehicle model. Citation 1 is the line drawing of the ‘488 Spider’
vehicle model whereas Citations
2 and 3 are the design of the ‘488
Spider’ vehicle model applied to a car and toy-scale car, respectively.
The Submissions
confirmed that the Citations all relate to the same design and,
having reviewed the Citations, I am satisfied that this is the
Design contains different visual features to those present in the Citations. For
example, the centre of the front bumper in the
Design exhibits a trapezoidal
shaped air scoop that is not present in the front bumper of the Citations.
Likewise, the rear diffusers
of the Design wrap around the lower rear lights
whereas the rear diffusers in the Citations do not. Given these visual
differences,
I am satisfied that the Design is ‘new’ for the
purposes of s 16(1) of the Act.
Accordingly,
I must now determine whether the Design is ‘distinctive’ over the
Citations. This requires a consideration
of the factors listed in s 19 of the
Standard of the informed user
19(4) of the Act requires that the factors prescribed in s 19 are to be assessed
from the perspective of the informed user.
The requisite standard of the
informed user is that of familiarity.
such, the informed user is a notional person that is familiar with the product
to which the Design relates or similar products.
To this end, it is not strictly
necessary for the informed user to be an actual user of the product, but
familiarity can be acquired
through use.
Similarly, the requisite standard of familiarity does not automatically exclude
a design expert.
product name of the Design is described as ‘car and toy-car’. It is
apparent from the representations that what is
depicted is a sports car and a
toy-scale sports car, given the low height and aerodynamic shape of the car.
Broadly speaking, sports
cars are motor vehicles designed with an emphasis on
speed, manoeuvrability, and dynamic performance. Sports cars fall under the
umbrella term of ‘performance cars’ which encompasses categories
Multisteps Pty Limited
v Source and Sell Pty Limited
[2013] FCA 743
Hunter Pacific International Pty Ltd
v Martec Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 796
(n 8) [66].
supercars and hypercars.
Performance
cars are a subcategory of motor vehicles. The informed user would therefore be a
person familiar with the functional and
aesthetic aspects of sports cars or
similar products. A person familiar with sports cars will possess a greater
understanding of
the features relevant to a car’s performance and would be
attuned to design variations that users of standard motor vehicles
ordinarily possess. Generally, the same is true of toy-scale sports cars given
these products replicate their full-scale
counterparts and are typically sought
by detail-oriented collectors. In this context, I consider the standard of the
informed user
would include sports car enthusiasts and collectors.
Owner asserts that the standard of the informed user should be construed
narrowly. Specifically, it should be confined to that
of a person familiar with
supercars because the Design relates to a car that retails for ‘over
$600,000 and is offered in limited
edition only’.
In my view, neither of these reasons
justify further restricting the class of persons that fall within the ambit of
informed users
of the product. This is because the retail price of the product
set by the Owner is not determinative of its fundamental nature
and the production volume is at the
Owner’s sole discretion. With that said, I am cognisant of the fact that
the standard of
the informed user is not strictly confined to a single class of
I accept that Mr
Moss is an informed user within the meaning of the Act, since supercars are a
and the informed user
is taken to be familiar with similar products to which the Design relates.
Mr Moss’ enthusiast background in
combination with his professional experience using various supercars endow him
with the requisite
degree of familiarity to qualify as an informed
Prior art base
state of development of the prior art base plays an important role in assessing
whether a design is distinctive for the purposes
of the Act. The maturity of the
prior art base, or lack
Such terms have an
inherent degree of subjectiveness and are seemingly distinguished based on
factors such as horsepower, price and
production volume. To that end, hypercars
may be conceptualised as being high performance supercars and supercars may be
conceptualised
as being high performance sports cars.
Submissions, [31].
The Act s 7(3)(b) specifically
excludes the materials used in the product as being a visual feature of a
product. Design protection
under the Act protects the overall appearance of the
product and not its function or the materials from which it is made. As such,
there is nothing preventing the visual features of the Design being applied to
cars or toy-cars sold at a lower retail price.
(n 8) [70].
Moss Declaration, [18]. The declarant
states ‘A supercar is a high-performance street legal
’ (emphasis added).
The Act s 19(4).
thereof, influences how the informed user will perceive any differences between
the design and the prior art. If the prior art base
is well developed, then the
informed user is likely to have a greater appreciation of smaller visual
differences between the design
and prior art for the purpose of distinctiveness.
On the other hand, if the prior art base is underdeveloped, more significant
differences between the design and prior art will usually be required to
avoid a finding of substantial similarity.
from mentioning that supercars ‘have been released over the past 20
Declaration is silent as to the development of the prior art base for the
Design. The Owner contends that the prior art base
is highly developed given new
models of supercars are released annually by ‘most, if not all, major
players in the supercar
though no corroborative
evidence has been filed in this regard.
examiner’s search results on file reveal that the prior art base for
sports cars and toy-scale sports cars is mature. Relevantly,
examiner’s search results disclose the existence of a diverse range of
front and rear bumper options, bonnet configurations,
diffuser arrangements,
spoiler sizes and air vent shapes. This is unsurprising given new vehicle models
have purportedly been released
annually over the past 20 years. As such, there
is considerable merit in the Owner’s submission that the informed user is
to ‘observe and appreciate differences that might be considered
more subtle by a person unfamiliar with supercars’.
Statement of Newness and Distinctiveness
application for the Design included the following SoND:
Those features of the car and toy-car depicted in the
representations that are new and distinctive are the shape and/or configuration.
The wheels and tyres shown in the representations are not part of the design and
are to be disregarded when considering the overall
impression of the design. The
design may be in mirror image, with the car and toy- car being right-hand drive,
rather than left-hand
to s 19(2)(b) of the Act, the informed user must have particular regard to the
visual features identified in the SoND which,
in this instance, are the shape
and/or configuration of the Design. Two further strands can be drawn from this
SoND: a) the informed
user should pay less attention to any pattern and/or
ornamentation present in the Design and b) the wheels and
Moss Declaration,
Submissions, [104].
Ibid [106].
tyres shown in the representations should likewise be afforded diminished
For completeness,
the last sentence of the SoND which states ‘The design may be in mirror
image, with the car and toy-car being
right-hand drive, rather than left-hand
drive’ is immaterial given the Citations all depict the vehicle in
left-hand drive.
Freedom of the creator of the design to innovate
designer’s freedom to innovate is informed and guided by the development
of the prior art base. As explained above, the
prior art base for the Design is
mature and functional constraints have naturally emerged. The Owner submits that
the inherent features
of a motor vehicle constrain the designer’s freedom
to innovate. That is, motor vehicles are required to include functional
such as headlights, doors, bumpers and windshields with little to no deviation
permitted in terms of their positioning on
the vehicle body given
‘industry norms’.
Submissions highlight that the performance aspect of supercars further inhibits
the freedom to innovate. This is because the designer
is required to optimise
the aerodynamic properties of the product whilst operating within the parameters
dictated by the inherent
functional requirements of a motor vehicle. To this
end, Mr Moss provides the following insights:
These types of vehicles [being
supercars] will be as low to the ground as possible to provide a lower centre of
gravity. The general
shape of the vehicles will appear streamlined and will
include a downward sloping front section and a downward sloping rear section,
along with front and rear diffusers, to decrease lift/increase downforce. At the
rear of the vehicles there will be wings or spoilers.
Given the size of the
engines in these vehicles, air inlets/vents are incorporated on the fronts and
sides of the vehicle body. Further,
engines in these vehicles are often located
in the mid or rear sections to increase acceleration and braking ability of the
resulting in additional air outlet vents around the mid-rear section of
these vehicles.
Moss Declaration also draws attention to the fact that there is limited scope in
which to re- design supercar features such as
the shape of the windshield, side
mirrors and side doors.
On this basis,
Mr Moss believes that such features do no contribute significantly to the
overall appearance of the respective designs.
The implication being that the
freedom to innovate largely resides in the front and rear areas of the
The Act does not provide
for visual features to be wholly disregarded or disclaimed.
Submissions, [108].
Moss Declaration, [32].
informed user, being a person familiar with sports cars and toy-scale sports
cars, would be aware of the aforementioned limitations
which curtail the
designer’s freedom to innovate. As such, the informed user would attribute
less importance to the visual
features that arise purely from these inherent or
functional features.
Amount, quality and importance of the similarities in the
context of the design as a whole
Design and the Citations share obvious visual similarities. A broad-brush
comparison reveals that each design depicts an open
top vehicle that has two
seats, two doors, a sloping bonnet, a slanted rear engine hood and an acute
angled windshield. The Owner
submits that these similarities ‘arise
primarily from design features which are inherently present in motor vehicles or
supercars’.
This is echoed in the
Moss Declaration which explains that the similar design profiles stem from
elements which are essential to supercars.
The informed user is therefore
unlikely to conclude that the Design lacks distinctiveness simply because it
shares visual similarities
with the Citations in the general positioning of, for
example, the rear engine hood, the sloping bonnet or low height of the vehicle.
As discussed in the Moss Declaration, the presence of these visual features
would be expected by an informed user given they provide
a functional purpose.
It follows that the quality and importance of these visual similarities, in the
context of the Design as a
whole, are accordingly
diminished.
regards to the dissimilarities, significant differences between the Design and
the Citations exist in prominent areas where the
informed user’s attention
would inevitably be drawn. For example, the bonnet of the respective designs
contributes significantly
to their overall visual impression due to its
centrality and large visible surface area. The inclusion of the air dam and the
angular shaped bonnet depicted in the Design creates an appreciable
point of difference to the bonnets shown in the Citations which
incorporate an air dam but instead feature a smooth appearance. Similarly, the
presence of the trapezoidal shaped air scoop
in the centre of the Design’s
front bumper provides another important point of difference to the front bumpers
shown in the
Citations which do not contain this feature. Importantly, these
visual features also serve a specific functional purpose given they
increase the
vehicle’s downforce by directing air flow into the scoop and releasing it
out through the air dam over the bonnet.
Submissions, [113].
Moss Declaration, [32].
Submissions, [59].
rear of the vehicle constitutes another prominent area that would be inspected
by an informed user and pronounced visual differences
exist between the Design
and the Citations in this regard. This is particularly evident in the presence
of the lower side air dams
as well as the wrap around diffusers present on the
rear of the Design. Both features are absent in the rear of the designs in the
Citations. Likewise, the upper rear lights shown in the Citations are set within
a cavity whereas the upper rear lights displayed
in the Design contain no such
feature. Reproduced below are the front and rear view of the respective designs
with the visual differences
highlighted as mentioned in this paragraph and at
[32] of this
Furthermore,
a comparison of the side views of the Design and the Citations reveals four
notable differences. First, as the Opponent
points out, the Design’s
‘front tip has a side profile resembling the letter “M”
anti-clockwise’
whereas the front tip shown in
the Citations is flat. Second, the side of the air inlets positioned at the
front of the vehicles slope
in opposite directions with the Design’s air
inlets sloping towards the front wheel and the Citations sloping away from the
front wheel. Third, the Design’s side air vent does not contain the large
downward facing panel that is positioned in the middle
of the side air vents
shown in the Citations. According to Mr Moss, the removal of the downward facing
panel in the Design improves
air suction and provides the engine with a cleaner
air flow. Finally, the Design’s rear spoiler protrudes upward and is
from the body of the vehicle whereas the rear spoiler shown in the
Citations ‘flows with the rest of the body panelling and
drops downward to
be flush with the boot’.
Moss’ view, the Design’s pronounced rear spoiler has a functional
advantage given it ‘increases downforce
across the rear of the
Reproduced below
are the respective designs with the visual differences
highlighted:
Submissions, [65].
Moss Declaration, [31].
Similarity in overall impression
Determining
whether the Design is distinctive over the Citations requires a holistic
assessment of the factors prescribed in s 19
of the Act. The Act mandates that
the standard of the informed user must be applied in undertaking this assessment
and that more
weight is to be given to similarities between the Design and the
Citations than to differences between them.
Pertinently, the assessment is not based
on a fleeting impression or casual appraisal. Rather, the informed user will
undertake a
studied comparison of the overall impressions conveyed by the
respective designs.
Submissions are comprehensive with respect to listing the differences that exist
between the visual features of the Design and
the Citations. Major differences
include the presence of the air dam and wrap around rear diffusers whilst minor
differences include
the bottom fin appearing in the front inlet as well as the
variation in the side skirts of the vehicles. Nevertheless, simply setting
list of visual differences does not, without more, establish that the Design is
distinctive over the Citations. Distinctiveness
for the purposes of the Act is
not determined by a purely quantitative approach to the visual differences.
Instead, it involves a
qualitative assessment which carefully evaluates the
factors prescribed in s 19 of the Act. As such, depending on the circumstances,
what may objectively appear to be a minor difference
The Act s 19(1).
(n 8) [55].
between a design and the prior art may still be sufficient to confer the design
with distinctiveness.
the present matter, the Owner has led evidence regarding the overall impression
that would be conveyed by the Citations and the
Design to an informed user,
namely Mr Moss. In Mr Moss’ view, the respective designs are ‘very
different’ because
the overall appearance of the Design is ‘more
aggressive and powerful’ than the designs shown in the Citations.
I find Mr Moss’ evidence
persuasive. Notably, Mr Moss explains that some features present in the Design
are absent in the Citations,
such as the bonnet air dam and rear air dams. These
differences create visual distinctiveness and, importantly, provide a functional
purpose. In this instance, for example, the air dams increase the aerodynamic
and cooling properties of the vehicle.
The informed user’s
awareness of such features would thus be heightened in the context of sports
cars where the vehicle’s
performance is of primary
importance.
nothing turns on the SoND because no readily apparent pattern or ornamentation
is present in the Design. Similarly, the
designer’s freedom to innovate is
constrained by the inherent features of a motor vehicle and additional
constraints are imposed
by the product being a sports car which must possess
aerodynamic features, such as a low height, to be fit for purpose. Thus, the
informed user would apportion more weight to areas where the designer has
freedom to innovate. In Mr Moss’ view, this would
be the front and rear
section of the vehicle. Substantial visual differences exist in these areas such
that these specific differences
in combination with other minor differences
combine to significantly alter the overall impression conveyed by the respective
the state of the prior art base for sports cars and toy-scale sports cars is
mature. As such, smaller visual differences
between the Design and the Citations
are capable of giving rise to a finding of distinctiveness. However, placing
reliance on smaller
visual differences to distinguish the respective designs is
not strictly necessary in this matter. This is because both major and
minor visual differences exist between the respective designs. Collectively
these differences distinguish the overall
impression conveyed by the Design when
Moss Declaration,
to the Citations, particularly given the informed user would be acutely aware of
both in view of the mature prior art base.
view of the above, I am satisfied that the Design is substantially different in
overall impression to the Citations.
am satisfied that no grounds for revocation exist. As such, examination of the
Design has been completed and a certificate of examination
may now issue for
Australian design number 201910301.
Nicholas Barbey Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings Trade Marks and Designs 14 July
RTF format (11.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format