Dunn v Aherrenge Association Inc [1998] IRCA 30 (27 August 1998)
Dunn v Aherrenge Association Inc [1998] IRCA 30 (27 August 1998)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
-alleged UNLAWFUL TERMINATION - whether termination at
the initiative of the employer.
Industrial Relations
Workplace Relations Act 1996
ss 170DE, 170DF,
Mohazab v Dick Smith Electronics Pty Ltd (No
(1995) 62 IR 200.
Carrigan v Darwin City Council
(unreported, IRCA No. 101 of 1997, von Doussa J, 20 March
Woods v WM Car Services (Peterborough) Limited
Slifka v JW Saunders Pty Ltd
(1995) 67 IR
STEVEN CEDRIC
DUNN -v- AHERRENGE ASSOCIATION INC.
RD FARRELL JR
PERTH (HEARD IN ALICE SPRINGS)
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
DI 1095 OF 1996
STEVEN CEDRIC DUNN
AHERRENGE ASSOCIATION INC.
RD FARRELL JR
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
PERTH (HEARD IN ALICE SPRINGS)
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The application under Section 170EA of the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
is dismissed.
2. The respondent pay to
the applicant the sum of $194.50 being unpaid
Note: Settlement and entry of orders is dealt with in Order 36 of the Industrial
Relations Court Rules.
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
DI 1095 OF 1996
STEVEN CEDRIC DUNN
AHERRENGE ASSOCIATION
RD FARRELL JR
PERTH (HEARD IN ALICE SPRINGS)
REASONS FOR DECISION
This is an application under Section 170EA of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
, now known as the
Relations Act 1996
(“the Act”). The application is for
compensation arising from the alleged unlawful termination of the employment of
applicant, Mr Steven Dunn (“Mr Dunn”) by the respondent,
Aherrenge Association Incorporated (“The Association.”).
Contentions
The Association’s case is that Mr Dunn abandoned his employment, and
that his employment was not terminated at the initiative
of the Association.
There was, therefore, no termination of employment to which the Act can
Mr Dunn disputes this, claiming that he was dismissed. He further contends
that his dismissal was in breach of Section 170DE of the
Act, because it was not
for a valid reason, and in breach of Section 170DF of the Act, because it was
for reasons including Mr Dunn’s
race and his temporary absence of work due
to illness.
Mr Dunn also had other outstanding claims against the Association, relating
to alleged underpayments of wages and payments allegedly
due under a separate
contract. There was no objection to those claims being dealt with under the
Court’s accrued jurisdiction.
Factual Background
Aherrenge Association Incorporated is an incorporated association which
performs a function equivalent to that of a local authority
for the Ampilatwatja
Community (“the Community”). The Community, whose members are people
of the Arandic language group,
is located 320 kilometres northeast of Alice
Springs on the Amaroo Station in the Northern Territory.
Mr Dunn’s wife, Mrs Belinda Dunn, (“Mrs Dunn”) was invited
by her nursing agency to apply for a position as registered
nurse with the
Ampilatwatja Health Centre Aboriginal Corporation (“the Health
Centre”) within the Community, on the basis
that her partner would be
offered work within the Community as well. At the time of the offer she was
working as a nurse at Roxby
Downs in South Australia, where Mr Dunn was employed
as a tradesman in the construction industry. They were employed at the Community
from 7 May 1996.
Mr Dunn was employed by the Association as a general labourer, with a wide
variety of duties including general maintenance and driving.
While employed by
the Association, he spent two days a week working under the control of the
Health Centre.
They worked with other employees of the Association and the
Health Centre, some of whom, like them, were employed from outside the
Community. These employees included:
• Mr Tony Becze, the administrator or council clerk;
• Jane Becze, the part-time bookkeeper and women’s centre
administrator;
• Mrs Kaylene Lindner, the health centre administrator;
• Dr John Gill, the health centre’s doctor; and
• Mr Michael Lindner, the emergency services operator.
Another person with whom Mr and Mrs Dunn associated was Ms Teresa Coe, who
ran the Community store.
Both the Association and the Health Centre were ultimately governed by their
respective committees. The committees were made up of
elected members of the
Community. Senior members of the Community included Mrs Wilma Ross, who was the
Health Centre’s President,
Mr Banjo Morton and Mr Peter Morton, who
appeared to have significant influence within the Association.
Mr Becze resigned in late June, following his wife’s dismissal and he
and his wife left the Community. In the circumstances
of his departure, he
negotiated a payment of four weeks salary.
It appears obliquely from the evidence that the decision making processes and
finances of the Association at this time were in some
disarray. I make no
findings as to the causes of these difficulties. However, it appears that the
Community was subject to the increased
attention of the relevant supervisory
Local Government and Aboriginal authorities.
Following the intervention of local government officers in July, the
Association’s committee took various decisions including
the retrenchment
of Mr Dunn. Mr Dunn was within his probation period. There was no administrator
to supervise his employment. Mr
Dunn was successful in persuading the committee
to reverse this decision.
The standard contract of employment for the Association’s employees
included a term that:
“You must refrain from influencing or participating in the political or
other affairs of the Aherrenge Community Council and
Ampilatwatja Community,
except where such activity is essential for the performance of your job. The
Council shall have absolute
discretion in determining whether any activity is
essential for the purposes of this sub-clause.”
appears that this term was more honoured in the breach than in the observance,
and that the outside employees tended to be susceptible
to “factional
infighting” into which the Community members were drawn from time to time.
The evidence on the matter was
limited, given its marginal relevance, but it
appears that Mr Becze’s departure took place in that context, and that the
factions revolved around Dr Gill and Ms Lindner, whose agenda was focused
upon the ongoing viability of the health centre, and Ms
Coe, who it seems was
allied to Mr and Mrs Becze. Ms Coe did not give evidence. My findings on this
question should be regarded as
tentative and I do not purport to apportion blame
for the situation.
It appears that Mr and Mrs Dunn came to be seen as allied with Mrs Coe.
Certainly, there was evidence that they socialised with each
other relatively
frequently. This led to tensions between Mr and Mrs Dunn on the one hand and Dr
Gill and Mrs Lindner on the other.
This was probably particularly difficult for
Mrs Dunn, who worked closely with them.
Friday 6 September 1996: Meeting at Health Centre
A controversy arose in the Community about Mr Dunn’s use of the
Association’s earth-moving machinery on the driveway of
their house in
early September 1996. I accept that Mr Dunn’s use of the machinery was
resented by some Community members, given
that their own access to the machinery
was restricted.
An informal meeting was held at the health centre on 6 September 1996 to
discuss the matter. Why the issue was seen as primarily a
matter of concern to
the Health Centre rather than the Association is not clear. Some reference was
made to the fact that the house
belonged to the Health Centre and their approval
to do the work had not been obtained. The meeting was attended by Dr Gill, Ms
Mr and Mrs Dunn, Ms Coe and three Community members, Mrs Wilma Ross
(the President), Mr Banjo Morton, and Mr Frank Holmes.
The focus of the meeting was the accusation that Mr and Mrs Dunn had told Ms
Coe about the Health Centre’s involvement with
the controversy about the
use of the earth moving equipment. Ms Lindner and Dr Gill believed that Mrs Coe
had told an officer of
ATSIC, who then rang the Health Centre President, Mrs
Ross, to tell her that Ms Lindner was “causing trouble”.
I am satisfied that the meeting became heated, and that by the conclusion of
the meeting, Dr Ross and Ms Lindner had resolved to try
to bring about Mr and
Mrs Dunn’s removal from the Community.
Monday 9 September 1996: Meeting at Association
A formal meeting of the Health Centre was held at the Association’s
offices on 9 September 1996. It was attended by Dr Gill
and Ms Lindner, together
with Mrs Ross and seven other members of the Committee. Mr Dunn sought to attend
that meeting, but was asked
Mr Dunn listened in on that meeting from outside the door, and reached the
conclusion that Ms Lindner and Dr Gill were seeking to
convince the Committee to
bring about the dismissal of him and his wife. Mr Dunn did not realise that the
meeting was a meeting of
the Health Centre, rather than the Association, and
thus that the meeting had no power to dismiss him.
I am satisfied that Ms Lindner complained to the Health Centre’s
Committee that Mr and Mrs Dunn were involved in “manipulation
interference” and that it was up to the Committee to “sort it
out”. Dr Gill added that he found it impossible
to work with Mr and Mrs
Dunn and threatened to resign. They elaborated on these themes at some
Committee members considered in principle the possibility of both Mr and Mrs
Dunn being dismissed, or alternatively Mr Dunn’s
work with the Health
Centre being discontinued, and Mrs Dunn being retained. It seems the Committee
was inclined to adopt the former
course, but accepted that it was necessary that
any dismissal be effected properly and lawfully. It was left on the basis that
Lindner was authorised by the Council to look into grounds for dismissal.
There was some evidence that a further meeting took place that evening
involving an officer of the Central Land Council. It may have
been a meeting of
the Association. There was no evidence of the meeting’s content. It seems
Mr and Mrs Dunn were not aware
of that meeting at the time.
9 September – 25 September 1996: Mr Dunn’s First
Period of Absence
Mr Dunn told Mrs Dunn what he had overheard. Mrs Dunn was distressed by this
news, particularly against the background of the pre-existing
tensions. She
telephoned an official of the Australian Nurses Federation for advice. The
official told Mrs Dunn that she was in no
state to work and advised her to take
stress leave. Mr and Mrs Dunn left the Community that day and travelled to Alice
Springs. They
left their belongings at the Community.
Mr and Mrs Dunn obtained medical certificates on 9 September 1996 from an
Alice Springs doctor for the period from 9 to 23 September
1996. Mr Dunn was
diagnosed as suffering from “acute stress reaction”. It would appear
from her evidence that Mrs Dunn’s
condition was more debilitating than Mr
Dunn’s condition.
Mr Dunn made his certificate available to the Association on 12 September
1996 through its accountant, Mr Rohan Richards, having notified
September 1996 that they were absent on stress leave. Mr Dunn gave his
solicitors’ address to Mr Richards as his
In accordance with the advice of Mrs Dunn’s psychologist, they
travelled back to visit the Community briefly on about 16 September
Dunn did not cope well and they returned immediately to Alice Springs. They did
have any interaction with anyone during
this visit other than Ms Coe; there was
a sports carnival in progress.
While Mr Dunn was absent, the Community’s new administrator, Mr Ricky
Hall, commenced work.
In a letter dated 23 September 1996, Mr Hall wrote to Mr Dunn, care of his
solicitors, seeking clarification that Mr Dunn was taking
leave without pay
while recovering from a medical condition, and seeking the return of keys and
various other items. Mr Dunn’s
limited sick-leave entitlements had been
exhausted during his absence.
During this period, Mr Banjo Morton, a senior member of the Community, signed
a request to cancel Mr and Mrs Dunn’s land permits
effective from 25
September 1996. The request was forwarded to the Central Lands Council. Mr
Morton did not give evidence. It appears
the permits were not cancelled until
after 8 October 1996.
Mr and Mrs Dunn returned to the Community on 25 September 1996. Mrs Dunn
found that she was unable to attend work the next day; she
describes herself as
having been mentally incapable of doing so.
Thursday 26 September 1996: Mr Dunn’s First Meeting with
Mr Dunn met Mr Hall at the Association’s office on 26 September
Mr Dunn’s continued employment was discussed. The content of the
discussion is in dispute. Mr Dunn says that Mr Hall claimed
Mr Dunn had
abandoned his employment at this meeting, which Mr Hall denies. I accept that Mr
Dunn is confused about this.
Certainly there were discussions of the possibility of Mr Dunn leaving
amicably in return for a settlement figure. Mr Dunn made reference
precedent set by Mr Becze’s departure, and Mr Dunn sought a payment of at
least four weeks’ salary. No agreement
was reached.
Mr Dunn advised Mr Hall that he had an injury to his knee, and that he was
going to seek further medical advice for it. I accept that
he told Mr Hall he
was going to Mount Isa, and gave Mr Hall his mobile phone number.
Before leaving, Mr Dunn tendered an invoice to Mr Hall for cleaning of the
men’s centre. His noted his address on the invoice
as Murray Bridge in
South Australia.
26 September – 8 October 1996: Mr Dunn’s Second
Period of Absence
Mr and Mrs Dunn travelled to Mount Isa, where they had a house. It appears,
though this is not absolutely clear, that they again left
belongings behind at
the Community.
Mr Dunn called Mr Hall from Mount Isa on 27 September in response to a
message from Mr Hall. They again discussed the possibility
of Mr Dunn leaving
amicably in return for a payment from the Association. Mr Hall indicated that he
expected to be able to gain authority
to offer two weeks’ salary.
Mrs Dunn recalls hearing Mr Dunn tell Mr Hall that if the Association was
offering less than four weeks then “he’d rather
come back to
The conversation was left on the basis that Mr Hall would seek the necessary
authority to extend an offer in writing to Mr Dunn. It
was envisaged that that
offer would be forwarded to Mr Dunn via facsimile. Mr Dunn recalls that Mr Hall
was to contact him if and
when the offer was ready to obtain the facsimile
number. Mr Hall’s recollection was that Mr Dunn undertook to get back to
to provide a facsimile number. It appears that each was of the belief that
the other party would make the next contact, while each
had the capacity to
initiate contact if they wished to.
Mr Dunn suggests that Mr Hall dismissed him in the course of the telephone
call. Mr Hall denies this. I accept Mr Hall’s denial.
Mr Dunn obtained a further medical certificate on 27 September 1996 from a
Mount Isa doctor for the period from 24 September to 6
October 1996, having been
diagnosed as suffering from a right knee injury. Mr and Mrs Dunn claim that Mr
Dunn told Mr Hall during
this call that he would be off work for another two
weeks due to his knee injury.
During this period, Mr Hall made arrangements for the work usually performed
by Mr Dunn to be done by two casual employees on a temporary
arrangement. It is
significant that no permanent replacement was engaged.
It was also during this period that Mr Hall learnt that Mr and Mrs
Dunn’s land permits were under review.
Tuesday 8 October 1996: Mr Dunn’s Final Meetings with Mr
Mr and Mrs Dunn returned to the Community by 8 October 1996.
Mr Dunn went to see Mr Hall. He provided Mr Hall with the medical certificate
he had obtained in Mount Isa. Mr Hall agrees that at
this meeting he raised the
proposition that Mr Dunn had abandoned his employment, it having been raised
with him recently by a lawyer
at the Central Land Council. He told Mr Dunn that
he was seeking legal advice. I accept that Mr hall may have referred, in this
both to the second absence and to the two day gap between the expiry of
Mr Dunn’s stress leave certificate and his return to
the Community.
Mr Hall says he also advised Mr Dunn that his land permit was under review.
He asked Mr Dunn to remain at home pending a resolution
to the situation, as he
considered it inadvisable for Mr Dunn to be moving around the Community when the
status of his land permit
was an issue with the Community members. Mr Dunn
claims he was not aware his land permit was under review until after he had
these proceedings.
Mrs Dunn had again hoped to be able to return to work. However, she again
found herself upset at the prospect of returning to her
work. She spoke about
the matter with Mrs Wilma Ross, the Health Clinic’s President, who came to
visit her. Mrs Ross offered
to call a meeting with Mrs Lindner and Dr Gill to
try to resolve Mrs Dunn’s difficulties, but Mrs Dunn says she told Mrs
that she was going to resign, for the Community’s sake and for her
own sake. She confirmed the resignation in writing.
Mr Dunn saw Mr Hall later that day. Mr Dunn asserted to Mr Hall that he had
been sacked by the Association. Mr Hall says he specifically
told Mr Dunn that
he had not been sacked. He says he would not have taken that step without taking
the necessary advice obtaining
the authority of the Committee. The
Association’s case was that the Committee had to decide whether permanent
employees should
be employed or dismissed; for example, Mr Dunn's employment and
earlier dismissal had been pursuant to decisions of the Committee.
Mr and Mrs Dunn packed up and left the Community.
Whether Termination at the Initiative of the Employer
Mr Dunn bears the onus of proof on this issue; in other words, he must
satisfy the Court that it is more likely than not that his
employment was
terminated at the Association’s initiative.
Mohazab v Dick Smith Electronics Pty Ltd (No
, the Full Court
considered how the courts should determine whether there has been a
“termination at the initiative of the employer”
for the purposes of
the Act. While disavowing an intention to formulate an “exhaustive
description” of what is termination
at the initiative of the employer, the
Court held that:
“...an important feature is that the act of the employer results
directly or consequentially in the termination of the employment
employment relationship is not voluntarily left by the employee. That is, had
the employer not taken the action it did, the
employee would have remained in
the employment relationship.”
Darwin City Council
Doussa J cited and expressly applied the following principles articulated by
Brown-Wilson J in
Woods v WM Car Services (Peterborough)
, which were upheld
by the English Court of Appeal
“In our view it is clearly established that there is implied in a
contract of employment a term that the employers will not,
without reasonable
and proper cause, conduct themselves in a manner calculated or likely to destroy
or seriously damage the relationship
of confidence and trust between employer
and employee... To constitute a breach of this implied term, it is not necessary
that the employer intended any repudiation of the contract: the
Tribunal’s function is to look at the employer’s conduct
and determine whether it is such that it’s effect, judged reasonable and
sensibly, is such that the employee cannot
be expected to put up with it... The
conduct of the parties has to be looked at as a whole and its cumulative impact
assessed...”
Having cited
Doussa J went on to state that, in his view, it is in accordance with the
approach of the Full Court to hold that the termination
of an employee’s
employment was at the initiative of the employer for the purposes of the Act if
there has been a constructive
dismissal arising from the breach of the implied
term as to trust and confidence.
Turning then to the circumstances of Mr Dunn’s case, who really
terminated the employment? To adopt the terminology of North
JW Saunders Pty Ltd
Dunn jump or was he pushed?
In my view, the uncontested facts above point more readily to a conclusion
that Mr Dunn decided to leave his employment as a result
of his wife’s
decision to resign.
In addition, where the evidence of Mr Dunn and Mr Hall conflicts, I have
generally preferred the evidence of Mr Hall. I formed a positive
impression of
Mr Hall’s credibility, based upon his demeanour when giving evidence,
whereas there were troubling aspects to
Mr Dunn’s evidence. Most notably,
there was one occasion when his evidence changed without explanation and
numerous occasions
when his evidence was inconsistent. Where Mr Hall was ready
to admit to the limits of his powers of recollection, Mr Dunn almost
offered a complete account of any incident. It seems likely that he relied, at
times, on a subsequent reconstruction of
events, opting for the reconstruction
that put his case in its best light.
In the course of the hearing, the Court was careful to focus on the evidence
relating to Mr Dunn’s employment. Much of the potential
evidence which
related only to Mrs Dunn’s employment was excluded. It is not the
Court’s task, in these proceedings,
to reach any view as to Mrs
Dunn’s treatment or as to whether Mrs Dunn may have had a claim under the
Act. However, as I noted
in the course of the hearing, it would be artificial to
have no regard to Mrs Dunn’s circumstances when assessing Mr Dunn’s
Mr Dunn saw an analogy between his situation and that of Mr Becze. In both
cases, married couples had been employed by the Community’s
employers. In
Mr Becze’s case, his wife had been dismissed, and there was at least
agitation in favour of his dismissal. In
order to resolve the matter without
ensuing litigation, the Association agreed to make a payment to him.
In Mr Dunn’s case, his wife appeared to be practically incapable of
returning to work. It is reasonable to conclude that she
wished to leave the
Community, and that he wished to accompany her. However, Mr Dunn was aware that
there was also a desire on the
part of at least some of the Community that they
leave. Mr Dunn also recognised that the Community would find it difficult to
bring about their departure if Mr and Mrs Dunn were determined to remain
in their employment. So long as Mr Dunn professed an intention
to so remain, he
had some leverage to negotiate a pay out. The various negotiations between Mr
Dunn and Mr Hall can best be understood
in this context.
Mr Dunn’s agenda throughout was to affirm his entitlement and his
intention to remain in his employment, while Mr Hall may have
averted to the
possibility that the Association already had grounds to dismiss Mr Dunn if it
wished. The impression left by Mr Hall’s
evidence was that the Association
was content to wait until Mr Dunn’s intentions became clear, rather than
force the issue.
In the event, Mr Dunn was unable to maintain his bargaining position. His
wife had had enough and decided to resign. Given that she
was leaving the
Community, it was no longer effectively an option that he stay. In the end he
had to jump, while maintaining that
he had been pushed.
Even assuming, for the purposes of argument, that Mrs Dunn’s employment
was terminated at the initiative of her employer, in
terms of the
decision referred to above, and leaving aside the fact
that she was employed by a different employer, the Association did nothing
prevent Mr Dunn from retaining his employment. It is well established than
employers, when contemplating the dismissal of husband
and wife teams, are
required to consider their performance separately. An employer with a valid
reason to dismiss one such employee
has no corresponding entitlement to
automatically dismiss that employee’s spouse, notwithstanding any
logistical difficulties
which might flow from retaining the spouse in
employment. Accordingly, the court cannot in fairness have undue regard to the
difficulties facing Mr Dunn as a result of his wife leaving her
employment.
I find therefore that Mr Dunn’s decision to leave was, in employment
terms, essentially voluntary.
I accept that there was a desire on the part of at least some individuals
that Mr and Mrs Dunn leave the Community, and had the Committee
Association considered the issue, they may have resolved to take steps to bring
signed by Mr Morton that their land
permit be withdrawn is indicative of that wish. It does appear that there were
expressions of
regret from members of the Community to Mr and Mrs Dunn as they
were leaving, but those expressions were consistent with a view that
departure was necessary to resolve the tensions between the Communities’
outside employees.
The Association did not however act to pursue the option of dismissing Mr
Dunn. There is significant doubt in my mind that any gaps
in Mr Dunn’s
medical certificates would have been justified such a dismissal. Nor would the
withdrawal of the land permit necessarily
have given rise to a valid reason for
dismissal. In the end, there was no ultimatum. There was no course of conduct
intended to coerce
Mr Dunn into resigning. There was merely an inquiry as to Mr
Dunn’s intentions, followed by negotiations which were initiated
I find therefore that Mr Dunn’s employment was not terminated at the
initiative of the Association. His claims under Section
170EA, based upon
sections 170DE and 170DF of the Act must therefore be dismissed.
Claims for Outstanding Payments
Mr Dunn also bears the onus of proof in relation to these claims.
Unfortunately, the evidence in support of these claims presented
difficulties, partly due to the logistical difficulties hampering pre-trial
discovery. The quantum of the claim shifted throughout
the course of the hearing
as new information continued to come to light and as problems with the evidence
became apparent.
Claim for Unpaid Overtime
Given the limitations of memory, the most cogent evidence of time worked is
usually the contemporaneous record of working hours. In
this case, that record
was in the form of time cards, which were completed by employees for each week
and then used as the basis
for making up wages. A bundy clock was available at
the Association’s offices to stamp the cards but it was often more
for Mr Dunn to complete his cards by hand, particularly on days when
he worked at the Health Centre.
Unfortunately, the reliability of the timecards was called into question as
it became evident in the course of the hearing that some
of Mr Dunn’s time
cards were incomplete and had been altered by Mr Dunn to his advantage.
It was alleged that the cards had been altered after these proceedings had
been initiated. Mrs Robin Gill, who took on an administrative
role with the
Association at about the time Mr Dunn’s employment ended, recalls making
photocopies of Mr Dunn’s timecards
soon after he initiated these
proceedings. By the time of the hearing, some of the original timecards
contained additional information
which Mr Dunn acknowledged was in his
handwriting.
The puzzling question was how Mr Dunn could have accessed the cards, which
were kept at the Association’s offices at the Community,
when he was
interstate. The most likely solution is suggested by exhibit A15, which shows Mr
Richards’ calculations of wages,
and includes the copies of time cards he
was faxed from the Community as the basis of those calculations. As a single
example, the
faxed copy of the time card for Tuesday 16 July 1996 shows the word
“Sick”. The original time card has standard hours
completed for
Tuesday 16 July 1996 from 8.00 am to 5.00 pm with a one hour lunch break. The
copy tendered by Mrs Gill, which she
recalls as having been made on or after 26
November 1996, shows the same handwritten word “sick” written in
copy tendered by Mrs Gill must therefore have been made before it was
faxed to Mr Richards, which presumably must have been at or
wages were made up, in July 1996.
I am satisfied, therefore, that while Mr Dunn may have altered the original
cards to his advantage before he left the Community, possibly
as late as on 26
September 1996 when he accessed the cards to send copies of his final time cards
to Mr Richards, he need not have
altered them after proceedings were
Also of relevance to the reliability of the time cards is the fact that for
much of his employment, after Mr Becze left, Mr Dunn was
not subject to
supervision. Questions arise therefore as to whether and how overtime could have
been authorised, and the reliability
of any claims of hours worked.
In the event, Mr Dunn appears in his final submissions to have abandoned most
of his claims for payment of overtime. In a section
of his submissions headed
“breakdown of monies still owing”, he claims only underpayment for 4
September 1996 and for
the fortnight ending 2 July 1996.
Mr Dunn was usually paid at the rate of $12.00 per hour for ordinary time.
However, in the fortnight to 2 July 1996 he acted as Emergency
Service Officer,
and was paid for his ordinary hours at the rate of $16.18 per hour. Mr Richards
conceded in the course of his evidence
that he had inadvertently paid Mr
Dunn’s overtime for that fortnight by reference to his usual rate of
$12.00 per hour. By
my calculations, Mr Dunn was underpaid $136.90.
With regard to 4 September 1996, Mr Richards acknowledged that soon after
going on stress leave Mr Dunn had provided him with a written
record of his
start and finish time on that day; his time card had no times noted. The start
time was 6.30 am and the finish time
was 8.30 pm. Mr Richards did not give
evidence as to the lunch break, so I will assume the usual break of one hour.
The evidence
is therefore that Mr Dunn worked 7.6 ordinary hours and 5.4 hours
overtime. Given that the first three hours overtime is calculated
at time and a
half and thereafter at double time, Mr Dunn was due $202.80 but was only paid
$145.20. It would appear that Mr Dunn
is due an additional $57.60.
The total monies still owing for underpayment of overtime is therefore
Claim for Time in Lieu of Overtime
Mr Richards denies that the Association had a practice of paying out time in
lieu of overtime. It appears from the evidence of Mr
Richards, who made up the
wages during most of Mr Dunn’s period of employment, that it was assumed
that Mr Dunn, as a permanent
employee, was working at least ordinary hours.
Thus, there are instances where Mr Dunn did not complete his time cards for days
he was scheduled to work, but was paid for those days anyway.
The basis for Mr Dunn’s claim for payment out of time off in lieu of
overtime is not clear to me, given that he is also claiming
for non-payment of
overtime based on working days of 7.6 hours. Mr Dunn’s final submissions
did not appear to pursue this claim.
Claim for Payment For Cleaning Men’s Centre
Mr Dunn claims that he entered into an arrangement with Mr Becze and Mr Oscar
Peterson, the sports and recreation officer, whereby
Mr Dunn agreed to clean the
Community’s Men’s Centre in return for a payment of $500.00 to cover
his labour and the purchase
of the necessary cleaning products. Mr Dunn has
characterised the arrangement he as a “gentleman’s agreement”.
It was not disputed that Mr Dunn performed the work and purchased the
materials. However, I note that his duties with the Association
are described as
including general maintenance and cleaning.
Assuming that such an agreement existed, Mr Dunn would have been sufficiently
aware of the formalities required of Aboriginal organisations
in their dealings
by the funding bodies to whom they are accountable to be aware that such an
informal arrangement was likely to
be beyond the authority of those with whom he
was dealing and therefore ultimately unenforceable.
Mr Dunn produced a document purporting to be a minute of an Association
Committee meeting held on 25 June 1996, which included the
following item:
“Men’s Centre – Discussion about cleaning up the
Men’s Centre and setting up some games machines, pool table
and so on with
Steve Dunn supervising after hours. The idea of women using the Centre one night
and the men the next seemed like
a good idea. It was agreed that we try the new
idea and decide on some sort of payment for Steve to run
The minute was not signed and did not form part of
the official minute book. In any event, the role proposed for Mr Dunn for which
he might be paid appears to be the running of the centre, not the cleaning of
The only evidence before me of the agreement that Mr Dunn be paid for the
cleaning was that of Mr Dunn, with some support from Mrs
Dunn; neither Mr Becze
nor Mr Peterson gave evidence. Mr Richards was not aware of any such
arrangement.
On the limited evidence before me, I am not satisfied that it is more likely
than not that a legally enforceable agreement was entered
into by the
Association to pay Mr Dunn $500.00.
The respondent has applied for an order for costs. While such an order would
be unusual in proceedings of this nature, the respondent’s
application is
worthy of serious consideration, given the nature of this claim, and the
substantial inconvenience and cost which
it has caused the Association.
While in my view Mr Dunn’s decision to leave his employment was finally
voluntary, it was not beyond argument that the prelude
to that decision was such
that the events preceding his departure were such that the Association might be
construed as having initiated
it. The principles which I have considered must be
applied to the particular facts of each case. Mr Dunn’s own version of the
facts, if accepted may have led to a different result. My findings as to
credibility are not such as would justify an order for costs
against Mr Dunn.
With regard to the claim for underpayment of wages, Mr Dunn met with some
limited success, and many of the claims
could have been resolved earlier had all
the relevant documentation been available.
On balance, therefore, I will make no order for costs.
I certify that this and the preceding seventeen (17) pages are a true copy
of the Reasons for Decision herein of Judicial Registrar
R. D. FARRELL.
Dated: 27 August 1998
Applicant appeared in Person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr M. Howden
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Central Australian Aboriginal Legal Aid Service Inc.
Date of Hearing:
19, 20 May, 11 & 12 August 1997
Date of Final Submissions
Date of Decision:
Mohazab v Dick Smith
Electronics Pty Ltd (No 2.)
(1995) 62 IR 200
(1995) 62 IR 200
(unreported, IRCA No. 101 of
1997, von Doussa J, 20 March 1997)
[1982] IRLR 347
at paragraph
[1982] ICR 693
(1995) 67 IR 316
RTF format (83 KB)
Signed PDF/A format