Puohotaua v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs [2025] FCAFC 141 (17 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Puohotaua v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FCAFC 141
Appeal from:
Puohotaua v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2024] FCA 1491
File number(s):
QUD 776 of 2024
Judgment of:
CHARLESWORTH, DOWNES AND O'SULLIVAN
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– consequences of failure
by Tribunal to warn self-represented appellant about his right to invoke the
privilege against self-incrimination
when answering questions – where
appellant could not have invoked privilege as there was no ‘real and
appreciable risk
of prosecution’ – where evidence showed awareness
by appellant of privilege – whether appellant bore evidential
adduce evidence before primary judge – appeal dismissed
Legislation:
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) ss 371,
Corrective Services Act
Drugs Misuse Act 1986
Transport Operations (Road Use Management) Act 1995
Cases cited:
Allesch v Maunz
(2000) 203 CLR 172
Bainbridge v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2024] FCA 1080
Chardon v Bradley
[2017] QCA 314
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Shi
(2021) 273 CLR 235
Griffin v Pantzer
(2004) 137 FCR 209
[2004] FCAFC 113
Hossain v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] HCA 34
LPDT v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
(2024) 280 CLR 321
[2024] HCA 12
Lucas v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2023] FCA 1653
Meneses v Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd
(2019) 273 FCR 638
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2021] HCA 17
Nathanson v Minister for Home Affairs
(2022) 276 CLR 80
Promsopa v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2020] FCA 1480
Sorby v the Commonwealth of Australia
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
(2006) 228 CLR 152
[2006] HCA 63
Verrill v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2024] FCA 802
X7 v Australian Crime Commission
(2013) 248 CLR 92
General Division
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr L Brown SC with Mr C J Fitzgerald
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Zarifi Lawyers
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr C L Lenehan SC with Mr A C White
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
MinterEllison
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
The Second Respondent filed a Submitting Notice
QUD 776 of 2024
TEA ANARU PUOHOTAUA
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Second Respondent
CHARLESWORTH, DOWNES AND O'SULLIVAN JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
name of the first respondent be amended to “Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship”.
appeal be dismissed.
appellant pay the costs of the first respondent to be agreed, or failing
agreement, to be assessed.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
CHARLESWORTH J:
have had the benefit of considering the reasons of Downes J in draft. As
explained by her Honour, the appellant’s responses
to the impugned
questions did not tend to incriminate him in the sense explained in the
authorities. I respectfully agree with the
analysis on that topic.
unfairness in the proceeding before the Tribunal could only have arisen by
virtue of the appellant responding to questions on
an incorrect assumption that
he was compelled to respond.
circumstances where there was no proper basis to claim the privilege, the
appellant was, as a matter of law, compelled to respond.
It follows that no
substantive unfairness arose.
my mind, that conclusion is sufficient to dispose of the appeal, without
addressing arguments concerning materiality of error.
In circumstances where
the privilege against self-incrimination could not reasonably be asserted, any
failure by the Tribunal to
advise the appellant of his right to claim the
privilege could not constitute an error.
do not consider it necessary to consider the matters argued on the
Minister’s notice of contention, whether through the lens
of materiality
or otherwise.
is also unnecessary to determine whether the primary judge erred in concluding
that there was sufficient material before the Tribunal
to support its findings
at [64] without reference to the appellant’s responses to the impugned
questions. It is enough to
conclude that the responses formed a part of the
material before the Tribunal in circumstances that did not give rise to
substantive
unfairness, unfairness being the essential complaint made on the
application for judicial review at first instance.
that more confined basis, I join in the order dismissing the
I certify that the preceding seven (7) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of
the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Charlesworth.
Dated: 17 October 2025
is an appeal from the orders of a single judge of this Court made on 20 December
Puohotaua v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2024] FCA 1491
). By those orders, the primary judge
dismissed the application for judicial review brought by Mr Tea Anaru Puohotaua
(the appellant)
of the decision of the former Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(now the Administrative Review Tribunal, the second respondent) to
decision of a delegate of the then Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and
Multicultural Affairs (the first respondent)
not to revoke the cancellation of
the appellant’s Special Category (Temporary) (Class TY) (subclass 444)
sole issue for determination on this appeal is whether the primary judge erred
in finding that the decision of the Tribunal was
not affected by jurisdictional
error resulting from what the appellant alleges was a denial of procedural
fairness. The denial of
procedural fairness is said to arise from the
Tribunal’s failure to inform the appellant at the relevant Tribunal
his right to claim the privilege against self-incrimination before
answering questions which had a tendency to incriminate him.
was common ground at first instance and on appeal that the Tribunal did not warn
the appellant about his right to invoke the privilege
against self-incrimination
at any stage during that hearing; what is in issue is whether that failure
resulted in a denial of procedural
fairness, and whether any such error was
material so as to be a jurisdictional error.
his Notice of Appeal accepted for filing on 24 December 2024, the appellant
raises a single ground of appeal which reflects the
sole ground of review
pressed at first instance:
learned primary judge erred in finding that the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
did not fall into jurisdictional error by failing
to afford the Appellant
procedural fairness.
Particulars
(B) By his sole ground of review advanced before the Court below, the Appellant
alleged that the Tribunal had fallen into jurisdictional
error by denying him
procedural fairness, in that the Tribunal did not warn him about his right to
invoke the privilege against self-incrimination
at any stage during its hearing
of his application for review. It was not disputed that the Tribunal did not
provide a warning.
(C) The learned primary judge found that, with respect to relevant answers
provided by the Appellant in response to questioning
2019 and 2022, and relating [sic] his drug use, that he was not exposed to a
danger of prosecution (such
that the Appellant was not denied procedural
fairness by the Tribunal). The learned primary judge erred in so finding.
(D) Further, the learned primary judge erred in also concluding that the
Tribunal’s error was not material.
(Emphasis omitted.)
the Notice of Appeal, the appellant seeks the following orders:
1. The appeal be allowed.
1 and 2 of the learned primary judge’s orders made on 20 December 2024 be
set aside, and in their place the following
orders be made:
(a) A writ of certiorari be issued to quash the decision of the Tribunal made
on 16 July 2024.
(b) A writ of mandamus be issued directed to the Tribunal requiring it to
reconsider and determine the Appellant’s application
for review according
(c) The Tribunal take all necessary steps to have its decision dated 16 July
2024 removed from publication online.
(d) The Respondents be prohibited from having regard to the transcript of
proceedings and audio recordings related to the decision
of 16 July 2024 in the
Appellant’s remittal proceeding.
(e) The First Respondent pay the Appellant’s costs.
Minister, by a Notice of Contention filed on 31 January 2025, contended that the
PJ was correct but should also be affirmed on
grounds other than those relied on
by the primary judge. In essence, the Minister contended that the evidence
before the primary
judge was insufficient to infer that there was a realistic
possibility that the appellant would have asserted the privilege against
self-incrimination had that privilege been adequately explained to him in the
Tribunal proceedings and thus, the appellant did not
discharge his onus in
establishing that any error was material.
second respondent lodged a Submitting Notice on 24 January 2025 and took no
active part in the proceedings. It submits to any
order the Court may make in
the proceeding but wishes to be heard on the question of costs.
the reasons that follow, the appeal must be dismissed, with costs to follow the
appellant was born on 1 September 1998. He is a citizen of New Zealand who
moved to Australia in 2012 to live with his father,
holding the visa: PJ
8 August 2023, the appellant was convicted in the Supreme Court of Queensland
and sentenced to multiple periods of imprisonment
for 12 months or more for a
range of offences, including the following:
Dangerous operation of a vehicle (domestic violence offence) (on
29/05/2021);
Choking suffocation (domestic relationship) (on 12/6/2021);
Assaults occasioning bodily harm (domestic violence) (on 29/05/2021, and between
11/06/2021 and 14/06/2021);
Common assault (domestic violence offence) (on or about 29/05/2021 and
12/06/2021);
Deprivation of liberty (domestic violence offence) (on or about 29/05/2021 and
12/06/2021);
Trespass (domestic violence offence) (on or about 29/05/2021);
Robbery with actual violence (on 12/01/2022);
Trafficking in dangerous drugs (between 02/10/2021 and 11/01/2022);
Supplying Schedule 1 dangerous drugs (on or about 07/01/2021); and
Possession of a Schedule 1 dangerous drug (on 13/01/2022).
1 September 2023, the appellant’s visa was mandatorily cancelled by a
delegate of the Minister pursuant to
Migration Act
(Cth): PJ [2].
4 September 2023, pursuant to
Migration Act
appellant made representations seeking the revocation of the mandatory
cancellation decision.
6 May 2024, a delegate of the Minister decided not to revoke the mandatory
cancellation of the appellant’s visa, as the delegate
was neither
satisfied that the appellant passed the character test nor that there was
“another reason” for revocation,
pursuant to
s 501CA(4)(b)
Migration Act
8 May 2024, the appellant then filed an application for merits review of the
non-revocation decision of the delegate in the Tribunal,
pursuant to
Migration Act
Minister lodged material to be considered in the Tribunal hearing, which
included material obtained under summons from the Queensland
Police Service
) and Queensland Corrective Services (
). The QPS material
included a Solicitor’s office report (
) which recorded a
complaint of domestic violence made against the appellant by his former partner
on 17 July 2019 concerning events
alleged to have occurred between 30 June 2019
and 17 July 2019. The appellant was not prosecuted in relation to these
allegations,
but following a further complaint made on 2 September 2019, a
protection order was made in favour of that complainant on 9 October
consent, and without admissions. The QCS material included records of the
appellant’s alleged involvement in assaults
while he was on remand within
Arthur Gorrie Correctional Centre
on around 1 March, 14 June and 4 August
2022. The appellant was not prosecuted in relation to these events.
15 and 16 July 2024, the Tribunal heard the appellant’s review
application. The appellant did not have legal representation
when appearing
before the Tribunal.
the Tribunal hearing, questions were asked of the appellant in the witness box
by the Tribunal member and the Minister’s
legal representative, which he
answered. There are four topics which the appellant contends fall within the
ambit of the privilege
against self-incrimination:
(1) assaults which he was alleged to have committed on 1 March, 14 June and 4
August 2022 whilst he was on remand at the Correctional
Centre (especially on 1
(2) a complaint of domestic violence made against him on 17 July 2019 concerning
events alleged to have occurred between 30 June
2019 and 17 July 2019;
(3) alleged illicit drug use by him and involvement in drug trafficking, without
limiting questions to those offences for which the
appellant had been charged,
convicted and sentenced; and
(4) alleged illicit drug use by him at the time he engaged in other offending
(including while driving) in circumstances where he
had been convicted of that
other offending but not of any crime related to drug possession or use or
driving under the influence
of those drugs.
16 July 2024, the Tribunal delivered
reasons affirming the
delegate’s decision not to revoke the cancellation of the
appellant’s visa. Written reasons were
delivered on 24 July 2024. In
making its decision, the Tribunal was required to, and did, have regard to
“Ministerial Direction
no. 110 – Visa refusal and cancellation under
section 501
and revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a visa under
Direction 110
17 August 2024, the appellant filed an application for judicial review of the
decision in this Court. An amended version of the
application was filed on 26
November 2024.
appellant’s key submission before the primary judge was that as a result
of the failure to warn him about his right to invoke
the privilege against
self-incrimination, the Tribunal made findings in respect of the alleged
assaults and alleged drug use which
were subsumed in the Tribunal’s
overall evaluative assessment in relation to Primary Considerations 1
(Protection of the Australian
Community) and 5 (Expectations of the Australian
Community) required by Direction 110: PJ [5].
20 December 2024, the primary judge dismissed the application for judicial
review: PJ [43]. Her Honour considered that two questions
arose: first, whether
answering the impugned questions would have exposed the appellant to a danger of
prosecution such that the
Tribunal was required to warn him of that danger, and
secondly, if that be the case, whether the Tribunal’s failure to warn
appellant of his right to refuse to answer those questions on the basis of the
privilege was a material error: PJ [7]–[10].
to the first question which concerned the alleged domestic violence events in
2019, the primary judge considered that the appellant’s
responses to the
relevant questions did not amount to admissions, but in any case it was
“tolerably clear that no further action
was going to be taken against [the
appellant]”, as the QPS Report noted that the relationship with the
complainant was over
and so “the need for a domestic violence protection
order is not required or justified”: PJ [17]–[18]. Her Honour
considered a retrospective prosecution in relation to these events to be
“most unlikely”, even if the appellant’s
responses amounted to
admissions, given that a protection order was subsequently made by consent in
relation to other events, but
the complainant had not since made any other
complaints about the appellant, and the appellant was subsequently punished in
the criminal
law system for domestic violence offences committed in 2021: PJ
relation to the alleged assault in the Correctional Centre on 1 March 2022, the
primary judge concluded that “[i]t cannot
be said that there is any
likelihood, or risk, of any steps being taken to prosecute [the
appellant]” on the basis of anything
he said before the Tribunal: PJ [27].
In particular, the primary judge had regard to a QCS report in evidence which
stated that the
incidents were “closed” after being referred to and
returned from the Corrective Services Investigation Unit (
recommendation for internal management. The primary judge considered that it
appeared likely that the appellant was “dealt
with for a breach of
discipline” in relation to the incident of 1 March 2022, and that it can
be comfortably inferred that
any steps to prosecute him in relation to this
incident would have been taken in 2022. Her Honour also noted that the QCS
does not suggest that the appellant denied involvement in the fight, such
that an admission before the Tribunal two years later could
not take the
position further than what was observable to the reporting officer and
investigated by the CSIU: PJ [26].
relation to the alleged drug use, the primary judge concluded that it did not
follow from anything the appellant said before the
Tribunal that he had admitted
to the possession of any quantity of drug for personal use that would
incriminate him or, at least,
there would be no greater risk of prosecution for
such an offence than would stem from the admissions he had already made about
drug use in his personal statement in support of revocation of the
cancellation decision and in earlier unsolicited admissions in
evidence to the
Tribunal: PJ [31].
to materiality, the primary judge concluded that even if it were assumed that
the appellant would have refused to answer the questions
asked by the Tribunal,
had he been appropriately warned of his rights, the absence of his answers could
not have produced a different
result because his admissions added nothing to the
material already before the Tribunal: PJ [38]. The primary judge was satisfied
that the Tribunal’s conclusions were supported by ample evidence before
it, absent any of the answers to the impugned questions,
and so there is no
realistic possibility that the Tribunal could have reached a different decision
had it warned the appellant about
his rights in relation to the privilege: PJ
LEGAL FRAMEWORK
appeal to this Court is by way of rehearing, meaning that the appellant must
demonstrate legal, factual or discretionary error
by the primary judge: see
Allesch v Maunz
(2000) 203 CLR 172
[2000] HCA 40
McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ).
first instance, the onus was on the appellant to establish that the Tribunal
made a jurisdictional error, being an error that results
in an administrative
decision lacking any legal force (or being “invalid”):
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
(2024) 280 CLR 321
[2024] HCA 12
(Gageler CJ, Gordon,
Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Jagot JJ);
Hossain v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
(2018) 264 CLR 123
[2018] HCA 34
(Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Keane JJ).
most cases an error will only be jurisdictional if it was material to the
decision that was made in fact, in the sense that there
is a realistic
possibility that the decision that was made in fact could have been different if
the error had not occurred:
at [7] (Beech-Jones J agreeing at [38]).
The standard of “reasonable conjecture” required in assessing the
counterfactual
scenario and whether the decision could, not would, have been
different absent the error has been described as “undemanding”
“not onerous”:
Nathanson v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 26
(Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ), [47]
(Gageler J);
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2021) 273 CLR 506
[2021] HCA 17
(Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane and Gleeson
rules of procedural fairness apply in connection with the conduct of a review by
the Tribunal under
Migration Act
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
requirements of procedural fairness are moulded by the facts and circumstances
of the particular case:
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
and Indigenous Affairs
(2006) 228 CLR 152
[2006] HCA 63
(Gleeson CJ, Kirby, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon JJ).
Promsopa v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2020] FCA 1480
, Allsop CJ accepted that a
tribunal may deny an unrepresented party procedural fairness if its questioning
strays into matters about
which the unrepresented party could invoke the
privilege against self-incrimination without warning the person. See also
Bainbridge v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCA 1080
–[61] (McDonald J);
Lucas v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] FCA 1653
–[51] (Meagher J);
Verrill v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship
and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCA 802
(Thawley J).
privilege against self-incrimination is a fundamental common law right: see
Sorby v the Commonwealth of Australia
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
at 294 (Gibbs CJ),
309 (Mason, Wilson and Dawson JJ), 311 (Murphy J);
X7 v Australian Crime
(2013) 248 CLR 92
[2013] HCA 29
(Hayne and Bell JJ) and
[158]–[160] (Kiefel J);
Meneses v Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd
(2019) 273 FCR 638
[2019] FCAFC 190
–[87] (Moshinsky, Wheelahan
and Abraham JJ). The Full Court in
at [85] explained it as a
right not to answer questions or produce documents or things where there would
be a tendency to expose the
individual to a criminal charge, citing
(2004) 137 FCR 209
[2004] FCAFC 113
(Allsop J, Ryan
and Heerey JJ agreeing).
privilege against self-incrimination was at the time of the Tribunal hearing
reflected in s 62 of the
as an exception to the express
statutory obligation to answer questions:
62 Refusal to be sworn or to answer questions
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person appears as a witness before the Tribunal; and
(b) the member presiding at the proceeding has required the person to answer a
question; and
(c) the person fails to answer the question.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 12 months or 60 penalty units, or both.
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply if answering the question might tend to
incriminate the person.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in
subsection (4) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the
Criminal Code
it then was, s 371(2)(c) of the
Migration Act
provided in similar
terms that it is an offence for a witness to fail to answer a question of the
Tribunal for the purposes of a
review under
, which encompassed the appellant’s review application. Section
371(3) provided an exception to this offence where “answering
the question
might tend to incriminate the person”.
practice, the privilege is raised by a person who objects to responding to a
question asked if answering the question might tend
to incriminate them, at
which point it then falls upon the Tribunal to determine whether answering the
question might tend to incriminate
the person or whether the applicant should be
compelled to answer the question. It is common ground that the manner of that
determination
was explained by the High Court in
Deputy Commissioner of
Taxation v Shi
(2021) 273 CLR 235
[2021] HCA 22
(Gordon J, Kiefel
CJ, Gageler and Gleeson JJ agreeing):
In assessing whether there are reasonable grounds for the objection, the court
must assess whether there is a “real and appreciable
prosecution if the relevant information is disclosed. The gist of the privilege
is that disclosure of the information
“would tend to expose the claimant
to the apprehended consequence”. The “reasonable grounds”
inquiry requires
the court to assess, having regard to the circumstances of the
case and the nature of the information which the relevant person is
required to
disclose, whether there are reasonable grounds to apprehend danger to them from
being compelled to disclose the information.
This requires consideration of
whether information may tend to prove the commission of an offence, as well as
the likelihood, or
risk, of steps being taken to prosecute that offence. There
must be some material upon which the court can be satisfied of these
(Footnotes and emphasis omitted.)
is some conceptual uncertainty as to whether the reasonable grounds
analysis—being whether the unrepresented person giving
evidence was in
fact entitled to invoke the privilege against self-incrimination (requiring
application of the test in
)—is best undertaken by the court
hearing an application for judicial review on these grounds under (a) the
framework of whether
there was a practical injustice and denial of procedural
fairness to the judicial review applicant and thus any error at all, or
framework of whether any error on procedural unfairness grounds was material and
thus jurisdictional.
at [67]–[68], McDonald J observed that:
The precise relationship between denial of procedural fairness and materiality
in a case like the present is somewhat unclear. In
, Kiefel CJ,
Keane and Gleeson JJ said (at 103 [33]):
There will generally be a realistic possibility that a decision-making process
could have resulted in a different outcome if a party
was denied an opportunity
to present evidence or make submissions on an issue that required consideration
(Citation omitted.)
However, the kind of denial of procedural fairness
that has been held to arise when a person is not informed of their privilege
self-incrimination is somewhat atypical. In such a case, the person has
been deprived of an informed opportunity to exercise their
right to decline to
answer certain questions. The opportunity denied is not an opportunity to
present evidence or make submissions
on an issue that required consideration; if
anything, the person is likely to have given additional evidence that they might
have given had they been made aware of the privilege (and, in some cases,
this may give rise to a need to address that additional
evidence in additional
submissions). On one view, the denial of that opportunity itself should be
characterised as amounting to a
denial of procedural fairness, with the question
of the materiality of that denial to the decision under review being a distinct
question. On the other hand, although there is a broader sense in which it can
be said that a person has been treated unfairly if
they have been denied the
practical opportunity to exercise their legal rights, it might be thought that
there will only be a denial
of procedural fairness
in relation to the
decision under review
if it is shown that the denial of that right could
possibly have affected the decision. On the latter view, the question of whether
there has been a denial of procedural fairness at all may effectively be the
same as the question of whether what occurred was “material”.
unnecessary to resolve this question because, on either approach, the second
ground of judicial review can succeed only if
the failure of the Tribunal to
inform Mr Bainbridge of his privilege against self-incrimination could have made
a difference to the
Tribunal’s decision.
(Emphasis in original.)
Honour further stated at [109]:
The failure of the Tribunal to inform [the applicant] about [the privilege
against self-incrimination] in connection with his drug
use will have amounted
to both a denial of procedural fairness and a jurisdictional error if it was
material to the Tribunal’s
decision. It is unnecessary to decide whether
it would have amounted to a denial of procedural fairness even if it was not
to the Tribunal’s decision and therefore did not constitute
respectfully agree with and will adopt the same approach in this case being that
which is aligned to the second view expressed in
That is, I will determine whether the failure by the Tribunal to inform the
appellant about the privilege against self-incrimination
was material to the
Tribunal’s decision as this will also determine whether there has been a
denial of procedural fairness
in relation to that decision and a jurisdictional
CONSIDERATION
Whether the appellant could have invoked the privilege against
self-incrimination
set out above, the appellant identifies four areas of questioning in respect of
which he contends the privilege against self-incrimination
could have been
invoked by him successfully (with the third and fourth area overlapping as they
both relate to the appellant’s
Alleged assault in the Correctional Centre
the primary judge, the appellant confined his case to an assault alleged to have
occurred at the Correctional Centre on 1 March
2022: PJ [11], [26], [27].
appeal, the appellant made submissions that refer to the questioning in the
Tribunal relating to three alleged assaults in 2022,
including on 1 March 2022.
The Minister objected to this, submitting that the appellant should not be
permitted to depart from how
he chose to confine the conduct of his case in the
proceeding below. I agree.
to the alleged assault on 1 March 2022, the relevant exchanges during the
Tribunal hearing began with the following questions put
to the appellant by the
Senior Member:
Okay. There’s a report from prison dated 1 March 2022 - - -?---Yes.
- - - that you were fighting with another prisoner and you were told to stop and
you stopped. Do you remember that?---Yes. Yes, I
do remember.
There’s a file note from a few months later, June 2022. You and another
prisoner were fighting on the A-side oval. You were
told to stop fighting and
you both said that you were just playing around and tackling each other. What
was that?---Yes. So that
was – we were playing a touch footy on the oval -
for the appellant accepts that this question and others in the course of the
hearing did not necessarily reach the point of
inviting incriminating answers
because a fight might or might not constitute an assault, but submits that it is
on the edge” of questioning that might expose the
appellant to give incriminatory responses. Further exchanges relevant to
events began with the Minister’s representative examining the appellant as
extracted above, and then continuing as follows
with the Senior Member
interjecting, relating to the alleged “proper fight” on 1 March 2022
and the “play fight”
on 14 June 2022:
Okay. I suppose I’m trying to understand the difference between what you
would call a proper fight and a play fight?---Well,
so we were just - - - In the
fight - - -?---In the fight there was obviously – we were fighting, and
then we got told to stop.
And then the play fight we were playing footy on the
oval and one of the boys tackled me and we were just rolling on the ground,
just wrestling, sort of just mucking around. But they obviously thought we were
taking it serious. But both of us admitted to
saying that it was just a –
it was just a muck around.
SENIOR MEMBER: No one was trying to hurt anybody?---Yes. No one was trying to
hurt anybody, whereas the other one - - -
Yes. You were throwing punches?---There was – yes. Exactly right.
Yes?---That’s the difference.
MS TAYLOR: And in the other fight did anyone get hurt?---Which one?
The proper fight?---I guess both of us. Yes. I guess both of us did in a sense.
Like, nothing major but.
So - - -?--- Like no – went to hospital and neither of us needed to go to
like emergency, like to the nurse.
Well, would you agree that a fight can be serious even if you don’t have
to go to hospital?---Yes. Yes. It was serious, but
I admit like no one got
seriously injured. I should’ve said it probably better. I said it like
– but, yes. I do. I do
agree with that.
But, I suppose going back to my question, and I think it – you know, just
a yes or no answer would be fine – based on
what you’ve said today
and the evidence it’s true that being in prison didn’t stop you from
engaging in physical
violence?---Well, if you put it like that I guess no, it
didn’t. That happened at the very start. Let’s say that happened
when I first went in there. It’s almost two and a bit years ago now, and
it’s - ever since then there wasn’t another
altercation since while
I’ve been in jail where I physically assaulted somebody.
But you would still accept that while you were in prison you did assault
somebody?---Yes. Yes.
this final question in context, although it does not specify a date or time of
the alleged assault, it seems clear that it
is a reference to the alleged 1
March 2022 incident, as the appellant characterised it. The appellant submits
that this is plainly
an admission of a criminal offence made in the absence of
an adequate warning, which verified from the appellant’s own mouth
was alleged in the QPS Report for the incident “at around 1735 hours on
march 2022” which is described there as an “assault
between [another prisoner] and [the appellant]”.
primary judge concluded at PJ [26] that an “admission before the tribunal
that he assaulted someone in prison, cannot realistically
be said to be an
admission of an offence different from what was observable to the reporting
officer and investigated by the CSIU”.
I understand her Honour to be
saying is that it cannot be said, looking at the material before the Tribunal
and all the circumstances,
that there is any
real and appreciable
prosecution. Her Honour’s conclusion with respect to the alleged assault
in the Correctional Centre must be read in
light of her immediately preceding
comment that an admission “cannot realistically be said to be” an
admission different
from what was already observable and investigated at the
time of the incident: see PJ [26]. Relatedly, the Minister submits that
precise measure or degree of risk does not need to be ascertained, but to
establish the entitlement to the privilege the risk
must be of a nature
“which cannot be dismissed as tenuous or illusory or so improbable as to
be virtually without substance”:
Chardon v Bradley
(Morrison JA, Fraser and McMurdo JJA agreeing at [1],
appellant submits that it cannot be known what the authorities with
prosecutorial discretion might do with admissions that were
required to be given
in response to the questions asked, and in that respect a distinction should be
drawn between the interest which
QCS had at the time of the incident in
disciplining him under the
Corrective Services Act
whether, as a result of the questions asked at the Tribunal, he faces a risk of
prosecution by the police. That distinction
appears unimportant, however,
because the CSIU was a branch of the QPS, albeit one attached to the QCS, so the
investigation that
had already been commenced and closed was by the police; a
decision was already made then not to prosecute. However, the appellant
emphasises that the difference now is that the questions asked of the appellant
at the Tribunal about the 1 March 2022 incident invited,
and the appellant gave,
specific, direct admissions, which go beyond the material previously available
to the prosecutorial authorities
and which could defeat potential defences that
might have obstructed prosecution relying on observable behaviour alone. The
submits that it would be a mistake to try and divine with some degree
of certainty what in fact prosecutorial authorities might do
admissions.
appellant also submits that there must be error in the primary judge’s
finding that “[i]t cannot be said that there
is any likelihood, or risk,
of any steps being taken to prosecute [the appellant] in respect of his conduct
on 1 March 2022 on the
basis of anything he said before the Tribunal”: PJ
[27]. He submits that, without more, the only conclusion that was open
there was some risk of prosecution and that risk was real.
response, the Minister advances two reasons why there was no real and
appreciable risk of prosecution for the assault the appellant
committed on 1 March 2022: first, because the investigating authorities in the
circumstances would be unlikely to prosecute,
and secondly, because further
prosecution is statute barred by virtue of
Services Act
, which states: “A prisoner must not be charged with an
offence because of an act or omission if the prisoner has been punished
act or omission as a breach of discipline”.
to the second reason, the Minister submits that the evidence before the Tribunal
indicated that the incident report was marked
with the status
“Closed”. The incident was referred to the CSIU, and three days
after the investigation was initiated,
it was returned from CSIU for closure
with a recommendation for “internal management”, which the Minister
submits was,
in substance, disciplinary procedure. However, there is no
evidence about, and there is no way of knowing, what a recommendation
“internal management” means and there is no evidence of actual
punishment or disciplinary action against the appellant
having been taken.
Accordingly, I am not satisfied that
Corrective Services
to the first reason, if on the material that QCS had before it at the relevant
time—when eyewitnesses’ memories were
fresh, the incident report
records that no injuries were suffered by the other person involved and the
consequences were more relevant—the
prosecutorial authorities did not
proceed to discipline or punish the appellant, I consider that there is no
realistic basis to conclude
that a real and appreciable risk of prosecution
arose two years later simply because the appellant admitted before the Tribunal
“assaulting someone” in prison.
these reasons, I am satisfied that any risk of prosecution arising from
information that was required to be given in response
to the questions asked
reasonable conjecture, be tenuous.
This is especially having regard to the time
that has passed without any steps taken since the CSIU investigation was closed
7 March 2022, the fact that the appellant is now in immigration detention and
is no longer at the Correctional Centre, and that,
as found by the primary judge
at PJ [26], any admission by the appellant that he “assaulted somebody in
prison” seems
unlikely to take the position further in any material sense
than what was already investigated and recommended for closure by the
including that the reporting officer noted that the prisoners were
“observed to be fighting”.
follows that the information required by the questions asked of the appellant
could not provide reasonable grounds for apprehending
a real and appreciable
risk of prosecution in relation to the alleged assault at the Correctional
Centre on 1 March 2022.
Alleged domestic violence incidents
impugned questions in the Tribunal hearing about alleged domestic violence
related to events on 30 June 2019 and 17 July 2019.
The relevant questioning by
the Senior Member included the following:
I’m going to ask you about your offending now. Sorry, I’m just
trying to find my place. I’m looking at police notes.
I’m not sure
if this one was actually prosecuted, but there’s a report. Police report
that on 30 June 2019, you were
with – who were you dating at that
... You went to visit family and had an argument in the car on the way. When you
left to go home – so when the person, the
aggrieved, went to go home, you
told the person to ‘Shut the fuck up,’ numerous times in the car.
Upon arriving home,
you told her to get out and get in the house. She went into
the house, and you pushed her twice. I’m just putting that to you.
Do you remember any of that happening?---Yes, it’s just – is
this – what year is this?
2019. It doesn’t look like there was any conviction in relation to that,
so if you don’t remember it, if you don’t
think it happened, you can
say that?---I don’t – I don’t remember it myself, sorry.
Okay?---(Indistinct) why they wouldn’t. That must have happened, but
– yes. I don’t (indistinct).
Senior Member continued asking questions about allegations made against the
appellant by the same complainant concerning events
on 3 July 2019 and 17 July
Yes. There’s a couple notes. I think again, it looks like nothing came of
this. No further police action came of this. But
the notes say that on 3 July
2019, after an argument the respondent, which is you, was asking the aggrieved
questions...
On 17 of July, so that would be about two weeks later, you and her were at home
and she said that she had numerous appointments through
the morning. You got
angry that you were going to be alone for five hours. You said she was shady,
and you didn’t know where
she really was, and she said she’d
approved the appointments. You turned and threw a spatula, which hit her knee.
most of her things and went to leave. The police thought that there was
no reason that you would come into contact once the property
had been collected
and divided, so there was no need for a domestic violence protection order.
She said that you’d been in a relationship for the last year and had lived
together for that time. Do you remember any of that?---I
don’t remember
that first on
with the – Chris was there. But I do the second one.
(Indistinct.)
who was that with?---That was with [the complainant].
So on the 17 July, she went to the Cleveland Police Station to tell the police
what you’d done. She said, since March, which
was three months previous,
and their return from holiday in New Zealand, you had been more aggressive. She
said, in New Zealand,
there was a domestic violence incident in which you were
arrested in order to do an anger management course, and that, once you’d
returned to Australia, you’d been accusing her of cheating with one
particular person and you’d been checking her phone.
Do you remember any
of that stuff?---Yes. Yes, I do.
So what’s going on? You’ve been with her for a while. You go to New
Zealand, and suddenly there’s domestic violence?---Yes.
So that happened
back in New Zealand.
Yes?---And I completed that, and I come back over here, and we did start a
relationship again, and I had found out when I was in
seeing someone else, and things were just (audio malfunction). I fully
I was quite aggressive in – towards her
Was it jealousy?---Yes. Definitely jealousy.
Okay?---So, yes, when I did come back from New Zealand, I was a lot more
aggressive (indistinct) our relationship (indistinct).
same events of 30 June 2019 and 17 July 2019 were the topic of questions put by
the Minister’s representative during cross-examination
of the appellant in
connection with the domestic violence protection order made by consent against
the appellant in 2019:
- - - and the order was made on 9 October 2019, and do you agree that
you’re – that you’re the respondent in that
order?---Yes.
... Okay. Can you explain the circumstances under which this order came into
effect?---So like we spoke about before, I received
– this come under
effect due to the pushing and aggression thing and the spatula.
Did you lose your temper often when you were in that relationship?---Yes. At
that point, yes. Yes.
You agree that you pushed your ex-partner?---Yes.
You agree that you swore at your ex-partner as well?---Yes.
You agree that you pushed her to the cou
h and you threw a spatula at
her?---Yes.
appellant submits that his responses made in the course of the Tribunal hearing
were admissions that could increase the risk of
prosecution. The appellant
disputed the primary judge’s findings at PJ [14] and [17] that it is not
clear that any admissions
of common assault, threats of violence and actual
violence were in fact made, and that at most his responses amounted to
of recollecting the circumstances of the incident on 17 July 2019 and
of being “aggressive” towards his then partner
because of jealousy,
falling short of an admission of the commission of any offence.
appellant submits to the contrary on the basis that his responses amounted to
specific and direct admissions from the alleged
perpetrator in circumstances
where he and the complainant were the only witnesses to the incident, going
beyond what the prosecutorial
authorities had available to them previously. In
my view, this submission obfuscates the required analysis, which is whether the
questions asked of the appellant required the disclosure of information that
would have a tendency to incriminate.
as the appellant’s submission is made with respect to the questions asked
by the Senior Member—“Do you remember
any of that happening?”,
“who was that with?”, “Do you remember any of that
stuff?”—there is
very little to suggest that the information
required by those questions could be apprehended to create any real and
appreciable risk
of prosecution; as the appellant acknowledged in oral
submissions, the questions about the appellant’s recollection were
and ambiguous.
the other hand, the questions asked by the Minister’s representative in
cross-examination, although not referring to specific
dates, required answers in
the nature of admissions that are referable to the allegations. The appellant
submits that there is no
basis for concluding what the authorities with
prosecutorial discretion might do as a result of this new evidence of direct
admissions,
where there is no record of a decision having been made not to
prosecute in relation to evidence that might have been elicited under
examination in the Tribunal proceeding.
Minister submits that the appellant did not face any real risk of prosecution in
relation to the incidents of 30 June 2019 and
17 July 2019, and that examining
the appellant directly about them in a manner which may have caused him to
confirm as correct what
was alleged in the QPS Report would not change that. In
particular, the Minister relies on the QPS Report which stated that the
“need for a domestic violence protection order is not required or
justified” and the clearance status is marked “Finalised”.
The Minister submits that, in circumstances where the appellant was the subject
of other scrutiny from investigatory authorities
after this time, there was
ample opportunity to investigate or prosecute the appellant in relation to this
incident, but there was
no evidence that he was ever even interviewed about it;
rather, the Minister submits that the QPS Report indicated the police did
have a desire to take further action in relation to these allegations. This is
compared with a separate incident which the police
deemed did require further
action, a protection order was sought and made by consent, and without
admission, on 19 October 2019 protecting
the same complainant. Further, the
appellant was investigated, prosecuted and convicted for domestic violence
offences against another
victim between May and June 2021. The Minister thus
submits that if the appellant faced any risk of prosecution in relation to the
conduct described in the QPS Report, it could be expected that steps would have
been taken long before the appellant gave evidence
at the Tribunal in 2024.
the circumstances, I consider that there is no error in the findings of the
primary judge at PJ [18] and [21] that it was “tolerably
clear that no
further action was going to be taken against [the appellant]” and that
“[t]here was no material before
the Tribunal to suggest that any such
steps were likely”. In particular, there was no evidence before the
Tribunal suggesting
any investigatory steps had been taken by police in relation
to the 30 June 2019 or 17 July 2019 incidents in the five years that
before the Tribunal hearing. By contrast, steps were taken in relation to other
allegations of domestic violence by the
appellant: a protection order was sought
and granted on 19 October 2019 following a fresh complaint on 2 September 2019
by the same
complainant (but, again, no criminal prosecution pursued as far as
the evidence reveals); and the appellant was investigated, prosecuted
convicted for criminal domestic violence offences against another complainant
between May and June 2021. In those circumstances,
it was open to the primary
judge to conclude that a retrospective prosecution would appear most unlikely
(PJ [21]), even taking the
appellant’s case at its highest.
Accordingly,
the information required by the questions asked of the appellant could not
provide reasonable grounds for apprehending
a real and appreciable risk of
prosecution in relation to the alleged domestic violence incidents on 30 June
2019 and 17 July 2019.
Alleged drug use (in general and in connection with other
the Tribunal hearing, the following exchange occurred:
In 29 May 2021 – this is one of the domestic violence offences that you
were convicted of in the Supreme Court?---Yes.
... You dragged her from the friend’s car into your own car, causing
bruising to her arm, and drove away... You drove dangerously
around the streets
for about two hours, and you didn’t stop at – you were not stopping
at red lights or intersections
to prevent her from safely leaving the vehicle...
So you’ve admitted to all that?---Yes.
The next one was June, so the following month. Again, you were violent to her...
You went to her car and joined her in the car. You drove away despite being
asked not to by her. During the drive, she started hyperventilating
her legs, causing the windscreen to break. You ran away from the car – no,
sorry, she ran away from the car and
you chased her. Was she your ex at that
point - - -?---No.
Were you affected by drugs at that time?---Yes.
Which drugs?---Well, yes, just cocaine and - - -
What about the first one in May? Were you affected by drugs then when you were
driving around?---Cocaine as well.
Apart from what you were doing to your partner, did you think that it was a bad
idea to drive around when you’re coked up?---Like,
in that point in time,
where my headspace was at, I probably wasn’t even thinking about what was
right and wrong in that moment.
to the appellant’s drug use whilst he was driving in May and June 2021,
the appellant submits that his admission may be used
in connection with
prosecution for the offence of driving a motor vehicle while under the influence
of a drug pursuant to
Transport Operations (Road Use
Management) Act 1995
Transport Act
). However, the
prosecution of this offence was statute barred by s 123V(4) of the
Transport Act
by the time of the Tribunal hearing. Accordingly, there
was no real and appreciable risk of prosecution arising if the information
to the questions asked and answered which related to drug use in general at
other times, the following exchanges with the Senior
Member are also relevant:
That’s all right. What did you learn in your drug and alcohol course?---
Just, like, understanding what drugs does to your,
like, brain... and you
wouldn’t even realise why you’re abusing it because you use it for a
certain reason when you are
taking it...what I realised was, like, I thought I
was sweet, but really, it’s doing all this stuff into your brain...
And cocaine? Was that the big one for you?---That was – so probably from
– when did I get – I got started 2022.
Cocaine from probably 2021 to
2022 was a very, very bad effect on me.
following exchange occurred with the Minister’s representative:
You said you were selling drugs as to supplement your – or to feed your
habit. Were you generating income or profit from selling
drugs as well?---Maybe
a little bit, but not much. It was more going all back towards feeding my drug
addiction. Any money I could
get was going towards that.
were also given to the following questions put by the Senior Member:
So how are you going to make sure that, you know, given that cocaine does make
you feel good and that it pushes the bad thoughts
away, how are you going to not
– how are you going to make sure you don’t resort to cocaine
again?--- ... and then I
got into the drugs and then getting off the drugs and
getting back into that healthy lifestyle...
I just want to check what the psychologist said. He said that you started using
marijuana and ecstasy in 2015 to fit in with your
mates. Is that right?---Yes. I
wasn’t really – so the ecstasy was probably more –
wasn’t an everyday occurrence
with it. That would’ve probably been,
like, at, like, schoolies or something and I had said that, so - - -
Right. Okay. So not so much with the ecstasy?---But weed was – weed was a
very, very big thing.
You used cocaine recreationally from around 2017 and then worse when strain
appeared in your relationship in mid-2021?---Yes.
appellant submits that at the relevant times of the events in connection with
his admissions relating to drug use in general,
it was an offence in Queensland
for a person to unlawfully possess a dangerous drug (including ecstasy,
marijuana and cocaine), pursuant
Drugs Misuse Act
(Qld). The appellant submits that while he had been found guilty and
was sentenced for offences against
twice—the first on 26
November 2019 by the Magistrates’ Court of Queensland for an offence that
occurred on 16 October
2019, the second on 8 August 2023 in the Supreme Court of
Queensland for an offence that occurred on 13 January 2022—he had
found guilty of such an offence in relation to events in 2021 or prior to 2019.
Accordingly, the appellant submits that,
when he was asked about and made
admissions of his illicit drug use at the times other than those relevant to his
convictions, these
direct admissions go further than the material previously
available to authorities with prosecutorial discretion and thus create
increased risk of prosecution in relation to unlawful possession of “a
dangerous drug” at those points in time.
admissions that a person used an illicit substance
tend to prove
that the person had, at some point, possessed that substance, thus contravening
Drugs Misuse Act
, such admissions by the appellant in the
Tribunal hearing placed him in no greater jeopardy of prosecution in
circumstances where
he had already made prior admissions about his drug use,
which admissions related to the same time periods. These include admissions:
(a) in the appellant’s “personal circumstances form” submitted
to the Department of Home Affairs, which stated:“[a]t
the point of my
offending i [sic] was addict [sic] to drugs which lead [sic] me to a path of
(b) in information provided by the appellant and incorporated in a report by a
forensic psychologist and clinical neuropsychologist
filed in criminal
proceedings in the Supreme Court of Queensland such as that the appellant
“started using marijuana and ecstasy
in 2015, to fit in with his
mates...” and “started using cocaine recreationally from around
2017, and worse when strain
appeared in his relationship in mid-2021”.
all of which were recorded by Ryan J (Supreme Court of Queensland) in her
Honour’s sentencing remarks.
that basis, the questioning as to the appellant’s drug use at the Tribunal
hearing could only have elicited answers which
did not add anything to the body
of evidence already available to any prosecutorial authority and which evidence
was before the Tribunal.
Accordingly,
the information required by the questions asked of the appellant could not
provide reasonable grounds for apprehending
a real and appreciable risk of
prosecution in relation to his drug use, including in connection with driving a
motor vehicle while
under the influence of a drug.
these reasons, I am satisfied that even if the appellant had been warned about
his right to invoke the privilege and had objected
to the impugned questions,
the Tribunal properly exercising its authority would have in any event required
him to answer the questions.
It follows that the failure by the Tribunal to
inform the appellant of the privilege was not material to its decision. As a
there was no denial of procedural fairness and no jurisdictional error
by the Tribunal.
Notice of Contention
the Notice of Contention, the Minister contends that the appellant failed to
discharge his onus to establish any denial of procedural
fairness was material
because the evidence before the primary judge did not support the conclusion, as
a matter of reasonable conjecture,
that the appellant may have availed himself
of the privilege against self-incrimination if an appropriate warning had been
The Minister submits that, in circumstances such as the present case
where there is evidence before the Tribunal to show that the
appellant had some
level of awareness of the substance of the privilege against self-incrimination,
there arises an evidential onus
on the judicial review applicant at first
instance to put on evidence which explains both their understanding (or lack
thereof) of
the privilege and what they might have done had they been
appropriately warned about it.
response, the appellant submits that it can be inferred that he was unaware of
the “metes and bounds of the rights that underpin
the privilege”
notwithstanding that no evidence was adduced.
this case, there was evidence before the Tribunal that indicated that the
appellant had some awareness of the privilege against
self-incrimination. This
included material in which the appellant was either informed, or demonstrated
awareness, of his “right
to silence”, such as instances in which he
exercised his right to remain silent as recorded in police documentation. For
a court brief prepared by the QPS regarding events on 5 and 27 April
2015 states that when the appellant was apprehended by police
exiting a vehicle
whilst he was not the holder of a driver licence, the appellant “decline
to be interview [sic]”. In
a further example, related to alleged breaches
of domestic violence protection orders on 17 May 2016, the court brief records
when apprehended by police at the “job address”, the appellant
was “reluctant to talk to Police about the disturbance
and later when he was arrested and taken to the police station, “he was
given his rights and cautions and
was subsequently offered to participate in an
electronically recorded interview to which he agreed to be interviewed”.
the hearing, there was this exchange between the Minister’s representative
and the appellant:
I should probably say you do have a right not to self-incriminate. So –
but if I can ask you, when you say one of them was
a proper fight what do 25 you
mean by that?---Well, it’s not incriminating myself. Like we obviously
the documents where it says that we had a fight and then
when we got told to stop we got told to stop, and so that’s what I
shouldn’t have said a real fight. We had a fight, and then the other one
was a play fight.
the appellant did not ask what was meant by a “right not to
self-incriminate” and he observed (correctly) that
incriminating myself”. The appellant also answered a later question after
being informed by the Minister’s
representative that he had a “right
not to self-incriminate”. These matters tell against the inference which
the appellant
, McDonald J stated at [122]–[123]:
Further observations about proof of facts necessary to establish materiality
in this context
It may well be that the failure of the Tribunal to inform an unrepresented party
will only amount to a denial of
procedural fairness (or a material denial of procedural fairness) if the person
did not, in fact,
have an adequate awareness or understanding of the privilege
at the time when they were questioned. If the person was already aware
adequately understood, their rights at the time when they appeared before the
Tribunal, there would seem to be no practical
injustice arising from the failure
of the Tribunal to explain them. It should, of course, be borne in mind that the
reality may often
involve some nuance: even if a person has a general awareness
that a privilege against self-incrimination exists under the law of
it does not follow that they will necessarily call that general awareness to
mind in context of a tribunal hearing, or
appreciate that they are entitled to
decline to answer questions about specific topics under oath.
It is the applicant in judicial review proceedings who bears the onus of
establishing the facts necessary to demonstrate jurisdictional
error (including
breach of the rules of procedural fairness):
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
(2021) 273 CLR 506
[2021] HCA 17
CJ, Gageler, Keane and Gleeson JJ);
at 615 [10]-[12] (Gageler CJ,
Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Jagot JJ). It may be, therefore, that it
will usually be incumbent
on a person in the position of Mr Bainbridge to adduce
evidence in judicial review proceedings sufficient to establish that he was
aware of his rights or the nature of the privilege against self-incrimination at
the relevant point in time, or at least that
he did not make an advertent
decision to give evidence that might incriminate him with an appreciation that
he was not required to
do so. Mr Bainbridge did not lead any evidence of that
kind in the present proceedings.
response to the Notice of Contention, the appellant relied on the statements in
at [1]–[2] (Kiefel, Keane and Gleeson JJ, Gageler J
agreeing at [59]) and [83]–[86] (Gordon J) that he was not required
into evidence “to articulate a specific course of action which could have
realistically changed the result”. However,
in light of the observations
by McDonald J in
, which have force, the statement in
is not apposite to consideration of whether a judicial review
applicant in the position of the appellant has demonstrated a material
procedural fairness in circumstances where (a) they complain that they were not
informed of the privilege by the Tribunal
(b) there is evidence which suggests
that they were already aware of the privilege (c) the circumstances indicate
that, notwithstanding
that awareness, they did not seek to invoke the privilege.
regard to the evidence before the Tribunal in this case and the manner in which
he responded to questions in the Tribunal,
the appellant bore the evidential
onus at first instance to establish his awareness (or lack of awareness) of the
privilege against
self-incrimination and what he might have done had he been
informed of the privilege.
no evidence was adduced by the appellant below, I infer that had any such
evidence been adduced, it would not have assisted the
appellant. This has the
consequence that the appellant failed to discharge his onus to establish that
any denial of procedural fairness
was material because the evidence before the
primary judge did not support the conclusion, as a matter of reasonable
conjecture,
that the appellant may have availed himself of the privilege against
self-incrimination if an appropriate warning had been given.
these reasons, I would uphold the Minister’s Notice of Contention, and
dismiss the appeal for that additional reason.
CONCLUSION AND DISPOSITION
these reasons, the appeal must be dismissed, with costs to follow the
I certify that the preceding
-four (84) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of
the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 17 October 2025
O’SULLIVAN J:
have had the benefit of considering the draft reasons of Downes J and agree the
appeal should be dismissed for the reasons given
by her Honour.
is for the same reasons as given by Downes J that I would uphold the
Minister’s Notice of Contention.
I certify that the preceding two (2) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice O’Sullivan.
Dated: 17 October 2025
RTF format (631 KB)
Signed PDF/A format