URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1966/36.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hall v Nominal Defendant [1966] HCA 36; (1966) 117 CLR 423 (23 May 1966)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
HALL v. NOMINAL DEFENDANT
[1966] HCA 36
; (1966) 117 CLR 423
High Court - Insurance - Legal Practitioners
High Court of Australia
Barwick C.J.(1), Taylor(2), Windeyer(3) and Owen(4) JJ.
High Court - Appellate jurisdiction - Appeal from Supreme Court of State -
Final or interlocutory judgment - Refusal of extension
of time to proceed
against nominal defendant - Whether civil right amounting to $3,000 involved -
Special leave to appeal - Grounds
for grant - Judiciary Act 1903-1960 (Cth),
s. 35 (1) (a).
Insurance - Third Party Insurance - Unidentified vehicle - Action against
nominal defendant - Extension of time to institute proceedings
Considerations applicable - Exercise of discretion - Review of exercise of
discretion on appeal - Right of further appeal to High
Court - Refusal of
application - Whether second application lies -
Traffic Act 1925
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
Legal Practitioners - Solicitor and client - Reliance by client on advice of
solicitor - Whether client may subsequently resile
from decision - Action not
brought within prescribed time - Application to extend time.
Hobart, 1966, February 15, 16;
Sydney, 1966, May 23. 23:5:1966
APPEAL and, in the alternative, applications for leave and special leave to
appeal from the Supreme Court of Tasmania.
The following written judgments were delivered : -
BARWICK C.J. The appellant, whilst a passenger in a car driven by Mr. Warren
into a pole carrying electric power lines. As a result
he was confined to
hospital until May 1963. Apparently his wife conveyed his instructions to a
solicitor to take action to recover
damages for his injuries. The appellant in
those instructions claimed to have seen a light of an oncoming but
unidentified vehicle
which had forced Mr. Warren's vehicle off the road.
Consequently, the solicitor on 23rd August 1962 sent a notice to the
Attorney-General
of Tasmania complying with the provisions of s. 65A (2) of
Traffic Act 1925
(the Act) and advising that the appellant intended
make a claim against the nominal defendant. (at p426)
2. Thereafter the solicitor saw the statements made to the police by
witnesses to the occurrence, including a statement by Mr. Warren
suggested the presence of another vehicle. The others of those witnesses did
not see any other vehicle. He also conversed with
some of these witnesses and
with other people, none of whom saw any second vehicle at the time of the
impact. The solicitor then
decided that upon all this information it was too
risky for his client to sue the nominal defendant and that he should not do
He issued a writ on 23rd January 1963 against Mr. Warren alone, though at
that time the period limited for the commencement of an
action against the
nominal defendant had not expired. It did expire on 2nd February 1963. (at
3. However, in August 1963, Mr. Warren caused a third party notice to be
served on the nominal defendant. The plaintiff's action
and the third party
claim were heard together between the twelfth and twentieth days of May 1964.
The nominal defendant, who had
knowledge of all available witnesses, called
some of them to dispute the presence of any second vehicle. (at p426)
4. On 6th August 1964 judgment was delivered in which the learned trial judge
1. That there had been a second vehicle at the scene of the
occurrence.
2. That negligence in the driving of that vehicle contributed
to the impact from which the appellant's injuries stemmed.
3. That Mr. Warren was negligent in the management of the
car then being driven by him.
4. That the appellant's damages in his action against Mr.
Warren should be assessed at 8,153 Pounds 13s. 0d.
5. That the responsibility for that damage should be apportioned
as to forty per cent to the driver of the unidentified
vehicle and as to sixty per cent to Mr. Warren.
6. That the third party claim against the nominal defendant
failed because it did not fall within
of the Tortfeasors
and Contributory Negligence Act 1954 of the State of
Tasmania. (at p427)
5. Accordingly, judgment was entered in the appellant's action against Mr.
Warren for the sum of 8,153 Pounds 13s. 0d. and for the
nominal defendant in
the third party claim. (at p427)
6. It had been known by the appellant's then solicitor early in the course of
his activities on behalf of the appellant, though
precisely when he knew it is
a matter of some doubt, that Mr. Warren had a third party indemnity policy
limited to 2,000 Pounds in
any one claim. Further, as must also have been
known at an early stage to that solicitor, Mr. Warren was unlikely to be able
to contribute
anything to the payment of a verdict. The plaintiff was thus
left at the conclusion of the case with the prospect of recovering no
than a sum less than one quarter of his verdict. (at p427)
7. By summons returnable for Monday, 21st September 1964, the appellant
sought of the Supreme Court an order pursuant to s. 65A
(3) of the Act
extending the time within which he might institute proceedings against the
nominal defendant. Upon the hearing of
the summons the primary judge made an
order extending the time for one month from 24th December 1964, that being the
date of the
delivery of his judgment. (at p427)
8. Against this order, the respondent appealed to the Full Court of the
Supreme Court which by majority set it aside and dismissed
the appellant's
application for an extension of time. The appellant now appeals to this Court
against the decision of the Full Court.
9. The jurisdiction of this Court to hear the appeal, brought as of right,
must first be resolved. If there is such an appeal it
must be by reason of the
provisions of s. 35 (1) (a) (2) of the Judiciary Act 1903-1959 (Cth). Having
regard to the language of that
subparagraph, as applied to the circumstances
of the case, three points arise. (at p427)
10. First, was the order of the Full Court a final order within the meaning
of the Judiciary Act? (at p427)
11. Section 65A of the Act is in the following terms:
"65A (1) Subject to this section, where the death of, or
bodily injury to, a person is caused by or arises out of the use
of a motor vehicle but the identity of the motor vehicle cannot
be established, any person who could have obtained a judgment
against the driver of the motor vehicle in respect of that
death or bodily injury may obtain against the nominal defendant
the judgment that, in the circumstances, he could have
obtained against the driver of the motor vehicle, but the amount
for which judgment may be entered against the nominal
defendant pursuant to this subsection shall not, in any case,
exceed the amount to which the liability of an insurer might
be limited by the terms of a policy of insurance that complies
with the requirements of this Part.
(2) A person is not entitled to obtain a judgment under this
section unless -
(a) within one month after the occurrence of the accident
he gives to the Attorney-General notice of intention to
make a claim under this section, together with a short
statement of the grounds thereof; and
(b) he institutes proceedings against the nominal defendant
within six months after the occurrence of the accident.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in subsection (2) of this
section, the court, upon application being made in that behalf,
may, after hearing such of the persons affected or likely to be
affected by the application as it thinks fit, extend the time
limited by that subsection for giving notice of intention to
make a claim or for instituting proceedings, or both, for such
further period as the court thinks fit.
(4) The powers conferred on a court by subsection (3) of this
section may be exercised notwithstanding that the times
limited by subsection (2) of this section have, or either of those
times has, expired." (at p428)
12. It is clear that the statute gives a right of action to a person of the
described class in the stated circumstances if the right
is exercised by the
commencement of an action within the stated time after due notice to the
nominal defendant. There is otherwise
no right in that person because of those
circumstances to sue the nominal defendant. Once the times set out in sub-s.
(2) have elapsed,
the person, though of the described class, cannot bring an
action against the nominal defendant. The cause of action which the statute
gave him has ceased to be available to him. But sub-ss. (3) and (4) by
authorizing the court to extend those times, after they have
passed, empowers
the court to restore the cause of action conditionally upon compliance with
the times it fixes. An order extending
the time operating under the Act thus
restores the right of the applicant to sue and exposes the nominal defendant
to liability to
suffer judgment. These are respectively the right and the
liability which result from the grant of the application. Subject to appeal
the order granting time determines them finally. I am of opinion that an order
granting an extension of time within which to commence
an action against the
nominal defendant is a final order within the meaning of the Judiciary Act.
But is an order refusing an extension
of that time, whether in the first
instance or on appeal, of the same kind ? Upon the making of such an order,
the applicant remains
without a cause of action and the nominal defendant is
under no liability to suffer judgment at the suit of the applicant. (at p429)
13. Yet the question remains whether after such refusal to grant an extension
of time a judge or a court may grant the same upon
a fresh application, that
is, in a subsequent independent proceeding. If this question be answered in
the negative, the dismissal
of the application for an extension of time within
which to sue the nominal defendant would, in my opinion, clearly be a final
14. There is no precise authority bearing upon this point. The matter, it
seems to me, is quite different from the case of successive
applications for
extensions of time for the taking of a step in an action or for setting aside
a default judgment in an action. In
these cases, the matter is under the
control of and generally within the discretion of the court in which the
action is brought.
Also, the action is brought to enforce rights which, if
they exist, derive from facts or circumstances apart from the statute or
of an action for insufficiency in a statement of claim,
or the entry of a
non-suit is also quite different. In such cases the right, if any exists, is
not determined by the order. But in
the case of an application for extension
of time under the Act, the only power given to the court is a power given in
relation to
an application to extend time. The questions for the court upon
such an application are whether a sufficient reason has been given
failure to sue in time, and, if so, whether it is just in all the
circumstances to grant or refuse the application. All the
facts relating to
each of these questions must actually exist at the time of the application
whether or not the applicant has assembled
all the evidence he might have
obtained as to them. This must be so, even if the nature of the applicant's
injuries is a material
fact in determining whether or not it is just to make
the order extending time. If the injuries are not fully manifest, they are
posse and the probabilities are quite capable of estimation. There is
therefore no reason in justice why an unsuccessful applicant
for an extension
of time should have further opportunities. On the other hand, there is reason
why the situation of the nominal defendant
should be rendered certain, a
circumstance which the statute emphasizes in fixing a short period within
which the action against
him must be commenced. There is thus reason to
construe s. 65A as not giving the court or a judge power to re-open upon a
application the matters determined upon an application to extend
the time. On this view,
Acts Interpretation Act 1931
would not have any relevant operation: but in any case, in my opinion, it
would not be apt of itself to empower a judge or
a court to extend the time in
a subsequent independent proceeding after an application for such an extension
had been refused: cf.
Day v. Hunkin
[1938] HCA 47
; (1938) 61 CLR 65, per Latham CJ (1938) 61
CLR, at p 74 (at p430)
15. Further, it seems to me that upon an application to extend time distinct
issues arise between the applicant and the nominal
defendant, following the
line of the two questions to which I have already referred. The dismissal of
the application involves a
finding that the applicant has no sufficient
explanation of his failure to sue in time or, having such an explanation, that
not be just to extend the time. The applicant could not, in my
opinion, be allowed to relitigate these questions which had been determined
upon the merits in the contested application for an extension of time: cf. In
re May(1885) 28 Ch D 516 (at p430)
16. Therefore, whether by reason of the construction of s. 65A based upon its
obvious purpose or by reason of the estoppels arising
from a refusal of an
application to extend the time for commencement of an action, in my opinion,
no right exists in the applicant
to make a second application to extend the
time or any power in the court or a judge to grant it. In my opinion, the
order dismissing
the application is a final order. It finally determines the
matter in dispute between the applicant and the nominal defendant, namely,
whether the applicant should, by the operation under the Act and an order
extending the time for commencement of the action, have
a right of action
against the nominal defendant. (at p430)
17. The next questions are whether the judgment of the Full Court reviewing
the order of the primary judge involves directly or
indirectly any civil
right, and, if it does, whether that civil right is of the value of one
thousand five hundred pounds, or more.
18. As to the first, as I have indicated, the order of the primary judge
restored the lapsed right of action to the appellant given
by s. 65A (1) of
the Act. Undoubtedly, that right of action is a civil right within s. 35 of
the Judiciary Act 1903-1959. The order
of the Full Court withdrew its
restoration. To my mind, that order directly involved the civil right with
which it thus dealt. (at
19. As to the second, the language of par. (2) of s. 35 (1) (a) of the
Judiciary Act, dictated no doubt by the association in the
paragraph of rights
of property with other civil rights, is somewhat inappropriate when it speaks
of "value" in the case of a civil
right which is not a right of property. No
doubt to make out a right of appeal, an appellant must establish to the
satisfaction of
the court that the civil right which is involved in the
judgment from which he seeks to appeal is of the necessary "value". In the
case of a right of action for damages, this cannot, in my opinion, be limited
to its "market", or presently realizable, value. (at
20. It seems to me that, whilst this Court cannot be placed in the position
of a valuer in cases where the civil right is susceptible
of expert evidence
as to its value, in the case where a right of action for damages has to be
assigned a value the Court has to make
the best estimate it can on the
materials placed before it as to the probabilities of success in the action
and as to the probabilities
of the amount to be recovered. Of course, the
Court must have proper evidence upon which it can securely make these
estimates. If
the materials are insufficient to produce a positive conclusion
that it is probable that the cause of action will in its success
produce for
the party-appellant at least one thousand five hundred pounds more than he
would otherwise have, the right of appeal
will not be made out. (at p431)
21. In this case, the right of action is against the nominal defendant for
damage caused by the negligence of the driver of an unidentified
vehicle. The
Court has evidence that in a contest in which the nominal defendant had his
part, it has been found that the appellant
did suffer personal injuries by the
negligence of the driver of an unidentified vehicle. The damages for that
personal injury have
been assessed at 8,153 Pounds 13s. 0d., and there is
evidence of the nature of those injuries. In my opinion, these facts strongly
suggest the probability that the appellant would succeed in his cause of
action against the nominal defendant and that he would recover
more than 1,500
Pounds. I would conclude on this material that the civil right which is that
cause of action is of the "value" of
at least one thousand five hundred pounds
for the purposes of s. 35 of the Judiciary Act. Consequently, in my opinion,
the appellant
has an appeal to this Court in this case as of right. (at p431)
22. If contrary to my own opinion the order of the Full Court is not a final
order, or, being a final order, does not involve a
right of the requisite
value, I would give leave or special leave as the case may be because of the
matter of general principle involved.
23. I turn now to the substance of the appeal: first, was the Full Court
warranted in setting aside the exercise by the primary
judge of his discretion
to extend the time for suing the nominal defendant; and, second, if their
Honours were so entitled, were
they in error in exercising their discretion by
dismissing the appellant's application for an extension of time. (at p432)
24. The primary judge decided in substance that the appellant had lost his
chance of suing the nominal defendant through no fault
of his own, meaning, it
seems to me, that he had placed before his then solicitor all the facts within
his knowledge as to the occurrence
out of which his injuries sprang; that he
had not made a judgment of his own with a full knowledge of the facts and
material considerations;
and that he had not contributed in any wise to the
decision which his solicitor had made on the basis of which the solicitor had
advised him not to sue the nominal defendant. (at p432)
25. It cannot be held, in my opinion, that his Honour was in error in this
conclusion. Indeed, I do not read the judgment of any
of their Honours of the
Full Court as so suggesting. (at p432)
26. There was before the primary judge, conflicting evidence as to what and
when the solicitor told the appellant about his reasons
for deciding that the
nominal defendant should not be sued. The primary judge found, as I read his
reasons for judgment, that the
decision not to sue was taken by the solicitor
himself, and that the failure to join the nominal defendant occurred not as
of any specific antecedent instructions given by or on behalf of
the appellant in that connexion but by the solicitor himself, as
falling within his general instructions from the appellant to commence
proceedings in respect of the facts of the occurrence
communicated by and on
behalf of the appellant to the solicitor. His Honour held that this decision
was made and acted upon by the
issue of a writ against Mr. Warren alone before
the appellant was apprised of the solicitor's reasons for that course. These
are not, in my opinion, shown to be erroneous. Again, I do not read
any of the members of the Full Court as suggesting that they
were. (at p432)
27. His Honour also held that the appellant when told of the action taken by
the solicitor and the reasons therefor, acquiesced
in them. He also thought
that had the matter come before the appellant before the writ had been issued,
the appellant would have
accepted the solicitor's advice on the footing that
he would have left the decision of the question to the solicitor in any case.
28. The primary judge concluded that the failure to sue the nominal defendant
was due to the solicitor's view of the facts and of
the law. He thought, as I
read his judgment, that, in substance, the blamelessness of the appellant in
connexion with the failure
to join the nominal defendant and the solicitor's
responsibility in that connexion were material considerations which he was
to take into account presumably both in deciding to examine the
question whether the time for suing should be extended and also in
whether it would be just in all the circumstances to do so. For that course,
he had, in my opinion, the clear authority
of a judgment of this Court in
Sophron v. The Nominal Defendant
[1957] HCA 27
; (1957) 96 CLR 469, at pp 474, 475,
expressions with
which I fully
and respectfully agree. (at p433)
29. The primary judge sought some explanation of the solicitor's decision not
to join the nominal defendant. Accordingly he examined
the facts, not placed
before him in any consistent fashion, surrounding the making of that decision.
He concluded that there were
probably three reasons which operated on the
solicitor's mind in this respect. (1) He thought the evidence was strongly
against the
presence of the alleged unknown vehicle (which on the evidence in
his possession was a not unreasonable view); (2) He foresaw that
unsuccessful action against the nominal defendant would mean that his client
would lose a substantial amount by way of costs out
of any judgment he might
collect from Warren (the defendant) or his insurers; and (3) He thought that
if Warren believed that there
had been an unknown vehicle, it was most likely
he would join the nominal defendant in which case the issues concerning the
unknown vehicle would be resolved without his client running the risk
of paying for the cost of having them resolved. His Honour
then expressed the
view that had the solicitor known that in point of law the nominal defendant
could not be made a third party,
he would have been unlikely to have taken the
risk of not suing the nominal defendant in time. Being of that mind, his
Honour thought
that this mistake of law on the solicitor's part, implicit in
the third of the reasons which his Honour inferred as probably accounting
the solicitor's decision not to join the nominal defendant, significantly
influenced that decision. (at p433)
30. His Honour thought that an appropriate order for costs would remove any
prejudice the nominal defendant might otherwise experience
by being required
to relitigate the issue of liability and that any prejudice he might suffer by
the delay in being sued by the appellant
was very slight. Taking all the
circumstances into account, his Honour thought that it would be just to extend
the time for commencing
proceedings, and by his order, did so. (at p434)
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
of Tasmania
provides that a discretionary judgment should not be
set aside unless (inter
alia) ". . . (b) the judge has proceeded
on a wrong principle or otherwise
contrary to law, or on irrelevant
or insufficient materials, or has
misapprehended the facts or
has failed to consider any material fact; (c) the
adjudication is founded
wholly or in part on an erroneous finding of fact or
erroneous determination in point of law: . . .". (at p434)
32. The members of the Full Court held that the trial judge was in error in
concluding that the ability of the defendant to join
the nominal defendant as
a third party weighed with the appellant's solicitor. A majority of the Court
held that this conclusion
amounted to an error of fact upon which his Honour's
exercise of discretion was to a significant extent founded. The majority
felt itself at liberty consistently with
Supreme Court
Civil Procedure Act
to set aside the order of the primary judge.
33. In exercising their own discretion the majority of the Court were not
convinced that it would be just to extend the time to
sue. The basis of this
decision seems to have been that the operative reason for which the solicitor
had decided not to sue the nominal
defendant was that in assessing the value
of their statements he failed to take into account the opportunities for
observation of
the witnesses who said they had not seen another vehicle, and
therefore concluded that his client's chances of success against the
defendant were slim. Their Honours did not think the solicitor had made any
excusable mistake as to a specific fact, or that
he had been influenced in his
decision by any mistake of law. They held that the nominal defendant would
suffer such prejudice by
the extension of time that weighing all the
circumstances they were not convinced that it would be just to grant the
application
for that extension. Accordingly, the Full Court set aside his
Honour's order and dismissed the appellant's application. (at p434)
34. It is important, when considering the propriety of an exercise of the
discretion given by s. 65A of the Act, to have regard
to the general purpose
of the section. It is designed to provide a remedy for persons suffering
personal injury by the negligent
driving or management of an unidentified
motor vehicle. Its emphasis and policy is that personal injuries in such
circumstances should
not go without compensation. By its very nature, however,
the action against a nominal defendant given by the Act in such circumstances
requires that there be prompt notification of the occurrence out of which the
action is to arise and the commencement of proceedings
within a stated time.
The first provision will enable the nominal defendant to follow up any scent
there may be whilst it is warm
and the second will assist to prevent the
nominal defendant being embarrassed by long outstanding claims. But the ends
section seeks to serve require that the time limitation shall not
stand in the path of justice. A very short time is set by the statute
which an action against the nominal defendant may be brought, and therefore a
power to extend that time is given to a court
of law so that justice may be
done according to the circumstances. No doubt this extension of time is not as
of course. Some acceptable
explanation for the failure of the appellant to sue
in time must be given before the court is required to consider the substantial
question whether it would be just to grant the extension. The door, as it
were, must first be opened. No hard and fast rule can be
stated defining what
may be an acceptable explanation. But at least, in my opinion, it should be
held that it is the litigant's failure
to sue in time which must be
satisfactorily explained. However much in some fields the client must suffer
for his solicitor's acts
done on his behalf, in this field the litigant is not
necessarily, in my opinion, to be saddled with responsibility for all that
solicitor does or does not do. It seems to me to be implicit in the views of
the Court in Sophron's Case (1957) 96 CLR, at p
474, where it says that the
blamelessness of the client and the responsibility of the solicitor are
material considerations, that
the client's reasonable acceptance of a
solicitor's advice, the solicitor having been properly apprised by the client
materials, relevant facts and circumstances within his knowledge,
may be a sufficient explanation of the failure to take action within
conscious decision by a litigant to take a particular course after
appreciating the relevant evidence and considerations
in the light of which a
decision is to be taken may very well in some circumstances lead directly to
the conclusion that it would
not be just to allow him to resile and to have an
extension of time in which to sue; or at any rate provide no reason for
entertaining
the application to extend the time. But, on the other hand, a
decision by the litigant concurring, whether tion of the relevant material,
in a different case and may well afford an acceptable explanation of the
failure to sue: and, if there be no outweighing prejudice
to the nominal
defendant, may warrant the making of an order extending the time for suit. The
extent to which a litigant can rely
on the advice of his solicitor so as
afterwards to be regarded as not having made a conscious and informed decision
must depend to
a significant extent on the nature of the proposed proceedings
and the circumstances of the matter generally. But, it can be said
expertise of the solicitor on which the client may rely must in some
circumstances include the capacity to evaluate evidence
- particularly when
all of it is not known to the client - and to estimate the likely reaction to
it of a court of law. In other
words, the solicitor's skill on which a client
may rely is not limited to questions of law. Of course there will be cases
notwithstanding that expertise and the advice it produces, there
remains room for a conscious and informed decision by the litigant
he must bear responsibility. In my opinion, it is in the light of
considerations such as these that the responsibility
of the litigant for the
failure to sue should be judged. If the conclusion is that he is "blameless"
then it seems to me that the
question of whether or not it is just in all the
circumstances to extend the time can be considered. (at p436)
35. The primary judge was thus entitled in this case to consider that
question. In my opinion, he had sufficient material before
him to warrant the
conclusion that it would be just to grant the extension of time. He was not in
error, in my opinion, in thinking
that no real prejudice to the nominal
defendant was involved. For my part, and with due respect to the Full Court, I
do not see any
substantial prejudice suffered by the nominal defendant. None
of the reasons preferred in this respect to the primary judge are,
opinion, valid, nor are any of the reasons advanced in this Court. The nominal
defendant obtained notice in due time and presumably
had access to all
witnesses and to the statements made by them to the police. He chose to
contest in the action the issue of his
liability in point of fact when
procedures were available to him to determine first his legal position. The
costs of that abortive
contest of fact can scarce be laid at the appellant's
door. The lapse of time has not lost him any witnesses. Their evidence is on
record to minimize any lapse of memory. He was not shown to have acted to his
detriment upon any assumption that he is quit of liability
to the appellant by
reason of the lapse of time. On the other hand, the appellant has suffered
substantial injuries and, whatever
his solicitor's reasoning, has reasonably
accepted his advice in a matter on which he was entitled to rely upon it. (at
36. But the primary judge was influenced in the exercise of his discretion by
his own estimate of the solicitor's reasons for not
suing in time. I do not
think his Honour was in error in seeking an explanation of the solicitor's
decision not to sue. The reasons
for taking that course might well, in some
circumstances, provide material properly influencing the exercise of the
discretion. But,
it is not necessary, in my opinion, in a case where the
client is "blameless" in the sense I have mentioned, that the solicitor's
advice should be tainted with mistake of fact or of law before the discretion
to extend time can be exercised favourably to the client
applicant. (at p437)
37. The solicitor's reasons were very much a matter of the probabilities upon
facts deposed to by affidavit assisted by some cross-examination
solicitor. The evidence contained inconsistencies : so some choice between
probabilities had to be made. It is important to
observe the precise view the
primary judge took. He said that the solicitor thought that if Mr. Warren
persisted in his statement
that a second car was present, he was likely to
join the nominal defendant as a third party in which case the issue of the
or otherwise of a second vehicle would be determined without risk to
the plaintiff. His Honour further said that if the solicitor
had not thought
that the nominal defendant could be joined, he would not have taken the risk
of not joining him in the action. (at
38. For my part, I would not have drawn this last conclusion. I would rather
have thought that, having formed an unfavourable view
of his client's claim
that a second vehicle was present, the solicitor decided not to take the risk
of joining the nominal defendant
in the action. But, an element in that
decision was the view the solicitor held, that, if the nominal defendant were
joined - a course
he was, in my opinion, entitled to consider as likely - the
total amount which the plaintiff would obtain as the result of the defendant's
success in the third party claim would be close enough to his full entitlement
as to make the joinder of the nominal defendant clearly
not worth while. (at
39. For my part, I see no ground for denying the reasonableness of such an
approach. But, implicit in that reasoning is the assumption
that as a matter
of law recovery against the nominal defendant was a possibility. This the
solicitor could well assume. (at p437)
40. Whilst upon the judgment of his Honour who heard the cause, the solicitor
would be in error in making that assumption, neither
the Full Court nor this
Court has examined the propriety of his Honour's view. Consequently, without
such an examination, neither
the Full Court nor this Court could say that the
solicitor was mistaken in the relevant law. But, the primary judge was
as a matter of comity to accept the view of the trial judge and treat
the solicitor's unexpressed assumption as erroneous. (at p438)
41. His Honour did not express the view that the solicitor thought that by
the joinder of the nominal defendant as a third party,
the client might obtain
the full amount of his damages. Though it is unlikely that the solicitor told
his client so, the appellant
did say that he believed that the joinder of the
nominal defendant would make it possible for him to recover all his damages. I
not think that this statement of the appellant is incredible but, in any
case, nothing has been founded upon it. (at p438)
42. Although I would not conclude as the primary judge did, that if the
solicitor had known that the nominal defendant could not
be joined as a third
party he would have joined him as a defendant in the action, I could not say
that his Honour was in error in
his conclusion. The matter is very much a
question of estimating probabilities and I could not say that his Honour's
view was not
open to him. (at p438)
43. Consequently, although the Full Court may have been unwilling, as I would
be unwilling, to draw all the conclusions which commended
themselves to the
primary judge, the majority of the Full Court were not entitled, in my
opinion, to interfere with his Honour's
exercise of discretion. They were not
warranted, in my opinion, in holding that his Honour was in error in any fact
on which the
exercise of his discretion was founded. None of the conditions of
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
were, in my
satisfied. (at p438)
44. However, as appears from what I have written, had I thought the
difference in opinion between the Full Court and the primary
judge as to the
reasons which probably motivated the solicitor justified the Full Court in
finding an error of fact radical to the
exercise of the discretion, with due
respect to the Full Court, I would not agree with its exercise of the
discretion. (at p438)
45. I would allow the appeal and restore the order of the primary judge, but
substituting for the word "one" in his order the word
"fifteen". (at p438)
TAYLOR J. This is an appeal brought as of right against an order of the Full
Court by which the order of a single judge extending
the time limited by s.
65A (1) of the
Traffic Act 1925
by a period of nearly two years for the
institution of proceedings by the
appellant against the respondent was set
aside. Being uncertain
whether the appeal lay as of right the appellant's
advisers also
filed a motion for leave or, alternatively, special leave to
2. Section 65A (1) of the
Traffic Act
gives a statutory right of action
against the nominal defendant in the circumstances therein
Sub-section (2), however,
provides that a person is not entitled to obtain a
judgment under that section unless, inter
alia, he institutes proceedings
the nominal defendant within six months after the occurrence of the
accident, that is, the
event out of which his cause of action
arises. But
sub-s. (3) goes on to provide that notwithstanding anything in the preceding
sub-section
the court, upon application
being made in that behalf, may, after
hearing such of the persons affected or likely to be affected by
application as it thinks
fit, extend the time limited by that sub-section for
instituting proceedings for such further period
as the court thinks fit. (at
3. In Sophron v. The Nominal Defendant
[1957] HCA 27
; (1957) 96 CLR 469 an appeal brought as
of right from an order refusing an
extension of time
upon an application made
pursuant to
the Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act of New South Wales
was dismissed
on the merits
but the Court expressly left open the
whether such an order is interlocutory or final within the meaning of
Judiciary Act. On the strength of that
case we were invited to consider
the merits of the appeal but it is, I think,
both desirable
and necessary that
the preliminary question
should now be decided. (at p439)
4. A great deal has been said concerning the distinction between final and
interlocutory orders but it has, in the main, been the
practice of courts to
confine themselves to a consideration of the character of the particular order
in question in each case. Indeed,
in In re Page; Hill v. Fladgate (1910) 1 Ch
489 Cozens-Hardy M.R. commenced his judgment by saying : "I have no intention
of attempting
the task of defining exhaustively or accurately the meaning of
an interlocutory order. I leave that to others. The only point we
decide here is whether the order in this particular case is an order which
must be appealed against within the time limited
for appeals from
interlocutory orders" (1910) 1 Ch, at p 491 "Others" have, however, not, in
general, attempted the task which the
Master of Rolls declined to undertake.
However, at an earlier stage Lord Alverstone C.J., when called upon to say
whether a particular
order was interlocutory or final said : "It seems to me
that the real test for determining this question ought to be this : Does
judgment or order, as made, finally dispose of the rights of the parties ? If
it does, then I think it ought to be treated as
a final order ; but if it does
not, it is then, in my opinion, an interlocutory order": Bozson v. Altrincham
Urban District Council
(1903) 1 KB 547, at pp 548-549 Much the same test has
been proposed on other occasions and, if I may say so with respect, it
a broad test which is unexceptionable. So an order made in the course
of an action or suit which does not conclude the rights of
the parties inter
se, although it may, of course, conclude the fate of the particular
application in which it is made, is interlocutory
only. On this basis an order
staying proceedings against one of several defendants on the ground that they
are scandalous, vexatious
and an abuse of the process of the Court has been
treated as interlocutory : Hind v. Marquis of Hartington (1890) 6 TLR 267 The
view was taken of an order striking out a plaintiff's statement of claim
on the ground that it disclosed no reasonable cause of action
Insole (1891) 64 LT 703 and of an order dismissing an action as frivolous and
vexatious in In re Page (1910) 1 Ch 489
In Manley Estates Ltd v Benedek (1941)
1 All ER 248 there were successive applications to extend time under a
provision similar to
that in question here, whilst Atwood v. Chichester (1878)
3 QBD 722 shows that an order dismissing an application to set aside a
judgment did not constitute a bar to a subsequent application of the same
character. It is not, however, of the essence of
an interlocutory order that
it is one made in the course of a pending action or suit and the
last-mentioned case may be regarded
as illustrating this proposition. Further,
in Smith v. Cowell (1880) 6 QBD 75 the objection was taken that the order
sought in that
case was not "interlocutory" and the objection was supported by
the contention "that an order is interlocutory only if made at some
between writ and final judgment". The contention was expressly rejected by the
Court of Appeal which was unanimously of the
opinion that the expression
"interlocutory order" was wide enough to include orders made after the
conclusion of proceedings in the
action. Brett L.J., referring to the
"The power there
given is of the largest kind, unless it is circumscribed in
point of time by the words 'interlocutory order'. But it is said that
interlocutory must mean something between action begun and final judgment. I
cannot agree. In my opinion, 'interlocutory order' there
means an order other
than a final judgment or decree in an action"(1880) 6 QBD, at p 78 The order
in the present case was made in
proceedings preliminary to the bringing of an
action and although it deprived the appellant of the benefit of the order of
the learned
judge of first instance, it did not operate to prevent him from
making a further application for an extension of time. No doubt its
effect was that any further application would have been fruitless unless
supported by additional relevant facts but the
order made by the Full Court
did not of its own force conclude his right to bring an action. (at p441)
5. In my opinion, the order in question was not final in the sense in which
that term is used in relation to judgments and was interlocutory
only so that
the appeal was, to say the least, incompetent without leave. But whether or
not the order of the Full Court is or is
not properly characterized as
interlocutory it seems to me that it cannot be said, as the appellant asserts,
that it was a judgment
which "involves directly or indirectly any claim,
demand, or question to or respecting any property or civil right amounting to
value of 1,500 Pounds". As I have already said the order deprived him of
the benefit of the order of the learned judge of first instance
but it did not
operate directly or indirectly, finally, to deprive him of a right of action
against the nominal defendant. In these
circumstances the question of value
cannot be resolved by the expedient of attempting to estimate the value to him
of his right of
action and special leave to appeal is, therefore, necessary.
6. In my view this is not a case in which special leave should be granted. In
the first place the case is not of such a nature as
to call for the granting
of special leave and, additionally, the unsatisfactory and conflicting nature
of the evidence adduced in
support of the application in the first instance
provides an additional reason why special leave should not be granted. (at
7. The latter feature of the case also induces me to think that if special
leave were granted the appeal should be dismissed. Further,
sufficient reason has been advanced to justify the Court in interfering with
the order made by the majority of the Full
Court and I would, if necessary,
dismiss the appeal on this ground. (at p441)
WINDEYER J. At the threshold of this case is the question whether an appeal
to this Court lies as of right (assuming that the sum
of 1,500 Pounds is
involved), or whether there is only an appeal by leave. That depends upon
whether the order appealed from is final
or interlocutory for the purposes of
s. 35 of the Judiciary Act. During the argument I said that it seemed to me to
be a final order.
But on consideration I realize that the question is not an
easy one. I have been tempted to do no more than echo the statement of
L.J. who once said ". . . the decisions are so conflicting that I confess I am
unable to arrive at any conclusion satisfactory
to my own mind as to whether
this is an interlocutory or a final order" : In re Page ; Hill v. Fladgate
(1910) 1 Ch, at pp 493-494
But a conclusion is necessary whether satisfying or
not. (at p442)
2. The starting point must, I think, be in a consideration of the nature of
the time limit that the
Traffic Act 1925
(Tas.), s. 65A, prescribes for
actions against the nominal defendant. The provision is as follows:
"65A (1) . . .
(2) A person is not entitled to obtain a judgment under this
section unless -
(a) within one month after the occurrence of the accident
he gives to the Attorney-General notice of intention to
make a claim under this section, together with a short
statement of the grounds thereof; and
(b) he institutes proceedings against the nominal defendant
within six months after the occurrence of the accident.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in subsection (2) of this
section, the court, upon application being made in that behalf,
may, after hearing such of the persons affected or likely to be
affected by the application as it thinks fit, extend the time
limited by that subsection for giving notice of intention to
make a claim or for instituting proceedings, or both, for such
further period as the court thinks fit." (at p442)
3. Section 65A creates an entirely new right of action. The times limited for
the notice of claim and for the institution of proceedings
do not (as do the
provisions of the Statute of Limitations in the case of ordinary actions at
law) bar the remedy for the enforcement
of rights independently existing. They
are built-in and essential conditions of the new right itself. They are not,
as I read the
section, procedural requirements that the defendant might waive
as requirements for notices of action sometimes are. I had occasion
Australian Iron & Steel Ltd. v. Hoogland
[1962] HCA 13
; (1962) 108 CLR 471, at p 488 to refer
to some of the cases in which
this distinction
was adverted to and I shall not
list them again
here. Coming then directly to whether an order made under s.
(3) enlarging the
time for bringing into existence an essential
the right is final or interlocutory: the distinction between
interlocutory
orders has in England caused much
difficulty. The question can
be approached and has been approached in several
ways : see the Annual
Practice, 1966, pp. 1664, 1665.
Professor Wheatcroft, formerly a Master of the
Supreme Court, who contributed
the article on Judgments
and Orders to the
third edition
of Halsbury's Laws of England, has listed (Halsbury vol. 22, p.
different tests that have
been suggested for ascertaining
finality of a judgment or order. In most cases the test that seems
satisfactory, and
the one that accords most nearly
with what has been said on
the subject in this Court, is it seems to
me to look at the consequences
the order itself and to ask
does it finally determine the rights of the
parties in a principal
cause pending between them. It
is never enough to ask
simply does
the order finally determine the actual application or matter out
of which it arises; because,
subject to the possibility of an appeal,
order does that, unless it be an order that is expressly
declared to be
variation. In Standard Discount Co. v. La
Grange (1877) 3 CPD 67
Bramwell L.J. recognized this when he
said : "There cannot be an
order which
is neither final nor interlocutory
; and therefore if the order before us is
not final, it
must be interlocutory. Is
it a final order? It is like every
other order
in one sense final, so long as it is not appealed against,
is not the final
order of the Court in the cause" (1877) 3 CPD,
at pp 69, 70 .
In the same case, Brett L.J. said : "I cannot
an action will be found to be final unless
a decision upon the application out
of which it arises,
but given in favour of
the other party to the action,
would have determined
the matter in dispute" (1877) 3 CPD, at p 72 And later
his Lordship, then Lord
Esher M.R., adhered to this as "the best rule for
determining these questions ; the rule which will be most
easily understood
involves the fewest difficulties"; and Lopes L.J.
agreed : Salaman v.
Warner (1891) 1 QB 734 But it is not
a view that has had general
acceptance :
see Isaacs & Sons v. Salbstein
(1916) 2 KB 139 And it cannot be regarded as of
application because an order
in favour of one party to an application
finally determine the dispute between them whereas an order
opposite effect would
not. For example, an order setting aside
verdict and ordering a new trial is clearly interlocutory.
But an order
a new trial is final : Adams v. Herald
and Weekly Times Ltd.(1934)
[1934] HCA 11
CLR 1 A grant of a new
trial means that until the new trial
be concluded and
judgment entered thereupon there is no final judgment
in the action, whereas
refusal of a new trial means that
final judgment is entered in accordance with
the postea at the trial.
In that sense it may be
correct to say that the
question is
resolved by looking not at the decision to grant or refuse a new
but at the consequences
of that decision upon the judgment
to be entered
in the action. The effect of such decisions as there are
of this Court on the
seems to me to be that when an
action has been commenced between parties
then whether an order in that
action is interlocutory depends
on whether or
not it results
in a final determination of that action. I say of "that action"
it appears that the question
depends more upon the action
brought by a writ than upon the cause of action upon which the
founded. For example,
it has been held that a judgment
of non-suit is a final
judgment, notwithstanding that it leaves the
plaintiff at liberty to bring
another action for the same cause
: Coroneo v. Kurri Kurri and South Maitland
Amusement Co. Ltd.(1934)
[1934] HCA 21
; 51 CLR 328,
at p 334 A judgment on a demurrer may
thus be either
final or interlocutory depending upon circumstances : Hope v.
C. A. Photophone
of Australia Pty. Ltd.
[1937] HCA 90
; (1937) 59 CLR 348; John
Sons Ltd. v. Trocadero Building and Investment Co. Ltd.
[1938] HCA 20
; (1938) 60 CLR 1, at p
35 These cases are all illustrative of the
general proposition that a final
order is one which
finally disposes
(subject only to appeal) of an action or
an existing dispute
between parties. This Court has said that "it must
that it is the interlocutory nature of the order, not the nature
the motion or other proceedings in which the
court made the order,
determines whether leave is required" : Ex parte Bucknell
[1936] HCA 67
; (1936) 56 CLR 221,
But I find it hard to relate the test of finality or otherwise in the
determination of a dispute between
parties to an application
under s. 65A (3),
because in such a case there is no existing dispute between parties and no
existing action,
and unless the prescribed
times be complied with or extended
there is no cause of action it seems to me. There are no defined parties
the application under
s. 65A (3). The court is required to hear "such of the
persons affected or likely to be affected by the
application as it thinks
fit". If the times prescribed have expired at the date of the application the
question is, should the applicant
who is out of time
for fulfilling a
condition for obtaining a judgment against the nominal defendant be put in the
position that
he has a cause of action.
The question is, in effect, whether he
should be permitted to bring an action. A refusal of his application
that he cannot
do so. I am prepared to assume that in practical effect, if not
in strict law, a refusal would preclude him
from making another application
for an extension of time. But does this mean that such a refusal would be a
final order? On the whole
I think not. The question is
a troublesome one ; and
I have found no analogy on which to base my decision. The position when there
is an existing dispute between
defined parties does not, I think, provide an
analogy. There, as I have said, the cases shew that
the determining factor is
of the order in establishing finally or otherwise the rights of the
disputant parties - does
it put an end to an existing dispute
or existing
action? But in a case such as this the character of the proceedings in which
order is made seems to me of more significance
than is the result for the
applicant. I am unable to accept the view that if an extension
sought were granted such an
order would be a final order. It seems to me it
would be interlocutory ; and I think that
the position is the same if the
be refused or if a lesser time were allowed than was sought. (at
4. The matter that then arises for consideration is whether this is a case in
which leave should be granted. Ordinarily I would
say that in a case of this
kind where there is a wide discretion not controlled by any express criteria
but only by the general purpose
and policy for which the discretion is
granted, this Court should be most reluctant to entertain an appeal.
Nevertheless there are,
I think, some special considerations in this case ;
and, as it was fully argued before us, I have come to the conclusion that
to appeal should be given and the appeal allowed. However, as, having
regard to the decisions of other members of the Court, this
view cannot
prevail, I shall only state my reasons briefly. I shall not go into the facts.
This case has, I think, shewn how much
trouble can arise from an attempt to
translate particular reasons given for the exercise of a discretion in one set
of facts as a
test of the validity of the exercise of a similar discretion in
a different set of facts. All that I would say is that the time limits
prescribed by s. 65A (2) are prescribed for a purpose, and there must be some
sure ground for setting them aside, something more,
that is, than a belief
that no harm might come of doing so. Adopting the language that Hill J. used
of another discretion, in terms
uncontrolled, to extend time (under the
Maritime Conventions Act, 1911 (U.K.), s. 8), I would say that "the discretion
can only be
used in favour of a plaintiff if there are special circumstances
which create a real reason why the statutory limitation should not
effect": The Llandovery Castle (1920) P 119, at p 125 It is quite apparent,
and indeed courts have observed, that claims against
the nominal defendant
based upon false allegations of the presence of an unidentified motor vehicle
can easily be made and are not
easily disproved. The provisions of s. 65A (2)
give some protection against this. The notice of claim within a month after
the accident,
required by par. (a) enables the authorities to investigate the
matter promptly. The institution of proceedings within six months
ensure that a case, which often needs careful probing, will be heard while
evidence is still available and fresh and when
recollections have not become
distorted in other proceedings. On the other hand it is to be remembered that
actions against the nominal
defendant are not like actions against private
persons. Delay in having the liability ascertained is not of itself inimical
; and there may be cases in which it seems that justice would be
best served by allowing a case to be tried upon the merits, notwithstanding
that par. (b) of s. 65A (2) has not been complied with. In the present case
par. (a), which is perhaps the more important requirement,
was complied with
and Neasey J. thought that the facts were sufficient to justify him in giving
the applicant further time to meet
the requirements of par. (b). I do not say
that I agree in his exercise of his discretion in this way. Had it been my
duty to decide
whether the application for an extension of time should be
allowed I think I would have been disposed to refuse it. But I do not
that, either upon general principles or upon the restatement of those
principles in
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
(Tas.), his
Honour's exercise of his discretion was so mistaken that the Supreme Court was
called upon to interfere and set it aside.
The principle is clear. I may quote
a recent statement of it in this Court by Dixon C.J. in Klein v. Domus Pty.
[1963] HCA 54
; (1963) 109 CLR
467, which was referred to by the learned Chief Justice of
Tasmania : "If it appears that the dominating, actuating
reason for the
decision is outside the scope of the purpose of the enactment, that vitiates
the supposed exercise of the discretion.
that very general
statement of the purpose of the enactment, the real object of the legislature
in such cases is to leave
the judicial or other officer who is
investigating the facts and considering the general purpose of the enactment
to his view of the justice of the case"(1963) 109 CLR, at p 473
5. Unless there be some quite obvious departure by the judge from that path,
and I do not think there was here, another court must
greatly hesitate before
it cancels an order allowing further time to institute proceedings under s.
65A even though it thinks his
decision mistaken. The public interest may be
best served in the long run by allowing the proceedings that he has authorized
to trial. (at p446)
6. The question whether leave to appeal would suffice or whether special
leave is needed depends upon whether the judgment of the
Supreme Court
involves directly or indirectly the sum of 1,500 Pounds in the sense required
by s. 35 (a) of the Judiciary Act. I
am inclined to think that it does not
involve that sum, and that therefore special leave is required. But I do not
in the circumstances
think that I need decide this question. It is enough to
say that the case does seem to have some special features, and that I would
prepared to grant special leave if required and I would allow the appeal. (at
OWEN J. For the reasons given by Taylor J. I agree that this case is one in
which an appeal lies only by special leave and that
this is not a case in
which special leave should be granted. In view, however, of the fact that
there is a division of opinion on
this question, I would add that I think that
the Full Supreme Court was entitled to take the view that it did and that no
good reason
has been shown for holding that it fell into error in exercising
its discretion. (at p447)
Special leave to appeal granted.
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter