Sangau v Public Service Association of SA Inc [2025] FedCFamC2G 1866 (12 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Sangau v Public Service Association of
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1866
File number(s):
ADG 55 of 2024
Judgment of:
JUDGE BROWN
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW
– workplace right
– adverse action – whether Section 340 of the
Fair Work Act
is engaged – where the Applicant asserts she was dismissed as a
consequence of making a complaint about another co-worker -
whether Section 351
Fair Work Act
is engaged – harassment and discrimination
– where the Applicant asserts unfair treatment compared to similar
breaches to that of co-workers – substantive and operative
reason for adverse action – reverse onus – matters to
be considered
Legislation:
Evidence Act 1995
Fair Work Act 2009
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
Cases cited:
Board of Bendigo Regional Institute of
Technical & Further Education v Barcley
[2012] HCA 32
(2012) 248 CLR 500
Byrne v Australiian Ophthalmic Supplies Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 66
(2008) 169 IR
Celand v Skycity Adelaide Pty Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 222
(2017) 256 FCR 306
CFMEU v Ango Coal (Dawson Services) Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 157
CFMEU v BHP Coal Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 41
(2014) 253 CLR 243
CFMEU v Clermont Coal Pty Ltd
[2015] FCA 1014
CFMEU v De martin & Gasparini Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 1046
Community and Public Sector Union v Tesltra Corporation Ltd
[2000] FCA 844
Cummins South Pacific Pty Ltd v Keenan
[2020] FCAFC 204
(2020) 281 FCR 421
Ermel v Duluxgroup (Aust) Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2015] FCA 17
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Gibbs v Palmerston Town Council
[1987] FCA 477
Hadgkiss v Sunland Constructions Pty Ltd & Ors
[2007] FCA 346
(2007) 158 FCR
Jones v Queensland Tertiary Admissions Centre Ltd (No 2)
Khiani v Australia Bureau of Statistics
[2011] FCAFC 109
McIlwain v Ramsey Food Packaging Pty Ltd
[2006] FCA 828
(2006) 154 IR 111
Patrick Stevedores Operations No 2 Pty Ltd v Maritime Union of Australia
(1998) 195 CLR 1
Serpanos v Commonwealth of Australia
[2022] FCA 1226
Shea v TRUenergy services Pty Ltd (No 6)
(2014) 314 ALR 346
State of Victoria (office of public prosecutions) v Grant
Qantas Airways Limited v Australian Transport Workers Union of
[2023] HCA 27
Wong v National Australia Bank
[2021] FCA 671
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
10, 11 & 12 June 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Appearing on her own behalf
Counsel for the Respondents:
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Johnston Withers
ADG 55 of 2024
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
SARAH SANGAU
PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATE OF SA
First Respondent
AUSTIN WHITE
NATASHA BROWN
Third Respondent
JUDGE BROWN
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Applicant’s Application dated 13 February 2024 is dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or
order to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
or to record a variation to the order pursuant to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2)
(General Federal Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE BROWN:
INTRODUCTION
reasons for judgment relate to general protection proceedings brought by Sarah
against her former
employer, the Public Service Association of South
pursuant to the
provisions of the
Fair Work Act 2009
named as respondents, in the relevant application, are Austin White and Natsha
They are respectively the
manager of policy and strategy at the PSA and its general secretary. Mr Austin
reports to Ms Brown.
is Ms Sangau’s case that Mr Austin and Ms Brown made various decisions
concerning her employment and so bear accessorial
liability for what she has
characterised as being the illegal actions of the PSA.
general terms, Ms Sangau asserts that she was subject to adverse action in the
form of the effective dismissal from her position,
with the first respondent,
because she exercised her right to complain to the management of the PSA about
the conduct of another
staff member whom, in conjunction with others, she
alleges had bullied and abused her in the workplace.
relevant complaint was made by Ms Sangau on 10 August 2023 and concerned the
conduct of a colleague, Nicole Connell. Her complaint
against Ms Connell was
substantiated by the PSA. It is her case that the PSA had tacit knowledge that
she was being unfairly treated
in its workplace but preferred not to have to
deal with the issues raised by her.
other staff members have been found to have behaved inappropriately towards Ms
Sangau. Ms Sangau, in general terms, complains that
she has been treated
differently to other of her former colleagues at the PSA by being more severely
disciplined than them.
the other hand, the PSA asserts that the substantive reason Ms Sangau’s
contract of employment was not extended was that
her work had been found to be
below the standard required of her position and her conduct had been disruptive
and unsatisfactory
in the workplace, over a protracted period of time.
this context, the PSA asserts that Ms Sangau’s earlier complaint
concerning Ms Connell was properly investigated by it, the
appropriate action
was taken, and therefore the complaint itself played no operative part in its
decision not to extend Ms Sangau’s
contract. It further argues that the
investigation of Ms Sangau’s complaint did, in fact, reveal further
incidents of misbehaviour
on Ms Sangau’s part, which it was obliged to
sanction because of its obligation to ensure its workplace was a safe one.
its rebuttal of the allegation that it took illegal action against Ms Sangau,
the PSA and its management team assert that Ms Sangau
had behaved
inappropriately towards other employees of the PSA, namely Mr Zach Jackman, Ms
Jackie Bone-George and Ms Kimberly Standish
and had been formally warned about
her behaviour, in May of 2023, but had continued to behave inappropriately,
including disobeying
a direction not to contact a work colleague, whilst subject
to suspension from the workplace.
addition, it is asserted that she shared material, which contained sexual
references, with other employees via text message and
social media, which was
both unsolicited and unwanted by those employees. This latter information came
to hand in the context of
the investigation of Ms Sangau’s complaint
against Ms Connell.
issues relating to the dissemination of sexually implicit material have their
origins in an out of office hours social occasion
which took place at the
Belgian Beer Café, in the East End of Adelaide, following the annual May
Day March, which is organised
by the Trades Hall Council. Accordingly, the
hearing before me involved an examination of several incidents arising from both
office environment at the PSA and what occurred outside it.
this context, Ms Brown has deposed that, in her role as the PSA’s general
secretary and as a union official generally, she
was acutely aware of the
statutory responsibility of all employers to safeguard their employees from
being exposed to sexual harassment
within the terms of the
Sex Discrimination
(Cth) and similar state based legislation and that pecuniary
penalties could be imposed on those who did not meet their obligations
provide a safe and appropriate workplace. It is the effect of her evidence that
these concerns played a further part in her decision
not to extend Ms
Sangau’s contract with the Association.
will be detailed in due course, the evidentiary issue to be determined by the
court, in this matter is what was the
substantive and operative reason
for Ms Sangau’s dismissal from the PSA.
the one hand, was it because her work and behaviour had been found to be
consistently unsatisfactory from the early stage of her
employment, as the PSA
assert or was it because Ms Sangau exercised rights, relating to her right to
complain about the conduct of
a colleague, in the workplace, which is protected
pursuant to the provisions of the FWA, as she contends.
Sangau was employed by the PSA as an industrial officer pursuant to a
twelve-month fixed term contract, which commenced on 20 June
2022 following a
selection process which had begun in early 2021, when she applied to the
Association for a position. Mr White has
provided a copy of her curriculum
contract was subsequently extended for a further period of six months on 8 June
2023. Accordingly, it was due to expire on 8
December 2023. The failure to
extend the contract is the adverse action of which Ms Sangau complains.
this context, Ms Sangau points to the fact that her contract was extended,
albeit on a short-term basis, in mid-2023, notwithstanding
complaints having
been made about her workplace behaviour in May of that year as being indicative
of the bad faith of the PSA in
making the decision which is the subject of these
proceedings.
Essentially,
it is illogical that her contract was extended after she had been sanctioned for
bad behaviour but that bad behaviour
has been utilised to justify the
PSA’s subsequent adverse action against her.
Sangau was employed as a member of the industrial team of the PSA, which
provides employment advice to members of the Association,
who are public sector
workers employed by the South Australian government and its agencies.
Sangau has been legally qualified for a significant period and had previous
experience working for industrial organisations and
in the public sector. Sara,
who was Ms Sangau line manager, has deposed that she was impressed with how Ms
Sangau presented at interview.
There can be no doubt that Ms Sangau was
appropriately qualified and experienced for her position.
this context, one of the major evidentiary issues in the case arises. On the one
hand, Mr White and Sara assert that Ms Sangau’s
written work in particular
and how she dealt with some of the files allocated to her was not of the
standard required. Whilst Ms
Sangau asserts that she did much of her work on the
telephone and generally received praise for her efforts.
leader of this team is Sara,
reports to Mr Austin, who in turn has responsibility for the oversight and
management of the team overall. At relevant times,
the team had about twelve or
thirteen members of which Ms Sangau was one. Mr White authorised the despatch of
correspondence compiled
by industrial officers in the course of their
25 August 2023, Ms Sangau was suspended from her duties following allegations
that she had engaged in incidents of sexual harassment
towards fellow officers
from May of 2023 onwards. She did not return to the workplace after this
sexual harassment allegations were formally put to Ms Sangau in a letter under
Ms Brown’s hand dated 5 September 2023 to
which Ms Sangau responded at
length in a letter dated 20 September 2023. These matters have not been formally
investigated. Ms Sangau
has characterised them as being obviously
baseless or
The implication being that they are maliciously motivated and
arose to deflect attention from Ms Sangau’s complaint.
followed other incidents in July of 2022 and May of 2023, in which it was
alleged that Ms Sangau had behaved aggressively towards
other colleagues –
Ms Bone George; Mr Jackman and Ms Standish – in the workplace and been
cautioned about her conduct
by Sara and others in the management team. She had
been suspended from duties in respect of one of these incidents.
Ms Sangau’s perspective, the most significant event, which precipitated
the failure to renew her contract, occurred on
10 August 2023, when she alleges
that she was angrily confronted and bullied by another industrial officer, Ms
Connell when she resigned
her membership, on a matter of principle (from her
perspective), from Professional Australia, the relevant industrial organisation
for industrial officers. Ms Sangau complained to Sara about Ms Connell’s
behaviour in a text message of 10 August
Sangau alleges that she was treated more harshly for what she regards as her
comparatively minor infractions of the PSA code of
conduct than was Ms Connell
for hers and her behaviour so far as Mr Jackman and Ms George Bone was minor in
nature, whilst Ms Connell
had an axe to grind against her as a consequence of
statements said to have been made by her (Ms Sangau), at the Belgian Beer
which concerned Ms Standish’s husband.
also is part of Ms Sangau’s case that Ms Connell was part of a clique, in
the industrial team, that had taken against her.
As a result of this incident Ms
Sangau formally complained to Sara on 10 August 2023. As indicated above, it is
Ms Sangau’s
view that Ms Connell’s behaviour was far more serious
than any of her earlier and comparatively minor breaches of office discipline
but were in effect condoned by the PSA.
this context, she alleges that her attempt to seek proper redress in respect of
her legitimate concerns about being bullied and
harassed, led her to be
ultimately singled out for serious adverse action by the PSA management. In
effect, because she complained,
as she was entitled to, about Ms Connell’s
behaviour, the management team of the PSA singled her out and the decision was
made that her contract was not to be extended, on confected
the aftermath of the incident of 10 August 2023, it was decided by the
management of the PSA that there would be a process of workplace
between Ms Sangau and Ms Connell, which would be arranged by Susie Andricic, the
Association’s HR manager and undertaken
by Lee Bradley, an external
relevant mediation did not take place, as Ms Bradley apparently ascertained,
during her intake process, that there were than a
current investigation on foot
regarding complaints of sexual harassment against Ms Sangau and, as such, it was
inappropriate for
there to be a formal process of mediation.
is Ms Sangau’s position that these complaints were made tactically to
deflect attention from her complaint against Ms Connell;
the complaints of
sexual harassment were not honestly made; and, in any event, have never been
properly investigated and, as such,
cannot form a bona fide reason for her
20 November 2023, Ms Brown, on behalf of the PSA, wrote to Ms Sangau informing
her that the relevant contract would not be extended
again or replaced with a
further contract of employment. The effect of the letter was to terminate Ms
Sangau’s employment with
the PSA with immediate effect from its date.
her letter, Ms Brown provided the following reasons for making the decision not
to extend Ms Sangau’s fixed term contract
Her conduct and
behaviour during the course of her employment with the PSA had consistently and
repeatedly been in breach of the PSA’s
Code of Conduct and below the
standard required of a PSA Industrial Officer.
Her conduct and
behaviour had been the subject of numerous meetings and processes, during which
she had been advised on several occasions
that her employment at the PSA was at
risk due to her conduct and behaviour.
She had been
advised in these terms orally on 3 August 2022 and again both orally and by
letter of 18 May 2023. As such she had been
put on notice.
In this context,
Ms Sangau had explicitly acknowledged that her behaviour had been unacceptable
and had had a negative impact on her
colleagues.
The PSA had made
significant efforts during the course of her employment to support Ms Sangau and
assist and encourage her to behave
appropriately towards her colleagues to
minimise the impact of her conduct on them.
PSA’s perspective issues remained outstanding about the allegations of
sexual harassment made in the letter of 5 September
In this context,
Ms Sangau’s response to these allegations, provided in her letter of 20
September 2023, was considered inconsistent
with the evidence so far
However, given
the short period of time remaining until Ms Sangau’s fixed term contract
expired, Ms Brown did not propose
to formally deal with
Ms Sangau’s
alleged conduct.
Concerns had
also been raised about the manner in which Ms Sangau had dealt with the
industrial cases referred to her in the course
of her duties. However, again Ms
Brown did not propose to formally deal with these issues.
Rather, given
that formal notice had been provided to Ms Sangau that her contract would not be
extended further in letters sent to
her on 18 October 2023 and 3 November 2023
it had been decided that Ms Sangau’s fixed term contract of employment
PSA would end on 22 December 2023 and she would be paid to this date
but not be required to report for duty.
effect, Ms Brown asserts that the PSA was justified in its decision not to
extend Ms Sangau’s contract further because her
conduct had been
disruptive in the workplace and the standard of her work had been found to be
unsatisfactory.
is also the PSA’s position that Ms Sangau’s complaint against Ms
O’Connell was properly dealt with by it and
there is no operative
connection between its decision not to extend Ms Sangau’s contract. It
stands by Ms Brown’s letter
that the reason for this was concerns about Ms
Sangau’s work and behaviour.
Sangau rejects the assertion that her work was substandard or that her
behaviour, although subject to some comment during her employment,
disruptive to a degree sufficient to justify her contract not being renewed. In
this context, she points to the fact that she
was not subject to any form of
performance management and, in fact, on her case, received written commendations
for her work.
these circumstances, she alleges that the real reason she was constructively
dismissed was because of her complaint of being bullied
by Ms Connell made in
her correspondence of 10 August 2023. It is an element of her case, as I
understand it, that if her complaint
had been properly investigated it would
have revealed a workplace culture at the PSA, riven with factions and cliques,
which regarded
her as an outsider because of her background. In addition, it
would have revealed the flimsiness of the complaint of sexual harassment
against her.
Sangau was born in Uganda and is a Muslim by way of religious background.
However, in a formal sense, she has not asserted that
she was subject to any
form of illegal discrimination because of her racial or religious background
under relevant Commonwealth legislation.
this sense, she has not specifically engaged the provisions of section 351(1) of
the FWA, which reads as follows:
(1) An employer must not take adverse action against a person who is an
employee, or prospective employee, of the employer because
of the person’s
race, colour, sex, sexual orientation, age, physical or mental disability,
marital status, family or carer’s
responsibilities, pregnancy, religion,
political opinion, national extraction or social origin.
it is her case that given the manner in which the PSA approached her in the
workplace, the Association discriminated against
her in the sense that it
treated her less favourably than other of its employees and this constitutes
adverse action.
Sangau also points to the time it took for the PSA to make its decision not to
extend her employment contract, during which period
it made overtures to her to
resign voluntarily. In these circumstances, she alleges that this is
of a situation in which the PSA knew it did not have a
sound legal footing to dismiss
also asserts that the industrial team condoned sexist behaviour and she has been
utilised as a scape goat to cover up the unacceptable
conduct of others. In this
context, she alleges that the complaint about her allegedly subjecting
co-workers to sexual harassment
was a form of smoke screen designed to cloud the
actual reason for her dismissal, which was other members of the industrial team
wanted her gone from the workplace for their own reasons and manipulated the
PSA’s management to this end.
Essentially,
she alleges that it would have been either politically embarrassing to the PSA
itself and unacceptable to other members
of the industrial team, who had taken
against her, if her complaint had been properly investigated and the actual
cultural nature
of the workplace revealed.
her claim form, which initiated these proceedings filed on 14 February
Ms Sangau has linked her
complaint of 10 August with the allegations of sexual harassment made against
her a few days later on 5
September and suggested that the latter was only
initiated to intimidate her.
relevant paragraphs of Ms Sangau’s application can be summarised as
harassment of the type alleged against her was widespread at the PSA and other
staff members regularly shared intimate
information with each other both orally
and on social media;
In this context,
the allegations made against Ms Sangau were
at worst a fraction of the
of other staff members;
As such it is
her assertion that she was treated differently to other staff members in regard
to what she would characterise as obviously
vexatious complaints or ones made in
respect of minor matters or conduct outside of work hours;
characterises the complaint of harassment itself as an act of bullying and bad
faith on the part of the PSA;
Given these
factors, she asserts as follows:
The conduct was
never complained about contemporaneously and only became subject to complaint
after Ms Sangau raised her own complaint.
This again demonstrates that the true
motivations of the Respondents’ actions was the complaint made by Ms
In this context,
Ms Sangau alleges that the preliminary inquiry into the allegations against her
was biased and lacking in independence,
as it was not at arm’s length from
the PSA and as such provides collaboration of her assertion that the reason she
was effectively
terminated was because of her
addition, Ms Sangau points to the fact that her initial contract was extended
for a period of six months in June of 2023, which
she characterises as being
axiomatically inconsistent with the more recent allegations that her work had
been assessed as being substandard
by the PSA. If so, why was her contract
such, the reasons provided by Ms Brown for the PSA’s decision not to
extend her contract are bogus and the
substantive and operative
her effective dismissal was that she had made a complaint, which the PSA did not
want to investigate because it either knew
(or should have known) what its
outcome would be, which would be critical of the PSA.
addition to this claim, Ms Sangau points to the timing of her dismissal as being
a device to circumvent provisions of the FWA scheduled
to take effect on 6
December 2023, which would potentially have altered her fixed term employment
into permanent employment.
to the provisions of section 340(1) of the FWA a person must not take
against another person
that other person has a
workplace right.
This is characterised as a
civil remedy
342(1) of the Act contains a table setting out the circumstances in which a
person is to be regarded as having taken
adverse action
against another
person. The table provides as
Meaning of adverse action
Adverse action is taken by ...
Column 2 if ...
an employer against and employee
the employer:
(a) dismisses the employee; or
(b)injures the employee in his or her employment; or
(c)alters the position of the employee to the employee’s prejudice; or
(d)discriminates between the employee and other employees of the employer
the current matter the adverse action to which Ms Sangau was the PSA’s
failure to extend her contract, which was in effect
a dismissal from its
employment or certainly a form of injury to her in an employment context. As
noted above, she asserts that she
was subject to some form of discrimination by
the management of the PSA, which amounts to adverse action.
341(1) provides the definition of
workplace right
. A person has such a
right if, amongst other matters, he or she:
(c) is able to make a complaint or inquiry:
(i) to a person or body having the capacity under a workplace law to seek
compliance with that law or a workplace instrument; or
(ii) if the person is an employee—in relation to his or her employment.
effect of this characterisation is that, if it is established the Ms Sangau was
subject to some form of
adverse action,
for a reason proscribed under the
Act, she is entitled to compensation, possibly reinstatement to her former
position and those responsible
for the action fined.
her application, Ms Sangau seeks the following:
Compensation in
an amount of $170,000.00 being her economic loss related to two years lost
Compensation in
an amount of $30,000.00 for pain and suffering and other aspect of non-economic
The imposition
of a pecuniary penalty in an amount of $75,000.00 against the PSA;
Other pecuniary
penalties in an amount of $37,500.00 respectively in respect of Ms Brown and Mr
is no dispute between the parties that the failure to extend Ms Sangau’s
contract, which resulted in the termination of
her employment, amounts to
adverse action
under the Act
It is also agreed that the
individuals, who made the relevant decision were Ms Brown in conjunction with Mr
Brown is the general secretary of the PSA. It is a full-time position and she
holds office as a result of being elected to her
position by the membership of
the PSA. She describes her position as being analogous to that of a chief
executive officer. As such
she is ultimately responsible for all staffing issues
at the PSA and all other managers, at the Association, report to her.
her evidence, Ms Brown has acknowledged that it is not a part of her
responsibilities, as general secretary of the PSA, to provide
direct oversight
or supervision of industrial officers or involve herself with their day-to-day
management.
a consequence, she relied on information provided to her by Mr White, who in
turn received information from Sara, in exercising
her decision-making authority
not to extend Ms Sangau’s contract of employment.
these circumstances, it is an aspect of Ms Sangau’s case that Ms Brown and
Mr White were influenced, in their decision not
to extend her contract, by other
more subordinate members of the industrial team, who had their own motivations
for wishing her to
be removed from the workplace.
general terms, Ms Sangau alleges that she was subject to adverse action, when
her employment as an industrial officer, at the PSA
was terminated, because she
exercised a
workplace right,
as defined by
section 341(1) of the FWA to complain about her
employment.
addition, she asserts that Ms Brown and Mr White bear accessorial liability for
making the relevant decision to take adverse action
against her and so are open
to being sanctioned for their actions pursuant to the provisions of section
550(1) of the Act on the
basis that each of them was
knowingly involved
in the relevant breach of the Act.
PSA does not dispute that Ms Sangau had such a right to complain nor that she
did in fact make such a complaint. It also disputes
that its actions were
motivated by any impending changes to the law relating to fixed term employment
contracts. It also accepts
that Ms Sangau’s contract was extended but
asserts that this was done for compassionate reasons relating to her being
to family violence in her home situation.
a consequence of the use of the word
in section 340 there must be
a factual link between the taking of the
adverse action
against the
applicant concerned and a protected attribute of the applicant arising from a
workplace right exercised
by him or her.
obvious reasons, the only person who can know definitively why any particular
incident of adverse action took place, in any particular
workplace, is the
person who made the decision to implement it. If the action was taken for a
reason proscribed by the Act, such
a decision-maker will, for obvious reasons,
be disinclined to provide the actual reason to the person affected by it.
such an individual or group of individuals may attempt the cloak the decision
with an acceptable rationale – operational
reasons or relating to some
fault on the part of the employee concerned – when the real truth is
may make it difficult, if not impossible, for the employee affected by the
relevant decision to extract what was the actual reason
for the decision made,
if he or she suspects – either rationally or otherwise – that the
real reason for adverse action
was for a reason prohibited by the FWA.
relevant provisions of the FWA acknowledge the difficulties frequently facing
complaints in general protection matters arising
from this imbalance. As a
result, sections 360 and 361 of the FWA are of central importance.
latter section creates what is often described as the
reads as follows:
361 Reasons for action to be presumed unless proved otherwise
(a) in an application in relation to a contravention of this Part, it is alleged
that a person took, or is taking, action for a particular
reason or with a
particular intent; and
(b) taking that action for that reason or with that intent would constitute a
contravention of this Part;
it is presumed that the action was, or is being, taken for that reason or with
that intent, unless the person proves otherwise.
adverse action can be taken for one reason or a variety of reasons, some
potentially proscribed, some not. In these circumstances,
section 360 is also
relevant. It reads as follows:
360 Multiple reasons for action
For the purposes of this Part, a person takes action for a particular reason if
the reason for the action include that reason.
will be detailed with more specificity, in due course, where there is
controversy as to the motivation for a particular incident
of adverse action,
the requirement on the court is to determine the
substantive or operative
for the action in question.
evidentiary onus on the case remains with the PSA which must establish, on the
balance of probabilities, that the substantive
and operative reasons it elected
not to extend Ms Sangau’s contract were performance and conduct based,
which Ms Sangau asserts
are confected.
is the evidentiary dynamic in the current matter. Ms Sangau asserts that the
reasons provided to her by the PSA for its decision
not to renew her contract
are disingenuous. Whilst the management team at the PSA assert otherwise.
this context, Ms Sangau characterises herself as being
outside the loop
of decision-making at the PSA and isolated within its organisation. As such
it is her position that she approaches the litigation
at a significant
disadvantage to the PSA, which in effect controls the narrative of why it made
the various decisions which it made.
Sangau is an intelligent and determined person. She is also legally qualified.
For axiomatic reasons, she also has professional
experience of working in the
area of employment disputes – as indeed does the PSA itself. She has
subsequently described herself
person, who
her feelings over an extended period of time until she
the workplace, leading to what she would characterise as unfair and heavy-handed
sanction being placed upon her.
Ms Sangau feels very strongly about what happened to her and holds powerful
feelings against some of her former colleagues.
I mean no disrespect, but it is
my impression that the intensity of these emotions has implications for how the
court should assess
her overall level of objectivity. In addition, at times, it
made it difficult for me to gauge a clear narrative of the sequence of
Sangau has acted on her own behalf in the case and prepared her extensive
application and one supporting
In these documents
she has attempted to reconstruct events, which occurred between June of 2022 and
the date of her termination.
her affidavit, Ms Sangau provides the following details of her
background:
I am of Ugandan heritage, having migrated to Australia in 2006 and I am a
practising Muslim.
She further deposes as to her perception as to how she was accepted by other
members of the industrial team in the following terms:
Shortly after commencing my role, I became aware that I was not accepted by my
colleagues as a member of the Industrial Team. I was
the only African woman in
the office, and at time, comments were made that caused me to feel that my
cultural background was not
seen as equal at the
perception caused Ms Sangau to feel
isolated, excluded and demeaned
the industrial team. In this context, she deposed further as follows:
The isolation worsened as I received praise from leadership. There appeared to
be an us vs. them mentality between Industrial Officers
and leadership, and I
was perceived as a threat due to my positive relationship with
management.
indicated above, as I understand her case, Ms Sangau asserts that she was
provided with positive feedback by management that it
found her work to be
satisfactory in its performance, but she was marginalised by certain sectors
within the industrial team, who
campaigned tacitly against her. This culminated
in her being discriminated against, in a broad sense, by the PSA, when it made
operative decision concerning her employment.
Sangau’s case primarily rests on her own evidence. However, in her
affidavit, Ms Sangau has deposed that she has attempted
to obtain affidavits,
from other members of the industrial team whom she presumably believed would
provide support as to her view
of how she was treated in the workplace.
was unsuccessful in this regard and in lieu thereof issued subpoenae to four
individuals who were employed at the PSA at relevant
times and remain employed
there and one who was involved in an abandoned process of mediation, in which Ms
Sangau was involved. The
subpoenae were issued to:
Barnwell, who was an industrial officer and acting team leader in Sara’s
Standish, an industrial officer and a person said to have been the subject of Ms
Sangau’s unacceptable behaviour.
She was also at the Belgian Beer
Susie Andricic,
who was responsible for aspects of HR at the PSA and was involved in
investigating the complaint Ms Sangau made in
respect of the conduct of Ms
Connell, on 10 August 2023;
Andre Wise; a
senior industrial officer, who undertook Ms Andricic and Mr White’s duties
when they were on leave;
Lee Bradley, the
mediator, who was asked to undertake a workplace mediation, between Ms Connell
and Ms Sangau, but elected not to.
Of these witnesses, only Ms Barnwell and Ms Standish gave evidence. Ms Sangau
elected not to call the others. It is also her case,
as I understand it, that
she was unsuccessful in obtaining any evidence from Cassandra Schumacher, who
was a person asserted to have
been offended by her conduct in the workplace.
PSA relies on the following witnesses, who provided affidavits for the
Necessarily, these persons are each part of the chain of management of the
Industrial Team. It is a feature of Ms Sangau’s
case, as I understand it,
that rank and file members of the team had their own grievances against her and
played a part in engineering
the adverse action against her to which management
either actively agreed or passively acquiesced.
noted above, it is not a specific aspect of Ms Sangau’s case that she was
subject to discrimination as a consequence of how
the PSA determined to approach
her. In broad terms, it is her case that her various infractions within the
workplace were of the
same magnitude of those of other employees, but it was she
who was subject to penalisation.
such, although in her application, she has not specifically engaged the
provisions of section 351 of the FWA, it is part of her
case that she was
treated differently within the workplace to other employees. However, a claim of
racial or religious discrimination
has not specifically been mounted by her
under section 351.
is important. Because these are general protection proceedings, it is
potentially open to the court to impose pecuniary penalties
on each of the
respondents concerned. Sara and Mr White have specifically denied that any
aspect of Ms Sangau racial or religious
background played a part in any decision
made by either of them.
these circumstances, given the inherent seriousness of the proceedings, all
breaches of the Act needed to be pleaded with precision
so, as a matter of
fairness, each party knows the case mounted against
I consider that this
is particularly so in respect of case of racial and/or religious discrimination,
I do not consider that I am
in a position to infer that it is part of Ms
Sangau’s case that she has been the subject racial discrimination in the
of such a claim being specifically pleaded.
present, in my estimation, there is a level of innuendo in some aspects of Ms
Sangau’s case. The implication being that it
is open to the court to
conclude that, because her contract was not renewed, it must be for a protected
reason, given her view that
she was, in her estimation, a satisfactory employee.
However, nonetheless, it would seem to be Ms Sangau’s case that that she
was subject to discrimination, in the ordinary sense
of that word, namely that
she was treated differently and less favourably than other employees of the
Association, who had behaved
in the same way as her and as such this is
potentially a form of adverse action as delineated in section 342(1)(d) of the
will be detailed in due course, as the evidence of each of these witnesses is
examined in this judgment, in common with many workplaces,
the PSA was a complex
organisation in social and psychological terms.
were not only colleagues in the sense that they worked together and discharged
their professional duties in the office,
but also from time to time, they
socialised outside of the office and its formal workhours. In this sense there
was a degree of blurring
between what happened at the office and what happened
outside of it.
of that socialisation involved the consumption of alcohol and also the exchange
of intimate information between colleagues on
social media. These events seem to
have generated some controversy in the workplace. Some of these issues were
explored in the proceedings
this context, it is important to delineate what these proceedings are not. They
are not a general inquiry into the general probity
of the PSA as an employer or
the overall propriety of its workplace culture or the conduct of any of its
individual employees.
is the case a broad inquiry into whether Ms Sangau has been
subjected to a
procedurally or substantially unfair
Rather, the only
issue potentially subject to the determination of the court is whether the PSA
took that the relevant adverse action
against her for a reason proscribed under
such, it is not a review generally of the fairness of the employer’s
conduct. As the Full Court observed in
Khiani v Australian Bureau of
Statistics:
A general protections application is not intended to provide an opportunity for
the appellant to raise whatever issues she wishes
to about the validity of the
steps taken before her dismissal. The crucial issue in such an application is
the causal relationship
between adverse action and one or more of the factors
mentioned in the various provisions of
The issue is whether the person who has taken the adverse action has done so
because the person against whom the adverse action
has been taken has one or
more of the relevant characteristics or has done one or more of the relevant
As a consequence of the use of the word
in section 340 there must
be a factual link between the taking of the
adverse action
against the
applicant concerned and a protected attribute relating to that applicant as a
consequence of a
workplace right exercised
by him or her.
THE EVIDENCE
these reasons for judgment, findings of fact are made on the balance of
probabilities, from my observations of the demeanour of
each of the witnesses
I have tried to reach
my conclusions as to credibility and reliability, on the basis of contemporary
materials, objectively established
facts and importantly, on the apparent logic
relevant standard of proof is the balance of probabilities. In addition, I bear
section 140(2)
Evidence Act
which indicates that in
applying this standard of proof, I am entitled to consider the nature of the
subject-matter of the proceedings
and the gravity of the matters alleged.
Hadgkiss v Sunland Constructions Pty Ltd &
Kiefel J (as her Honour
then was) summarised the considerations relevant to establishing facts, on the
balance of probabilities,
in civil proceedings, particularly those involved in
civil penalty proceedings. Her Honour indicated as follows:
The strength of
the evidence necessary to establish a fact or facts, on the balance of
probabilities, may vary according to the nature
of what it is sought to be
The conventional
perception is that people do not ordinarily engage in conduct prescribed by
legislation and, as such, a court should
make a finding to
this effect, in civil litigation.
my assessment this is not a case which can be determined by the court simply
finding it prefers the evidence of one witness over
that of another. In general
terms, each of the witnesses, who have provided affidavits in the case and
indeed Ms Sangau herself,
impressed me as being intelligent and honest
individuals, who each tried to tell the truth, as best they could.
did not appear to me that anyone, who gave evidence in the case, had a secret
agenda or was concealing information in the case.
In this regard, I pay careful
regard to the admonition provided by Keifel J that it is a very significant
thing to find that any
person has, in effect, manufactured the ostensible reason
for any action taken by them, in an industrial context, in order to escape
at the same time, my impression is that, at relevant times, the workplace at the
PSA was not always a harmonious one. Rather
it was one characterised by office
politics and quite possibly divisions between older and younger members of staff
and those of
a more conservative disposition and those not so.
her evidence, Ms Barnwell deposed that was a change in the atmosphere in the
industrial team, during the time Ms Sangau was a part
of it. In her words, there
public camps
which I take it there were some members of staff who took Ms Sangau’s part
and those who took that of Mr Jackman, Ms Bone-George
and others.
Barnwell confirmed her impression that there were
Industrial Team, which she described as
and these groups affected
She deposed as follows:
There was definitely people you were out with, or they were out with you,
whichever way you want to say it. I think there was –
there were times
that – I suppose you were always in with
were managerial issues with which Sara and Mr White had to deal. I accept that
their overall responsibilities were to the Association
and its members,
particularly ensuring that the Association’s business with employers was
efficiently and professionally dealt
with by the industrial team. At the same
time, they had to maintain a fair and harmonious workplace to achieve this
each side of the divide in the office, it is likely that there were differing
views about the types and appropriateness of matters
ventilated on social media
by some staff members and what were the boundaries, in this regard, imposed by
office and out of office
hours respectively.
only staff member who gave evidence in respect of material emanating from Ms
Sangau who was directly affected by it was Ms Barnwell.
Se indicated that this
material did not upset her and she did not want to take her exposure to it
further with management through
any formal complaint.
this context, an email to Ms Brown has been provided, dated 22 September 2023,
in which Ms Barnwell explicitly expresses her concern
information about these matters to the management of the
Association.
addition, I have been provided with a text message, Ms Barnwell sent to Sara on
25 August 2023, which is around the time the complaint
that Ms Sangau had
engaged in some form of sexual harassment of either Ms Barnwell herself or some
other unnamed colleague or colleagues
Essentially
how far the remit of office discipline extended to out of hours and personal
discussions between colleagues, who were
also friends. In addition, different
individuals are likely to have had different views about how efficient each of
the industrial
officers were in the despatch of their duties.
my view, these were legitimate areas of interest for the management of the
Association. However, as will be examined later there
is a level of uncertainty
Necessarily,
those on the respective sides of those various currents are likely to have
differing perspectives and views on the rights
and wrongs of what was happening
in the office from time to time and, indeed, outside of it. This is a case which
appears to have
precipitated strong emotions in all concerned.
is also my impression, given the nature of their work in an industrial setting,
both management and staff at the PSA were acutely
aware of the sensitivity and
nicety of managing conflict in the workplace and how to defuse it.
such a context, it also seems to be the case that members of staff were well
versed in how to ventilate whatever grievances they
had in the workplace and
seek redress for them, both through official and unofficial channels. In this
context, much of the relevant
correspondence is shrouded in euphemisms and
bureaucratese to avoid obvious offence on the written record. Again, these
made it difficult for me to determine precisely what happened.
all these circumstances, it is highly probable that various staff members said
different things to different people, depending
on how it was perceived their
loyalties lay. In exchange with Ms Standish, I likened it to a game of
Chinese Whispers.
From my perspective, it has been difficult to gain a
clear narrative of what actually occurred and as noted above, I must be careful
not to stray into the realm of trying to unravel
office politics.
am not the only person who expressed a degree of perplexity at how grievances
were expressed and dealt with at the PSA, during the
period Ms Sangau was
employed there and during which her behaviour was apparently concerning to some
members of the Industrial Team.
her evidence, Ms Standish deposed as follows in respect of matters which appear
to have come back to her after the social events
at the Belgian Beer
Café, which she did not, in any event, attend, when she was asked if she
had made a complaint about Ms
Sangau by Ms Sangau:
I recall that I spoke to my team leader surrounding the making of a complaint
at the PSA. I can’t be 100 per cent sure because
you never really know
whether you’re making a formal complaint or whether you’re just
advising the team leader. Did I
approach the team leader about it? Yes I
accept that Ms Sangau genuinely feels that she has been hard done by as a
consequence of how the PSA has dealt with her. As will
be seen she may have
legitimate cause for complaint given her perception that some aspects of her
behaviour have been the subject
of overreaction in comparison to that of others.
Essentially, she contends that she was not the only disruptive person, in the
from time to time, yet it was she whose contract was not
my impression, she is a proud and forthright person who has a tendency to voice
her opinion strongly, particularly if she feels
she has been wrongly criticised
or been the subject of some form of hypocrisy.
is not a person who will refrain from actively voicing her feelings if she
perceives she has been wronged. However, her subjective
assessment of what she
perceived was happening in the workplace, although honestly held, is likely to
be affected by the biases arising
from self-reference.
the perspective of the court, the difficulty with how she presented her case is
that it was more an expression of an inchoate
sense of grievance at her
perception that she had been egregiously treated by the PSA rather than a clear
exposition of how the evidence
mustered by her amounted to the breach of her
workplace rights. As I am at pains to point out, it is not the court’s
to hold an inquiry into the management practices of the
Association.
White is an experienced unionist with over thirty-two years’ experience in
the industrial area. Sara has also been at the
PSA for over a decade. They are
each likely to have long-held views as to how things are to be done in the
setting of their union
and, as such, not without their own prejudices both overt
and concealed, in this regard. Ms Brown was at arm’s length from
day-to-day management of issues arising in the workplace.
is also to be noted that, apart from Ms Barnwell and Ms Standish, there is no
evidence from any member of the actual rank and file
in the industrial section
as to some of the salient issues raised by Ms Sangau, which Sara, in particular,
learned about at second
Barnwell impressed me as an honest witness with no axe to grind either for or
against Ms Sangau. She is no-longer employed by the
PSA, which adds to my
assessment that she is be approached as an unbiased witness. It was also my
impression that her clear preference
would have been to have avoided giving
evidence in the case, if at all possible. At times, in her evidence, she was
acutely uncomfortable.
this context, her loyalties were torn between her desire to help Ms Sangau, whom
she regarded as a friend and her obligation to
tell the truth, as she saw it. I
am satisfied overall that her obligation to tell the truth had clear ascendancy
over her feelings
of affection for Ms Sangau.
most important aspect of her evidence, so far as I am concerned, is that she was
not concerned about any electronic messages sent
to her by Ms Sangau. However,
she does appear to have raised these matters with Sara, who did not share a
similar sanguine view about
them. This confirms my impression that individual
employees in the Industrial Team said different things at different times in the
setting of a fractured workplace.
this context, as will be detailed in due course, Ms Barnwell, in her evidence,
candidly expressed the dilemma the situation created
for her. Essentially, she
found the various controversies surrounding Ms Sangau and the discord which they
created to be deeply unsettling
and she wanted no part of them. However, at the
same time, she acknowledged that Ms Sangau seemed prone to create an atmosphere
volatility around her in the workplace, which she (Ms Barnwell) found
uncomfortable.
Standish did not seem to me to be a particularly candid witness. She too has
left the employ of the PSA and also presented as a
person who was not happy to
be called upon to give evidence about her previous place of employment. The
relevance of her evidence
would appear to be as an explanation for some of the
obvious tensions in the Industrial Team, following the Belgian Beer Café
previously noted, it is not my function to assess whether the PSA was a pleasant
place to work or suffered from deficiencies in
its overall workplace culture.
Rather I must focus on what was the
substantive and operative reason
Ms Brown made the decision not to extend Ms Sangau’s contract.
this context, I must focus on the objective evidence available to me, as it is
to be applied to the formal provisions of the Act.
This boils down to two major
Firstly, is the
evidence capable of supporting the respondents’ assertion that Ms
Sangau’s work was not of a sufficient
standard to justify her continued
employment by the Association, after her contract had expired? Or are the
complaints levelled against
her, in this regard, so obviously bogus, that the
respondents have not discharged the onus placed upon them.
Secondly, is the
evidence capable of supporting the respondents’ assertion that Ms
Sangau’s behaviour was
consistently and repeatedly
disruptive in
the workplace to such a degree that the PSA could not justify the continuation
of her employment? Or should the court
reject this assertion on the basis that
others in the workplace, at relevant times, have also been demonstrated to have
behaved inappropriately
and therefore it is open to the court to find that this
was not the substantive reason for Ms Sangau’s effective dismissal
her position.
The work standard issue
White deposed that one aspect of an industrial officer’s role, at the PSA,
was to draft correspondence on behalf of the Association,
to be sent to both its
members and their employees, in respect of industrial issues referred to it.
is the effect of his evidence that, from time to time, he found aspects of Ms
Sangau’s correspondence to be
poorly written
so far as its syntax,
spelling and presentation were concerned
and so requiring re-drafting
prior to despatch.
one piece of correspondence has been provided in this regard and Mr White has
deposed that he was struck at what he has characterised
extraordinarily low number
of letters Ms Sangau wrote whilst at the PSA,
which he assessed as being far fewer than other industrial officers. The
implication
sought to be drawn being that Ms Sangau was not doing her job
this context, he asserts that he engaged extra support, from the PSA’s
media officer, to help her improve what he perceived
to be a deficit in the
necessary skills for an industrial officer in written expression. However, it is
the effect of his evidence
that this assistance did not result in any marked
improvement in this area of her work.
evidence is in similar terms. She describes her perception that Ms Sangau had
with written communication, which she hoped could be overcome
with support. Sara describes Ms Sangau’s communication style as
argumentative and abrupt.
Ms Sangau has refuted these assertions.
fact, it is Ms Sangau’s perception that she was singled out for praise for
her work, from her superiors, and this exacerbated
perceptions amongst her
colleagues, in the industrial team, that she was unduly close to management
which, in turn, intensified their
unjustified hostility towards
This in turn stoked their
efforts to have her penalised.
this context, I acknowledge that Ms Sangau has provided a number of short
emails, including from Ms Brown and Sara, which thank
her for her efforts on
behalf of an Association member and commending her as a
valuable member of
the Industrial Team.
in the overall context of other evidence available to me, I do not consider that
it can be inferred from these testimonials
that the management of the PSA did
not have other concerns about Ms Sangau’s performance in the workplace and
were being anything
other than encouraging and supportive by sending them on to
Essentially,
from these documents and other positive sentiments attributed to Ms Sangau, by
Mr White about some of her cases, it cannot
be inferred that the concerns raised
by him and Sara about her overall work performance are confected.
Barnwell was the acting team leader, when Ms Sangau commenced at the PSA as Sara
was on leave. In this context, Ms Barnwell agrees
she was thrown into the
unofficial role of being Ms Sangau’s mentor.
also deposed that she was tasked by Mr White to, in her terminology,
one of Ms Sangau’s letters because it was, again to use her language
it was a little bit escalated before it needed to
noted above, it is my view that Ms Barnwell was uncomfortable about giving
evidence about Ms Sangau’s performance in the
industrial team. For
understandable and human reasons, she did not want to appear to be a
so far as a former colleague was concerned.
does however appear to be the case that Ms Barnwell did raise concerns with Sara
Ms Sangau was unduly reliant
upon her to acquit her tasks as an industrial officer. In this context, Ms
Barnwell deposed as follows,
in cross-examination by Ms Stewart, counsel for the
Ms Stewart: Was it not the case that during Ms Sangau’s employment that
you were concerned about the level of – level
of involvement that Ms
Sangau asked you to conduct in her case, effectively to help her along the
Ms Barnwell: I wouldn’t say concerned. I would say that she – that
Sarah had a very heavy reliance on me because our
team leader was very busy, and
she would keep have to keep her door closed a lot of the time because she was
very busy. I was a senior
in the team, and so I was the only – probably
because of the fractured relationships, I was the only probably senior that she
felt comfortable coming to. I think that other people saw Sarah’s reliance
on me, and I believe they had concerns around it.
Ms Stewart: Do you recall having a meeting with the team leader, Sara, on 23
August 2023, where she specifically asked you about
the level of reliance that
Ms Sangau was asking from you?
Ms Barnwell: I can’t recall specifically that meeting. No, I can’t.
I would often have meetings with Sara, because I
think Sara would like to sort
of get my view on the temperature out on the team. I think she thought she could
rely on me to –
you know, to give a fairly honest assessment.
Ms Stewart: Okay. And in giving that honest assessment, do you accept that in
one of these discussions with Sara that you communicated
that it had got to the
point where you now felt conflicted and drained by the extent to which Ms Sangau
was placing reliance on you
to help her?
Ms Barnwell: I do not now recall saying the word “conflicted” and
“drained”. I don’t ever recall that.
Do you recall saying that it was affecting your capacity to do your own
workload? – I don’t recall saying it, but obviously
somebody’s relying on you, you’re spending time with someone. Of
course it is impacting yours.
my view, it is the import of this evidence that it cannot be said that Ms Sangau
fitted seamlessly into the Industrial Team. Clearly,
there was problems
perceived by management as to these issues. Ms Barnwell reluctantly conceded
that Ms Sangau did rely on her and
it did impact upon her, which was a view
which was conveyed by her to Sara.
oral evidence in respect of the nature of Ms Sangau written correspondence was
that there were
fixable problems
– her terminology – in
respect of her letters but there were other aspects of her workplace performance
which also caused
her concern.
included not properly recording her interactions with Association members, on
its electronic data base, and the general
of her communications with
members, which Sara deposed led to her receiving more complaints about how Ms
Sangau interacted with members
than other industrial officers. In this context,
Sara has provided an email from an Association member dated 23 June 2023, which
expresses dissatisfaction with Ms Sangau’s mode of communication with
deposes that these issues were noted to have occurred both before and after Ms
Sangau’s period of probationary employment
had concluded. Sara has
provided the relevant probation report, which was dated 22 November 2022.
concedes that it is
in its overall tone, but concerns are noted
in respect of
conflict with colleagues over a minor
with Ms Sangau noted
to have agreed to be more courteous and respectful in future. In summary, Ms
Sangau is noted to have made
good progress
and as having
achieved some
good outcomes for
broad terms, I take the probationary report with a
grain of salt
not consider it to amount to a completely frank assessment from either
party’s perspective given that it was produced
by each of them in a
collaborative context.
also deposed that, whilst Ms Sangau was suspended from duties from 25 August
2023 onwards, she had taken over the management
of her files and had discovered
deficiencies in their management. These included inactive cases being left open
and a general lack
of progress in them.
White, in his evidence, has refuted any suggestion that Ms Sangau was engaged in
the more complex work allocated to industrial
officer or that he regularly
praised her work. Rather, as noted above it is the effect of his evidence that
he had some concerns
discussing matters with Sara.
Ms Sangau’s perspective, these are manufactured and exculpatory
justifications to hide the true reason for the PSA’s
actions against her,
which were not linked to work performance, given her assertion that her work was
satisfactory.
this context, it is a significant aspect of her case that she was not formally
warned by the management of the PSA that it had
any concerns in this regard and
further no proactive steps were taken to manage her performance as a
precondition of termination.
her evidence, Ms Brown confirmed that such interventions – performance
management – are not unusual in the workplace
and, in a workplace such as
an industrial organisation, this would be particularly the case, given the
likely sensitivity and implications
of any suggestion that an employee was not
managing their work.
will be detailed in due course, Ms Sangau was suspended from duties in late
August of 2023, when the various allegations of sexual
harassment against her
arose. It is Sara’s evidence that this suspension meant that she –
as team leader – took
over all of the industrial cases which had been
formally managed by Ms Sangau and found her handling of them to be wanting with
lack of progress and a level
of inappropriate communication
agree that the issues of poor work performance do have the characteristic of
being a post hoc rationalisation, which was agitated
only in the aftermath of
other issues surrounding other aspects of Ms Sangau’s behaviour in the
workplace. It is not possible
for me to conduct any accurate appraisal of the
quality or otherwise of Ms Sangau’s work performance both because I lack
expertise to do so and it is likely that the determination of such an issue
must be inevitably highly subjective.
I am not in a position to reject wholesale the evidence of Sara and Mr White
given my overall assessment that they are credible
witnesses, in positions of
responsibility, who must be considered to be unlikely to try and conceal
unlawful behaviour, on the part
of their employer, by concocted allegations of
incompetence. It seems to be to be more likely than not that both Sara and Mr
had significant reservations about the level of Ms Sangau’s overall
suitability as an industrial officer, which coalesced over
in this context, it seems to me to be unlikely that issues of performance alone
would have led to Ms Sangau’s contract
not being extended. However, these
issues were part of the decision-making process, in this regard, given other
factors which led
the management of the PSA to reach the conclusion that Ms
Sangau had not, in neutral terms, been a good fit with other members of
Industrial Team and her continued employment there could not be
The incident involving Ms Bone-George
Sangau and Ms Bone-George were both industrial officers and, at relevant times,
shared the same open plan office. The incident
occurred in July of 2022, during
Ms Sangau’s probation period. This was the time whilst Sara was on leave
and Ms Barnwell was
the temporary team leader of the Industrial Team.
Sangau did not specifically allude to the incident in her formal affidavit or
application. It was however raised with her in cross-examination
consequence of Sara deposing that she conducted a mediation between Ms
Bone-George and Ms Sangau, on 4 August 2022, when she
learnt of the incident,
upon her return.
Barnwell was in the office at the time but did not directly observe the apparent
altercation between the two but she was present
in its immediate aftermath.
Accordingly, there is scant evidence about the matter from its actual
protagonists.
Sangau deposed that the incident was minor in nature and has been blown out of
proportion. It concerned a dispute about a grammatical
issue about the use of
as opposed to
In order to resolve the
disagreement, Ms Sangau had recourse to her phone and asserts that she was
vindicated by what it recorded.
She deposed as follows:
And, yes, I pulled out my phone, and I ended up being right. And Ms Bone-George
did not – I would not say she didn’t
take it well, but it appears
like it, and she went silent on me. The next day morning, I woke up, came to
work, and I’m shaking
on this because I returned to work in the morning
and Ms Bone-George – without us having further interaction – it was
an exchange, “The word means this, the word means that,” and then I
pull out my phone – she said the manner in
which I showed her my phone was
aggressive; I held my phone to her face, and I – that was how she felt. I
respected that, if
she felt holding my phone in her face was aggressive. The
next day morning, I came into work. Ms Bone-George had moved her entire
away from me with the entire team. I came in the alley in the office. I used to
sit with her, close to each other. I found the
whole team moving her. Now, you
can imagine what sort of environment that would look like, and I left people to
Ms Sangau’s perspective, what happened after what she regarded as a minor
matter marked a turning point in the atmosphere
of the workplace, which in her
perception turned against her. She went on to depose as follows:
[T]hat’s where the issues began with me and everybody else –
everybody else helped her move this. I hadn’t arrived
in office. I arrived
the next day morning, everyone was moving her desk and no one was communicating
with me. So I went and worked
in another area, because I didn’t know what
was told to the group, and I never asked, and nobody ever asked me. So that
created that issue within the group. And as you can – you can
imagine, when that happens, the hostility now, I don’t
know what was said,
and I just continued working. And further down, I raised it with the acting team
leader – who will be here
testifying today – I raised it with her,
and I said, “I don’t know why she moved. It was a minor
And the acting team leader responded that she felt that Ms
Bone-George felt threatened by me when I held the phone, and I said, “It
is not what I intended.”
Barnwell agrees that the incident precipitated a change of atmosphere in the
office, and she was discomforted by Ms Bone-George’s
unilateral decision
to move her workstation which had been assisted by other members of the
Industrial Team. However, given that
she was only temporarily in the team leader
role, she felt unable to intervene.
Ms Sangau’s perspective, she had, in effect, been
sent to Coventry,
in respect of an issue where she had stood her ground and been vindicated
but had not meant to be either intimidating or offensive.
Essentially her
assertiveness had been misconstrued by Ms Bone-George, who had over-reacted to
it. Clearly, with the benefit of distance
and hindsight, the whole incident is
highly unfortunate and seems to have assumed a significance, which it does not
notwithstanding these easy sentiments of disapprobation, it does not seem to be
an unreasonable inference for me to draw
that this incident resulted in the
formation of what Ms Sangau characterises as
– essentially
those who were either neutral or positively disposed towards her and those who
were not – within the workplace,
which proved to be long-lasting and to
have long-standing implications.
is an aspect of her case that this development had racial overtones, given her
background. In this context, both Sara and Mr White
have vehemently refuted any
suggestion that Ms Sangau’s race or religious background played any part
in the decisions made
by either of them, which affected Ms Sangau, during the
period she was employed by the PSA.
cross-examination, Ms Sangau put it to Sara that she (Sara) was well aware of
the hostile environment which existed for her (Ms
Sangau) at the PSA, which
these divisions had created. Sara denied that she had any such awareness or
personal responsibility.
her further cross-examination of Sara, Ms Sangau specifically put to her whether
she (Sara) was influenced in some way by stereotypical
assumptions and reactions
to her (Ms Sangau’s) behaviour. The exchange was in the following
Ms Sangau: You describe me as heightened and aggressive. Ms Bone-George, in
your explanation to me one-on-one, described me as aggressive
in the – in
the conversation with Ms Bone-George. Do you understand the stereotype of a
black woman?
Sara: I think we had that conversation during mediation, and I agreed that those
stereotypes are out there, and – and –
and I understand why people
wouldn’t like that linked, that behaviour. But I also think that there
needs to be room to call
out bad behaviour when it happens without it being
linked to anything else.
Ms Sangau: Now, I will take you back. The incident with Ms Bone-George in the
mediation you state we were – we talked about
being called an aggressive
woman. The issue with Zach is the same language, I was aggressive, even when I
was emotionally changed.
Now, you were saying to me as well that in interaction
with you I was aggressive and heightened, Sara. Is there a problem with who
as a black woman?
Sara: No, that is no problem, and if somebody else would have behaved in the
same ways I would have described them in the same
in my view, wherever the rights and wrongs of the situation lay, the conflict
between Ms Sangau and Ms Bone-George was a
management issue which Sara had to
resolve on her return to the workplace. She has provided extensive notes of how
she approached
the situation.
The notes are extensive and, in my view, demonstrate that Sara approached her
task with an even-handed and proactive manner.
this context, the notes indicated that Sara spoke privately with both Ms Sangau
and Ms Bone-George and to all the other members
of the Industrial Team.
Sara’s notes indicated that the other members of the Team unanimously
reported to her their discomfort
at the tension between Ms Sangau and Ms
Bone-George.
this context, it was proposed that Sara undertake a workplace mediation between
the two, to which each of them agreed. This took
place on 3 August 2022. As Sara
recalled, Ms Sangau did raise the issue of being stereotypically described as an
aggressive black
also indicated that Ms Bone-George’s change of desk had sent a clear
message that she (Ms Sangau) was at fault in the matter,
and this was not a fair
assessment of the situation. Ms Bone-George is recorded as being distressed that
her actions were perceived
as being racially motivated, when from her
perspective it was Ms Sangau who was not responding to her greetings in the
and who had elected not to communicate with her.
my assessment Sara’s notes express some sympathy with each party’s
position but from her perspective the apparent impasse
between them was
unacceptable from the perspective of the PSA and needed to be broken. As a
result, Sara recorded the following:
S noted capacity to continue greatly diminished – suggested focussing on
how we move ahead. Suggest agreement be drawn up to
establish expectations (of
JBG, SS and PSA) around communications in the workplace. Agreed. JBG expects
that SS will respond to greetings
and communication professionally. SS expects
that JBG will be genuine in her communications. PSA expects all members of the
Team to communicate in courteous, respectful and professional manner
to enable effective collaboration wherever possible.
concerned were prepared to execute an agreement in mutual and neutral terms to
this effect, the terms of which were to be kept
confidential from other members
of the Industrial Team and subject to review from time to time. As noted above,
the incident was
also referred to in Ms Sangau’s probation report, albeit
as a minor matter. It seems doubtful to me that it was so regarded
by either Ms
Sangau or at least some of the other members of the Industrial Team or indeed
middle management at the PSA. However,
the hope remained that it would
Events at the Belgian Beer Café following May Day
was customary at the PSA that members of its staff attended the May Day March in
2023 to celebrate International Workers’
Day. After the March had
concluded, it was suggested by some of the Industrial Officers that they should
go and have a drink at the
Belgian Beer Café.
event had not been authorised by the management of the PSA and occurred outside
working hours. Clearly, attendance at the event
was entirely voluntary. Ms
Sangau has asserted that she attended the event in order to see if this would
acceptance within the Industrial Team.
only witnesses who were actually present at the Café on the day in
question were Ms Sangau and Ms Barnwell. No member of
PSA management was present
and nor were Ms Standish and her husband, Sam. Ms Connell was apparently
present. Alcohol was consumed.
Ms Barnwell concedes that she
drank too much
but all concerned were having
a great time.
this context, one of the group suggested that they engage in a game entitled
fuck, marry or kill.
In her affidavit, Ms Sangau indicates that she felt
deeply uncomfortable
at having to participate in this activity and
pressurised to do so. However, be that as it may, she did participate, although
has provided scant details of how she did so.
is clear is that person whom she was nominated to discuss under these various
headings was Ms Standish’s husband. Ms Sangau
also concedes that she was
prevailed upon, against her better judgment, to show a picture of herself, in
lingerie, to the group.
would seem to be the case that details of what Ms Sangau had said and done at
the Belgian Beer Café got back to Ms Standish
and Ms Sangau’s
perception was that she was cool in her interactions with her, as were other
members of the Industrial Team,
thereafter.
was Ms Sangau’s understanding that Ms Connell was the source of what she
regarded was malicious, mischievous and untrue scuttlebutt,
which suggested that
she was intent on seducing Sam. It is the import of her evidence that she felt
that the hostility towards her,
in the workplace intensified.
Ms Sangau herself had no personal motivation for bringing the events of 1 May
she had no interest in being the
subject of gossip at the PSA. Indeed, it is her case, incapable of being
refuted, that she nominated
Sam in the game in question because she considered
him a neutral and safe subject, which would not result in any recriminations for
her. For these reasons, in my estimation, she must be regarded as a victim of
what occurred, just as much as Ms Standish.
The Incident with Mr Jackman
is the effect of Ms Sangau’s evidence that, following the events at the
Belgian Beer Café, she was subject to an atmosphere
towards her in the office. This culminated in a confrontation
occurring between her and one of her colleagues in the Industrial Team,
Jackman, which occurred on 9 May 2023.
the absence of any evidence from Mr Jackman, it is difficult to know precisely
what occurred and whether he was or was not present
at the Belgian Beer
Café on 1 May. Ms Barnwell was present and Sara, as team leader, had to
deal with its sequalae, in conjunction
with Mr White, who, in turn referred the
issue to Ms Brown.
her affidavit, Sara describes what she understood had occurred in the following
On 9 May 2023, a Senior Industrial Officer advised me that there had been an
incident on the 4th, floor, following a team case conferencing
meeting. Although
generally situated on the 5th floor of the PSA building, the Industrial Team use
the 4th floor for informal meetings
or for a quiet space to work. The Senior
Industrial Officer told me that Sarah Sangau had 'suddenly' become angry with
Officer Zack Jackman and had begun shouting at him, aggressively
pointing her finger and accusing him of "having double standards"
and "treating
me differently from other people".
The Senior Industrial Officer explained that the 'trigger' for this incident was
Sarah overhearing Zack tell Jessie O'Neill that
he intended to catch up with
Nicole Connell to 'set right' a non-work-related issue. Apparently, Sarah was
aggrieved with Zack and
she felt he had not set things right with her.
I was advised that Sarah's shouting was so loud that it caused an Organiser to
come out of an adjacent office and ask her to be quiet
as he was trying to have
a phone conversation with a member.
After speaking with the Senior Industrial Officer, I spoke with Zack Jackman who
appeared visibly distressed. He acknowledged feeling
upset and said he intended
to put in a Work Health and Safety report in relation to the issue.
I discussed the matter with Austin White and expressed the view that Sarah could
not be in the office for the rest of the day. Austin
agreed that she should be
directed away to ensure the wellbeing of other staff and to allow time for
further consideration of the
I spoke with Sarah about the incident. She acknowledged she had acted
inappropriately. I directed her away from the workplace and
let her know we
would contact her in the near future to discuss next steps.
The Senior Industrial Officer and another Industrial Team member who were
present when the incident occurred reported feeling unsettled
and unable to
focus for the rest of the day.
Sangau asserts that the incident with Mr Jackman occurred because she
after having
having been isolated in the
workplace since the incident with Ms Bone-George and she had explained this
subsequently to Sara and Mr
White, who were not unsympathetic to her situation.
Barnwell, who seems to be the
senior industrial officer
referred to by
Sara, in her evidence, indicated that she was surprised at how heated the
interaction between Ms Sangau and Mr Jackman
became, as initially she had
thought Ms Sangau was
The exact exchange in her oral evidence was
as follows:
Ms Barnwell: I sort of thought you were joking... Now I don’t know it
that’s my naivety. I don’t know what it
is, but... then I suddenly
realised you were serious, because Zack looked a bit shocked, because he
wasn’t expecting it obviously.
And, so yes, I – I was shocked, I
suppose - you know, like what happened sort of out of the blue, because
something had bothered
Barnwell went on to indicate that she thought the grievance Ms Sangau had
that it was an issue of double standards within the workplace team
Sangau’s perception that she was being treated differently from others
bone of contention being what had been said by Ms Connell to Ms Standish. My
impression is that Ms Standish and Ms Barnwell did
not want, in their evidence
given under subpoena, to be perceived as having taken sides. Again, this
heightens my own impression
Chinese Whispers.
after the incident with Mr Jackman, it appears that Ms Sangau also wanted to
clear the air with Ms Standish. Ms Barnwell was
again present. Initially, Ms
Sangau invited Ms Standish to have a coffee with her, which Ms Standish declined
on the apparent basis
needed to be said should be said then and
Ms Barnwell accepted that Ms Sangau was not shouting.
her affidavit, Sara reported what she later learned about the incident from an
unnamed team member, whom I assume was Ms Barnwell,
as follows:
I was advised that Sarah had approached Kimberly Standish at her desk, in the
presence of another Industrial Team member, and said
she felt that Kim was
'treating her differently' because Nicole Connell had told her about a remark
Sarah had made at an out of work
I was advised that during the conversation, Sarah's behaviour became heightened
and she made several disparaging remarks about the
whole Industrial Team,
including "I want nothing to do with any of them" and "they can't be
It was explained to me that the background to this incident was that during
drinks after the 2023 May Day March, Sarah had made a
comment about being
sexually attracted to Kim's husband Sam - who was also a PSA employee.
Kimberly advised that she had not discussed the comment with Sarah and did not
believe she had treated her any differently despite
being aware the comment had
been made. Kim said that she felt intimidated by
my view, it is axiomatic that what occurred can again only be described as being
extremely unfortunate. From Ms Sangau’s
perspective her conduct is open to
criticism but is also subject to significant exculpatory factors, not least of
which is what she
describes as her
personality. In
cross-examination by Ms Stewart, she said as follows:
Ms Stewart: No. I’m asking you, first of all, do you agree that the reason
why you were offered a further period of employment
of six months only is
because of incident that you were involved in on 9 May, where you spoke
inappropriately to two colleagues.
Do you agree with that or disagree with
Ms Sangau: I agree that that is – that’s correct.
Ms Stewart: And this was in relation to you speaking inappropriately to Mr Zack
Jackmna and Kimberley Standish. Correct?
Ms Sangau: I disagree that I was inappropriate. I was passionate in a heated
moment. I disagree I was
inappropriate.
a later portion of her cross-examination, Ms Sangau conceded that her conduct in
the workplace had not been
but it was an overstatement to assert
that she had
consistently and repeatedly breached
the PSA’s Code of
Conduct. In this context, she said as follows:
I addressed professionally. I attended work. Did not cause any issues. Sat on my
desk...And, yes, I had friction with – as
far as I’m concerned, the
only friction I had was with the incident with Zack that I took accountability
for. I have always
conducted myself professionally. And so I would say
I’ve always been, 99 per cent of the time, conducted myself consistently
with the PSA code of conduct. Okay, maybe I’ll say 85 per cent of the
the point of view of the management of the PSA, Ms Sangau’s behaviour on 9
May was not acceptable and required a response
from it. As a result of a report
to her from Mr White, who in turn had been briefed by Sara, Ms Brown decided to
suspend Ms Sangau
from her duties from 10 May until 15 May. On her return, she
was directed to attend upon Sara and Mr White to put any matters in
response to
the allegations that she had behaved inappropriately towards colleagues on 9 May
causing them to
feel very distressed.
Ms Sangau was further warned of
possible disciplinary action being taken against her.
is evident from the date on which these incidents occurred, Ms Sangau’s
initial contract of employment had only a few weeks
to run before it expired on
20 June 2023. Yet, the PSA still elected to renew it for a further period of six
months and as previously
noted, her earlier probationary report was generally
unremarkable.
this context, it is an element of Ms Sangau’s case that the various
complaints made against her, at this stage, have been
subsequently reworked
against her, by the management of the PSA, when she initiated her own complaint
against Ms Connell, some months
later. The implication being that the complaints
of misconduct made against in May of 2023 have been conveniently exaggerated far
beyond their moment.
Essentially,
she asserts that it makes no sense for the PSA to have offered her a further
six-month contract if her behaviour in the
workplace was as consistently
disruptive as is now alleged by Sara and Mr White. Necessarily, she asserts that
the complaints of
her behaviour on 9 May have been exaggerated for strategic
reasons, and her behaviour was mostly unexceptional in the workplace.
White deposed that, in his assessment Ms Sangau’s behaviour towards Mr
Jackman in particular, did warrant immediate dismissal
and certainly could have
justified a decision not to extend her contract beyond 20 June. However, it is
the effect of his evidence
that he was persuaded that there were some
extenuating circumstances, most relevantly that Ms Sangau had been recently
family violence in her home situation.
Sangau does not explicitly disagree that she disclosed to Mr White and Sara that
she was suffering personal difficulties at the
time occasioned by her
through domestic violence and moving house.
However, it is her case that her
contract was extended
because the management recognised and accepted that
she had been subject to some unfair behaviour, in the workplace, since the time
of her disagreement with Ms Bone-George. She deposed as follows:
I say I exploded because I was holding it a lot. That's why I exploded it to Mr
Jackman. I explained that in that meeting. And I
was told by Mr Austin and Sara
that, well, we want to make sure that such explosions don't happen. This is why
my contract was not
renewed, because I was told, "Do not" - as you can see in
the email that you - that you read out, it says that I was told that I
not be exploding, and that's why- the reason that my behaviour was inappropriate
according to the PSA when I spoke out in
an emotional state.
And I can't tell the PSA how to define my behaviour, if they say it was
inappropriate. I don't say it was inappropriate. But the
contract mainly was
only extended temporarily to make sure that I don't bottle things in. I bottled
it in Jackie creating a toxic
work environment, everybody's siding with her. I
never spoke about everything that happened after that. But it is clearly in the
probation. I discussed it with management and I said, "I am not being treated
well because Ms Bone-George, I'm not sure what she
said to the team. Nobody is
speaking to me, they all ....." It's in the probationary notes. So I just wanted
to be very clear.
her formal affidavit, Ms Sangau deposed as follows:
In a meeting on 15 May 2023, I was informed by Sara and Mr White that my
explanation was accepted and was reminded to adhere to the
code of conduct. My
value to the team was reiterated.
My employment contract was extended for six months I June 2022, with the
understanding that I would be made permanent, provided no
further incidents
occurred. At all times my performance was exceptionally great; this was further
emphasized in the outcome letter
would seem to me to be more probable than not that, in the meeting of 15 May, Mr
White and Sara did attempt to extend some sympathy
and support to Ms Sangau and
they were not oblivious to the difficulties she had faced at the time, including
in her home situation.
However, I do not consider that this level of empathy can
be construed as deflecting from what they considered to be the
Association’s
necessary censure of Ms Sangau’s behaviour in the
their background as union officials, they are likely to have done so in as
non-confrontational and as sensitive manner as possible,
which quite possibly
was open to misinterpretation on Ms Sagau’s part. Indeed, one of my
impressions of the workplace, as a
whole, was of well-intentioned but flawed
communication style.
impression of how Ms Sangau responded to criticisms that her behaviour had not
been acceptable in respect of Mr Jackman
was that it was
heightened and
bordering on aggressive,
which description Ms Sangau
Again this caused me to
consider that at times Ms Sangau and her immediate supervisors were at
cross-purposes.
letter which was forwarded to Ms Sangau following the meeting of 15 May 2023 was
prepared by Mr White and executed by Ms Brown.
It read as follows:
Thank you for meeting with Manager, Policy and Strategy, Austin White and Team
Leader, Industrial, Sara on 15 May 2023 to discuss
our concerns that you may
have acted inappropriately during two incidents that occurred on 9 May 2023.
I appreciate the fact that, during the meeting, you acknowledged that your
behaviour had been inappropriate and that your colleagues
had been negatively
impacted as a consequence of your behaviour.
I also acknowledge that you sought an opportunity to apologise in order to
re-establish a professional working relationship. We are
aware that this has now
occurred and you apology was well received by your colleague.
It is an expectation of the PSA that all employees comply with the PSA’s
Code of Conduct and treat their colleagues with respect
and courtesy. As
discussed during the meeting, if you believe that you are not being treated
fairly (in any way) please discuss this
with your Team Leader.
It is not my intention to take any further action in relation to the incidents
However please be advised that any further instances of inappropriate behaviour
will result in a formal process being initiated and
possible disciplinary
consequences.
Having said that, I accept that it is your intention to move forward in a
positive and constructive way and I look forward to you
continuing to work as a
valued member of our Industrial
letter is diplomatically couched. The use of the verb
in the first
paragraph has a subjunctive quality to it. There is, as such, no formal finding
of misconduct against Ms Sangau. There
is also a tacit acknowledgement, in the
fourth paragraph, that Ms Sangau raised her perception, at the meeting, that she
unfairly treated in some way.
at the same time, as Ms Sangau herself has acknowledged, there is also a
recognition that she had behaved inappropriately,
in some unspecified manner,
and this had caused
impact. There after the focus is on moving
forward and clearing the air.
in my view, given the fact that Ms Sangau had been stood down from the workplace
for a period of five days, there can be
no mistaking the terms of the formal
reprimand which the letter contained. Notwithstanding its somewhat ambivalent
framing, its import
is that Ms Sangau is on notice of the possibility of more
serious disciplinary consequences if there is a repeat of her unspecified
inappropriate behaviour.
The conflict between Ms Sangau and Ms Connell of 10 August 2023
and what happened afterwards
is the effect of Ms Sangau’s evidence that it was Ms Connell who
instigated a confrontation with her, in the workplace, on
10 August, rather than
vice versa. As previously indicated, Ms Connell was the workplace union
representative at the PSA and the
precipitating factor for the confrontation
seems to have been Ms Sangau’s resignation from the union and the reasons
provided to their mutual colleagues for so doing, which was apparently
Ms Sangau’s perception that Ms Connell had been gossiping
respect of the earlier happenings at the Belgian Beer Café.
Sangau complains that Ms Connell
shouted profanities
challenged her to fight. She describes Ms Connell as being bigger than she is
and asserts that she was extremely frightened
by what happened. No evidence has
been provided from Ms Connell herself about the incident and Sara, who was
called upon to deal
with its consequences, was not present. Sara did however
have access to contemporaneous notes made by another industrial officer,
Cassandra Schumacher, who was present and who reported it to Sara.
has provided a copy of Ms Schumacher’s
but Ms Schumacher herself
did not provide evidence in the proceedings. The notes indicate that Ms Connell
approached Ms Sangau, at
her workstation, asking why she (Ms Sangau) had been
telling colleagues that she had quit
because of her (Ms
Connell). There is no reference to any
profanities
(Ms Connell) then said, in effect, that it was fine for Ms Sangau to resign but
she was not to blame her (Ms O’Connell)
for this. Although, no expletives
are recorded, it seems apparent that the conversation was a heated one and it
was initiated by
Ms Connell, who was angry that it was being suggested that
something she had done had caused Ms Sangau’s resignation.
Sangau’s version of events is clear from her formal complaint, made to
Sara, later that day. It is necessary for the report
to be included verbatim. It
is as follows:
It is important I write to you regarding today's incident where my colleague
Nicole aggressively confronted me in the presence of
my colleagues. It is my
understanding that, it was brought to Nicole's attention that I resigned my
membership with Professionals
Australia (PA) and she played a part in it.
I do not deny that Nicole played a part in my resignation of my membership with
In early May following the May Day match and the after match (sic) drinks with
my colleagues, I learnt that Nicole had maliciously
and incorrectly delivered
information to another colleague Kim, this upset Kim. I understand in the
interest of verifying information
Kim was given by Nicole, Kim spoke with a few
people who attended the after match drinks. I learnt that Kim had spoken with
I also had a conversation with Caroline, Tom and Max separately regarding
Nicole's conduct and intentions especially because so much
was said but only my
comment was singled out.
This all happened prior to Kim making a complaint along with the incident with
In my conversation with Max, I expressed my disappointment in Nicole especially
since she was our PA representative- I said to Max,
how can I take my problems
to a person who creates problems for me? her role is supposed to unite us not
try to divide us. Max acknowledged
how I felt, he stated it wrong for
information to be relied to Kim. I then expressed to Max my intention to resign.
Max advised me
to stay on as a member under his umbrella. I resigned my
membership by way of email to PA. PA in a return email asked for the reason
my resignation- I responded by way of written email back to PA that I no longer
had trust in my Rep when it comes to uniting us.
The conversation with Max happened a while ago soon after the match.
I had a similar conversation with you.
At no point did I tell Max I resigned my membership as a result of being bullied
by Nicole. I did not believe that Nicole's conduct
at that time amounted to
bullying even though I strongly believed that she had malicious intent in
speaking with Kim.
There has been minor numerous incidents which I have raised with you but despite
this, I have tried to have a positive working relationship
however Nicole's
conduct of today made me feel threatened and unsafe, I feel it has reached a
point where I need to make a formal
is apparent from her complaint that Ms Sangau linked the altercation between her
and Ms Connell with what had happened some weeks
earlier at the Belgian Beer
Café following the May Day March and blamed Ms Connell for creating the
unrest in the workplace.
Sara forwarded Ms Sangau’s complaint to Mr Wise,
who at the time was acting in the HR role. He in turn handed it on to Ms
for her to investigate.
that day Ms Connell was directed away from the workplace but was allowed to
return the following day, on condition that she
worked on a different level of
the PSA building than Ms Sangau. Ms Sangau reported her impressions of what then
occurred at the workplace
in the following terms:
Despite lodging my complaint, the workplace environment remained hostile to me.
Ms Connell was carrying on with life on level 5 with
her clique, like nothing
had happened while I was still subject to staying in isolation yet I was the
this context, Ms Sangau forwarded a further text message to Sara, in the
following terms:
Thank you for your follow-up, I appreciate the update.
I note my complaint has been forwarded onto HR however as expressed to you today
I do feel uncomfortable and unsafe around Nicole.
I’m concerned that the
follow up may take some time which means that I will have to remain on level 4
away from my colleagues.
To be honest, I’m surprised that Nicole was not directed to go home and
reflect on her behaviour like I was. Having this time
and space imposed on both
parties can be beneficial I believe.
I understand it is HR’s prerogative to decide upon the most appropriate
course of action but I feel it is important that I
clearly articulate the impact
that seemingly “double standards” are having on me currently.
Thank you for taking the time to check on me this morning and allowing me the
space to express myself.
As directed by you and Austin previously, I’m now sending this email to
ensure that I’m not bottling up issues that are
important to me.
As you know, my contract was only temporarily extended by the PSA as a distinct
measure to ensure management were seen to be handling
the impact my conduct had
had on my colleague. I fully accepted this action by the PSA as I believe it is
vital that one is called
to account if behaviour is less than exemplary.
I simply seek equity in how this current matter is dealt with.
Many thanks
Sarah Sangau
her affidavit, Sara indicates that she did not
this message as
being a complaint per se given the absence of this word from it. This may be so,
but it seems clear that Ms Sangau
did articulate her perception that she had
been treated differently (and more severely) to Ms Connell in terms of the
length of time
she had been excluded from the workplace for what she impliedly
categorised as a similar infraction of office discipline to that
committed by Ms
Connell towards her. In my view, that is the only logical explanation for the
use of the phrase
double standards
in Ms Sangau’s
correspondence
is the effect of Sara’s evidence that the events of 10 August renewed
previous tensions in the workplace and, as a consequence,
she sent an email to
all members of the Industrial Team reminding them not to engage in what she
characterised as
discussions and encouraging them to maintain a
positive workplace culture.
August of 2023 Mr White was away from the office on medical leave due to a knee
replacement operation. In his absence, Mr Wise
was formally responsible for
managing Ms Sangau’s complaint against Ms Connell. As indicated above he
delegated this responsibility
to Ms Andricic, who reported directly to Ms Brown.
Ms Andricic retired from her position with the PSA in August of 2024. As
indicated, she did not provided evidence in these proceedings.
Mr White and Sara have provided a copy of the report prepared by Ms Andricic in
response to Ms Sangau’s complaint. It was
clear from that report that she
had access to Ms Schumacher’s notes. Ms Andricic interviewed both Ms
Sangau and Ms Connell.
The former reported being fearful of Ms Connell and being
unhappy that Ms Connell had been allowed to remain at work, whilst the
was being investigated.
outcome of the investigation was that Ms Andricic found that Ms Connell had
neither sworn at nor raised her voice at Ms Sangau
but had behaved
unprofessionally, discourteously, disrespectfully and inappropriately in raising
a non-work issue with her. The outcome
recommended was that Ms Connell be
reminded of her obligations under the Code of Conduct but no further
disciplinary action be taken.
was further recommended that there be a workplace mediation between the two
individuals concerned. Both Ms Connell and Ms Sangau
agreed to this and the
mediator nominated was Ms Brady, with the mediation scheduled for 31 August 2023
and pre-mediation conferences
to take place separately with firstly Ms Sangau
(23 August) and secondly Ms Connell (24 August).
Sangau attended her pre-meditation conference with Ms Brady. As previously
indicated it was Ms Sangau original intention to call
her as a witness in these
proceedings, but she did not ultimately proceed with this application.
effect of Ms Sangau’s evidence is that she felt under some pressure to
attend the mediation given she remained on a temporary
employment contract and
told the meditator this. It is also her position that she informed Ms Brady of
her perception that she had
been subject to exclusionary conduct, in the
workplace, which she believed had been initiated by Ms Connell.
to the date scheduled for the mediation, Ms Andricic provided her report to Ms
Brown, who confirmed the recommendation that
no disciplinary action be taken
against Ms Connell. Ms Brown further decided to direct Ms Connell to be
counselled about her behaviour.
This counselling was provided by Ms Andricic. On
31 August, Ms Brown formally notified both Ms Connell and Ms Sangau of the
of Ms Sangau’s complaint.
my view, the outcome of this complaint was less admonitory in its tone than that
which related to the May complaint made against
Ms Sangau arising from her
conduct towards Mr Jackman and Ms Standish. In her letter, Ms Brown also
confirmed that it was envisaged
by the PSA that there would be a mediation
between Ms Sangau and Ms Connell
any issues between them in a
professional way.
The mediation did not take place.
transpired between Ms Connell and Ms Brady is not known to me. But Sara and Ms
Brown did meet with Ms Andricic on 24 August because
Ms Brady had advised Ms
Andricic that she did not consider the matter referred to her to be suitable for
mediation because
serious issues
had been uncovered in the pre-mediation
process. These related to issues of sexual harassment and aggressive behaviour
relating to
Ms Sangau, including that she had waved a knife
colleague’s face at the May Day social event.
this stage, it is the effect of Ms Brown’s evidence that, as the General
Secretary of the PSA she took executive charge of
what she considered to be a
very serious matter. It is her evidence that she personally had no knowledge of
any controversies which
had arisen following the May Day March social event.
Brown also sought urgent legal advice as to what the PSA should do in the light
of the allegations, given her understanding of
the obligations and legal duties
incumbent upon employers to protect their employees from being subject to sexual
harassment, whilst
being procedurally fair to the person who was the subject of
such allegations.
advice was that Ms Sangau should be directed away from the office and prohibited
from making contact with any staff, whilst the
matter was investigated. Ms
Sangau did not return to the PSA office after this date until her contract
expired at the conclusion
of its term on 22 December 2023. She did however talk
with Mr White, on the telephone and correspond with him in October.
Brown delegated Ms Andricic and Mr Wise to investigate the matter and it was Ms
Andricic who orally informed Ms Sangau that she
had been suspended, which she
did at the office on 25 August,
because of allegations of sexual misconduct involving the sending of
inappropriate images of herself on social media.
Sangau has deposed that she was shocked at this disclosure and immediately
proffered her phone to Ms Andricic for her examination.
She further deposes that
she confirmed to Ms Andricic that the only photograph of herself, which she had
shared with colleagues was
the one she had shown at the Belgian Beer Café
and which she described as
gorgeous and not
inappropriate.
Ms Andricic had been apparently tasked to investigate the allegations against Ms
Sangau, the evidence indicates that Sara
played a part in this regard prior to
Ms Bradley declining to undertake the mediation. Sara took notes in this regard
and 25 August.
notes reveal that, on 23 August 2023, Sara spoke with Ms Standish and Ms
Schumacher about concerns that Ms Sangau was pressurising
the latter about what
she had noted in respect of the incident with Ms Connell. Ms Schumacher denied
any such pressures but alleged
industrial officer had complained about being sent sexually explicit material by
Ms Sangau had
described to her (Ms Schumacher) a sexual encounter she (Ms Sangau) had had over
the weekend in the lunchroom.
23 August Sara had spoken with Ms Barnwell who expressed concern about Ms
Sangau’s reliance on her (Ms Barnwell) to do her
work, including drafting
emails and liaising with colleagues. The next day, Ms Bone-George approached her
to complain that Ms Sangau
was isolating herself in the office and making the
industrial team an unpleasant place to work.
also complained that Ms Sangau was
not publicly representing the PSA in a
good light by showing a number of images of her being scantily clad
Facebook page. On the same day Ms Connell made similar complaints, including
that Ms Sangau had shown her an explicit sexual
video on her phone, which had
made her (Ms Connell) uncomfortable.
noted above, it is the effect of Sara’s evidence that these various
disclosure of an unhappy and conflicted workplace coincided
with her being more
proactive in investigating Ms Sangau’s various files, which she found to
be wanting.
is clear that Ms Andricic’s investigation of these various allegations was
perfunctory and relied heavily on what had been
reported to her by
It does not appear to be
the case that she herself personally interviewed any of the individuals who had
made complaints about Ms
Andricic confirmed that Ms Sangau had voluntarily provided her with photographs
from Instagram and Facebook and had indicated that
she had only shown them to
colleagues at the May Day dinner when asked to do so. In the conclusion to her
report Ms Andricic wrote
as follows:
That during a
team dinner, after the May March event, Sarah showed members of the Industrial
Team, and some of their partners, uninvited
pictures of herself on lnstagram and
Facebook where she was dressed in lingerie.
regularly showed inappropriate pictures saved on her phone to members of the
team. That she would just pull up next to
someone and ask them to look, not
giving any preamble to what they would see.
That in May 2023
without preamble Sarah asked a work colleague to view a video on her phone which
contained 2 people (one that Sarah
identified as being her cousin) having sexual
relations in the Botanical Gardens in Adelaide.
That she made
suggestive comments about a member of staff to the partner of that person (also
an employee).
discussed the size of the male genitalia (of a person) with whom she had sexual
relations over a weekend with a colleague
as they went out to lunch, with no
preamble and being quite unexpected by her work colleague, around that level of
familiarisation.
allegedly has inundated one work colleague in particular with calls and photos
sent by phone text, both during and after
work. That many of these message were
inappropriate.
the nature of these allegations, Ms Andricic recommended that they be formally
put to Ms Sangau in writing and she be invited
to respond to them. This duly
happened with a letter, under Ms Brown’s hand dated 5 September 2023. Ms
Sangau was formerly
directed not to discuss the matters raised in the letter
with any other member of the PSA. Her attention was drawn to the PSA’s
Sexual Harassment Policy, which defined sexual harassment as including the
showing any explicit sexual image.
Sangau responded to these allegations in a lengthy letter dated 20 September
She also re-agitated her
complaint about Ms Connell and what she characterised as the
of the Industrial Team, which had resulted in her being subject
to bullying, victimisation and isolation.
also, in effect, accused the PSA and its staff of hypocrisy given the general
culture of the organisation was one which condoned
chat and banter
amongst its members of a sexualised nature. In this context, during the
hearing of the evidence in the case, Ms Sangau produced a
letter which she has
sent to Mr White, following the commencement of the proceedings, in which she
gave examples in this regard.
my view, it cannot be the function of these proceedings to assess the probity or
otherwise of these communication and assess whether
they offend contemporary
industrial mores.
some moment, in the context of the current proceedings, she alleged that the
complaints of sexual harassment, made against her,
arose in retribution for her
having made her earlier complaint against Ms Connell and had either been
orchestrated by her or individuals,
at the PSA, associated or aligned with her.
matters are not expressly stated to be a complaint but clearly have that
quality, in my view. The degree of connection of her
initial complaint about Ms
Connell, to these subsequent events and their operative consequence for
decisions made in in respect of
her employment are at the heart of the case from
Ms Sangau’s perspective.
respect of the first allegation, Ms Sangau acknowledged showing the relevant
photograph of herself but at a non-work event and
at the request of the persons
there. She also asserted that the image did not offend Instagram’s content
respect of the second allegation, Ms Sangau indicated that she had
occasionally
sent images of herself to Ms Barnswell, via social media, as
a consequence of what she considered to be a close friendship between
respect of the third allegation, Ms Sangau denied it had ever occurred and
rejected it as being entirely untrue. In respect of
the fourth allegation, Ms
Sangau agreed that it had occurred in
broad terms
and had involved her
friend Ms Barnswell and was a jocular conversation of a private nature.
respect of the fifth allegation, Ms Sangau assumed that it was again a reference
to Ms Barnswell, as she was the only person, at
the PSA, to whom she sent
messages with any degree of frequency – again as a consequence of what she
regarded as a friendship
between them. In Ms Sangau’s perception her
messaging and the sending of internet jokes was both private and
consensual.
is the submission of Ms Stewart that Ms Sangau’s response contained
certain admissions,
Ms Brown was entitled to take into account, in respect of the ultimate decision
which was taken not to extend Ms Sangau’s
contract. The implication being
that there was no obligation on the PSA to either respond formally or undertake
a more forensic investigation.
of what was its ultimate aetiology, it is clear that the attitude of the
management of the PSA towards Ms Sangau hardened
after August of 2023. This
coincided with Sara speaking with Ms Barnwell about issues to do with Ms
Sangau’s work performance
and receiving information, from it would seem Ms
Schumacher, regarding another industrial officer being bombarded with unwanted
messages of an explicit nature. Sara conferred with Mr White when he
returned to work.
industrial officer in question, named by Ms Schumacher, would seem to be Ms
Barnwell. As previously noted, during the course of
her evidence, she indicated
that she (Ms Barnwell) had not been upset by the material sent to her and did
not want to formally complain
addition, Sara confirmed that she was surprised to learn that it was Ms Barnwell
who had apparently raised the issue of being bombarded
with unwanted messages.
From Ms Sangau’s perspective, this would appear to support her contention
that issues were being manipulated
and exaggerated against her in order to bring
is also clear that in contravention of the direction that she stay away from all
her colleagues at the PSA, whilst suspended from
her duties, Ms Sangau did, in
fact, attend upon Ms Barnwell’s home, whilst she and her husband (Ray)
were there, which Ms Barnwell
had not invited and which made her feel
uncomfortable for a variety of reasons, as did her apparent involvement in the
process against Ms Sangau.
these circumstances, Ms Barnwell raised with both Sara and Ms Andricic her
unwillingness to be
identified as a complainant
against Ms Sangau and her
desire to know precisely what it was asserted that she had complained to
management about. Necessarily,
in my view, this indicates a lack of precision as
to who was complaining about what. In a letter Ms Barnwell wrote to Ms Andricic,
she provided two reasons why she had reached this position, which were as
reason is because the information my colleague shared with me did not make me
feel uncomfortable and therefore it would
be unfair and disingenuous of me to
suddenly raise concerns.
reason I did not want to be included is because I am genuinely concerned about
the possibility of repercussions from my
I have already noted, it is my impression that Ms Barnwell was deeply
uncomfortable about being compelled to give evidence in these
proceedings and
any perception that her actions had been instrumental in Ms Sangau’s
contract not being extended. In this context,
in her oral evidence, she could
not recall saying to Sara that she felt
conflicted and drained
Sangau’s reliance on her in the workplace or ever having complained about
being sent sexualised text messages by her.
She reiterated what she believed had
been the confidential nature of her discussion with Sara.
the same time, Ms Barnwell acknowledged the detrimental emotional effect Ms
Sangau’s visit to her home had had on her. In
this context, Ms Barnwell
expressed the dilemma which the situation present for her in the following
exchange with Ms Stewart, as
to why she had sought a meeting with
Ms Stewart: And, Ms Barnwell, having confirmed that Ms Sangau did attempt to
with Sara at the office
along with your husband?
Ms Barnwell: I did.
Ms Stewart: And that you had specifically come into the office to raise the
concerns that you had about Ms Sangau contacting you
and also to complain about
Ms Sangau sending you hundreds of emails?
Ms Barnwell Wrong. Not true. I definitely did go into the office to meet with
her because I was supposed to be working from home.
I felt quite impacted, and
so I said – because Ray was there, I said, “Sara, I think I want to
come in and have a chat
with you.” So we went in. I went and Ray came with
me. And from my recollection, when I showed Sara the messages, I don’t
think she thought they were that bad. I thought it was more. Right? So –
and I was very – the same words I have said
here that I have put in emails
to the PSA. I said at that time to Sara, “I don’t have an issue with
it.” I think
I might have said some of them were a bit weird, but I
didn’t have an issue. Like, the age I am and, like, I’m –
know. They were funny, but they’re like – it’s sort of like
– that’s why I think Sara didn’t
think it was me that was
getting the messages. But I hadn’t – and I made it very clear I had
no issue. I wasn’t
uncomfortable. What I was uncomfortable about was the
fact that because of some of the talk in the office about Sarah’s volatile
nature, the fact that she had been directed not to contact me and she ended up
at my door, it just impacted me a little bit, and
I was nervous about that. It
was never about the sexual thing, and it was never about work. It was just about
that there’s
a directive that somebody has been given. They haven’t
followed it. What does this mean for me? I’ve been brought into
that I want nothing to do with, and I’m concerned. So whatever you said
there wasn’t true. It wasn’t
true. I never – I never expressed
whatever concerns you said I expressed. I didn’t. It was an informal
meeting with Sara,
and we just sort of – Sara said, “Do you feel
comfortable? Do you want me to do anything else,” after I had had
let you know if Sarah contacts me.” And
that’s how we left it, you
know. And she just said, “Are you able to send me on those things,”
and I sent them
on, never thinking that they would be
seems clear that Ms Barnwell was the source of the electronic communications
which were the subject of the complaint against Ms
Sangau and she personally was
not offended by them. It also seems more likely than not that any complaint that
she made about Ms
Sangau’s reliance on her was intended to be informal in
nature. More significantly, Ms Barnwell raised with Sara her concerns
she believed to be the volatility of the workplace, which she connected to Ms
Sangau and which she observed made her feel
uncomfortable.
my view, firstly the fact that Ms Sangau disobeyed a directive not to contact a
staff member and secondly, the discomfort of staff
regarding the atmosphere of
the workplace must be considered matters of legitimate concern for management,
particularly what was
the cause of that atmosphere and how it could be
alleviated.
Sangau complains at the length of time it took for the PSA to respond to her
following her being stood down from the workplace
and its failure to investigate
actively the sexual harassment complaints made against her or to reply to the
matters she had raised
in her letter of 20 September.
White confirms that he discussed the situation confidentially with Ms Sangau in
mid-October. He agrees that he subsequently conferred
with Ms Brown, after he
had returned from sick leave, in respect of what he termed
further issues
to do with Ms Sangau’s work performance, which had come to his notice.
advised Ms Brown that, whilst Ms Sangau had been absent from the workplace, Sara
had advised him that she (Sara) had found examples
of inadequate work
performance. In this context, on 18 October, Ms Brown wrote to Ms Sangau and
confirmed that the Association had
made no determination in respect of the
allegations of sexual harassment. In addition, Ms Brown, after her consultation
with Mr White
wrote as follows:
Since you have been directed away from the workplace we have had cause to look
into industrial cases of PSA members which were allocated
to you. This has
raised a number of concerns about your conduct in relation to these cases. These
concerns require further investigation
and will require that further matters be
put to you. I confirm that no determination has been made about your conduct in
to industrial cases at this time.
As you are aware, there have also been several instances of inappropriate
conduct in the workplace which have been the subject of
management processes
with you during the course of your employment with the PSA.
In these circumstances, the PSA proposed that Ms Sangau resign her position
voluntarily with immediate effect but receive a settlement
sum equal to the
wages due on her existing contract.
White, in his affidavit confirms that he actually drafted Ms Brown’s
letter and provided the following reasons for its contents:
While Ms Sangau's continued employment had been under serious consideration for
a long time, it was in the immediate lead-up to issuing
a letter to Ms Sangau on
18 October 2023 that the PSA made the decision not to offer Ms Sangau further
employment after her contract
expired on 22 December 2023.
I recommended to Natasha that we seek to bring Ms Sangau's employment to an end
by mutual agreement before the end of her contract.
I had very serious genuine
concerns about the impact of Ms Sangau's conduct on the psychosocial health of
PSA staff. The PSA was
aware of its responsibilities to its staff in this regard
and had sought legal advice about fulfilling those responsibilities. The
of the impact of Ms Sangau's conduct on staff, and the numbers of staff impacted
by her conduct, had become more apparent
during the course of investigating the
misconduct allegations against Ms
Ms Sangau’s perspective, this is not consistent with her impression that
Ms Barnwell had not been troubled by her electronic
communication and nor had
any other person, until she complained about Ms Connell’s conduct towards
these circumstances, it would appear to be her position that it can be inferred
that the management of the PSA did not wish to
properly investigate the sexual
harassment allegations because they realised that they had no basis and had been
made in retaliation
for Ms Sangau making her justifiable complaint against Ms
Connell. Accordingly, she contends that the allegations of poor work performance
were also raised, at this late stage, in order to justify her contract not being
her affidavit, Ms Brown deposes as to what matters, concerning Ms Sangau, were
conveyed to her following the latter’s suspension
from work. These
included the following:
The photograph
latter produced by Ms Sangau in response to the formal allegations of misconduct
against her showed her in black lingerie;
whilst Ms Andricic reported the image
shown to her was of Ms Sangau on a bed wearing red lingerie;
Other staff
members had reported incidents of being exposed to gratuitous sexual comments
from Ms Sangau but had not wanted to make
formal complaints for fear of
retribution from her;
Although some of
the complaints related to occurrences arising in a social setting away from the
workplace, the incidents were
affecting workplace harmony and working
relationships as well as the wellbeing of a
The colleague
appears to be Ms Barnwell as Ms Brown was aware that Ms Sangau had contacted her
after having been directed away from
the workplace by Ms Andricic; and as
previously noted
Ms Sangau had
acknowledged an incident involving a casual conversation of a sexual nature,
with a work colleague, which not been the
subject of complaint, in her response,
which caused Ms Brown to conclude that Ms Sangau had frequently behaved in such
in the workplace.
this context, Ms Brown deposed that she made the decision to end the PSA’s
employment relationship with Ms Sangau because
it seemed to her to be
that at least some of the allegations against
substantiated.
In addition,
on the basis of advice provided by Sara, she had been alerted to alleged
deficiencies in the advice provided by Ms Sangau
to members. However, Ms Brown
had not made her own inquiries in this regard as such
a level of operational
was not part of her
Sangau was not open to the offer made to her by Mr Austin that she resign
voluntarily from her position in exchange for being paid
for the remainder of
her contract. In these circumstances on 30 October 2023, she replied to Ms
Brown’s letter and declined
the offer of settlement, reiterating her view
that the allegations against her lacked merit.
also raised the assertion made in the current proceedings that she would have
been made permanent in June of 2023 other than for
the incident involving Mr
Jackman, in respect of which Sara and Mr Austin had expressed some sympathy for
these circumstances, she asserted that the offer of voluntary resignation could
only be construed as a
concerted effort
on the part the PSA
In her letter of 30 October, Ms Sangau expressed herself as being
that all the allegations against her had only surfaced
following her complaint against Ms Connell.
receipt of Ms Sangau’s letter of 30 October, Ms Brown reiterated the offer
of voluntary resignation in a letter of 3 November.
This led to the formal
decision of Ms Brown, in respect of Ms Sangau’s employment at the PSA,
which was conveyed to her on
20 November 2023 and contained the various reasons
specified earlier in these reasons for judgment, which Ms Sangau challenges in
these proceedings.
Accordingly,
the relevant decision of the PSA was clearly made in circumstances in which Ms
Brown and the managers who reported to
her were well aware that Ms Sangau had
alleged that she had been singled out for unfair treatment only (or largely)
because of her
complaint against Ms Connell. In this context, Ms Sangau points
to the fact that the letter conveying the PSA’s decision not
to extend her
contract makes no reference to the issue raised by her in respect of Ms
her affidavit, Ms Sangau deposes as follows:
I believe that my termination was directly related to the complaints I made
against Ms Connell, the subsequent complaints I made
throughout as to the way
the complaint was handled, the impact it was having on me, I complained about
being forced to mediate. It
was clear to Ms Brown that the sexual allegations
were vexatious on the day of my suspension when Ms Andricic spoke with her after
our meeting. It was clear that, Ms Brown knew these matters were addressed back
in May 2023, yet it took Ms Brown over two months
to respond to my response to
the allegations. There is no reason the PSA could show required for my
employment to be terminated,
the termination constitutes adverse action under
Fair Work Act
Necessarily,
Ms Sangau’s case is one which relies heavily on inference. Essentially the
temporal connection between her complaint
and the subsequent actions of the PSA
in the context of her detailed reply to the allegations of sexual harassment,
which were not
formally answered and what she would characterise as the
previously unventilated complaints of workplace inefficiency levied against
acknowledge that Ms Sangau herself does not have to establish the actual reason
or reasons for the actions of the PSA as the onus
is on it to provide the
reasons as to why it acted as it did and establish that, in substantive terms,
it was not for a reason protected
by the Act. In this context, Ms Brown has
deposed as to factors which influenced her in making the relevant decision. Her
can be summarised as follows:
Mr White had
reported that Sara had told him that in her absence it had been discovered that
Ms Sangau had been given poor or incorrect
advice to members; and
There had been
previous complaints about Ms Sangau’s conduct in the
Brown further deposed as follows:
The decision to terminate Ms Sangau's employment before her contract expired was
made as there were numerous unresolved concerns
with Ms Sangau's work
performance, and behaviour in the workplace including sexual harassment and
other aggressions towards PSA staff.
We had not made a determination of the
allegations put against Ms Sangau in our letter of 5 September 2023 but based on
Ms Sangau's
responses to the allegations it seemed likely that at least some of
the allegations would be substantiated. The allegation reported
to Lee Bradley
expressed genuine fear of retribution
from Ms Sangau. I was highly concerned
PSA staff if
Ms Sangau was to return to the workplace.
I was also aware that there were a number of serious concerns about the quality
of her work and work performance, and that if she
was to return to the workplace
she would require performance management. This included both ongoing concerns
with the quality of
her written correspondence, and concerns identified by Sara
during review and reallocation of Ms Sangau's cases in Ms Sangau's absence.
It was clear to me that the employment relationship would not be salvaged. I was
aware that Mr White had had a number of conversations
with Ms Sangau, and that
she could expect her contract would not be renewed. By that time she had not
attended work, or performed
any work, for some time.
We did not consider it fruitful to continue to devote organisational resources
to managing misconduct and performance issues, when
we did not intend to
continue Ms Sangau's employment after 22 December 2023. We terminated the
contract before the expiry but nevertheless
provided payment to Ms Sangau the
equivalent of what she would have received if she had remained employed until
the end of her contract.
The complaint that Ms Sangau made about Ms Connell's behaviour on 10 August 2023
had nothing to do the decision to terminate Ms Sangau's
employment. Ms Sangau's
complaint was investigated appropriately and Ms Sangau and Ms Connell were
advised of the outcome on 31 August
2023. The decision to terminate Ms Sangau's
employment was due misconduct and performance issues and not wanting to devote
more resources
to investigating and managing those issues in circumstances where
we did not intend to offer Ms Sangau further employment after 22
Brown appears to accept that some of the concerns raised about Ms Sangau’s
behaviour remained unresolved. However, the import
of her evidence is that the
PSA were concerned at the potential of Ms Sangau to cause disruption in the
workplace in future and so
upset other staff members, if she continued in its
employ and the unwillingness of the Association to commit its future resources
to the performance management of Ms Sangau, in the same eventuality. These being
the factors that led to its decision not to extend
her soon to expire contract.
In my view, the court must now assess the probity of these reasons within the
matrix provided by the
ASSESSING THE EVIDENCE WITHIN THE LEGAL CONTEXT
Who was the decision-maker
am satisfied that the relevant decision-maker in this case is Ms Brown given her
function as the General Secretary of the PSA. In
carrying out her functions, she
was influenced by information provided to her directly by Mr Austin and
indirectly, via him, from
Sara. As such, each of them is to be regarded as a
relevant subsider decision maker.
also seems to be the case that Ms Brown received some information from Ms
Andricic and Ms Bradley – the lingerie image and
the knife incident
respectively. It will be necessary to examine what factors were at play in how
the operative decision was actually
reached. In addition, it would appear to be
the case that there were undercurrents of ill-will, from time to time,
surrounding Ms
Sangau, which seem to have had their origin in the gossip arising
from the evening at the Belgian Beer Café.
previously indicated, it is an element of Ms Sangau’s case that other
individuals had a malign influence in the decision-making
process and so
affected its outcome to her detriment. I accept that given the involvement of
others, particularly Mr Austin and Sara,
it is necessary to examine whether it
is possible to attribute any protected factor as being instrumental in Ms
Brown’s ultimate
decision and the degree of awareness, if any, she may
have had of that influence.
there is only one person who made the relevant decision, this process is
relatively simple. It involves an inquiry in the reasoning
process leading to
that person’s decision to take the adverse action. Albeit in a different
kind of adverse action case (one
concerning industrial organisation) Gageler J
said as follows in respect of the onus arising under
section 361:
Where the adverse action taken is in consequence of a decision made by a
responsible individual within a corporation, the existence
or non-existence of a
particular reason as an operative and immediate reason for taking that adverse
action turns on an inquiry into
the mental processes of that
individual.
Necessarily,
it becomes more complex if a number of individuals are involved, with varying
degrees of knowledge about the relevant
issues and the decision-making process
can be described as collaborative – essentially one involving the thought
of more than one person. This complexity is intensified if there is
controversy about the identity of the various decision makers
in question
– essentially who decided what and on what bases.
the PSA was a conflicted and unhappy workplace, during the time Ms Sangau was a
part of it is, in my finding, undeniable. As
such, it may well be the case that
others outside of the actual management team had motives for wishing Ms Sangau
to be removed from
it. That does not automatically transform any such individual
into some form of quasi decision maker. Rather the court must examine
evidence available and ascertain what influence, if any, such individuals
actually had, in the relevant outcome, in substantive
Gibbs v Palmerston Town
Gray J identified
this issue in the following terms:
...there is still a difficult question of the extent to which the improper
purpose of one person may be a substantial and operative
factor in the decision
of another. Clearly, if the actual decision maker simply “rubber
stamps” a decision in fact made
by another, the purpose of that other will
be a substantial operative factor. At the other, if the actual decision maker
truly believes
the false and innocent reasons advised by the other person, the
mind of the decision maker will not be tainted by the improper purpose
other person. The problem assumes greater complexity when the decision is made
by more than one person, as might be the case
with the board of directors of a
company, and as is often the case when the decision is made by a local
government authority.
the current matter, I do not think that it can be established that Ms Brown
rubber stamped
any malicious information provided to her concerning Ms
Sangau in reaching her decision that the continued employment of Ms Sangau
untenable by the PSA.
in my view, there was an atmosphere of controversy surrounding Ms Sangau
behaviour in the workplace, which related to both
how the management beneath her
(Ms Brown) regarded Ms Sangau’s professional performance and the influence
she had in terms
of the harmony of the workplace as whole. I will return to
these issues when assessing what were the
substantive and operative
reasons which led to Ms Brown’s decision as conveyed in the letter of
20 November 2023.
What is the workplace right
indicated above,
section 341(1)(c)
of the FWA defines as a
an employee’s ability to make a complaint arising from his or
her employment. In
Shea v TRUenergy Services Pty
Dodds-Streeton J defined the concept of being able to make a complaint, in
the industrial context, in the following terms:
(a) a complaint is a communication which, whether expressly or implicitly, as a
matter of substance, irrespective of the words used,
conveys a grievance, a
finding of fault or accusation;
(b) the grievance, finding of fault or accusation must be genuinely held or
considered valid by the complainant;
(c) the grievance, finding of fault or accusation need not be substantiated,
proved or ultimately established, but the exercise of
the workplace right
constituted by the making of the complaint must be in good faith and for a
proper purpose;
(d) the proper purpose of making a complaint is giving notification of the
grievance, accusation or finding of fault so that it may
be, at least, received
and, where appropriate, investigated or redressed. If a grievance or accusation
is communicated in order to
achieve some extraneous purpose unrelated to its
notification, investigation or redress, it is not a complaint made in good faith
for a proper purpose and is not within the ambit of s
341(1)(c)(ii)
(e) a complaint may be made not only to an external authority or party with the
power to enforce or require compliance or redress,
but may be made to persons
including an employer, or to an investigator appointed by the employer;
(f) a complaint that an employee is able to make in relation to his or her
employment is not at large, but must be founded on a source
of entitlement,
whether instrumental or otherwise; and
(g) a complaint is limited to a grievance, finding of fault or accusation that
satisfies the criteria in s
341(1)(c)(ii)
does not extend to other grievances merely because they are communicated
contemporaneously or in association with the complaint.
Nor does a complaint
comprehend contemporaneous or associated conduct which is beyond what is
reasonable for the communication of
the grievance or accusation.
a later stage, Dodds-Streeton J indicated the making of such a complaint was not
restricted to a person who had the capacity to
seek compliance with a legal
obligation but
extends to complaints about an employer made to the employer
itself in relation to the person’s employment.
In addition, such a
complaint need not be factually correct or ultimately substantiated to be a
complaint falling within the purview
341(1)(c)(ii).
the past there has been controversy about what is meant by the expression
able to make a complaint
section 341(1)(c)
and whether the legislature
envisaged that such a right to make a complaint about in relation to a
person’s employment needed
to be sheeted home to some
identifiable
of entitlement or whether it was a right which could be characterised
more broadly.
Qantas Airways Limited v Australian Transport Workers Union of
the High Court
held that the words
were not to be taken as words of limitation.
Bromberg J in
Cummins South Pacific Pty Ltd v
said the phrase was
directed towards the identification of an actuating circumstance which could be
related to rights that the scheme
of general protections created by the FWA
eventuated.
Accordingly,
in general terms, a complaint under the relevant section encompasses the
expression of a grievance or a finding of fault
or some form of accusation. In
general terms, Ms Sangau’s complaint about Ms Connell was that she had
behaved aggressively
in the workplace and made her feel unsafe and threatened in
the context of being called out for spreading misleading information
Wong v National Australia
Snaden J expressed some
disquiet at the prospect of the court unduly expanding the concept of complaint
in the workplace setting,
when he opined as follows:
[N]ot every interaction by which one person communicates to another the
existence of some suboptimal state of affairs will qualify
as that term is properly understood. Were it otherwise, any form of
reporting that involves the conveying of objectively unwelcome
suffice to qualify.
share these misgivings. However, in this particular case, given the formality
with which Ms Sangau expressed her complaint about
Ms Connell and the response
of the PSA to it, which was to engage in an investigation of it, I accept that
it can be characterised
as a compliant for the purposes of the Act and so in its
making, Ms Sangau was exercising a workplace right.
general terms, pursuant to
section 351
of the FWA, there is a workplace right
which prohibits adverse action being taken against a person for reasons relating
ethnic or religious background. Although not formally pleaded, Ms
Sangau made reference to her ethnic and religious background to
assertion that she had been subject to adverse action for a protected reason.
White and Ms Brown deposed that issues to do with Ms Sangau’s background
played no part in their approach to the matter.
Ms Sangau did not challenge this
evidence. However, it remains an aspect of her case that there were
undercurrents of prejudice against
her emanating from some other members of the
Industrial Team, which had some influence in giving rise to the complaints
against relating
to sexual harassment in the workplace and which were
influential in her contract not been extended.
this context, apart from Ms Barnwell and Ms Standish, no member of the Team gave
evidence in the case and so these issues remain
diffuse, relying on Ms
Sangau’s perceptions. In her affidavit evidence, Ms Sangau made reference
to one comment which she attributed
to a fellow member of the Industrial Team,
which she found distasteful and objectional.
brief it was that in Australia parents exhorted their children to eat their
meals because
children were starving in Africa.
I agree that this was
insensitive and in poor taste, but it cannot be regarded as being influential in
her cross-examination, Sara acknowledged the existence, in general terms, of the
stereotype of the
aggressive black woman
but denied that either she or
other members of the Industrial Team had adopted any such a formulation in
respect of Ms Sangau or had
been affected by it, in an active sense, in how they
had approached the various controversies, which have been examined extensively
in this case.
it is impossible to divorce Ms Sangau from her background or ignore it. She is a
proud, passionate and strong person and
presented as such. However, the case
must remain focused on what were the actual factors, which led to the relevant
decision being
made, not Ms Sangau’s subjective perceptions of what
occurred. In this matter, based on the evidence available to me, I do
consider that it is necessary for the court to consider the application of
section 351.
the face of the unchallenged denials of racist conduct made by Ms Brown, Mr
Austin and Sara and in the absence of any other probative
evidence, I do not
find that Ms Sangau was subject to any prohibited conduct based on any aspect of
her background.
Adverse Action
as noted above, the expression
adverse action
is defined by the table
contained in 342(1) of the FWA. It includes actual dismissal; injury in
employment; alteration of employment;
and discrimination. Ms Sangau was not
formally dismissed from her role, rather the decision was made not to provide
her with a further
contract of employment, when her fixed term contract
Patrick Stevedores Operations No.2 Pty Ltd v Maritime Union of Australia
the High Court
discussed the expression injure an employee in his or employment and concluded
that the expression encompassed:
...a broad additional category which covers not only legal injury but any
adverse affectation of, or deterioration in, the advantages
enjoyed by the
employee before the conduct in question.
is necessary to compare the position of the employee, before the impugned
conduct with their position afterwards, in order to determine
whether there has
been a detrimental alteration occasioned to him or
injury may include a reduction in an employee’s take home pay, a change in
an employee’s shifts and/or hours or a diminution
of the opportunity to
obtain work. As Finkelstein J observed in
Community and Public Sector Union v
Telstra Corporation
Injury is concerned with an actual adverse effect, usually by the loss or
alteration of a legal right, in the position of an employee,
in his capacity as
an employee.
prejudicial alteration
is a broader concept, which covers not
only legal injury but any adverse affection of, or deterioration in, the
advantages enjoyed
by the employee in question prior to the conduct in question,
which is alleged to constitute adverse action.
Jones v Queensland Tertiary Admissions Centre Ltd
Collier J said as
The term “alters the position of the employee to the employee’s
prejudice” appears to refer to an intentional act
directed to an
individual employee or prospective employees ... [which include] circumstances
which result in the employment of employees
becoming less secure, in a real and
substantial manner, than it had been previously, constitutes an alteration in
their position
to their prejudice. (citations removed)
one’s prejudice have included discriminatory
allocation of less congenial
shifts or rosters. A change to working arrangements (in the relevant case, a
transfer to a different
position) was found by Marshall J in
Australian Ophthalmic Supplies Pty
... “an injury” and “an alteration” because it was part
of a plan devised by [the employer] to make the [employee’s]
working life
so intolerable that she would have no alternative but to resign. It was nasty
and egregious conduct and involved an
abuse of power by [the employer] in a
relationship where the employer held all the power and [the employee] was doing
no more than
asserting her right to her correct entitlements.
discrimination
means to treat an or some employees differently
from each other. It is an element of Ms Sangau’s case that she was treated
differently
to Ms Connell in respect of how management approached their
respective breaches of office discipline – with Ms Sangau being
for some days and a warning issued; whilst Ms Connell was allowed to return to
work and was not warned.
my view, without finding a need to pigeonhole its specific nature, I find that
Ms Sangau was subject to some form of adverse action
within the meaning of the
Act. A more nuanced issue is connecting that adverse action to the exercise of
her workplace right to complain
Because of – The substantive and operative reasons for
the adverse action
PSA was a complex workplace. I accept that it was not always a harmonious one
and amongst the rank and file – for want of
a better term – of its
industrial team, there were a number of cliques, from which Ms Sangau felt she
had been excluded.
is not my function to hold some form of inquiry as to the causes of these
tensions or attribute fault for them or determine, in
general terms, whether Ms
Sangau was treated in a kind or fair way by her colleagues or whether the PSA
can be characterised as an
equitable employer.
it is an element of Ms Sangau’s case that the general antipathy some of
her colleagues felt for her influenced the
management against her, particularly
when, from her perspective, she had the temerity to respond and make her own
stand against the
antipathy directed towards her, by formally complaining about
Ms Connell.
Essentially
the underpinning of her case is that there was an active connection between her
complaint of inappropriate behaviour against
Ms Connell and the investigation
which was mounted in respect of her behaviour shortly afterwards, which in turn
led to Ms Brown’s
decision not to extend her contract.
is an aspect of her case that considerations of this kind were influential, in
some way, in the tortuous chain of issues and events,
which emanated and
followed from Ms Connell and then on to Ms Schumacher, Ms Barnwell and Ms
Standish, landed then with Sara and
Ms Andricic, who in turn influenced Mr
Austin, who in turn briefed Ms Brown.
one sense, there is an obvious connection between Ms Sangau’s complaint
and what transpired later. Without the complaint
there would have been no joint
referral for mediation and so no disclosures made to Ms Andricic and Ms Bradley.
However, the operative
effect of such connection cannot arise from either
conjecture or coincidence. It must rest on logic. In this context, a purely
connection between the asserted workplace right and the resulting
adverse action is inadequate.
addition, other factors are likely to have been in play, not the least of which
is likely to be the growing impatience of middle
management, in the agency of
Sara, with what she perceived to be the destabilising forces which seemed to
coalesce around Ms Sangau
and which she viewed as being disruptive to the
workplace. A view she transmitted to Mr White.
noted earlier, the use of the word
section 340
denotes that
there must be a factual and causative link between the taking of the
against the applicant concerned and a protected attribute relating to
that applicant as a consequence of a
workplace right
exercised by him or
Sangau cannot know precisely what were the various factors, and what was their
degree of influence, in the minds of Ms Brown, Mr
Austin and Sara, when they
made their respective recommendations to one another, about Ms Sangau’s
employment and what was
the operative effect, in any, of other persons in that
am not in a position to ignore Ms Sangau’s evidence that some of her
co-workers had an adverse agenda so far as she was concerned
and this might
conceivably have had some influence on the relevant decision-makers. Ms Sangau
need not herself establish such a connection
but her conjecture in this regard
is not sufficient to establish it.
onus is on the management of the PSA to provide the reason or reasons why it was
determined to do as was done in respect of Ms
Sangau’s employment. In my
view, each relevant member of the decision-making team has provided evidence of
the relevant factors,
which were that her work had been assessed to below
standard and her behaviour in the workplace was considered to be disruptive.
issue arising for the court is whether it accepts these are being the operative
– in the sense of the precipitating factors
– and substantive
– in the sense of being the major or predominant – one which
resulted in the relevant decision
being made.
obvious reasons, a managerial decision-maker is unlikely to telegraph if an
employment decision has been made for a protected
reason and nor are any
off-stage actors, who may have their own motivations for wanting a person to be
removed from the workplace,
likely to make their feelings overt in the
aftermath. Any connection between the two forces may be difficult to
of the Act are directed to ameliorating the inherent imbalance
between employer and employee in this regard through the creation
reverse onus.
In practical terms, at the end of the evidentiary process,
the question for the court will be whether the first respondent has established,
on the civil standard of proof, that Ms Sangau’s employment was not
terminated for a reason, or for reasons which included
a reason, proscribed by
the Act. In practical terms, the PSA is required to establish what was
substantive or operative reason
for the action in question and eliminate
any protected reason, as being influential in that decision.
of the Act comes into operation only after it has been established
adverse action was taken
that a relevant workplace right exists as an
objective fact.
the reasons outlined above, I accept Ms Sangau has demonstrated the application
of a relevant workplace right and that adverse
action was taken against her.
Section 361
therefore is engaged.
Jones v Queensland Tertiary Admissions Centre Limited (No 2)
explained the operation of
section 361
in the following terms:
That the employee is required to first prove the existence of objective facts
which are said to provide a basis for the alleged adverse
action, before the
onus shifts to the employer in respect of the prohibited reason ... it is not
sufficient for [an applicant] to
simply allege that she had a workplace right
and that she was the subject of adverse action – rather on the assumption
[an applicant] is able to prove these allegations, the burden is then cast
on to [the employer] to prove that adverse action was
not taken against [an
applicant] because of [her] workplace rights for the purposes of
section 340
of the Act.
Necessarily,
after adverse action has been established and its relation to a workplace right,
the reverse onus must involve an analysis,
by the court, of the reason or
reasons why the adverse action was taken by the person or persons who made the
relevant decision to
take the adverse action.
there is only one person who made the relevant decision, this process is
relatively simple. It involves an inquiry in the reasoning
process leading to
that person’s decision to take the adverse action. Albeit in a different
kind of adverse action case (one
concerning industrial organisation) Gageler J
said as follows in respect of the onus arising under
section 361:
Where the adverse action taken is in consequence of a decision made by a
responsible individual within a corporation, the existence
or non-existence of a
particular reason as an operative and immediate reason for taking that adverse
action turns on an inquiry into
the mental processes of that
individual.
Necessarily,
it becomes more complex if a number of individuals are involved, with varying
degrees of knowledge about the relevant
issues and the decision-making process
can be described as collaborative – essentially one involving the thought
of more than one person. This complexity is intensified if there is
controversy about the identity of the various decision makers
in question
– essentially who decided what and on what bases.
PSA acknowledges that there was a collaboration between Ms Brown, Mr White and
Sara, each of whom has provided evidence as to
the factors influencing their
minds. Ms Brown, the ultimate decision-maker relied both on matters which arose
from her own knowledge
– the potential penalties for employers arising as
a consequence of vicarious liability for acts of sexual harassment attributable
to their employees and the fact that Ms Sangau had been earlier disciplined for
the workplace infraction involving Mr Jackman –
and what was told to her
by others – namely Sara and Mr White – regarding the standard of Ms
Sangau’s work and
their growing disquiet at the disruption she
precipitated in the Industrial Team.
authority from the High Court indicates clearly that how a decision was made; by
whom it was made; and what was the substantive
and operative reason for it; are
matters to be determined by reference to the facts. Each is fundamentally a
question of fact.
Qantas Airways Ltd v Transport Workers Union of
Steward J said as
Corporate decision-making is often the product of many motivations, causes,
influences and processes of reasoning. Depending on their
level of seniority or
function, officers of a company may well emphasise different aspects or factors
as to why something is to be
done. For example, those in the area of human
resources may well have a focus on employment outcomes. But the task is the
identification
of the actual, immediate or operative reason or reasons for
taking adverse action. That is a question of fact. In a given case, it
require one to reject as a reason for taking adverse action the musings or
thoughts of employees that ultimately play no
part in the ultimate
decision-making process. It may also require one to differentiate between the
actual reasons for taking adverse
action, and factors or issues which may have
contributed in only some causal way in the lead up to the occurrence of such
similar vein His Honour said as follows:
Identifying the actual or operative reason for taking adverse action will also
require one to identify the decision-maker or decision-makers.
That is again a
question of fact.
various reasons, not least being the fact that the decision-maker concerned, in
this case, was an industrial organisation, with
a level of sensibility about how
employment decisions are to be made in the workplace and also I accept holding a
concomitant degree
of sensitivity for the implications of any decision for the
worker concerned, the actual process of decision-making in this case
complex and somewhat convoluted one, involving many factors.
this context, it is necessary to detail the jurisprudence relating to both cases
involving an individual decision maker and those
involving decisions which are
disbursed throughout an organisation. In each case, the emphasis is on the
reasoning process underpinning
the decision to take the relevant adverse
is clear that in both such scenarios, the focus of the inquiry is on the reason
the decision to take the adverse action was made. This remains the
focus whether the fact making scenario relies on a sole decision-maker
the decision making is disbursed through a collegiate group.
inquiry is centred, in each case, on what was the operative reason for the
relevant decision. This arises as a consequence of
the use of the word
section 340(1).
Matters are potentially further complicated,
in a group making decision process, where the relevant adverse action is
upon more than one specific item of conduct, on the part of the
employee concerned.
High Court authority, namely
Board of Bendigo Regional Institute of Technical
& Further Education v
CFMEU v BHP
Coal Pty Ltd,
which focus on
an analogous provision in the FWA relating to industrial action
(section 346
the Act), dealt with single decision makers and one specific episode of conduct
leading to the taking of adverse action.
Heydon J expressed the nature of the inquiry required in the
following terms:
The word "because" requires an investigation of Dr Harvey's reasons for her
Section 360
provided that "a person takes action for a particular
reason if the reasons for the action include that reason." The Explanatory
Memorandum makes it clear that to satisfy
the particular reason must be an
"operative or immediate reason for the action"
of the Act,
it is presumed that action was taken for a prohibited reason, unless the
employer proves otherwise. Examining whether
a particular reason was an
operative or immediate reason for an action calls for an inquiry into the mental
processes of the person
responsible for that
CJ and Kiefel J provided a similar analysis in
The focus of the enquiry as to whether
section 346(b)
has been contravened is
upon the reasons for Mr Brick taking the adverse action. This is evident from
the word "because" in
section 346
, and from the terms of
section 361.
enquiry involves a search for the reasoning actually employed by Mr Brick. The
determination to be made by the court is one of
fact, taking account of all the
facts and circumstances of the case and available
inferences.
this is an inquiry into a factual state of affairs – why did someone make
a decision to do something – caution must
be taken to avoid converting the
relevant inquiry into an examination of either the objective or subjective
circumstances surrounding
what occurred. As their Honours indicated the
application of the reverse onus does not involve an objective test.
To speak of objectively ascertained reasons risks the substitution by the court
of its own view, rather than making a finding of
fact as to the true reason of
the decision-maker.
Accordingly,
in this case, I must be careful to avoid any conflation between Ms
Sangau’s subjective views as to why her employment
was terminated with any
inadvertent objective assessment of the possibly different motivations and
actions of the various actors
concerned, which may be influenced by the context
in which the decision was made.
the court must focus on the
reasoning process
which led to the impugned
decision. In the circumstances of this case, this is essentially an inquiry into
the reasoning process of
Ms Brown and Mr White. It is an issue of fact. What is
the substantive and operative reason leading to making of the decision in
French CJ and Crennan J made it clear, in so doing, the court is
required to take into account all the relevant facts and circumstances
case, as established by the evidence. They said as follows:
This question is one of fact, which must be answered in the light of all the
facts established in the proceeding. Generally, it will
be extremely difficult
to displace the statutory presumption in
section 361
if no direct testimony
is given by the decision-maker acting on behalf of the employer. Direct evidence
of the reason why a decision-maker
took adverse action, which may include
positive evidence that the action was not taken for a prohibited reason, may be
because of other contradictory evidence given by the
decision-maker or because other objective facts are proven which contradict
the decision-maker's evidence. However, direct testimony from the decision-maker
which is accepted as reliable is capable of discharging
the burden upon an
employer even though an employee may be an officer or member of an industrial
association and engage in industrial
similar vein, Gummow and Hayne JJ said that:
In determining an application under
the Federal Court was to assess
whether the engagement of an employee in an industrial activity was a
"substantial and operative
factor" as to constitute a "reason", potentially
amongst many reasons, for adverse action to be taken against that employee. In
the evidence led to discharge the onus upon the employer under
, the reliability and weight of such evidence was to be balanced against
evidence adduced by the employee and the overall facts and
circumstances of each
case; but it was the reasons of the decision-maker at the time the adverse
action was taken which was the focus
the need to focus on the
substantial and operative
reasons germane to the
relevant decision, in order to ascertain whether such as decision is affected by
the alleged prohibited reasons,
an employer:
Need not negate
every reason, however immaterial it was to the decision to dismiss the employee
roving search
into the minds of relevant employees;
Is not in the
nature of an objective inquiry;
entail some attempt to elicit the
unconscious
reasoning of the ultimate
decision-maker.
this context, I accept the primary reasons for Mr White recommending to Ms Brown
that Ms Sangau’s contract not be renewed
were as follows:
Firstly, his
assessment based both on what Sara had told him and his own experience and
examination of her files that Ms Sangau had
not adequately acquitted herself as
an industrial officer and given the time she had by then been employed it was
unlikely that any
process which could be engaged by the PSA would ameliorate
that situation.
Secondly, his
assessment that Ms Sangau on-going presence in the Industrial Team had a
destabilizing effect on the psychological well-being
of other members of staff.
This largely centred on the fact that she had been at the centre of a number of
previous disruptions in
the office and had been subject to censure for her
acknowledge that Ms Sangau herself has a different view as to the standard of
her work and it cannot be discounted that she was
not always provided with
fearless feedback as to how she was going, including by Ms Barnwell, in this
regard. But, as noted above,
it is not the function of the court to engage in an
objective inquiry into whether or not either Sara or Mr White had sufficient
grounds to conclude that Ms Sangau was not what the PSA wanted in its industrial
officers or whether they were hypocritical in providing
praise for her efforts
from time to time. Nor can Ms Sangau’s subjective appraisal of her work be
influential.
the nature of the inquiry must be on whether work performance was an operative
factor in bringing about the decision which
is subject to challenge. I am
satisfied that a perception that Ms Sangau’s work was not up to standard
was an operative factor
in the decision-making process of Mr White and it was
not one which has been retrospectively manufactured by him. For obvious reasons,
performance must be a highly influential aspect of any managerial
decision-making, in an employment context.
logical underpinning of Ms Sangau’s case is that although her conduct in
the workplace was not always impeccable –
in this context, she has
accepted that her behaviour towards Mr Jackman was open to censure – she
was subject herself to far
worse conduct and isolation, which had been neither
investigated nor penalised. As such, the entire bona fides of the
decision-making
process against her must be called into question.
Sangau raises the same contentions in respect of the sexual harassment
allegations, namely no one was actually offended by what
she did and others, in
the workplace, were far more complicit in this type of conduct than she, yet she
has been made the scapegoat
these circumstances, she submits that the court can draw the inference that the
reasons actually provided by the PSA, for her effective
dismissal, are
necessarily bogus and there must be some occult motivation in play.
my view, in order to accept such an inference, it would be necessary for me to
conclude that each of Ms Brown, Mr White and Sara
are dishonest and uncredible
witnesses, which I am not prepared to do. More significantly it would require me
to discount what I
regard as credible reasons why Ms Sangau’s employment
had been found to be unacceptable and disruptive to the PSA.
is conceivably possible that others in the workplace did behave poorly towards
from Ms Sangau from time to time and also transgressed
standards regarding
social media exchanges. However, that cannot negate management’s concerns
to discipline all other of its employees in the
same way. As noted above, the court’s inquiry is directed towards
ascertaining
what were the reasons for the adverse action in the case not
whether its procedures were objectively fair or even-handed.
are aspects of the case which are troubling – what does it matter what
colour was the lingerie – this issue of the
knife was never put to Ms
Sangau and appears somewhat gratuitous. More significantly, as noted above, if
Ms Sangau’s account
correct, she has been
more sinned against than sinning
it is not necessary for the PSA to negate every possible factor which was at
play in its workplace, from time to time, which
may have conceivably been in
play when the relevant decision was made. This includes the possible malign
motives of other of its
employees, who had taken against Ms Sangau, for whatever
reason, in the workplace.
significantly, I am not entitled to, nor would it be consistent with logic, for
me to attempt to intuit some unconscious motivation
or hidden influence which
led to the PSA management reaching the conclusion that the on-going employment
of Ms Sangau was likely
to be disruptive in future and so contrary to its
my view there were compelling and logical reasons for Ms Brown to be able to
reach such a conclusion on the basis of the material
available to her, which
were clearly open to her irrespective of her complaint regarding Ms Connell and
the complex and somewhat
obscure response it generated, which was conveyed to Ms
Andricic and Ms Brady.
included the fact that there was clear evidence that Ms Sangau had disobeyed a
direction to stay away from Ms Barnwell, when
she had been suspended. In
addition, given the conflict which had occurred between Ms Sangau and both Ms
George-Bone and Mr Jackman,
it was open for Mr White to conclude that Ms Sangau
was a potentially destabilising factor in the Industrial Team and so posed a
risk to its psychological functioning.
addition, regardless of its ultimate aetiology, there was also evidence
available to Ms Brown which indicated that Ms Sangau had
been a catalyst for
disruption in the office. Ms Brown herself had executed the letter, which
informed Ms Sangau to this effect,
when she had been subject to a formal
import of Ms Sangau’s case is that there was a range of malign
undercurrents, which had been directed against her by members
of the Industrial
Team, which management should have investigated more proactively than it did
and, if it had done so, it would have
entirely undercut what were subsequently
proffered, by management, as the substantive reasons for the failure to renew
her contract.
the mere possibility of such an outcome – which cannot be guaranteed on
the basis of Ms Sangau’s case alone and
the inferences she wishes to be
drawn – cannot, in my view, negate the propriety of the reasons provided
by each of the respondents
in the case for the adverse action taken by
Sangau’s case relies on a high degree of speculation, namely that Sara or
Mr White either individually or in cahoots with
one another, knew how bogus the
claims made against Ms Sangau were because they had their origins with
disaffected members of the
Industrial Team but nonetheless decided to engineer
Ms Sangau’s effective dismissal, either because they shared this
disaffection
or wished to placate these individuals.
in my view, this
ultimate inference
cannot be safely drawn, relying as it
does on the court regarding each witness of the PSA as being inherently
unreliable and discounting
all the other evidence provided by them, regarding
the problems related to Ms Sangau perceived by each of them in the workplace
the protracted period of her employment.
my view, this inference cannot be open, even it is accepted that the management
could have done more to investigate some or all
of the matters raised by Ms
Sangau in her letter to Ms Brown of 20 September 2023. In these circumstances,
Ms Stewart submits that
the facts of this matter bear a similarity to those
examined by Snaden J in
Serpanos Commonwealth of Australia.
His Honour was dealing with a situation in which it was asserted
that an investigative process was so deeply flawed that resulting
findings of
misbehaviour made against the employee concerned could also not be allowed to
stand. His Honour wrote as follows:
In inviting the court to reject the evidence that Ms Kotronakis and
Ms Boyd gave about why they each did (and did not) do what they
did, Mr Serpanos’s submission reduces to this: that the investigation
that led to the findings that were made against
him was defective to a point so
obvious that Ms Boyd and Ms Kotronakis simply must have been conscious
of it. From their collective
failure to address the defects of which each should
be presumed to have been aware, it is said that the court should infer that what
Ms Kotronakis and Ms Boyd told the court about the reasons that
animated their conduct at the time was wrong (whether because it
deliberately untrue or otherwise). That submission requires successive
inferences, each of which lacks a proper foundation.
First, the court is invited to infer from the nature of the defects that
attended the investigation, and from Ms Kotronakis’s
Ms Boyd’s seniority and experience, an awareness on the part of
Ms Kotronakis and Ms Boyd that the findings that Mr Serpanos
contravened the APS Code of Conduct were unsound or ought not to be acted upon.
Second, the court is invited to infer, from the
fact that Ms Kotronakis and
Ms Boyd proceeded, despite that presumed awareness, to do as they did, that
the reasons that each gave
for their conduct were in fact not the reasons for
which that conduct was engaged in.
There is a healthy degree of speculation in what Mr Serpanos posits. I
mean no disrespect in saying so—it must, of course,
be borne in mind that
Mr Serpanos was hardly in a position to lead evidence of his own about why
others did things. Nonetheless,
the ultimate inference that the court is asked
to draw—namely, that the reasons that Ms Kotronakis and Ms Boyd
identified for
the conduct in which they relevantly engaged were, in fact, not
the reasons for which they engaged in it—cannot safely be drawn.
safely be drawn because the inference that underpins it—namely, that
Ms Kotronakis and Ms Boyd were both aware that
the findings made
against Mr Serpanos were unsound or unreliable—also cannot safely be
drawn. The decisions to make and then
act upon those findings in the
circumstances that prevailed were just as likely products of carelessness,
inattention, misjudgment
or oversight as of calculated impropriety.
my view, the criticisms of Ms Sangau, available to Sara and Mr White and indeed
Ms Brown were so significant that it cannot be
inferred from any failure, on
their part, to take the investigations sought by Ms Sangau further can lead to
ultimate inference
that any of them is trying to cover something up.
It would be fundamentally unsafe and unfair for me to draw such a conclusion on
the basis of the evidence available to me.
CONCLUSIONS
effect of section 361 is to place an onus on the applicable respondent to
establish that a proscribed characteristic was not a
substantial and
operative factor
leading to the taking of the adverse action in
applicable principles are summarised by the Full Court in
State of Victoria
(Office of Public Prosecutions) v Grant
in which the relevant principles
were summarised as follows:
The central
question to be determined is one of fact. It is:
Why was the adverse action
That question is
to be answered having regard to all the facts established in the
proceeding.
The court is
concerned to determine the actual reason or reasons which motivated the
decision-maker. The court is not required to
determine whether some proscribed
reason had subconsciously influenced the decision-maker. Nor should such an
enquiry be made.
extremely difficult to displace the statutory presumption in
if no direct testimony is given by the decision-maker acting on
behalf of the employer
Even if the
decision-maker gives evidence that he or she acted solely for non-proscribed
reasons other evidence (including contradictory
evidence given by the
decision-maker) may render such assertions unreliable.
If, however, the
decision-maker’s testimony is accepted as reliable it will be capable of
discharging the burden imposed on
the employer by section
the perspective of the PSA, each of the relevant decision-makers has provided
evidence and been subject to cross-examination.
As noted above, I did not find
either Mr White or Sara to be anything other than credible witnesses. I accept
that both of them found
aspects of Ms Sangau’s conduct in the office to be
destabilising, during the course of her employment there.
Brown, in her role as the PSA’s general secretary, was entitled to rely on
the information provided to her by her senior
managers. In addition, she was
entitled to be concerned about issues of potential sexual harassment in the
workplace and act on her
PSA was not obliged to call anyone else to discharge the onus upon it. Both Mr
White and Sara put forward this as being part of
the substantive and operative
reasoning as to why they came to the conclusion that Ms Sangau on-going
employment, at the PSA, was
not viable, from a management perspective.
accept that each of them (and indeed Ms Brown) has been transparent about the
factors and considerations that were present in each
of their respective minds
when the salient decisions about Ms Sangau were made. The reasons provided by
each of them have an internal
logic and basis on concrete facts.
this context, I do not consider it incumbent on the PSA for it to have called
any member of the Industrial Team to rebut suggestions
made by Ms Sangau that
some of her colleagues had acted undermine in the workplace, by fabricating or
exaggerating claims of misconduct
against her.
addition, even if such fabrication could be established, the desire on the part
of management to put an end to it, perhaps, even
unfairly, by making some person
a scape goat for such conduct, cannot negate the operative reason for the
if conceivably it is possible that other information subsequently comes forward
as to the mala fides of other member of the
Industrial Team against Ms Sangau,
it does not mean that these mala fides can be assigned to Ms Brown, if she was
not aware of them,
when she made her decision and the reasons provided by her
for it, were able to be reached by her.
this context, as noted above, she had reliable information related to her
supervisors’ perception of her work; evidence of
previous infractions of
office standards; and at the very least evidence of social media transmissions
to other employees which might
have transgressed the objective standards set by
relevant workplace legislation.
noted above, Ms Barnwell both helped and hindered Ms Sangau’s case. She
(Ms Barnwell) did not wish to be associated with
any aspect of the case centred
on her being the subject of unwanted harassment as a consequence of messages or
social media sent
to her by Ms Sangau.
the same time, she expressed herself wearied by what she characterised as the
of Ms Sangau’s conduct, most dramatically displayed by
her coming to her home, when subject to suspension. She also, albeit
reluctance, confirmed that she had informed Sara of Ms Sangau’s reliance
on her in respect of the discharge of her work.
it is not the function of this court to make its own assessment of the probity
or otherwise of the text messages asserted to
have been sent by Ms Sangau or to
engage in the same sort of exercise in respect of material sent or posted by
other employees of
the PSA from time to time.
I accept that the issue of such communications can be the subject of the actions
of management, in an industrial setting,
particularly given relevant legislation
pertaining to the issue and the potential liability of employers for its adverse
on employees.
or wrongly, Ms Brown was entitled (and indeed from her perspective, required) to
be concerned about employees of the PSA sharing
materials (and conversations)
which had a sexual component. In my view, this did not require her to conduct an
exhaustive examination
of the material concerned; determine whether any person
or persons had been actually been offended by it; or to attribute a definite
provenance in respect of its origination.
it was a legitimate managerial concern to which she was obliged to respond. Once
she had made some connection to Ms Sangau,
she was also entitled to react. Ms
Brown was not required to be procedural fair or make a concluded finding of
wrongdoing.
these circumstances, I am satisfied that Ms Sangau had a connection to this
material and Ms Brown was entitled to conclude so and
act upon her conclusion.
The operative force of this conclusion remains, no matter how innocent she (Ms
Sangau) considered the material
to be and regardless of whether one of its
recipients greeting it with insouciance
is in this context, that the legal provisions arising under section 340 and
section 361 must be applied. As previously indicated,
the test does not include
either a subjective or objective component. It is directed towards ascertaining
true reason
for the relevant
This inquiry is not
concerned with
mere causation, in the sense that it is not sufficient that
there is factual or temporal connection between the relevant protected
the adverse action.
if such a connection is demonstrated, it
may necessitate some consideration
of the true motivation or reason of the decision
maker. As such, it is not
necessary for a decision maker to dissociate the adverse action taken from a
protected attribute entirely.
As previously indicated, in all cases, the issue
is one of fact, focused on
the relevant decision was made.
accept that Ms Sangau had a workplace right to complain about Ms Connell’s
behaviour towards her. The evidence indicates that
this complaint was
investigated, albeit not to Ms Sangau’s ultimate satisfaction. I also
acknowledge that this complaint was
the precipitating factor which led to the
PSA electing to suspend Ms Sangau from the workplace.
the temporal coincidence of these two events is insufficient to provide the
necessary causation required by section 340(1)
of the FWA or otherwise found the
inference which Ms Sangau wishes the court to make.
am unable to reject the evidence of Sara and Mr White that some aspects of Ms
Sangau’s work as an industrial officer were
not satisfactory and given the
proximity of the end of her contract, Mr White did not consider it expedient to
either extend that
contract or consider the application of any performance
management strategies to Ms Sangau.
also accept that the evidence available to me indicates that the management of
the PSA had been concerned that Ms Sangau’s
behaviour in the workplace had
been disruptive and not consistent with its code of conduct. These concerns
arose first in the context
of Ms Bone-George and then Mr Jackman, the latter
resulting in Ms Sangau being formally warned.
also accept that Ms Brown, in particular, was concerned at the prospect of the
PSA breaching its statutory duties, as an employer,
arising under the provisions
of both State and Commonwealth anti-discrimination legislation. Ultimately, I
accept that this might
conceivably not be the case, but this does not negate it
as an operative factor in Ms Brown’s mind.
both individually, and in combination, were the substantive and operative
reasons why Ms Sangau’s contract of employment,
already provisionally
extended, was not replaced with a permanent contract. Clearly these are not
reasons which are prescribed under
the FWA and which prohibit adverse action
being taken.
my acceptance of these as the substantive and operative reasons for Ms
Sangau’s effective dismissal from the PSA any failure
on its part to
investigate further the issues raised in Ms Sangau’s letter to Ms Brown of
20 September 2023 is immaterial.
this context, I accept the evidence of Mr White and Ms Brown that the decision
to extend Ms Sangau’s contract for a further
period of six months, in
mid-2023, was only because they were concerned at the hardship this might cause
her because of her familial
situation at the time.
reject the assertion that this conduct, on their part, can be construed as being
any form of implied assurance or undertaking that
the PSA had had no concerns
complaint concerning Mr Jackson
and the action taken by the PSA at this stage
indicates to the contrary.
all the circumstances, I am satisfied that the evidence provided by the PSA is
sufficient to displace the presumption established
by section 361(1) of the FWA.
The PSA has established that it decided not to extend Ms Sangau’s contract
of employment or offer
her a permanent position with it not because she
exercised her workplace right to complain about the conduct of a follow employee
towards her but because of reasons relating to her conduct in the workplace and
the manner in which she discharged her responsibilities
as an industrial
follows therefore that Ms Sangau is not entitled to any compensation or any
other remedy and that no pecuniary penalties should
be imposed on any of the
respondents to the application, which must be dismissed.
all these reasons the order of the court is as set out at the commencement of
these reasons for judgment.
I certify that the preceding three hundred and
ninety-six (396) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
Dated: 12 November 2025
Hereinafter referred to as Ms
Sangau or the applicant.
Hereinafter referred to as the PSA or the Association or the first
respondent.
Hereinafter
referred to as the FWA of the
Hereinafter referred to
as the second respondent and third respondent or Mr White and Ms
See Exhibit AJW 1 to
Mr White’s affidavit filed 16 April 2025.
Hereinafter referred to as
Annexure SS-6 to Ms Sangau’s affidavit filed on 18 February
Hereinafter referred to
as the Application.
Application at [59].
affidavit of Natasha Brown filed 16 April 2024 at
Affidavit of Sarah
Sangau filed 18 February
Ibid at [9] –
Celand v Skycity
Adelaide Pty Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 222
(2017) 256 FCR 306
per Bromberg
Duluxgroup (Aust) Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2015] FCA 17
per Bromberg
Australian Bureau of Statistics
[2011] FCAFC 109
per Gray, Cowdroy
& Reeves JJ.
Evidence Act 1995
section 140.
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
at 129 [31] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow
& Kirby JJ.
Hadgkiss v Sunland Constructions Pty Ltd & Ors
[2007] FCA 346
(2007) 158 FCR 193
Transcript at page
Ibid at page
See Exhibit
See Exhibit
Transcript at page
See Ms Sangau’s
affidavit of 18 February 2025 at
Ibid as Exhibit
Transcript at page
Transcript at page
See Annexure S-6 to
Sara’s affidavit filed on 16 April
As will be seen, this
was a reference to Ms
Bone-George.
Annexure S-3.
Transcript at page 33.
at page 34.
Ibid at page
See Annexure S-2 to
Sara’s affidavit filed on 16 April
affidavit filed 16 April 2025 at [55] –
See Transcript at
Ibid at [64]
Ibid at page
Ibid at page
Ibid at page
See Ms Sangau’s
affidavit filed 18 February 2025 at [22] –
See Transcript at
See Annexure NB-2
to the affidavit of Natasha Brown filed 16 April
See Annexure S-17 to
Sara’s affidavit filed 16 April
Ibid at Annexure
See Ms Sangau’s
affidavit filed 18 February 2025 at
Ibid at Annexure
Ms Sangau deposed that
the date was 28 August but, on balance, it seems she is
Sangau’s affidavit of 18 February 2025 at
See Exhibit
See Annexure NB-7 to Ms
Brown’s affidavit filed 10 April
See Annexure NB-9 to
Ms Brown’s affidavit filed 16 April
See Exhibit
See Ms Stewart’s
written submissions at [19].
See Exhibit H.
See affidavit of
Austin White filed 16 April 2025 at [127] –
See Natasha
Brown’s affidavit filed 16 April 2025 at
See Affidavit of Ms
Sangau filed 18 February 2025 at
See Affidavit of Ms
Brown filed 16 April 2025 at [84] –
CFMEU v BHP
Coal Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 41
253 CLR 243
Palmerston Town Council
[1987] FCA 477
Shea v TRUenergy
Services Pty Ltd (No 6)
(2014) 314 ALR 346 at
Shea v TRUenergy
Services Pty Ltd (No 6)
(2014) 314 ALR 346 at
Qantas Airways
Limited v Australian Transport Workers Union of Australia
[2023] HCA 27
Cummins South
Pacific Pty Ltd v Keenan
[2020] FCAFC 204
(2020) 281 FCR
Wong v National
Australia Bank
[2021] FCA 671
Stevedores Operations No.2 Pty Ltd v Maritime Union of Australia & Ors
(1998) 195 CLR 1
McIlwain v Ramsey Food Packaging Pty Ltd
[2006] FCA 828
(2006) 154 IR 111
Community and
Public Sector Union v Telstra Corporation Ltd
[2000] FCA 844
(2000) 99 IR 238
Jones v Queensland
Tertiary Admissions Centre Ltd (No 2)
[2010] FCA 399
Byrne v Australian
Ophthalmic Supplies Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 66
(2008) 169 IR 236
CFMEU v Anglo
Coal (Dawson Services) Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 157
Jones v Queensland
Tertiary Admissions Centre Limited (No 2)
[2010] FCA 399
CFMEU v BHP
Coal Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 41
253 CLR 243
Qantas Airways Ltd
v Transport Workers Union of Australia
(supra) at [104] per Steward
Board of Bendigo
Regional Institute of Technical & Further Education v Barclay
[2012] HCA 32
CFMEU v BHP
Coal Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 41
(2014) 253 CLR
Bendigo Regional Institute of Technical & Further Education v Barclay
[2012] HCA 32
(2012) 248 CLR 500
BHP Coal Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 41
(2014) 253 CLR 243
CFMEU v BHP
Coal Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 41
(2014) 253 CLR 243
Bendigo Regional Institute of Technical & Further Education v Barclay
[2012] HCA 32
(2012) 248 CLR 500
See Board of
Bendigo Regional Institute of Technical & Further Education v Barclay
[2012] HCA 32
(2012) 248 CLR 500
, 542 at [127] per Gummow and Hayne
Clermont Coal Pty Ltd
[2015] FCA 1014
Commonwealth of Australia
[2022] FCA 1226
Victoria (Office of Public Prosecutions) v Grant
[2014] FCAFC 184
CFMEU v BHP
Coal Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 41
(2014) 253 CLR 243
Martin & Gasparini Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 1046
RTF format (1.38 MB)
Signed PDF/A format