URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1978/40.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brisbane City Council v Valuer-General (Qld) [1978] HCA 40; (1978) 140 CLR 41 (24 October 1978)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
BRISBANE CITY COUNCIL v. VALUER-GENERAL (Q.)
[1978] HCA 40
; (1978) 140 CLR 41
Local Government
High Court of Australia
Gibbs(1), Stephen(2), Mason(3), Murphy(4) and Aickin(5) JJ.
Local Government (Q.) - Rating and valuation - Valuation of land by
Valuer-General - Unimproved value - Land submerged by water
for dam - Whether
improved - Land Appeal Court (Q.) - Powers - Appeal from Land Appeal Court -
Appeal to be rehearing - Case stated
- Questions of law - Questions of fact -
Valuation of Land Act, 1944 (Q.), as amended, ss. 11, 12, 13(7), 21, 25, 45 -
Local Government
Act, 1936 (Q.), as amended, s. 24 - City of Brisbane (Water
Supply) Act of 1959 (Q.) ss. 9, 12 - Land Acts 1962
(Q.), as amended,
45-48 - Somerset Dam Catchment Area Declaratory Act, 1974 (Q.)
Brisbane, 1978, May 29, 30;
Sydney, 1978, October 24. 24:10:1978
APPEAL from the Supreme Court of Queensland.
1978. Oct. 24
The following written judgments were delivered: -
GIBBS J. This appeal arose out of valuations made by the respondent, the
the appellant, Brisbane City Council, and situated in
the Stanley River valley
in the State of Queensland. The valuations were made under the Valuation of
Land Act, 1944 (Q.), as amended,
("the Act") and subject to objection or
appeal were to take effect on 30th June 1970. Valuations made under the
are effective
for the purposes of land tax and rating: see s. 25 of the Act.
The lands are within the Shire of Esk and, as will
be seen, Brisbane
Council is liable to pay the rates levied on them under the Local Government
Act, 1936 (Q.), as amended. (at
2. The lands were amongst those which had been resumed for the purposes of
the construction of the Somerset Dam, which was built
for the purpose of
providing an additional water supply for the cities of Brisbane and Ipswich,
and also as a measure of flood mitigation.
Later, by s. 9 of City of Brisbane
(Water Supply) Act of 1959 ("the Act of 1959") the dam itself, and the fee
simple in the lands
described in the first schedule to the Act, which include
the lands now in question, were vested in Brisbane City Council on and
1st July 1959. By s. 10 of that Act Brisbane City Council has the power and
duty to maintain, manage, control, operate and safeguard
(inter alia) the dam
and all lands appurtenant to it. Since that time Brisbane City Council, in the
exercise and performance of its
statutory powers and duties, has distributed
waters from the dam to consumers through the water supply systems of Brisbane
and Ipswich
and has received revenue therefore by way of water rates. (at p45)
3. Each of the parcels of land in question is partly covered by the waters
retained by the concrete wall of the dam. Two of the
parcels are on opposite
sides of the river at about the point where the wall is built and each of
those two parcels is covered to
the extent of about two acres (out of a total
area of 716 acres and 158 acres respectively) by part of the dam's concrete
The remaining parcels are situated around the edges of the body of
water impounded by the dam. Each of the parcels consists partly
of land which
is covered permanently by the impounded water of the dam ("the submerged
land") and partly of land which is not permanently
covered ("the emergent
land"); some of the emergent land may be inundated at times for a short period
("the marginal land"). According
to the findings of the Land Appeal Court to
which reference will later be made, the total area of submerged land in the
1,206.55 acres, and the total area of emergent land is 1,932 acres,
of which 342 acres is marginal land. (at p45)
4. Five parcels of the land are leased by Brisbane City Council to various
tenants. The leases were originally made by the Coordinator
General of Public
Works, who was the predecessor in title of Brisbane City Council, and they are
unaffected by the Act of 1959, except
that Brisbane City Council has become a
party to them by virtue of s. 15 of that Act. However, the existence of these
leases does
not seem to be material for present purposes. (at p45)
5. Objections to the valuations having been made and disallowed, Brisbane
City Council appealed to the Land Court under s. 21 of
the Act. Before the
appeal was heard the Valuer-General, acting under s. 21A of the Act, reduced
the valuations and advised that
the new valuations would take effect as from
the 30th June 1973. Brisbane City Council did not accept the reduced
valuations which
were by s. 21A then deemed to be the valuations appealed
against. The Land Court dismissed the appeals and confirmed the reduced
valuations. Brisbane City Council brought a further appeal to the Land Appeal
Court. Such an appeal is by way of re-hearing: s. 21
(5) of the Act; in
practice there is an actual re-hearing on fresh evidence, and the Land Appeal
Court is entitled and bound "to
form an altogether independent judgment on the
whole case, quite irrespective of the reasons for the conclusion of the Land
(Reg. v. Rigby
[1956] HCA 38
; (1956) 100 CLR 146, at p 150 ). The Land Appeal Court
allowed the appeals and reduced the valuations.
Thereupon the
Valuer-General
appealed to the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Queensland by case stated.
The questions asked in
the case stated
were answered
by the Full Court in
favour of the Valuer-General. From that decision Brisbane City Council has
to this Court.
6. The parties before the Land Appeal Court agreed, and the Land Appeal Court
concluded, that the emergent land, including the marginal
land, in each parcel
should be valued on the basis that its highest and best use was for grazing
cattle. No question arises on this
appeal as to the emergent land. In deciding
what valuation should correctly be placed on the submerged land, the Land
Appeal Court
had to choose between two different methods of approach. On the
one hand evidence was presented on behalf of the Valuer-General of
of each of the eight disputed parcels made upon the basis that no regard was
had to the fact that impounded water from
the dam covered portion of each
parcel. In other words they were valued as good alluvial river flat lands,
which in fact they had
been before their inundation by the waters of the dam.
The Land Appeal Court found that if the parcels were rightly valued as grazing
land, and upon the basis that no regard should be had to the fact that parts
of them were covered with water, the reduced valuations
of the Valuer-General
were not excessive. On the other hand Brisbane City Council contended that the
permanent presence of the water
could not be ignored in making the valuation.
In fact the evidence of value presented by Brisbane City Council was confined
emergent portion of each parcel including marginal land, but regard was
had to the water on the submerged portion in each case where
available to that water for grazing purposes. The Valuer-General submitted
that the submerged land could have an unimproved
value as land used for the
retention of water, in excess of the value which it would have had if free of
the retained water, and
the only valuer called on behalf of Brisbane City
Council conceded that he was not competent to place a value upon the submerged
lands on the basis that they were used for the retention of water. (at p47)
7. The Land Appeal Court rejected the method of valuation which the
Valuer-General had adopted. It held that neither the impounded
water of the
dam nor the structure of the dam nor any portion of them could be regarded as
an improvement within the meaning of the
Act in arriving at the unimproved
value of any of the parcels. Accordingly it held that the submerged land and
the marginal land
should be valued upon the basis that it was covered,
permanently or temporarily as the case might be, by part of the dam and its
waters. However the Court held that in the state of the evidence it was
entitled to apply a dollar per acre to all the submerged
land contained in
each of the parcels as being its highest value unimproved, assessed on the
basis of its value for water content
over and above any added value which the
submerged land gave to the emergent land, including the marginal land, as
grazing land.
8. The foregoing account is based upon the statement of the facts and of the
grounds of decision set out in the stated case. A copy
of the reasons for
judgment of the Land Appeal Court was annexed to and incorporated in the case,
and those reasons reveal more fully
the nature of the approach both of the
parties and of the Court to the questions in issue. The Land Appeal Court
found that the areas
of submerged land in each case were of or about the areas
estimated by Mr. Jones, the valuer called for Brisbane City Council, and
adopted the unimproved values given by Mr. Jones for the emergent land
including the marginal land. However, as has already been
indicated, Mr. Jones
"confined the application of any monetary value assessed by him to the
emergent land in each case". The valuer
called on behalf of the Valuer-General
was Mr. Conroy. In making his valuation Mr. Conroy had no regard to the fact
that water impounded
by the dam lay over portion of the land. In other words
he valued the land as if the water, and the thick layer of silt which it
deposited, were notionally removed and as if the land were in the condition in
which it was before the dam was built. He took
this course because he
considered that he was obliged by authority to disregard any statutory
restrictions on the user of the land.
He did not regard that portion of the
impounded water of the dam which was on any parcel of land as an improvement.
9. The Land Appeal Court said that they had no doubt that Mr. Conroy
considered that he was required to value according to the rule
laid down in
Royal Sydney Golf Club v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1955] HCA 13
; (1955) 91 CLR 610
and Gollan v. Randwick
Municipal Council
(1961) AC 82 , which they stated as
being that in assessing the unimproved
value for the purposes of the Act, an
estate in fee simple
must be taken as a hypothetical unencumbered fee simple,
without regard
to any restrictions on title or user
other than those imposed
by the general law. They accepted that this principle applied, but
it did not affect the basic
rule that in making a valuation
regard must be had
to any physical disabilities affecting the
land. They held that Mr. Conroy's
could only be justified
if the water was an improvement on the land.
As to that question
"The fact that he has removed the water and that it is implicit in his
valuation that in doing so he thereby assessed a higher
unimproved value on
such uncovered 'submerged land', and a higher total value for each whole
parcel than if he had left the water
there, leaves only one inference open and
that is that he regarded such water as a detriment on the land."
They went on to hold that the water was not an improvement, first because
water in itself is not an improvement on land and secondly,
because the method
adopted by Mr. Conroy "itself completely repudiates the suggestion that any
operation of man in putting water
on the submerged lands in these cases has
enhanced the value of any such land." They accordingly held that the lands had
to be valued
as they were in fact with the water over them. When they came to
apply their decision on principle to the facts of the case they
said that they
were "hampered to some extent by the failure of the parties to furnish
evidence on all the matters that we think have
to be considered". They held
that the submerged land - or the "water content land" as they proceeded to
call it - would have a saleable
value, as being contiguous with the large
volume of water available to supply the cities of Brisbane and Ipswich and
also as an adjunct
to a picnic or recreation area, or as part of such an area
as for instance a waterskiing area. The conclusion which they reached
question was expressed as follows:
"In our judgment, having regard to the evidence before us, we can do no
better than proceed along the same lines on the assumption
that the only value
these water content lands would have, in each case, to a hypothetical vendor,
over and above the additional value
each gives to its emergent and marginal
lands as grazing land, could be the figure or price at which he and the
appellant in these
cases as hypothetical purchaser would come together. We
think this would be the same unit figure in each case, rather than a
figure based on the emergent and marginal land values. We adopt and
apply $1 per acre to these water content areas." (at p49)
10. In the Full Court Hanger C.J. disposed of the matter by holding that the
building of the dam causing water to accumulate on
the lands had effected an
improvement to the lands. D. M. Campbell J. did not find it necessary to
decide whether the lands were
improved or unimproved. He held that the lands
with water on them had a special value to Brisbane City Council, and that
City Council had not discharged the onus of showing that the
Valuer-General's valuation was wrong. Dunn J., who dissented, held that
question whether the submerged lands were improved or unimproved was one of
fact and that it was not open to the Full Court to
substitute a finding of its
own for the finding of the Land Appeal Court. He rejected the further
arguments that there was no evidence
upon which the Land Appeal Court could
have reached a conclusion as to the value of the lands with water upon them,
that Brisbane
City Council had therefore not displaced the presumption in
favour of the valuation created by s. 13 (7) of the Act, and that in
absence of evidence as to the value of lands with water upon them it was wrong
to hold that the lands were less valuable in their
actual than in their
hypothetical state. (at p49)
11. By s. 21 (6) of the Act an owner or the Valuer-General is given a right
to appeal from the decision of the Land Appeal Court
to the Full Court of the
Supreme Court "on the ground that the decision is erroneous in point of law or
is in excess of jurisdiction".
The appeal is by way of case stated under the
provisions of ss. 45-48 of the Land Acts, 1962 (Q.), as amended, which are
applicable by s. 21 (8) of the Act. Section 45 (1) enables a party
aggrieved by the decision of the Land Appeal Court "on the ground
of error or
mistake in law on the part of the Land Appeal Court or that the Land Appeal
Court had no jurisdiction to make the decision
or exceeded its jurisdiction in
making the decision" to request the Land Appeal Court to state and sign a case
setting forth the
facts and the grounds of decision. By s. 47 the Full Court
is to hear and determine "every question of law" arising on the case stated.
It is apparent from these provisions that the question for our decision on
this appeal is whether the case stated reveals that the
Land Appeal Court
committed any error of law. Of course if the Land Appeal Court erred in
principle in arriving at its valuation,
that would constitute an error of law:
if authority is needed for that proposition the recent judgment of the
Judicial Committee
in Melwood Units Pty. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Main Roads
(1978) AC 426 provides it. The first question that arises is whether it
error in principle to hold that the land should be valued in its actual rather
than in its notional state. (at p50)
12. It was not contested before us that this question depended on whether the
water, or perhaps the dam, constituted an improvement
in relation to the lands
in question. A valuation on the basis that the water covering the land was
deemed not to exist could only
be justified if the water was an improvement.
By s. 11 (1) of the Act the Valuer-General is required to make a valuation of
unimproved value" of the land. The expression "unimproved value" is
defined by s. 12 (1) as follows:
"(a) in relation to unimproved land, the capital sum which the fee simple
of the land might be expected to realise if offered
for sale on such
reasonable terms and conditions as a bona fide seller would require; and
(b) in relation to improved land, the capital sum which the fee simple of
the land might be expected to realise if offered for
sale on such reasonable
terms and conditions as a bona fide seller would require, assuming that, at
the time as at which the value
is required to be ascertained for the purposes
of this Act, the improvements did not exist:
Provided that the unimproved value shall in no case be less than the sum
that would be obtained by deducting the value of improvements
improved value at the time as at which the value is required to be ascertained
for the purposes of this Act;
By s. 12 (2), for the purposes of the Act -
". . . (b) 'The value of improvements' means, in relation to land, the
added value which the improvements give to the land at
the time as at which
the value is required to be ascertained for the purposes of this Act,
irrespective of the cost of the improvements,
Provided that the added value shall in no case exceed the amount that
should reasonably be involved in effecting, at the time
as at which the value
is required to be ascertained for the purposes of this Act, improvements of a
nature and efficiency equivalent
to the existing improvements; and
(c) 'Improvements' means in relation to land, improvements thereon or
appertaining thereto, whether visible or invisible, and
made or acquired by
the owner or his predecessor in title . . . " (at p51)
13. These provisions make it necessary to determine for valuation purposes,
whether the land in question is improved or unimproved.
They also indicate
what tests should be applied in deciding what is an improvement for the
purposes of the valuation. In the first
place, an improvement in relation to
land must be "thereon or appertaining thereto". This means that the
improvements, if not on
the land, must be "such as are in the strict legal
sense 'appurtenant' to the property and incident to its ownership" (McDonald
Deputy Federal Commissioner of Land Tax (N.S.W.)
[1915] HCA 54
; (1915) 20 CLR 231, at pp
234-235 ). Secondly, something done on
or appertaining
to land which reduces
rather than enhances its value
is not an improvement for the purposes of the
Act, any more
than it would be
in the ordinary sense of the word. In Morrison
Commissioner of Land Tax
[1914] HCA 10
; (1914) 17 CLR
498, at p 503 , Griffith
in a passage which has frequently been cited: "Any operation of man
on land which
has the effect
of enhancing its value comes within
definition of 'improvement'." (at p51)
14. It appears clear enough that the wall of the dam was not an improvement
in relation to the lands in question, even to the two
parcels on which a small
part of the structure stands. The wall itself (or the greater part of it) is
not on the lands and does not
appertain to them within the meaning of the
definition. The real question is whether the water is an improvement. I agree
view expressed by the Land Appeal Court that water in itself is not
an improvement. Improvements, as has been said, consist of something
which has enchanced the value of land. To build a dam, or to improve a
watercourse, so that water may be collected on or flow
over land may improve
the land, but it is the dam or the watercourse, and not the water, that
constitutes the improvement. But even
if that did not dispose of the matter,
the water could only be an improvement if its presence enhanced the value of
the lands. Whether
it did so or not is a question of fact. There is no doubt
that a dam, an artificial lake or a swimming pool may in many cases be
improvement to the land on which it is built. However, whether that will be so
or not will depend on the facts of the case. For
example, if a grazing
property has more dams than are necessary to water the stock that it can
carry, the erection of an additional
dam could not usually be said to be an
improvement. Similarly, assuming that water can itself be an improvement,
whether it is so
is a question of fact. In Reg. v. Rigby (1956) 100 CLR, at pp
150-151 , this Court, in a passage to which I shall again refer, repeated
is well settled, that upon a case stated the court cannot determine questions
of fact. In the present case, it has not been
established that the Land Appeal
Court was wrong in law in holding that the water did not enhance the value of
the lands. The only
error in law that could be suggested was that there was no
evidence to support that conclusion. However, for reasons which I shall
elaborate, I consider that the form of the case stated makes it impossible to
hold that there was no evidence to support any
particular finding. Common
sense suggests that in the ordinary course of events the permanent inundation
of lands is detrimental
to them and depreciatory of their value. However that
may be, it has not been shown that there was no evidence on which the Land
Appeal Court could find that the water did not enhance the value of the lands
in the present case. For these reasons it has not been
established that the
Land Appeal Court erred in law in holding that the water was not an
improvement and that the lands should be
valued in their actual state. (at
15. The parts of the concrete structure which stand on two of the parcels
would of course be improvements to those parcels if they
enhanced their value.
Whether they did so or not is a question of fact. There is nothing in the case
to suggest that the Land Appeal
Court erred in law in not treating them as
improvements. Further, having regard to the respective sizes of the parcels
areas on which the structure stood, it appears that D.M. Campbell
J. was quite correct in saying that they were not large enough
consequence. (at p52)
16. It is necessary to notice a further submission made on behalf of the
Valuer-General that even if the water was not an improvement
within the Act,
the special provisions of the Act of 1959 required the submerged lands to be
valued as though the water did not exist.
The latter Act, by s. 12, provided
as follows:
"Any land described in the First Schedule to this Act shall be rateable
land under and within the meaning of 'The Local Government
Acts, 1936 to
1958', and additionally Brisbane City Council shall be liable to pay and
discharge all charges and assessments in respect
of any such land duly made by
any person or authority other than the Local Authority at all times on and
after the first day of July,
One thousand nine hundred and fifty-nine, during
which any person other than Brisbane City Council occupies that land under any
agreement to lease, licence, or other contract, agreement, or
arrangement entered into by him with Brisbane City Council or the Co-ordinator
General of Public Works."
It is quite clear that this section renders the lands in question ratable and
that in Ex parte Kilcoy Shire Council (1967) QWN 26
, Sheehy J. was right in
rejecting an argument that the latter part of the section in some way
qualifies, affects or cuts down the
words of the first part. However it was
submitted that legislature, in enacting the section, intended to compensate
the Kilcoy Shire
Council for the loss of rate revenue arising from the
compulsory alienation of a considerable portion of valuable ratable land, and
a dictum in Ex parte Kilcoy Shire Council (1967) QWN at p 48 was cited in
support of this argument. When the Act of 1959 was enacted
it must have been
apparent to the legislature that by reason of the construction of the dam and
the devotion of the lands to the
purposes thereof the local authorities in
which the lands were situated - including the Esk Shire Council and the Kilcoy
Shire Council
- might lose considerable revenue from rates unless special
legislation were enacted. In the absence of such legislation the lands
fall within one of the exemptions contained in pars. (c) and (d) of s. 24 (1)
(i) of the Local Government Act, 1936 (Q.) as
amended and if so they would not
be ratable. The legislature dealt with this question by s. 12 of the Act of
1959 and declared that
the lands are to be ratable. However it did not go
further and provide a new basis for their valuation. It is not correct to say
that s. 12 would have no effect, or only a nominal or illusory effect, if it
rendered the lands in the first schedule ratable but
did not affect the method
of their valuation. On no view could the lands in the first schedule be
regarded as having little or no
ratable value. Only parts of the lands were
submerged; the balance - the emergent land - retained its value, and in many
cases probably
increased considerably in value because of the increased
availability of water. There is no justification for giving to the words
12 a meaning other than their plain and natural meaning. It would be the
merest speculation to say that the legislature intended
to provide that the
submerged lands should be valued as if they had not been inundated. Section
12, properly construed, has nothing
to say in relation to the question how the
lands are to be valued for rating purposes; it does no more than render them
If Sheehy J. intended to suggest to the contrary in Kilcoy Shire
Council (1967) QWN 26 he was in error. (at p53)
17. On behalf of the Valuer-General, some reliance was placed on the Somerset
Dam Catchment Area Declaratory Act, 1974 ("the Act
of 1974"). That Act was
apparently enacted to resolve disputes between Brisbane City Council and
lessees from the Council of some
of the lands described in the first schedule
to the Act of 1959. The scheme of the Act of 1974, broadly stated, is to make
City Council solely liable for rates on all the lands (see s. 3,
whose words are however badly chosen), to ensure that lessees are
to pay Brisbane City Council anything on account of rates levied in respect of
submerged lands (s. 4), to give consequential
relief to lessees (ss. 5-7) and
to provide a method for the apportionment of rates between submerged and
emergent lands. For the
last-mentioned purpose, s. 8 (1) and (2) provide as
"(1) In any case where, in the absence of agreement on the issue, it
becomes necessary (for the purpose of giving effect to
this Act) to ascertain
what part of a rate made and levied or paid in respect of land within the
Somerset Dam Catchment Area in relation
to a particular period shall be
apportioned to submerged land and what part of such rate shall be apportioned
to other land, such
apportionment shall be carried out as prescribed by this
section and according to the formula -
- - - x R - where -
The factor 'UVSL' is the unimproved value of the submerged land in
question at the time the rate to be apportioned was made and levied;
the factor 'UVWL' is the unimproved value of the whole of the land in
respect of which the rate to be apportioned was made and
levied at the time it
was made and levied;
the factor 'R' is the amount of the rate to be apportioned;
the unimproved values referred to in the formula are those ascertained by
the Valuer General subject to this Act.
(2) The amount ascertained according to the formula prescribed is the part
of the rate that shall be apportioned to the submerged
land in question.
The part of the rate that shall be apportioned to the land in question
other than submerged land is the amount equal to the difference
between the
whole rate made and levied in respect of the land in question and the amount
ascertained according to the formula prescribed."
Section 9 (1) provides that the unimproved value in the factor "UVWL" shall be
the unimproved value for the purposes of the Act.
Section 9 (2) then makes the
following provision as to the unimproved value in the factor "UVSL":
"(2) For the purpose of ascertaining the unimproved value in the factor
'UVSL' referred to in section 8 the Valuer-General
is hereby authorised and
required to ascertain the unimproved value of the submerged land at the
material time as if such land were
a separate parcel and without regard to the
fact or extent of inundation of such land by the waters of Somerset Dam
(defined in The
City of Brisbane (Water Supply) Act of 1959) at the material
By s. 10 provision is made for a revaluation of the submerged land in certain
circumstances; in making any such revaluation the Valuer-General
is required
to comply with s. 9 (2). (at p55)
18. These provisions are designed to regulate the relationship between
Brisbane City Council and its lessees, and they do not prescribe
any method of
valuation for purposes other than those of the Act of 1974. But in the
argument put on behalf of the Valuer-General
it was sought to use them in the
following way. The fact that to ascertain the factor "UVSL" it is necessary to
value the submerged
land on the assumption that it has not been inundated
suggests that a similar assumption was expected to be made when the whole of
the land was valued for the purpose of ascertaining the factor "UVWL", for
otherwise the formula in s. 8 would appear likely to give
a distorted result.
Section 9 (1) requires "UVWL" to be ascertained by reference to the valuation
made under the Act. Therefore it
was submitted that the legislature, in
enacting the Act of 1974, gave recognition to the principle that an ordinary
valuation under
the Act should be made on the assumption that the submerged
land was not inundated, and that in that way the Act of 1974 throws light
the meaning of the Act of 1959. However in my opinion the Act of 1974 does not
provide any clear indication either of the meaning
of the Act of 1959 or of
the policy of the legislature with regard to the method of valuation of the
submerged land. The reason why
the submerged land is to be valued on a
notional basis in arriving at "UVSL" for the purpose of the Act of 1974 is
that s. 9 (2)
of that Act so provides. If under the ordinary principles of law
applied by the Valuer-General in making a valuation for the purposes
Act, or under the special provisions of the Act of 1959, the submerged land
should be valued on a notional basis, it would
be unnecessary for s. 9 (2) to
require it to be valued on that basis. The very provisions of s. 9 (2), on
which this argument of
the Valuer-General is founded, suggest that the
submerged land should be valued in its actual state unless special provision
to the contrary. The provisions of the Act of 1974 do no more than
provide arguments pro and con as to the pre-existing law, and
do not resolve
the question. I am unable to regard the Act of 1974 as providing a guide to
the meaning of the Act of 1959 or the
effect of the earlier law. (at p55)
19. For these reasons I hold that no error of law has been shown in the
conclusions of the Land Appeal Court that neither the water
nor the dam was an
improvement, and that the lands should be valued in their actual state; on the
contrary I agree with those conclusions.
However it was then submitted on
behalf of the Valuer-General that even if the Land Appeal Court was correct in
reaching those conclusions
its ultimate decision, that the appeal should be
allowed and that the submerged land should be valued at $1 per acre, was
in law, because there was no evidence that the valuation of the
Valuer-General was excessive in amount, or that the submerged land
had a value
of $1 per acre. As part of this argument it was said that Brisbane City
Council had not displaced the presumption created
by s. 13 (7) of the Act as
to the correctness of the valuation, or discharged the onus cast on it by s.
21 (3) and (5) of the Act.
20. Section 13 (7) of the Act provides as follows:
"Any and every valuation, or alteration of the valuation, of any land
made, or purporting to be made, under this Act by the
Valuer-General shall be
deemed to be correct until proved otherwise upon objection or appeal or until
altered or further altered
pursuant to a provision of this section."
The argument based by the Valuer-General on this provision was, first, that
the valuation which is presumed to be correct is the
figure arrived at as a
result of the process of valuation - the unimproved value in dollars and cents
- and, secondly, that in order
to displace the presumption it is not enough to
show that an error in principle was made by the Valuer-General in arriving at
value, because the valuation, though unsoundly based, might nevertheless
not be excessive. The word "valuation" is used in the Act
in shifting senses,
and, as was said in Kilcoy Shire Council v. Brisbane City Council
[1971] HCA 19
; (1971) 124
CLR 60, at p 67
, it "covers both
the activity of assessing value and the
reduction of that assessment to written form".
However, I accept that in
least includes the amount of the valuation, and that there is a
presumption that the value
in money terms shown by
the Valuer-General
notice of valuation is correct. The question then is whether a court on appeal
is bound to accept the Valuer-General's
as correct unless it is
positively established that the true value is lower, or whether
it is enough
to show that the value
was reached
as the result of an error in principle. In
my opinion once it is shown that in making
the valuation the Valuer-General
a wrong principle, or made a serious error of fact, the presumption
created by s. 13
(7) is rebutted. It is true that
the Valuer-General
coincidence reach the right result by a wrong process of reasoning,
cannot attribute to the legislature
the capricious
intention that a valuation
shown to have been erroneously made should be
presumed correct simply because
by mere chance
the Valuer-General
may have hit on the right figure. If, for
example, lands were valued
as suitable for high rise city buildings
the law forbad
them to be put to that use, or as rich agricultural land when
fact they had been rendered useless by excessive
salinity, it would
absurd to hold that the valuation, although shown to be radically
wrong, still
must be deemed correct. In my
opinion once it is
shown that a valuation was
made by a method fundamentally erroneous
the presumption is rebutted. In the
case the presumption
of correctness was rebutted once it was held that
the submerged
land should be valued in its actual state and
state in which the Valuer-General had valued it. (at p57)
21. Section 21 (3) of the Act, so far as it is material, provides as
"An appeal under this section shall be instituted by filing in the Land
Court registry a notice of appeal.
Such notice shall state the grounds of appeal and the appeal shall be
limited to the grounds so stated, and the burden of proving
any and every such
ground shall be upon the owner.
Such notice shall also state the amount which in the opinion of the
appellant should be the valuation of the subject land."
Since, under s. 21 (5), an appeal to the Land Appeal Court is a rehearing, the
same burden of proof must apply. By s. 21 (7) -
"Upon an appeal under this section the Land Court or, upon the
re-hearing of any such appeal, the Land Appeal Court may -
(a) Affirm the valuation appealed against; or
(b) Reduce or increase the amount of that valuation to the extent
necessary in its opinion to determine the same correctly under, subject to,
and in accordance with this Act,
The effect of these provisions is that an owner on appeal to the Land Appeal
Court has the burden of proving the grounds of his appeal,
but not the burden
of proving that the amount which in his opinion should be the valuation is
correct. Obviously the Court, if it
allows an appeal, may determine the
valuation at an amount different from that for which the owner contends. The
argument on behalf
of the Valuer-General was that, once the valuation of the
Valuer-General was rejected, there was no evidence as to the value of the
submerged land. The case stated that the evidence of value called by Brisbane
City Council was confined to the emergent land and
the evidence of value
called by the Valuer-General was rejected. Therefore, it was submitted, there
was no evidence to support the
valuation of one dollar per acre put on the
submerged land by the Land Appeal Court, and indeed no evidence that the value
submerged land in its actual state, as part of a dam, was less than its
value in the notional state as grazing land. There was therefore,
it was said,
no evidence to support the decision which was accordingly erroneous in law.
22. In discussing whether there was evidence sufficient to support the
decision both parties referred to and relied upon the analysis
of the evidence
contained in the reasons for judgment of the Land Appeal Court. It is
customary to annex the reasons for judgment
to the case stated and convenient
to do so, to enable the matter to be properly understood. If the reasons
revealed an error of law,
no doubt the Full Court would be entitled to correct
that error, even if it would not otherwise have appeared from the case stated.
However in my opinion it is impermissible to regard the reasons for judgment
as a statement of the facts or as a statement of the
evidence. (at p58)
23. In Reg. v. Rigby (1956) 100 CLR, at pp 150-151 the Court said:
"Upon a case stated the court cannot determine questions of fact and it
cannot draw inferences of fact from what is stated
in the case. Its authority
is limited to ascertaining from the contents of the case stated what are the
ultimate facts, and not the
evidentiary facts, from which the legal
consequences ensue that govern the determination of the rights of parties. The
question may
be one of the relevance of evidence and then the nature of the
evidence becomes in a sense an ultimate fact for the purpose of that
But that is not a common case . . . "
Similarly it would seem that if the question is whether there is any evidence
to justify a particular finding it is permissible to
set out in the case all
the evidence on the point (which would become in a sense an ultimate fact for
the purpose of the question).
Such a course would not entitle the Full Court
to consider questions of fact arising on the evidence; it would be limited to
considering
whether there was any evidence to support the finding. But that
course was not taken here; the case stated does not set out all the
and we are asked to infer from the case stated and the reasons for judgment
what the evidence was. The Court is not entitled
to draw any inferences from
the case stated, and still less from the reasons. The submission now under
consideration must fail because
it does not appear from the case stated that
there was no evidence to justify the conclusion of the Land Appeal Court. (at
24. Even if it had been shown in the case stated that there was no direct
evidence as to the value of the submerged land in terms
of money it would not
have followed that the decision of the Land Appeal Court was erroneous in law.
Since it would be unsatisfactory
to decide this appeal simply because the case
stated did not contain sufficient material, it may be assumed for the purposes
of argument
that the reasons for judgment did set out all the relevant
evidence. Clearly the Land Appeal Court was entitled to hold that the
submerged land had some value for the purpose of water supply and recreation.
One valuer, Mr. Jones, said that he was not competent
to assess a value and
that he knew of no comparable values that he could use for the purpose.
However he did value the marginal land;
his figures, which the Court adopted,
ranged from $4 per acre to $25 per acre for the dry emergent land, and from $1
per acre to
$15 per acre for the marginal land. It would seem to have been a
legitimate if not a necessary inference that the value of the submerged
was less than that of the marginal land. Mr. Conroy took the matter no
further. Thus the Court had evidence of the nature and
uses, possible and
actual, of the submerged land, of the fact that there appeared to be no
comparable sales, and of the value of
adjacent but more valuable land.
Brisbane City Council had discharged the onus of proving the grounds of its
appeal, for it had shown
that the Valuer-General had valued on an incorrect
basis; the Court therefore could not affirm the valuation appealed against.
Court then had to form its opinion as to the value of the submerged land
on the material before it. In Raja Vyricherla Narayana Gajapatiraju
Divisional Officer, Vizagapatam (1939) AC 302, at pp 312-3 , Lord Romer,
delivering the judgment of the Privy Council,
"But sometimes it happens that the land to be valued possesses some
unusual, and it may be, unique features, as regards its
position or its
potentialities. In such a case the arbitrator in determining its value will
have no market value to guide him, and
he will have to ascertain as best he
may from the materials before him, what a willing vendor might reasonably
expect to obtain from
a willing purchaser, for the land in that particular
position and with those particular potentialities."
The fact that no valuer had expressed an opinion as to the value of the
submerged land in dollars and cents did not mean that there
was no evidence on
which a valuation could be made. In these circumstances the conclusion reached
by the court was not erroneous
in law. (at p59)
25. The final submission on behalf of the Valuer-General was that the Land
Appeal Court was wrong in saying that it could do no
better than proceed on
the assumption that the only value the submerged land would have to a
hypothetical vendor (apart from the
additional value that the availability of
water gave to the emergent lands) would be a figure at which the owner and
Brisbane City
Council as hypothetical purchaser would come together. It was
submitted that there was a possibility that other hypothetical purchasers
might exist. The Court appears to have been saying no more than that the
highest and best value of the submerged land was for the
purposes of a dam
controlled by Brisbane City Council. As flooded land it obviously could not be
used for grazing or agriculture,
but it was adapted for use as the catchment
area of a dam, and it seems to have been a proper inference that in its actual
this was its greatest potential. If the land was reasonably capable
of being put to other and more profitable use in the future,
the fact that it
could only be used as a dam at the date of the valuation would not mean that
it should be valued as land capable
only of the latter use: see the Raja Case
(1939) AC, at p 313 . But there was no likelihood that the land would cease to
be flooded,
and there were no potentialities to be taken into account other
than those to which the Court adverted. (at p60)
26. The first of the questions, which the Full Court did not answer, was
somewhat obscurely phrased. It seems to have been intended
to ask whether the
Land Appeal Court, in determining the value of the land, should have taken
into account, or given more weight
to, the fact that Brisbane City Council
derived revenue by way of water rates from the distribution and use of some of
in the dam. It was not argued before us that the Court was wrong in
this respect. (at p60)
27. For these reasons I hold that it has not been established that the
decision of the Land Appeal Court was erroneous in point
of law. It may
perhaps be added that the Valuer-General appears to have made his valuation on
the basis which he considered had received
judicial approval in Ex parte
Kilcoy Shire Council (1967) QWN 26 . It was of course right for him to follow
that decision while it
stood. It is however not clear that Sheehy J. intended
to decide that the submerged land should be valued as if it had not been
If that was his view he was in error. And as has already been
indicated Sheehy J. was wrong in assuming that in enacting the Act
of 1959 the
legislature intended to compensate the local authorities concerned for loss of
revenue by way of rates. The Act of 1959
is silent on the question how the
submerged land should be valued and we cannot speculate what the legislature
might have done had
it directed its attention to that question. (at p60)
28. I would allow the appeal and would set aside the judgment of the Full
Court and in lieu thereof would order that each question
in the case stated be
answered, "No". (at p61)
STEPHEN J. I agree that this appeal be allowed for the reasons stated by
Gibbs J. and that the order should be in the form prepared
by his Honour. (at
MASON J. I am in general agreement with the reasons for judgment which have
been prepared by Gibbs J. (at p61)
2. Accordingly, I would allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the
Full Court. In lieu of that judgment I would order that
each question in the
case stated by answered in the negative. (at p61)
MURPHY J. I agree with Gibbs J.'s conclusions and generally agree with his
reasons. (at p61)
2. The history of the case (with its successive upsets) shows that some of
its difficulties have been caused by the procedure for
appeal by case stated
from the Land Appeal Court. The lengthy argument in this appeal concerning the
effect of the case stated illustrates
the disadvantage of that procedure.
Except in very simple cases, it generally introduces complications which
obscure the real points
to be decided. Whatever its theoretical merits, in
practice it is one of the worst legal techniques. Invoking the stated case
generally results in a legal snarl. Sometimes this is due to
careless statement of the case, but often it happens because even with
is not easy to predict which findings an appellate court will consider
necessary or relevant. (at p61)
3. The appeal should be allowed and the questions answered "No". (at p61)
AICKIN J. I have had the advantage of reading the reasons for judgment of
Gibbs J. with which I am in complete agreement. I would
therefore allow the
appeal and set aside the judgment of the Full Court and in lieu thereof order
that each question in the case
stated be answered, "No". (at p61)
Appeal allowed with costs. Judgment of the Full Court of the Supreme Court
of Queensland set aside and in lieu thereof order that:
(1) the questions in the case stated be answered as follows -
(a) Was the Land Appeal Court in error or mistaken in law in the extent to
which it took into account the fact that the Brisbane
City Council, as a water
authority, derived revenue from the distribution and use of some of the
impounded water of the dam, held
by and within the subject dam and the subject
parcels of land?
Answer: No.
(b) Should the Land Appeal Court have held that the submerged parts of each
parcel of the subject parcels had a minimum unimproved
value as grazing land?
Answer: No.
(c) Was the Land Appeal Court in error or mistaken in law in not regarding the
concrete structure of the dam, and the impounded waters
held by it spreading
over each of the subject parcels, as improvements which ought to have been
notionally removed to arrive at the
proper unimproved value of each parcel?
Answer: No.
(d) Having regard to the state of the evidence and the relevant onus of proof,
was the Land Appeal Court in error or mistaken in
law in the determining the
value of the submerged lands at $1 per acre?
Answer: No.
(e) Was the Land Appeal Court in error or mistaken in law in the method which
it adopted in the determination of the unimproved values
of each of the 8
disputed parcels?
Answer: No.
(f) Having regard to the state of the evidence and the relevant onus of proof,
was the Land Appeal Court in error or mistaken in
law in disturbing the
Valuer-General's reduced determinations as set out in par. 18 hereof?
Answer: No.
(2) Brisbane City Council recover against the Valuer-General its costs of the
appeal to the Full Court of the Supreme Court to be
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter