Master Builders Australia Ltd - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Joinery and Building Trades Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 993 (24 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
Master Builders Australia Ltd
(AM2009/123)
JOINERY AND BUILDING TRADES AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 24 DECEMBER 2009
This decision concerns an application by Master Builders Australia Ltd (MBA) to vary the
Joinery and Building Trades Award 2010
with respect
to reimbursement of apprentice fees, first aid allowances and superannuation.
In its application, MBA proposed three variations to the award:
1. Amend cl.13.12 – apprentices – to add “in respect of their apprentice training”, so that cl.13.12 would
“Apprentices attending technical colleges, schools, registered training organisations or TAFE institutions and presenting reports
of satisfactory progress must be reimbursed all fees paid by them in respect of their apprentice training.”
2. Amend cl.32.2(b) - payment for period of annual leave
to delete the reference to “first-aid allowances” in the fourth line and to add the word “applicable” before
“allowances” in the third line, so that cl.32.2(b) would read:
“Subject to clause 32.2(c), the wages to be paid must be worked out on the basis of what the employee would have been paid under
this award for working ordinary hours during the period of annual leave, including applicable allowances, loadings and penalties
paid for all purposes of the award and any other wages payable under the employee’s contract of employment including any overaward
3. Amend cl.27.4 – superannuation - to include BUSS(Q) as a default fund.
The variation concerning reimbursement of apprentice fees was directed to ensuring that fee reimbursement is limited to fees in respect
of apprentice training. It was not opposed by the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU). This was the intended
effect of the provision. The variation proposed makes that intention clear. The award will be varied as sought.
With respect to payment for annual leave, cl.32.2(b) is intended to reflect the entitlement in cl.30.7 of the
National Joinery and Building Trades Products Award 2002
to payment of “the wages which would ordinarily accrue to the employee during the currency of the leave.” The CFMEU opposed
the variation. It submitted that the first aid allowance is a weekly allowance which should be included as part of the ordinary rate
for annual leave purposes.
We think the provision could be clearer. We will vary cl.32.2(b) to add the word “applicable” before “allowances”.
Rather than remove “first aid allowance”, we will add the words “if applicable” immediately after them. The
amended clause will read:
“Subject to clause 32.2(c), the wages to be paid must be worked out on the basis of what the employee would have been paid under
this award for working ordinary hours during the period of annual leave, including applicable allowances, loadings and penalties
paid for all purposes of the award, first aid allowance, if applicable, and any other wages payable under the employee’s contract
of employment including any overaward payment.”
Finally, we will add BUSS(Q) to the list of default funds in cl.27.4. It is named in the Queensland
Building Products, Manufacture and Minor Maintenance Award - State 2003
and the application was not opposed by the CFMEU.
BY THE COMMISSION:
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code A, PR992197>
No downloadable files available