PI-Design AG [2018] ADO 2 (21 February 2018)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Request
for examination of design number 201515424 (registered design number 365096) in
the name of PI-Design AG.
Adrian Richards
REPRESENTATION:
Kate Andean of Banki Haddock Fiora
Examination of a design under
Designs Act 2003
considered – design new
and distinctive over the prior art base – examination certificate to
14 October 2015, PI-Design AG (‘the Owner’) filed an application
seeking registration of a design (‘the Design’)
(Cth) (‘the Act’). The Design was entered on the
Register of Designs (‘the Register’) on 6 November 2015
following particulars:
Product name
Design number
Registration
Statement of Newness and Distinctiveness
The visual features of the coffee maker depicted in the representations that
are new and distinctive are the shape and/or configuration
Priority date
7 May 2015 (‘the Relevant
Representations
Owner requested examination of the Design at the same time it filed its
application for registration. Because of this, immediately
after the Design was
registered it was scheduled for examination. A first examination report was sent
to the Owner on 6 January 2016,
raising a single ground for revocation based on
the Owner’s earlier Australian registered design (‘the Earlier
Particulars of the Earlier Design relevant to this decision have
been reproduced below:
Product name
Design number
Registration
Registration date
Priority date
Representations
Owner responded to the first examination report on 10 February 2016, drawing
attention to the double walled areas visible in the
Design, but this did not
result in the ground for revocation being withdrawn. Instead, a second
examination report issued on 10 March
2016, to which the Owner responded on 29
June 2016. Since the six month statutory deadline for the conclusion of
examination was
drawing near, the Owner filed a request for a hearing on 5 July
2016. The hearing request was able to be acted upon by this office
payment of the relevant fee was made on 6 September
examination was originally scheduled to be heard by me, a delegate of the
Registrar of Designs, on 22 January 2018. However, on
20 December 2017 the Owner
asked that the matter instead be decided on the papers. In response I vacated
the hearing date and, in
lieu of a hearing, set a deadline for the Owner to file
any evidence or submissions by 22 January 2018. Kate Andean of Banki Haddock
Fiora filed written submissions on behalf of the Owner on 22 January 2018, and
so the matter was ready to be decided.
Examination of the Design
of the Act states that the sole question to be answered when examining a
design is whether a ground for revocation exists under
ground for revocation relevant to the present proceedings is
—‘the design is not a registrable design’. A
design is ‘...the overall appearance of the product resulting
from one or
more visual features of the
Product, in turn,
is ‘a thing that is manufactured or hand
So far as the Act is
concerned, all designs must be ‘in relation to’ a
is a registrable design is set out in
15 Registrable designs
(1) A design is a
registrable design
if the design is new and
distinctive when compared with the prior art base for the design as it existed
before the priority date
of the design.
is convenient to explain at this point what is meant above by ‘the prior
art base as it existed before the priority date
of the design’,
particularly in relation to the Earlier Design. The starting point is the
definition of prior art base in
of the Act:
Registrable designs
prior art base
for a design (the
) consists of:
(a) designs
publicly used in Australia; and
(b) designs
published in a document within or outside Australia; and
(c) designs in
relation to which each of the following criteria is satisfied:
(i) the design
is disclosed in a design application;
(ii) the design
has an earlier priority date than the designated design;
(iii) the first
time documents disclosing the design are made available for public inspection
is on or after the priority date of the designated
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
to ss 15(2)(a)-(b) the prior art base for the Design includes all designs that
were publicly used in Australia, or were
published in a document anywhere, any
time before the Relevant Date. While many designs that fall into those two
categories are relevant
to the discussion below, it is noteworthy that the
examination reports do not assert that either of these circumstances existed for
the Earlier Design. There is no evidence that it was publicly used in Australia
before the Relevant Date and it was not registered
(and therefore published in a
document) until 24 August 2015—over three months after the Relevant Date.
The examination reports
instead rely on s 15(2)(c). Each of the elements of
s 15(2)(c) has been satisfied. The Earlier Design was filed under the
claims a priority date two
months earlier than the Relevant
and was registered (which
rendered it available for public inspection under s 60 of the Act) after
the Relevant Date.
The Earlier
Design is therefore in the prior art base for the Design.
to the notion of registrable designs,
of the Act goes on to define a
‘new’ design and introduces in broad terms what it means for a
design to be
‘distinctive’:
Designs that are identical or substantially similar in overall
(1) A design is new unless it is identical to a design that forms part of the
prior art base for the design.
(2) A design is distinctive unless it is substantially similar in overall
impression to a design that forms part of the prior art
base for the design (see
section 19).
these limbs to ‘registrable design’, whether a design is new will
always represent the lower bar. It serves only to
invalidate designs that are
the same as an instance of prior art. Since the Design is not identical to the
Earlier Design I have
no hesitation finding that the Design is new. This
examination turns on whether the Design is substantially similar in overall
to the Earlier Design.
of the Act sets out the
considerations in making this
assessment:
19 Factors to be
considered in assessing substantial similarity in overall impression
(1) If a person is required by this Act to decide whether a design is
substantially similar in overall impression to another design,
the person making
the decision is to give more weight to similarities between the designs than to
differences between them.
(2) The person must also:
(a) have regard
to the state of development of the prior art base for the design; and
design application in which the design was disclosed included a statement (a
statement of newness and distinctiveness
) identifying particular
visual features of the design as new and distinctive:
particular regard to those features; and
(ii) if those
features relate to only part of the design—have particular regard to that
part of the design, but in the context
of the design as a whole;
(c) if only
part of the design is substantially similar to another design, have regard to
the amount, quality and importance of that
part in the context of the design as
a whole; and
(d) have regard
to the freedom of the creator of the design to innovate.
(3) If the design application in which the design was disclosed did not include
a statement of newness and distinctiveness in respect
of particular visual
features of the design, the person must have regard to the appearance of the
design as a whole.
(4) In applying subsections (1), (2) and (3), the person must apply the
standard of a person who is familiar with the product to
which the design
relates, or products similar to the product to which the design relates (the
standard of the informed user
now turn to discussing these factors.
Discussion of
The informed user
Owner submits that the informed user is a person familiar with coffee makers.
That submission is to the point, but could do with
some unpacking for the
purposes of the discussion that follows. While the product name for the Design
is ‘a coffee maker’,
a person familiar with the product shown in the
representations would readily identify it as something more specific. There are
methods commonly used to prepare coffee, and it is immediately apparent
that the Design bears the visual features of a type of filter
coffee maker known
as a ‘pour-over’, of the non-electric variety, and one that includes
a decanter (as opposed to decanting
directly into a drinking vessel). In
operation its conical neck is fitted with a filter, which is then packed with
ground coffee
beans, hot water is poured over the grind and the beverage
collects in the chamber below.
a person familiar with coffee makers, the pour-over style would stand sharp in
contrast to, for example, an espresso machine.
The visual differences between
the two would signal differences both in methods of preparation and the
qualities of the beverage
produced. Despite their contrast, the informed user
would still regard both as coffee makers, and so as similar products. An
user would resort to picking out smaller differences in order to
distinguish between two pour-overs than a pour-over and an espresso
since in the latter comparison visual differences will invariably be more
pronounced than in the former. I therefore focus
my attention below on
non-electric pour-over coffee makers, whilst bearing in mind the diversity that
exists among coffee makers
in general.
statutory requirement that the standard be on the basis of familiarity with the
product (or similar products) typically will lead
to a comparison ‘based
upon a careful and deliberate visual
inspection’,
a fleeting or casual comparison of the [representations] or some
recollection”’.
Prior art base
appreciation of the state of development of the prior art base is a central
concern of the assessment of distinctiveness. The prior
art base can aid in
assessing other
factors, particularly in gaining an understanding of
the freedom of the creator to innovate. It also directly informs the degree
which differences in visual features will influence overall impression of the
design in comparison. As a general proposition,
when the prior art base is well
developed smaller differences will generally be seen by the informed user as
conferring a distinct
impression.
The opposite is true
for an underdeveloped art base—greater differences would be required to
achieve the same effect.
Owner has provided an array of Google image search results for the phrase
‘pour over coffee maker’. The search was
conducted about a month
before the date of this decision, and no attempt has been made to restrict the
results to before the Relevant
Date. These images are of no assistance at this
point since they are not shown to be in the prior art base. I do however return
them when discussing the freedom of the creator to innovate below.
examination searches conducted for the Design also include a set of Google image
coffee brewer’ and
restricted to the period of 6 May 2013 to 6 May 2015. Such a search on its own
will not return coffee makers
made of materials other than glass, nor will it
necessarily show examples of relevant prior art given names other than
This is not to intimate that the examination was
deficient. According to the file many other keyword searches were conducted, but
only these results were attached.
these limitations, three things are apparent from this collection of images from
the prior art base. Firstly, at the Relevant
Date there were many types of
coffee maker, and from within the subset of non-electric pour-over coffee makers
there was a diversity
of visual features. Secondly, whether looking at coffee
makers in general or only the non-electric pour-over subset, at the Relevant
Date there existed a rather crowded prior art base, and so the significance of
smaller differences between the Design and the Earlier
Design should be
carefully weighed when assessing the overall impression of each. Finally, there
are no examples in the prior art
that incorporate double walled glass.
Freedom of the creator of the design to innovate
shape and configuration of a pour-over coffee maker is dictated in some respects
by its functional requirements. The upper area
that houses the filter and coffee
grounds must both approximate the shape of the filter (that is, at least
internally, conical).
Since the device relies on gravity, the filter area also
must be positioned above the decanter into which the brewed coffee gathers.
Another essential element of this type of product is a means of safely
transferring the hot liquid into a drinking vessel. In the
case of the Design
and the Earlier Design, this has been accomplished by way of a handle opposite
to a pouring lip. A handle is not
the only way to achieve this, however. An
alternative method that appears many times in both prior and post art involves
a collar of thermal insulation, such as cork, around the vessel. Some
examples from the post art are set out below.
remainder of the visual appearance of this category of coffee maker is less
dictated by function than by market expectations.
By way of contrast, an
electric pour-over coffee machine tends to be bulkier since they incorporate a
housing for a cold water reservoir
and various electrical componentry, such as
in the below examples.
non-electric variant instead typically has a small footprint, as exemplified by
the Design and the Earlier Design. This is possible
due to the simplicity of its
operation. Looking at the examples of prior and post art, it seems that a
majority of the consumers
of this type of product are likely to prefer a
commensurately simple design. A smaller remainder of consumers would instead
something more visually complex (if perhaps a little more challenging to
Amount, quality and importance of the
similarities
Owner has quite rightly conceded that the similarities are many, noting that the
real issue for determination ‘is essentially
whether the double-wall
feature of the Design is sufficient to render it substantially different to the
[Earlier] Design in overall
impression.’ The ‘amount’ of
similarity is therefore rather large, though I hasten to add that a great
of the Design is executed in double walled glass—a point I return
to in my summation below.
other two elements, quality and importance, are informed by the above discussion
on the freedom of the creator to innovate. The
general impression conveyed by
the conical area above a decanter is to be discounted to a significant degree.
The quality and importance
of these visual features accord more to the essential
features of this product than of design considerations. The slimness and
of the designs in comparison can also be seen as being influenced by
market demand. So to the handle, since it is the more common
out of a few
possible solutions to the need to pour hot liquid from the product into a
drinking vessel.
above is intended to be overstated. Market expectations and functional
requirements of this type of product at most give a
general guideline to how
this product will be shaped and configured. The prior and post art show great
variances out there that still
fall within those general guidelines.
summarise, there are large and rather obvious areas of similarity. This is
tempered (albeit very modestly) by the fact that the
quality and importance of
those areas of similarity are not absolute.
Statement of newness and distinctiveness
Owner notes that both the Design and the Earlier Design include a statement of
newness and distinctiveness (‘SoND’)
that claims the visual features
of shape and configuration, and submits that as a result ‘it is the shape
and configuration
of each as a whole that must be considered.’ This
conclusion is correct, though I would like to dispel two inaccuracies in
premises that led to it.
both designs bear only the three dimensional features of shape and
configuration, as opposed to pattern and ornamentation,
which are usually two
dimensional. It would be impossible to pay regard in either design to visual
features other than shape and
configuration, since they do not exist.
where an instance of prior art happens to be an earlier registered design with a
SoND, that SoND is not relevant to the
examination of a later filed design. This
is because the SoND associated with an earlier design does not form part of the
base. The prior art base consists only of
As has been covered
above, a design is ‘the overall appearance of the product resulting from
one or more visual features of
associated paperwork.
nothing turns on any of this in the present case.
Section 19(2)(b)
requires me to pay particular attention to the features mentioned in the SoND.
The SoND seeks to emphasise the shape and
configuration of the Design, and the
representations of the Design show only shape and configuration. The result of
this is that
the SoND doesn’t have much of an effect, if any, on the
overall impression of the Design.
Similarity in overall impression
the above discussion, the factors of
of the Act do not firmly point in
one direction or the other. On the one hand, the amount of similarity between
the Design and the
Earlier Design is great. The Design resembles the Earlier
Design so much that were it not for the differentiation that is the double
feature, I would have simply concluded that the Design was not new. On the other
hand, the state of the prior art base is such
that it can generally permit
smaller details to form the basis for a finding of distinctiveness. The freedom
of the creator to innovate,
and related concepts of the quality and importance
of the similarities also support the Owner’s position, but only
marginally.
The ultimate decision remains finely balanced.
coming to a conclusion it is helpful to recall that that the assessment is a
side-by-side comparison, from the point of view of
the informed user, who would
readily resort to noting smaller features to distinguish between two
non-electric pour-over coffee makers.
In that vein, the Owner has provided
noteworthy pair of images showing a different design for the product using a
single wall beside
to an image of the Design. These are reproduced
images show two examples of the product as it might appear in use after brewing
a batch of coffee. While this is something extra
to what is shown in the
representations of the Design, this particular something would not be far from
the mind’s eye of the
informed user. In the above image of the Design, it
can be seen that the coffee, crema and condensation assume the shape of the
wall, serving to accentuate the visual effect of its double wall feature.
The transparency of the double wall gives an illusion that
the fluids it
contains are floating. I agree with the Owner’s submission that this is
‘an intriguing design feature and
a point of interest’.
double wall also provides more insulation than a single wall, so this visual
feature communicates to the informed user that there
is likely to be a
functional difference between the Design and the Earlier
mentioned above in relation to the amount of similarity, the double wall covers
a significant proportion of the Design. It is also
readily appreciable from any
angle, and as such it contributes significantly to the overall appearance of the
Design is obviously related art to the Earlier Design. But, despite its
similarity to the Earlier Design in a great number of
respects, I am on balance
satisfied that the double wall feature in the Design grants it a substantially
different overall impression
to the Earlier Design.
find that no grounds for revocation have been made out for the Design. As a
result, examination of this design has been completed,
and I direct that a
certificate of examination issue for the Design.
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and
Trade Marks and Designs Group
February 2018
Designs Regulations 2004
(Cth) reg 11.07(2).
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act 2003
15(2)(c)(i).
Designs Act
s 15(2)(c)(ii).
Designs Act 2003
15(2)(c)(iii).
Pacific International Pty Ltd v Martec Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 796
(2016) 121 IPR 1
D Sebel & Co
Ltd v National Art Metal Co Pty Ltd
(1965) 10 FLR 224
Kärcher GmbH v Jinping Zhu
[2016] ADO 3.
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act 2003
Astra/Zeneca AB
[2007] ADO 4
Kmate Pty Ltd v David Mills
RTF format (8.32 MB)
Signed PDF/A format