Complainant v The Australian Capital Territory Department of Justice and Community Safety (JACS) [2004] PrivCmrACD 5 (19 April 2004)
Complaint Determination No 5 of
Federal Privacy
Commissioner
Table of Contents
Determination No. 5 of 2004
section 52.
Parties to the
Complainant
Complainant’.
Respondent.
The Australian Capital
Territory Department of Justice and Community Safety
This determination relates to
a complaint lodged by the Complainant in December 1999 under
respondent to the complaint is the Australian Capital Territory Department of
Justice and Community Safety (JACS). It is alleged
that certain acts of JACS
interfered with the Complainant’s privacy.
I decided to investigate the relevant acts
and practices of JACS pursuant to
, being satisfied
that there was an act or practice which may have been an interference with the
the complaint received was validly made under
Background,
allegations and remedies sought
Complainant was employed by JACS and subsequently accepted a voluntary
redundancy. In late 1998 while employed by JACS, the Complainant
made a public
interest disclosure to the Australian Capital Territory Ombudsman (the
Ombudsman) under the
Public Interest Disclosure Act 1994
(ACT) (the PID
Act). The disclosure alleged that JACS had failed to enforce provisions of the
adequately in relation to offences concerning minors and associated
issues of public safety. The allegations made by the Complainant
Ombudsman were similar to allegations that the Complainant had previously raised
internally with JACS.
On 30 June 1999,
Officer A of the Ombudsman’s Office, wrote to JACS in relation to the
Complainant’s public interest disclosure.
Officer A did not identify the
Complainant. The letter said in part:
We have received a complaint under the provisions of the
Public Interest
Disclosure Act 1994
which we propose to investigate in accordance with
Ombudsman Act 1989
In order that the Ombudsman may decide what action, if any, to take on these
matters I seek your comments on the matters raised in
the complaint. I would
appreciate your reply together with a copy of any relevant documentation by 30
July 1999, in response to this letter, an officer of JACS (JACS officer),
telephoned Officer A. Officer A made a file note of
the conversation. The file
note records that in the course of the conversation the JACS officer advised
Officer A that the JACS
officer presumed the public interest disclosure was made
by the Complainant and proceeded to disclose to Officer A a range of personal
information about the Complainant. The JACS officer did not make a file note of
the conversation.
The JACS officer
telephoned another officer of the Ombudsman, Officer B, on 12 July 1999.
Officer B made a file note of the conversation
that recorded that the JACS
officer wanted to brief Officer B on the employment related issues which the
JACS officer felt contributed
to the Complainant pursuing the complaint.
The Complainant subsequently became aware
of the file notes and their contents and made a complaint to my Office.
The Complainant seeks compensation of
$20,000 and an apology in respect of loss or damage that was said to be suffered
by the disclosure.
The Information Privacy
Principles (IPPs) in
outline standards for
handling personal information that legally bind agencies.
Personal information is defined in
as follows:
information or an opinion (including information or an opinion forming part of a
in a material form or not,
ascertained, from the information
or opinion.
The question in
this complaint is whether there was an improper disclosure of personal
information. IPP 11 deals with the disclosure
of personal information and
states that:
1. A record-keeper who has possession
or control of a record that contains personal information shall not disclose the
information
to a person, body or agency (other than the individual concerned)
a) the individual concerned is reasonably likely to have been aware, or
made aware under Principle 2, that information of that kind
is usually passed to
that person, body or agency;
(b) the individual concerned has consented to the disclosure;
(c) the record-keeper believes on reasonable grounds that the disclosure is
necessary to prevent or lessen a serious and imminent
threat to the life or
health of the individual concerned or of another person;
(d) the disclosure is required or authorised by or under law; or
(e) the disclosure is reasonably necessary for the enforcement of the criminal
law or of a law imposing a pecuniary penalty, or for
the protection of the
public revenue.
2. Where personal information is
disclosed for the purposes of enforcement of the criminal law or of a law
imposing a pecuniary penalty,
or for the purpose of the protection of the public
revenue, the record-keeper shall include in the record containing that
information
a note of the disclosure.
3. A person, body or agency to whom personal information is disclosed under
clause 1 of this Principle shall not use or disclose the
information for a
purpose other than the purpose for which the information was given to the
person, body or agency.
provides that after I have investigated a complaint I may make a
determination:
dismissing the
complaint; or
finding the complaint
substantiated and making a determination
the conduct should not
continue or not be repeated;
the respondent should perform
any reasonable act or course of conduct to redress any loss or damage suffered
by the Complainant; and/or
Complainant is entitled to compensation for any loss or damage – including
injury to the Complainant’s feelings or
humiliation suffered by the
Complainant.
Investigation
The Office’s
investigation of this complaint involved the
On 14 February 2000 formally
advising the parties that I was opening an investigation into the complaint
section 40(1)
consideration
of information provided by JACS, and the Complainant and the
the respondent and the Complainant with opportunities to comment on an initial
preliminary view on the complaint on 23 August
2000, which found that the issues
raised in the complaint indicated a breach of IPP 11.1( a) and (d) and providing
two further clarifications
to the preliminary view in September 2001 and March
2003 to the respondent following changes in some aspects of the preliminary
or the reasons for the preliminary findings;
holding a hearing on 11
August 2003 affording the respondent (represented by Senior Counsel) the
opportunity to appear before me and
make submissions both orally and in writing
pursuant to
section 43(5)
considering
supplementary material provided by JACS after the hearing, including an
affidavit from the JACS officer dated 15 September
pursuant to section s
43(5) and the principles of procedural fairness, providing the Complainant with
a final opportunity to make
oral or written submissions or both on the issue of
a remedy before I finalised the determination. The reason for affording the
Complainant the opportunity to make submissions as to a remedy was because, on
the evidence before me, I was not inclined to award
compensation in the amount
of $20,000 that the Complainant was seeking for loss or damage allegedly
suffered. The Complainant decided
not to make an oral submission and did not
provide a written submission.
The Complainant alleged that
the respondent improperly disclosed personal information about the Complainant
to the Ombudsman. The
respondent does not dispute the fact the disclosure
occurred although it does dispute the details of the information disclosed.
respondent also argues that there are in fact two exceptions to IPP 11 that are
applicable – IPP 11.1(a) and IPP 11.1(d)
– both of which sanctioned
the disclosures.
Before moving to the
application of the relevant exceptions I make the following findings about what
personal information was disclosed.
Personal information
There are two sources of
evidence about what personal information about the Complainant was disclosed to
the Ombudsman; these are
the file notes made by the Ombudsman’s staff and
the recollection, including the affidavit, of the JACS officer who made the
disclosures.
I am satisfied that the file
notes made by the officers of the Ombudsman’s Office were made at, or
close to, the time at which
the conversations they refer to took
As noted above, JACS does not
dispute that personal information was disclosed. JACS also acknowledged in a
letter to me dated 18
2000 that it was unable to be precise about
the content of the discussion as there were no file notes of the conversation
the JACS officer. However, JACS has stated during the course of the
investigation that it does not agree that the file notes
by Officer A and
Officer B accurately describe what was disclosed. The JACS officer made an
affidavit under oath on 15 September
2003 setting out in detail the
officer’s recollection of the circumstances of the discussions and the
officer’s concerns
In my view the affidavit does raise some
questions about the file note made by Officer A. However, I consider that the
JACS officer’s
affidavit does not raise doubts about the substance of the
disclosures but rather corrects some details and provides further context.
discuss below my findings on each of the file notes made by the officers of the
Officer A’s file note
records that:
The Complainant had
experienced a number of personal problems at work over the last few years and
had sought a voluntary redundancy
without success
In the JACS officer’s affidavit the
officer does not dispute the disclosure of information about the
Complainant’s problems
at work. However, the JACS officer disputes that
the officer describes these as personal problems which in the officer’s
would imply something in the Complainant’s private life. The JACS
officer stated that this would not properly describe the
problems which were
relations with customers and the Complainant’s
response to performance
management that included requesting a voluntary redundancy. I find that the
JACS officer did disclose that
the Complainant had experienced a number of
problems at work and had sought a voluntary redundancy without success.
The Complainant worked as a
penciller for a bookie at racetracks for some
In the JACS officer’s
affidavit the officer expressly concedes that the officer did disclose this
information. Accordingly,
I find that the JACS officer did disclose this
information recorded by Officer
The Complainant sought permission
from JACS to hold a bookmakers
The JACS officer states that
this note is inaccurate. In support of this contention the officer sets out the
facts that the officer
considers relevant; these included that the Complainant
had sought approval to
to hold a bookmaker’s licence while
being employed by JACS. The file note does not appear to reflect the JACS
explanation. However, I am satisfied that the JACS officer did
disclose personal information about the Complainant’s racing
activities and about the Complainant’s requests to JACS in relation to the
Complainant holding a bookmakers licence.
The Complainant asked for a
voluntary redundancy when it had been pointed out to the Complainant that the
Complainant would have to
resign if the licence was
In the JACS officer’s
affidavit the officer expressly concedes that the officer disclosed that the
Complainant had asked for
a voluntary redundancy. However, the officer
clarifies that at the time the request was made the Complainant already held a
licence, and that this was obtained without first seeking JACS
permission to undertake a second job. In view of this, the Complainant
voluntary redundancy and, and when this was denied, the Complainant had no
option other than to cease operating as a bookmaker
or resign from the
Complainant’s position at JACS. I am satisfied that the JACS officer
disclosed the fact that the Complainant
had sought a voluntary redundancy and
note is inaccurate in relation to the status of the
Complainant’s bookmaker’s
The Complainant had been
refused a voluntary redundancy by JACS and then did not proceed with the licence
application
As noted above, the JACS
officer expressly concedes that the officer disclosed that the Complainant had
been refused a voluntary redundancy.
However, I am also satisfied, on the basis
of material provided by the JACS officer that the Complainant already held a
licence at the time the Complainant requested a voluntary redundancy.
I therefore find that the JACS officer did disclose that the
Complainant had
been refused a voluntary redundancy. I also find that Officer A’s file
note is inaccurate in stating that
the Complainant ‘did not then proceed
with the Complainant’s licence application’ as the Complainant
already held
a licence at this point.
The Complainant m
fielded illegally since that time
JACS officer states in the officer’s affidavit that this statement is an
inaccurate reflection of what the officer said.
The officer states that
‘the reference to ‘illegality’ presumably records imperfectly
my reference to the Complainant’s
lack of approval to field as a
bookmaker’ without approval under the
Public Sector Management Act
. I am satisfied that the JACS officer’s explanation is likely to
be accurate and I find that the officer did not say that
the Complainant
‘may have fielded illegally since that time’. However, I also find
that the JACS officer did disclose
information about how public service rules
apply to the Complainant’s activities as a bookmaker.
I find that the above disclosures amount
to a disclosure of personal information for the purpose of IPP 11(1). To avoid
of IPP 11 the disclosure must fall within one of the exceptions
contained in IPP 11. JACS has submitted that the disclosures fall
exceptions in IPP 11.1(a) and IPP
IPP 11.1(a) permits the
disclosure of personal information where ‘the individual concerned is
reasonably likely to have been
aware ... that information of that kind is
usually passed to that person, body or agency’.
Set out in the Office’s Plain
English Guidelines to Information Privacy Principles 8-11
(pp. 39-43)
issued in November 1996 are factors that I might take into account in deciding
when the individual concerned ‘is
reasonably likely to be aware’ of
a particular disclosure. These factors include the relationship that the person
has with the agency; the occupation and life experience of the person
and their previous actions. I also conclude that I can consider
the relevance
of the personal information for the purpose for which it was disclosed.
In this case, the Complainant was, at the
time of the disclosure, an experienced employee of JACS and the
Complainant’s duties
included inspection of liquor licenses. The
Complainant had been through a number of other grievance and complaint
processes, including
with the involvement of external bodies.
A reasonable person in this position
– that is a person with reasonable familiarity with grievance and
investigation processes,
who was making a public interest disclosure about a
matter that had previously been raised internally – would, be
‘reasonably
likely to be aware’ that JACS would disclose
information in discussions with the Ombudsman, even if, as in this case, the
Complainant’s name had not specifically been mentioned
Ombudsman’s staff.
In my view, a
reasonable person in the Complainant’s position would have been reasonably
likely to be aware that JACS might
disclose some personal information and this
information could include the identity of the Complainant and the fact that the
Complainant
had previously made the same complaint internally to JACS. As such,
I find that IPP 11.1(a) permitted JACS to disclose personal
information about
the Complainant’s identity and the fact that the Complainant had
previously made the same complaints internally.
The other information the JACS officer
provided was about a series of disputes, grievances and complaints between the
Complainant
and JACS on matters to do with the Complainant’s work with
JACS, the Complainant’s working relationship and the Complainant’s
outside interests in bookmaking. In my view, these points were not
intrinsically related to the public interest complaint which
was about the way
that JACS enforced the provisions of the
in relation to offences
concerning minors and associated issues of public safety.
JACS argued during the course of the
investigation that these disclosures were intended to demonstrate that there
were factors in
the Complainant’s history that were relevant to the
Ombudsman in considering if the PID complaint might be ‘frivolous
vexatious’, in accordance with section 17(1)(a) of the PID Act or in
similar terms in
section 6(1)(b)
Ombudsman Act 1989
(ACT) (Ombudsman
I have therefore considered whether
a reasonable person with a history with JACS similar to that of the Complainant
would have been
‘reasonably likely to be aware’ that personal
information of that kind would usually be passed to the Ombudsman to establish
that the complaint was frivolous or vexatious.
In my view, an individual would require a
detailed understanding of the Ombudsman’s legislation to have been
reasonably likely
to be aware that JACS might disclose information that went to
whether the PID complaint was ‘frivolous or vexatious’.
satisfied that a person in the Complainant’s position would have had such
a detailed understanding. As such, I find
that IPP 11.1(a) did not permit JACS
to disclose any personal information beyond that which I earlier found was
permitted, namely
information about the Complainant’s identity and
previous complaints.
I note here that
Australia’s privacy law is not intended to provide an absolute right to
other public interests, including the
Ombudsman’s role in promoting proper administrative practice. I recognise
and similar roles cannot operate without a flow of information.
However, the law does not say that individuals give up all rights
to privacy in
this context.
agencies in a position of responsibility in relation to personal information and
requires them to recognise that it can cover
very sensitive matters that can
have considerable impact on individuals concerned, even when the disclosure is
authorised.
For the reasons set out
above I find that IPP 11.1(a) permitted JACS to disclose personal information
identity and that the Complainant previously had
made the same complaints internally. However, IPP 11.1(a) did not permit the
of the other information, as listed in Officer A’s file note,
relationship with JACS.
IPP 11.1(d)
IPP 11.1(d) permits the
disclosure of personal information where the disclosure is ‘required or
authorised by law’.
JACS contended
that the disclosure of personal information about the Complainant was authorised
sections 6(1)
Ombudsman Act
and section 17(1) of the PID Act.
Section 9(4)
Ombudsman Act
that ‘subject to this Act the Ombudsman may for the purposes of this Act,
obtain such information from such persons,
or make such inquiries, as he or she
thinks fit’. This provision authorised JACS to respond to the
Ombudsman’s request
for comments.
However, in my opinion the authority given
by this provision is not unrestricted. Any disclosure of personal information
circumstances should be limited by a test of relevance. Without a test
of relevance IPP 11 would be rendered nugatory as any general
provision that
provides authority to gather information would, in theory, permit the disclosure
of virtually unlimited and unrelated
personal information.
The Ombudsman’s request for
information was couched as follows:
In order that the Ombudsman may decide what action, if any, to take on these
matters I seek your comments on the matters raised in
the complaint. I would
appreciate your reply together with a copy of any relevant documentation.....
In the first instance, JACS
was being asked to comment on the ‘matters raised in the complaint’
and to provide ‘a
copy of any
(my emphasis)
documentation’. Significantly, the Ombudsman’s letter did not name
the Complainant, or seek information
seek information about whether the complaint may have been frivolous or
I am not suggesting that it
would be improper or irrelevant to raise any matter that was not referred to
directly in the request for
comment. However, I do consider that the question
of relevance is one I can take into account in deciding if a particular
is authorised by law.
that it will not always be clear to an agency responding to a request from the
Ombudsman, particularly in the early stages
of an investigation what sort of
information will be relevant to the request. It is also the case that taking
too narrow a view
of relevance in responding to a request for information from
the Ombudsman or other regulator could impede the important work of
regulator and for this reason be contrary to the public interest.
As noted above, JACS argues that the
disclosures were made to alert the Ombudsman to the possibility that the PID
complaint may have
been frivolous or vexatious or not made in good
Section 17(1) of the PID Act and
section 6(1)(b)(i)
Ombudsman Act
give discretion to the proper authority
(in this case the Ombudsman) to decline to investigate a PID that is frivolous
or vexatious.
Section 17(1) of the PID Act
(1) A proper authority may decline to act
on a public interest disclosure received by it if it considers--
(a) that the disclosure is frivolous or vexatious.
Ombudsman Act
a complaint has been made to the ombudsman with respect to action taken by an
agency, the ombudsman may, in his or her discretion,
decide not to investigate
the action or, if investigation has commenced, decide not investigate the action
(b) if, in the opinion of the ombudsman--
(i) the complaint is frivolous or vexatious or was not made in good
It was not entirely clear
from the Ombudsman’s correspondence as to whether the investigation was
under the PID Act, the
Ombudsman Act
or both. I have therefore, for
completeness, considered both
alternatives.
In this case, the letter from
the Ombudsman asked for information as follows:
In order that the Ombudsman may decide what action, if any, to take on these
matters I seek your comments on the matters raised in
the complaint.
accept that this request for comment includes comment on issues relating to
whether or not the PID should be ‘declined’
‘frivolous, vexatious or not made in good faith’ as it indicates
that the Ombudsman may decide not to take any
action in relation to the
The JACS officer states in the
officer’s affidavit that the officer’s intention in making the
officer’s comments
Ombudsman in relation to the sections mentioned above.
There is no record in Officer A ’s
file note that this intention was specifically discussed and Officer A advised
in May 2000 that the Officer did not consider at the time that JACS
officer’s comments were such a submission.
I note Officer B’s file note does
state that ‘it was not clear to me how the motivation for making a
complaint affected
the substance of a matter’.
The then Ombudsman has since advised that
he considers that the comments made by the JACS officer could constitute a
submission about
whether the Complainant’s complaint was frivolous or
I find that the JACS officer
intended, by the officer’s comments in relation to the Complainant, to
persuade the Ombudsman not
to take any action in this matter.
However, the issue in the present case is
whether the personal information disclosed by JACS went beyond what was relevant
Ombudsman in deciding whether to decline to investigate the matter
To answer this question it is
necessary to consider the meaning of the expressions ‘frivolous or
vexatious’ and ‘in
good faith’ so as to determine what
personal information was and was not relevant to the decision to be made by the
Counsel for JACS and Counsel
Assisting in this matter referred me to a number of authorities concerning what
is meant by ‘frivolous
or vexatious’ and ‘frivolous, vexatious
or not made in good faith.’ For example, in
Aspar Autobarn
Co-operative Society v Dovala Pty Ltd
(1987) 16 FCR 284
at 287 the Federal
Court considered the meaning of vexatious to mean: ‘instituted without
sufficient grounds
for the purpose
of causing trouble or annoyance to the
defendant’.
Magenta Nominees Pty Limited
[1999] FCA 152
(1999) 161 ALR 458
, the Federal Court stated as
The terms "vexatious" and "frivolous" have been used interchangeably (
Atlantic Star
[1974] AC 436
at 464-468). "Frivolous" has been held to be
apt to describe proceedings in which the Plaintiff's claim is so obviously
that it cannot possibly succeed (
Burton v Shire of Barnsdale
[1908] HCA 57
(1908) 7 CLR 76
at 92). "Vexatious" has been held to be apt to describe an
action which is a sham and which cannot possibly succeed (
Wills v Earl
(1856) 11 PD 59
I am of the
view that the expression ‘frivolous, vexatious or not made in good
faith’ (the broader of the two formulations
relevant here) requires a
consideration of objective elements (namely the merits of the claim) and
subjective elements (namely whether
or not the claim was brought for an ulterior
purpose of causing trouble or
annoyance).
The question that Counsel
Assisting has suggested I should ask is: ‘did the JACS officer go too far
in the provision of personal
information to the Ombudsman for this
Counsel Assisting has
further submitted as follows:
While it might be
accepted that it was relevant for the JACS officer to identify the Complainant
and advise that the Complainant had
previously made the same complaint
internally to JACS, was it relevant to advise that the Complainant has been in
dispute with JACS
over aspects of employment? Was it relevant to advise that
the Complainant has unsuccessfully sought a voluntary redundancy, or
Complainant had worked as a penciller, or that the Complainant had sought
permission to hold a bookmaker’s licence?
Was it relevant to advise that
JACS were suspicious that the Complainant had "fielded illegally"?
I am satisfied that the JACS
go too far in the provision of personal information to the
Ombudsman. I find that it was not relevant to go into details of the
between the Complainant and JACS over aspects of the Complainant’s
employment. I find that it was not relevant to
advise that the Complainant had
unsuccessfully sought a voluntary redundancy, or that the Complainant had worked
as a penciller,
or that the Complainant had sought permission to hold a
bookmaker’s licence. Nor do I find it was relevant to advise that
were suspicious that the Complainant had "fielded
illegally".
It is not necessary for me to
make a finding as to the reason why this information was provided. It is enough
that I find that this
information was not relevant to the question of whether or
not the PID was ‘frivolous, vexatious or not made in good faith’
therefore was not authorised by law under IPP 11.1(d). Consequently, I find
that JACS breached IPP 11.1 by disclosing personal
information about the
Complainant.
circumstances, I find that it was not relevant to the question of whether the
Complainant’s public interest disclosure
was frivolous or vexatious for
JACS to disclose detailed information about the Complainant’s background
and the Complainant’s
working relationship with JACS and accordingly the
disclosure of this personal information was not authorised by IPP 11.1(d).
Determination
The issues in this complaint
go to some difficult issues of judgement for agencies that are both responsible
for protecting the privacy
of their employees and customers and that also have
an obligation to cooperate with the important work of a range of regulators.
In my view this case highlights the need
for agencies to think about these issues before they are faced with the need to
make decisions
In accordance with
section 52(1)(b)(i)(B)
, I find the Complainant’s complaint that the
Complainant’s privacy has been interfered with substantiated and I declare
that JACS has engaged in conduct constituting an interference with the privacy
of the Complainant by disclosing personal information
the Ombudsman’s Office that was not authorised by IPP 11.1(a) or IPP
11.1(d) and that JACS should
not repeat such conduct.
The Complainant submitted that the
appropriate remedy for JACS’ breach of the Complainant’s privacy was
a letter of apology
from the JACS officer and financial compensation of $20,000.
The Complainant claimed that the JACS officer’s actions damaged
Complainant’s reputation and effectively ended the Complainant’s
career with the Public Service.
relation to compensation, I note that the disclosures that occurred were to two
staff of the Ombudsman’s Office. The disclosures
did not occur outside
the confines of the investigating team of that Office and were not known more
widely in that Office or in the
community. For these reasons, the Complainant
was not able to demonstrate to my satisfaction that the Complainant suffered the
alleged in the complaint. For this reason I have decided not to make a
declaration as to compensation.
respondent in this matter is JACS, and not the JACS officer, I am unable to make
an order that specifically requires that the
JACS officer apologise to the
Complainant. However, I declare, in accordance with
section 52(1)(b)(ii)
, that JACS should apologise to the Complainant for disclosing the
Complainant’s personal information that was not relevant
Ombudsman’s investigation of the Complainant’s PID complaint.
Malcolm Crompton
Federal Privacy
Commissioner
Dated 19 April 2004
Before I discuss this question
further I note that in its submission of 15 September 2003, prepared by Counsel
appearing for JACS
queries whether I will be forming the view that the JACS
officer acted from a ‘base’ motive in disclosing personal
information
note here that I did not consider whether the JACS officer was
motivated by any
ill feeling towards the Complainant.
No downloadable files available