Nematian and CEO, National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA 2439 (14 November 2025)
Nematian and CEO, National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA
2439 (14 November 2025)
Applicant: Khadija Nematian
Respondent: CEO, National Disability Insurance Agency
Tribunal Number: 2024/2565
Tribunal: General Member A Shelley
Place: Canberra
Date: 14 November 2025
The Tribunal sets aside the decision under review and in substitution decides
that the applicant satisfies the access criteria in
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
.............[SGD]..................
General Member A Shelley
NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME – access criteria –
disability requirements – whether impairments are likely
to be permanent
– substantially reduced functional capacity – decision set aside and
substituted
Legislation
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant) Rules
National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Getting the NDIS Back on
1) Act 2024
Administrative Review Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions
1) Act 2024
Drake and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
Mulligan v National Disability Insurance Agency
[2015] FCA 544
Nika and National Disability Insurance Agency
[2021] AATA 2127
National Disability Insurance Agency v Foster
[2023] FCAFC 11
Garcia Albiol and National Disability Insurance Agency
[2024] AATA
Foster and National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS)
[2025] ARTA
National Disability Insurance Agency v Lampard
[2025] FCAFC 139
King and CEO, National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS)
[2025] ARTA
Statement of Reasons
issue in this application is whether Mrs Nematian (the
become a participant in the National Disability Insurance Scheme
applicant sought access to the NDIS on 25 October 2022. In the application form,
her treating general practitioner, Dr Khashaiar
Shekarchi, identified that she
had major depressive disorder with an adjustment disorder leading to
fibromyalgia, cervical radiculopathy,
and a bilateral knee meniscal tear and
23 October 2023, a delegate of the Chief Executive Officer (
National Disability Insurance
determined that the applicant did
not meet the criteria to access the NDIS. The applicant sought review, but on 22
March 2024 the
decision was affirmed by a different delegate of the CEO.
23 April 2024, the applicant applied to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
) for review of the decision.
14 October 2024, all matters on-hand with the AAT transferred to the
Administrative Review
. Under the transitional provisions in the
Administrative Review Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions No.
1) Act 2024
, anything done in relation to the proceeding before 14 October
2024 is taken to have been done by the Tribunal.
matter proceeded to a hearing on 15 and 16 September 2025. I had before me:
Exhibit 1: a
joint hearing tender bundle (
) comprising:
applicant’s documents numbered A1 to A12,
respondent’s documents numbered R1 to R4,
documents (which are documents produced under summons by treating providers)
numbered O1 to O7.
Exhibit 2: the
documents produced to the AAT under section 37 of the
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1975
T‑documents
, numbered T1 to
applicant gave evidence through an interpreter in the Farsi language. The
Tribunal also heard from Mr Mateusz Miszczuk, who is
an occupational therapist.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
criteria that a person must satisfy to become a participant of the NDIS are set
out in section 21 of the
National Disability Insurance Scheme
, which provides (emphasis added):
(1) A person meets the
access criteria if:
(a) the CEO is satisfied that the person meets the
age requirements
(see section 22);
(b) the CEO is satisfied that, at the time of considering the request, the
person meets the
residence requirements
(see section 23);
(c) the CEO is satisfied that, at the time of considering the request:
(i) the person meets the
disability requirements
(see section 24);
(ii) the person meets the
early intervention requirements
section 25).
summary, if the person meets both age requirements and residence requirements,
it is necessary for the Tribunal to determine whether
the applicant meets
the disability requirements in section 24 of the Act or the early
intervention requirements in section 25 of the Act.
24 and 25 of the Act were amended with effect from 3 October 2024.
Section 126 of the
National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment
(Getting the NDIS Back on Track No.
1) Act 2024
has the effect that the
legislation in force before 3 October 2024 (set out below, where relevant)
applies where a person requested
access to the NDIS before 3 October 2024, as
the applicant.
209 of the Act empowers the responsible Minister to make rules, called the
National Disability Insurance Scheme rules. Section
27 of the Act provides that
the rules may prescribe methods or criteria to be applied, or matters that may,
must, or must not be
taken into account, or circumstances in which a matter is
taken to exist or not exist in relation to a person, for the purposes of
determining whether the disability requirements and early intervention
requirements are met. Relevantly, the rules that have been
made for that purpose
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Becoming a Participant) Rules
Agency has published operational guidelines for the purposes of interpreting and
applying the law. The T-documents include a guideline
headed ‘Applying to
the NDIS’, which is relevant to this
application.
The Tribunal is not
bound to apply government guidelines but will usually do so unless there are
cogent reasons not to.
have considered whether the applicant meets age and residence requirements, then
whether she meets the disability requirements,
and finally whether she meets the
early intervention requirements.
CONSIDERATION
Does the applicant meet age and residence requirements?
22 of the Act provides that a person meets the age requirements if the person
was aged under 65 when the access request was
made. The applicant is now 52
years of age. I am satisfied that the age requirements are met.
23 of the Act requires that a person resides in Australia and is an Australian
citizen or holder of a particular type of visa.
The Agency apparently verified
through Centrelink, in connection with its decision of 23 October 2023, that the
applicant met the
requirements,
and there is no
suggestion that that is not the case. I am satisfied that the residence
requirements are met.
Does the applicant meet the disability
requirements?
24 of the Act provided (before 3 October 2024):
(1) A person meets
the disability requirements if:
(a) the person has a disability that is attributable to one or more
intellectual, cognitive, neurological, sensory or physical impairments
person has one or more impairments to which a psychosocial disability is
attributable; and
(b) the impairment or impairments are, or are likely to be, permanent;
(c) the impairment or impairments result in substantially reduced functional
capacity to undertake one or more of the following activities:
(i) communication;
(ii) social interaction;
(iii) learning;
(iv) mobility;
(v) self‑care;
(vi) self‑management; and
(d) the impairment or impairments affect the person’s capacity for
social or economic participation; and
(e) the person is likely to require support under the National Disability
Insurance Scheme for the person’s lifetime.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an impairment or impairments that
vary in intensity may be permanent, and the person is likely
to require support
under the National Disability Insurance Scheme for the person’s lifetime,
despite the variation.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (1), an impairment or impairments that are
episodic or fluctuating may be taken to be permanent,
and the person may be
taken to be likely to require support under the National Disability Insurance
Scheme for the person’s
lifetime, despite the episodic or fluctuating
nature of the impairments.
(4) Subsection (3) does not limit subsection (2).
applicant submits that she should be granted access to the NDIS by reference to
impairments resulting from a number of medical
conditions, identified in the
applicant’s statement of facts, issues and contentions (
major depressive disorder, post‑traumatic stress disorder, generalised
anxiety disorder, a risk of schizophrenia, fibromyalgia,
and chronic neck and
respondent’s statement of facts, issues and contentions (
comparison, identifies the applicant’s conditions as major depressive
disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, fibromyalgia,
osteoarthritis, cervical
and lumbar spondylosis and bilateral knee
criteria in subsection 24(1) are cumulative, which means that the test in each
of paragraph (a) to (e) needs to be satisfied for
the disability requirements to
be met. The applicant’s position is that each of the tests is met. The
respondent says that
the criteria in paragraphs (b), (c) and (e) are not made
(a) Does the applicant have disability attributable to impairment?
the applicant meets the first requirement is not in dispute. The respondent
accepts that the applicant has impairment arising
from ‘fibromyalgia,
osteoarthritis, lumbar spondylosis and bilateral knee deformity resulting in
chronic pain, as well as major
depression disorder and
is, though, a need for some precision about what impairments the applicant
experiences, in order for the subsequent criteria
to be fairly examined.
applicant gave evidence that she had suffered from osteoarthritis, fibromyalgia,
a disc problem in her back, spinal stenosis,
migraine, tennis elbow, a recent
tear in the pelvic area and, recently, an inflammatory problem affecting her
hip. The applicant,
though, professed to having a poor memory and had
significant difficulty accurately recalling dates in the course of giving
so I do not take that list to be exhaustive or any substitute for what
is put in the ASFIC.
better list, which tends to ‘cover the field’ of the
applicant’s diagnoses, if not her impairments, is in a
report of Dr
Khashaiar Shekarchi, general practitioner, dated 20 September
Dr Shekarchi identified the
following diagnoses and impairments:
Bilateral knee
deformity and pain due to meniscal tear and joint early arthritis, causing
difficulty with walking and chronic pain
which affected sleep
Cervical spinal
disc herniation with nerve impingement and radiculopathy, which caused neck
pain, radiculopathy and arm numbness,
affecting daily activities and sleep
Lumbar disc
herniation with radiculopathy, causing back pain, radiculopathy, limping and
Bilateral elbow
bursitis and epicondylitis causing bilateral elbow pain and restricted range of
movement due to pain
Major depressive
disorder causing poor sleep, crying, anger, loneliness and avoidance of social
Anxiety and
adjustment disorder causing stress, poor sleep, heart palpitations, fear and
lack of confidence
Chronic migraine
causing headaches, nausea and loss of concentration during
Dermatitis and
psoriasis causing skin changes, itchiness and small joint disease
Bilateral wrist
carpal tunnel syndrome causing wrist pain and numbness, particularly at
fibromyalgia causing chronic pain, poor sleep and depression
A bilateral heel
spur and feet deformity causing pain and tendonitis in the feet, despite
is more detailed information in the evidence about some of those conditions from
treating medical specialists and allied health
practitioners. For example, in a
report dated 22 May 2024,
Attai, psychologist, said the applicant had been receiving counselling and
treatment for her psychological illness, which
was consistent with
post-traumatic stress disorder and major depressive disorder. Mr Attai described
the applicant’s current
problems and symptoms as including:
functioning which had impacted her social interaction, communication and
psychosocial development,
reduced memory
and concentration,
self-esteem and self-confidence,
depressed mood,
low motivation and lethargy,
limited family
and social support, and
disturbances.
a report dated 14 November 2024,
Associate Professor Ana Ananda, rheumatologist, said she had seen the applicant
since 2022. The applicant had fibromyalgia and chronic
pain syndrome, as well as
cervical spondylosis and nerve root compression requiring C5/6 discectomy and
fusion, osteoarthritis affecting
the knees, lumbar spondylosis, depression,
chronic migraines, bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and elbow epicondylitis. Her
resulted in diminished cognitive function, widespread joint and soft
tissue pain, emotional distress and social isolation.
Shekarchi’s list does not mention hip pain, but I accept the
applicant’s evidence that she suffers from hip pain, and
it is likely to
have commenced since Dr Shekarchi’s report.
accept, in general terms, that the applicant experiences long-term major
depression (the diagnosis, including whether there is post-traumatic
disorder, is not a significant issue), a constellation of musculoskeletal
problems with chronic pain, and migraines. As her
treating practitioners have
set out, those problems collectively cause – amongst other things –
impaired cognition, mood
and motivation, impaired sleep, difficulty with
walking, and joint pain at numerous anatomical sites. I am satisfied that she
a disability attributable to impairments and impairments to which a
psychosocial disability is attributable.
have not addressed the applicant’s skin condition beyond this point. It is
not identified in any terms in the ASFIC and is
not a particular subject of
discussion in the medical evidence before the Tribunal. It is uncontentious to
observe that dermatitis
is not a condition that would often result in
significant impairment or disability for the purposes of the NDIS.
(b) Are the impairments likely to be permanent?
relation to whether an impairment is permanent or likely to be permanent, the
Rules provide:
5.4 An impairment is, or is likely to be,
permanent (see paragraph 5.1(b)) only if there are no known, available and
appropriate evidence-based
clinical, medical or other treatments that would be
likely to remedy the impairment.
5.5 An impairment may be permanent notwithstanding that the severity of
its impact on the functional capacity of the person may fluctuate
or there are
prospects that the severity of the impact of the impairment on the person's
functional capacity, including their psychosocial
functioning, may improve.
5.6 An impairment may require medical treatment and review before a
determination can be made about whether the impairment is permanent
or likely to
be permanent. The impairment is, or is likely to be, permanent only if the
impairment does not require further medical
treatment or review in order
for its permanency or likely permanency to be demonstrated (even though the
impairment may continue
to be treated and reviewed after this has been
demonstrated).
5.7 If an impairment is of a degenerative nature, the impairment is, or
is likely to be, permanent if medical or other treatment would
not, or would be
unlikely to, improve the condition.
have set out the evidence about the applicant’s psychosocial impairments
(from her major depressive disorder), physical impairments
fibromyalgia and musculoskeletal conditions) and neurological impairments (from
her migraines) separately. I have borne
in mind, though, that the conditions are
somewhat inter-related.
Psychosocial impairments
applicant’s conditions are longstanding. She was born in Iran to a
Bahai’i family, where she suffered systemic discrimination.
She left for
Turkey and migrated to Australia in about 1999. She married a Bahai’i man
in Australia and had 2 children. The
relationship with her husband was
conflictual and marked with reported domestic violence. They separated in about
2016 and divorced
in 2019. The family breakdown resulted in a strained
relationship with the applicant’s now adult
Progress notes from
her regular general practice indicate that the applicant first attended on
21 February 2012 and gave a history
of suffering from depression for 7
years and been taking antidepressant medication Lovan (fluoxetine) for 5
Depression is a feature
of many subsequent progress notes, often in connection with family issues and
domestic violence.
7 June 2012,
Dr Fiona Denton,
clinical psychologist, said she had seen the applicant the previous day, and she
reported low mood, loss of pleasure
in life, sleeping difficulties, tearfulness,
lack of motivation and social withdrawal. Dr Denton said the applicant’s
appeared to be contributed to by her isolation (the applicant had few
friends and mostly stayed home), sleeping during the day instead
of at night,
and poor communication within her marriage.
13 December 2012,
reported that the applicant had improved her sleep patterns and energy, but her
mood remained low, and she had not attended
appointments (involving cognitive
behavioural therapy) frequently enough for them to be of maximum benefit. The
applicant was concerned
15 May 2013,
Dr Denton said that
recent sessions with the applicant had focussed on helping her adjust to the
physical experience she experienced
from fibromyalgia and migraines. A worsening
of migraines, which the applicant experienced most days, significantly affected
mood and motivation.
a report dated 17 August 2013,
Dr Richa Rastogi, psychiatrist, said:
She describes improvement in
her relationship with her husband whom she identifies [as] having anger issues
ad sought counselling
which has helped to improve their relationship. Her onset
of depression was related to dealing with his anger issues and some physical
violence directed towards her and further relapses [occurred] in context of
pregnancies as well as battling with recent diagnoses
of fibromyalgia and
chronic pain. Her pain is under good control since being on current medications
but pain worsens with minimal
Her current symptoms include [a] constant state of emotional lability,
intolerance to situation and irritability, increased agitation,
headaches, feeling hopeless, worthless and sense of failure despite [that] the
relationship [has] improved with [her] husband
and he [is] being very supportive
in her management. Her sleep, appetite, concentration and motivation are
impaired with pervasive
sense of sadness and anhedonia. ... She has been
socially isolated and avoids social situations with limited social functioning
is restricted by chronic headaches. She also experiences nervous anxiety
when going out and constant arguments initiated by her due
to loss of control
and feeling stressed by parenting needs.
She has trialled Aropax in the past for a period of 3 years since 2002 and
then has been maintained on Lovan to date. She describes
withdrawal symptoms of
[a] physical nature when she has tried to withdraw from Lovan.
Rastogi prescribed Cymbalta and recommended introducing Seroquel with graded
a report dated 10 November 2015,
Dr Tracey Fay, psychiatrist, recorded that the applicant’s depression had
worsened in the previous 12 months. The applicant
attributed her depression to
interpersonal problems with family. She was taking duloxetine (Cymbalta). She
had tried a number of
antidepressants over the years but found that, while
initially effective, the benefit tended to plateau. She was seeing a
psychologist.
Dr Fay recommended an interpersonal approach to psychotherapy
to broaden and strengthen the applicant’s social ties, and moving
duloxetine to venlafaxine.
7 November 2016,
the applicant
was admitted to hospital with worsening depression in the context of a marital
breakdown, which had happened in July.
Her children were, at that stage, living
with their father. The hospital recorded that the applicant was taking
venlafaxine and had
been on 3 different SSRI medications before that. She had
been seeing a psychologist regularly but had started cancelling appointments
she was not improving. The applicant reported crying every day and having no
motivation or energy. The applicant was admitted
on a crisis basis but
discharged the next day.
the applicant had 10
sessions with Dr Farangis Houshmand, psychologist. Dr Houshmand said that the
applicant was seen for chronic,
anxiety, depression and relationship issues.
Despite psycho-intervention and cognitive behavioural therapy, the
applicant’s
prognosis was poor and she was ‘struggling
significantly.’
a report dated 19 August 2019,
Mr Massoud Amani, psychologist, said that the applicant was suffering with
depression and panic attacks. Her separation and family
issues negatively
influenced her social life, development and self-esteem. She required ongoing
psychological support.
a report dated 28 August 2019,
Dr Susheel Manambrakkat, psychiatrist, said the applicant presented with
significant anxiety and depressed mood. She had headaches
when stressed. There
was a history of panic attacks but not in the previous 4 months. The applicant
had tried at least 4 different
antidepressant medications without benefit.
Dr Manambrakkat prescribed Lexapro (escitalopram) and Serenace
(haloperidol), which had
nightmares and insomnia.
a report dated 2 September 2020,
Mr Amani said he had seen the applicant since June 2019. She had symptoms
consistent with post-traumatic stress disorder and major
depression. Mr Amani
was providing cognitive behavioural therapy and interpersonal therapy. He said
All available treatments which could alleviate the impairment
of functioning for these conditions have been undertaken without any
improvement. Ms Nematian’s mental health impairment on daily life is
likely to be permanent, and it will require the assistance
of another person on
most daily tasks or assistance equipment to support her daily life. Extra
demanding mental activity at this
stage increases the level of stress and it
affects her mental health negatively due to her condition.
At this stage, Ms Nematian is not fit for any extra stress either physical or
mental which could increase her stress levels and affect
her mental health
negatively. I believe she needs long‑term treatment in order to recover
from her Depression, Anxiety and
Domestic Violence. Ms Nematian obviously needs
psychological intervention in order to cope with her current situation and
condition. Based on the facts regarding her mental health, I
recommend continued therapy to recover from her severe anxiety and depression.
observe there is some tension in that opinion, between the applicant’s
condition being permanent on the one hand, and the
possibly of recovery on the
letters to Centrelink dated 10 September
and 3 December
Dr Mohsen Mirzale,
psychiatrist, said the applicant had major depressive disorder in the context of
a traumatic divorce and personality
vulnerabilities. She was taking Pristiq and
Seroquel, and seeing Mr Amani (psychologist) and Dr Bina (family therapist).
said that the applicant’s condition was enduring and
unlikely to improve in the foreseeable future.
a longer report addressed to Dr Shekarchi, also dated 10 September
Dr Mirzale said the
applicant’s symptoms of depression largely came from unresolved grief
related to the end of her marriage.
She was frustrated with her relationships
with her children. Dr Mirzale recommended the applicant continue with Pristiq
from haloperidol to Seroquel.
a further letter dated 20 April
Dr Mirzale said he had
seen the applicant 3 times in 2020. She had post-traumatic stress disorder
as well as major depressive disorder.
a letter dated 28 July 2021,
Mirzale made some treatment recommendations to assist with nightmares and said
that long-term therapy would be immensely helpful.
the applicant’s NDIS application dated 25 October
Dr Shekarchi diagnosed
major depression and anxiety disorder with adjustment disorder. He identified
that treatment (identifying
a mix of physical and psychological therapies) would
be likely to substantially reduce the applicant’s impairment, including
reducing stress and anxiety.
8 March 2023,
Ms Roshanak
Vahdani, psychologist, wrote to Dr Shekarchi that she had seen the applicant for
6 sessions. She had stress and anxiety
in relation to her marriage break-up and
co-parenting arrangements.
Roshanak Vahdani, psychologist, completed an NDIS ‘evidence of
psychosocial disability form’ on 24 August
Ms Vahdani said the
applicant had major depressive disorder and fibromyalgia. She had seen
psychologists on and off for 10 years.
She had had cognitive behavioural
therapy, interpersonal psychotherapy and trauma counselling with little effect.
She had been prescribed
and taken several antidepressant medications with little
effect. The applicant remained anxious and depressed.
Vahdani made similar comments in another version of the form completed on
17 September 2023.
Vahdani’s progress notes, spanning the period 12 April 2022 to 30 November
2023 are contained in the JTB.
The applicant consistently presented with low mood. Sources of distress
reflected in the notes are mixed, but the applicant’s
relationship with
her children is a consistent theme.
late 2023 or early 2024, Ms Vahdani referred the applicant to the NSW Service
for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Torture and
Trauma Survivors
The referral
information, as it appears in the JTB, is incomplete but
Khadijeh has lived in Australia over 25 years but never
received trauma counselling in relation to trauma she experienced as a Bahai
person in Iran and then in Turkey where she was a refugee. She has had multiple
stressors throughout her life including discrimination
and abuse because of her
religion. This has affected her personality and ability to engage in
relationships. She has had PTSD and
Major depression for many years as well as
muscle-skeletal issues and Fibromyalgia. She needs regular therapy and cannot
pay for this in the private health system. I have seen her on and off
in the last couple of years in relation to family issues but
she [text cut off]
Khadijeh needs more regular therapy to help her deal with issues from the
past as a refugee and a minority in Iran as well as issues
stemming from her
marriage and separation. She has found it hard to accept this and has challenges
in relating to her children. She
needs to have regular therapy which she cannot
afford as a pensioner.
his report of 22 May 2024,
Attai said the applicant had been receiving counselling and treatment for her
psychological illness, which was consistent with
post‑traumatic stress
disorder and major depressive disorder. She had been taking psychotropic
medication for over 20 years,
including Serenace (haloperidol), Seroquel
(quetiapine), and Lexapro (escitalopram), and was currently taking Pristiq
(desvenlafaxine).
He described her condition as permanent, however noted a need
for further treatment including cognitive-behavioural therapy, acceptance
commitment therapy, mindfulness, diary entries, gradual desensitisation and
progressive muscle relaxation. The applicant had
been unable to have required
treatment over the previous few years due to access and affordability issues.
his report of 20 September 2024,
Dr Shekarchi said the applicant needed regular consultations with a clinical
psychologist and annual review by a psychiatrist. If
she was on ‘regular
treatment such as psychotherapy, consultation, physio and hydrotherapy, pain
management program, she can
live independently with less stress and
a report dated 5 February 2025,
Mr Attai maintained his opinion that the applicant had symptoms consistent with
major depressive disorder and post-traumatic stress
disorder. Her psychological
illnesses were debilitating and, in combination with physical ailments,
significantly hindered her normal
daily functioning. She required NDIS support
because she could not afford required psychological intervention.
Jacinta Kiraz, occupational therapist, reviewed the applicant and produced a
report dated 13 March 2025,
to be in support of the applicant’s application to be a participant in the
NDIS. Ms Kiraz noted the applicant’s
various diagnoses and
Taken together, these complex and chronic conditions result in
significant, permanent, and non-improving impairments across both physical
psychosocial domains. Khadijah’s disabilities are not responsive to
standard treatments or rehabilitation interventions,
and she requires ongoing,
intensive, and sustained support to maintain basic functioning, safety, and
participation in daily life.
Her functional impairments substantially reduce her
ability to undertake everyday activities independently and have led to a
loss of capacity to engage meaningfully within her home and community
environments.
a report dated 16 April 2025,
Attai said that:
Ms Nematian’s illnesses and conditions are
permanent and stabilised. Ongoing treatment will not cure or remedy her
but are necessary to ensure she does not develop additional illnesses
for which she is at risk of (such as schizophrenia), and that
her illnesses are
managed and do not worsen in intensity, frequency and duration. Treatment
provides temporary relief and aims at
increasing quality of life despite her
permanent conditions.
applicant said she had last seen Mr Attai about 3 months before the hearing (so
more but had not been able to
(which she variously attributed to difficulties travelling and running out of
medicare‑subsidised
a report dated 23 April 2025,
Shekarchi said:
From a professional perspective, it is important to
note that while the recommended treatments (e.g., physiotherapy, psychotherapy,
acupuncture, etc.) can help manage symptoms and improve her quality of life,
they may not entirely cure chronic conditions such as
fibromyalgia,
osteoarthritis, or major depressive disorder. These treatments are designed to
relieve symptoms, enhance mobility,
and improve functional capacity. While they
could substantially benefit Ms. Nematian, they cannot completely eradicate the
impairments.
Miszczuk assessed the applicant in her home and provided a report at the request
of the respondent. In his report of 30 August
Mr Miszczuk suggested that
the medical consensus was that symptoms (of both physical and psychological
conditions) were likely to
persist for the foreseeable future, and treatment
would not be curative.
the issue of permanence of the applicant’s psychosocial impairments, the
says that although the
applicant’s psychiatric diagnoses are longstanding, ‘they appear to
have arisen at an acute point
in the applicant’s life (separation and
divorce 2016-2019)’. The applicant’s treating practitioners
Dr Shekarchi and Mr Attai) have made comments consistent with the
proposition that the applicant’s condition might improve
with more regular
treatment. The evidence before the Tribunal ‘does not establish the
frequency, duration and nature of therapy
sessions which the applicant has
received in order that the respondent and the Tribunal can make a proper
assessment of the evidence
as to the permanency or otherwise of the
applicant’s impairments in respect of her MDD and PTSD’.
closing submissions, counsel for the respondent said that the evidence was that
the applicant’s engagement with treatment
(for both physical and
psychological issues) was sporadic and inconsistent.
has been true at times, but a wider look at the evidence reveals that:
The applicant
has had symptoms of depression since perhaps 2005 (7 years before the earlier
evidence of treatment in the hearing papers,
in 2012). The main drivers of the
applicant’s symptoms appear to be her social isolation and her
interpersonal relationships
with family members, against a background of trauma
from events in Iran and Turkey. While the respondent is not quite correct to
point out that the applicant’s diagnoses arose with her separation and
divorce, those were clearly very significant stressors
in that context.
The applicant
has seen at least 5 psychologists: Dr Denton, Dr Houshmand, Mr Amani, Ms
Vahdani and Mr Attai. She has been treated
with cognitive behavioural therapy
and psychotherapy, amongst other interventions.
The applicant
has seen at least 4 psychiatrists: Dr Rastogi, Dr Fay, Dr Manambrakkat and
Dr Mirzale.
The applicant
has tried a number of antidepressant medications, including fluoxetine,
paroxetine, duloxetine, venlafaxine, escitalopram,
haloperidol and
desvenlafaxine, as well as quetiapine (which is an antipsychotic medication
rather than an antidepressant medication).
The treatment
that Mr Attai recommended in his 2024 report (essentially, cognitive behavioural
therapy, psychotherapy, and concentration
and relaxation techniques) are not, at
least generally speaking, new treatment ideas. The applicant has had cognitive
behavioural
therapy with a range of providers and psychotherapy with at least Ms
Vahdani, both of which – on Ms Vahdani’s account
particularly successful. Mr Attai clarified in his 2025 report that treatment
would be aimed at preventing deterioration.
accept it is the case, as Dr Shekarchi’s reports suggest, that the
applicant would benefit from more regular treatment and
has been limited to
medicare‑subsided psychological treatment in more recent years. I do not
put much weight on the opinion
contained in Dr Shekarchi’s responses
in the original form seeking access to the NDIS – while Dr Shekarchi
that a substantial decrease in impairment was likely, the form does
not facilitate the provision of any nuanced opinion about which
applicant’s various impairments might improve.
question, in all of that, is whether the applicant’s psychosocial
impairments are, or are likely to be, permanent. That
turns on whether there are
known, available and appropriate treatments, as described in rule 5.4, that
would be likely to remedy
the impairments. In my view, the evidence establishes
that there are known, available and appropriate treatments – per Mr Attai
and Dr Shekarchi, regular cognitive behavioural therapy and psychotherapy
supported by antidepressant medication and psychiatric
review – but that
the treatments would not be likely to remedy the applicant’s psychosocial
impairments.
is because the applicant has actually availed herself of recommended treatments
over a great many years. There is no suggestion
that engagement has always been
a problem (though I accept it has at times and has been a problem recently).
Nonetheless, the applicant’s
impairments have not improved over time. The
acute worsening of the applicant’s condition in 2016 has clearly not
take Mr Attai’s 2024 opinion as persuasive evidence that
psychosocial impairments are capable of being remedied ignores his
clarification that treatment will only prevent deterioration and, more
significantly, disregards the applicant’s
extensive treatment
have, below, found that the impairments resulting from the applicant’s
musculoskeletal conditions are not permanent, in the
sense required by
subsection 24(1). That raises a question as to whether, if those impairments
were remedied, the applicant’s
psychosocial impairments might improve as a
result. I do not think that is the case. The evidence is that the
applicant’s depression
predates her complaints of pain, and –
although chronic pain is a factor – to the extent that the depression has
an external
cause it has mostly been linked to interpersonal, family problems.
In fact, I note Associate Professor Ananda’s opinion that
applicant’s fibromyalgia has a psychological input, rather than the other
way around.
the applicant’s impairments are likely to be permanent is consistent with
the explicit opinions of Ms Vahdani, Mr Amani
and Dr Mirzale,
notwithstanding that each of them recommended continuing treatment of one kind
or another.
rule 5.5, this is a case where the applicant’s condition will fluctuate,
and the extent of the impact on the applicant’s
functional capacity may
improve, but her psychosocial impairments are nonetheless likely to be
follows that the requirement in paragraph 24(1)(b) is met, in relation to the
applicant’s psychosocial impairments, including
her impaired mood and
emotional regulation, sleep, social functioning, motivation and cognition.
Physical impairments
is unclear precisely how long the applicant has experienced symptoms from her
musculoskeletal or chronic pain conditions. I note
she was concerned about the
possibility of multiple sclerosis in
On 19 November 2012, she
reported that all her joints were painful and she wanted an MRI or bone
Soon after, she was
referred to a rheumatologist and a neurologist.
a report dated 15 February 2013,
Associate Professor Ananda said that the applicant reported a 5-month history of
insidious onset of generalised pain affecting the
hands, feet, shins, elbows,
forearms and shoulders. Associate Professor Ananda said the applicant had
features of fibromyalgia in
the context of depression and migraines. There were
no clinical features to suggest inflammatory arthritis. Management of the
would require an understanding of the condition, psychological input,
lifestyle factors, exercise and medication.
a report dated 7 April 2013,
trainee doctor writing on behalf of Associate Professor Ananda said that
physical examination was unremarkable. Fibromyalgia symptoms
had improved
significantly with Lyrica (pregabalin) but due to a change in Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme criteria for prescribing
Lyrica, the applicant was switched to
Neurontin (gabapentin).
a report dated 4 July 2013,
Richard Holland, rheumatology registrar writing on behalf of Associate Professor
Ananda, said the applicant was encouraged to
continue taking duloxetine
(prescribed by her psychiatrist) and gabapentin, and to commence a regular
exercise program, slowly upgrading
the level of intensity.
25 November 2013,
said he had encouraged the applicant to develop an exercise routine, which at
first could be as simple as walking around
the block twice a week. He also
suggested aqua aerobics.
a report dated 24 June 2014,
Daniel Sumpton, rheumatology trainee, said the applicant’s pain was well
controlled, her mood had improved, and her fibromyalgia
was stable. Her
‘main issue’ was that she was not exercising, and there had been a
long discussion about the benefits
of exercise for fibromyalgia, including
improvements in mood, pain and sleep.
a report dated 18 August 2016,
Dr Farhaan Altaf, orthopaedic surgeon, said the applicant had left knee pain
which had started 8 months earlier. Dr Coolican would
review her to see if she
was a candidate for realignment surgery.
a report dated 7 September 2020,
Dr Shekarchi listed diagnoses of bilateral knee deformity due to a meniscal tear
and arthritis, a cervical spinal disc herniation
with nerve impingement and
radiculopathy, a lumbar disc herniation causing radiculopathy, bilateral elbow
bursitis and epicondylitis,
chronic migraine, dermatitis and psoriasis.
a report dated 7 October 2020,
Dr Chi-Yueh Yang, general practitioner, referred the applicant to a
neurosurgeon, in connection with her cervical spine pathology.
8 November 2020,
applicant reported to Dr Yang that she was on a waiting list for Royal North
Shore Hospital ‘orthospine’.
a report dated 27 November 2020,
Associate Professor Ali Ghahreman, neurosurgeon, noted the applicant had been
referred for cervical spine pathology. She also had
lower back pain, knee pain,
migraine, depression and anxiety. Associate Professor Ghahreman recommended
injections to control symptoms
and delay surgery.
a report dated 14 December 2020, Dr Sean Suttor, orthopaedic surgeon, said the
applicant had a 4-month history of left arm and
neck pain with radicular
symptoms, on a background of chronic neck and lower back pain. Examination was
normal. Dr Sutton recommended
a left C6 nerve root injection.
a report dated 28 January 2021,
Dr Justine St George, orthopaedic surgeon, saw the applicant with bilateral knee
pain. Dr Coolican had discussed options with the
applicant and felt that the
best course of action was to refer her to the Osteoarthritis Chronic Care
), for education and exercises. Surgery would be
contraindicated in the absence of arthritis.
2 July 2021,
Associate Professor
Ghahreman said the applicant had not responded to steroid injections and
continued to have low back pain.
applicant said the same at the hearing: over the years she had had multiple
cortisol injections, including for the back, neck,
knee, elbows and shoulders.
She had not experienced any relief.
6 September 2021,
Professor Ghahreman said that taking Palexia would allow the applicant enough
pain relief to participate in an intense
core strengthening exercise program and
he had referred her to a physiotherapist to arrange that.
a letter dated 26 July 2022,
Associate Professor Ghahreman said he had referred the applicant for
transforaminal injections which the applicant was keen to have
while waitlisted
for neck surgery.
a report dated 23 September
Dr Mayuran Suthersan,
orthopaedic surgeon, said he had seen the applicant with bilateral forefoot
pain, apparently attributable to
osteophytes at the first metatarsophalangeal
joint on each foot. The applicant was waitlisted for surgery. The applicant was
to the gym at that stage.
connection with the applicant’s NDIS application dated 25 October
Dr Shekarchi
diagnosed fibromyalgia, cervical disc herniation and bilateral knee deformity.
The applicant’s treatment at that
time included physiotherapy. As above,
Dr Shekarchi thought that treatment (including physiotherapy and pain
management) would be
likely to substantially relieve the applicant’s
impairment.
a report dated 9 November 2022,
Associate Professor Ananda said (consistent with her 2013-2014 reports), that
the applicant had symptoms of fibromyalgia in the context
of depression,
migraines and social stress. There were no clinical features of inflammatory
arthropathy. The applicant was on waiting
lists for neck surgery and for bunion
surgery. Associate Professor Ananda restarted Neurontin and encouraged exercises
and lifestyle
modification.
20 January 2023,
Professor Ananda recorded that the applicant had mechanical knee pain and a
surgeon, Dr Graham, had apparently advised
knee arthroscopy and put the
applicant on a waiting list. Because of upcoming neck surgery, the applicant
would put her gym membership
on hold. Associate Professor Ananda recommended
ongoing physiotherapy exercises and told the applicant that arthroscopy was only
indicated for an unstable knee.
31 March 2023,
Professor Ghahreman certified that the applicant could use a treadmill for
19 May 2023,
Associate Professor
Ananda noted that the applicant had now had an anterior C5/6 cervical discectomy
and fusion (the anticipated
neck surgery), but it had made no difference to the
scope of time that the applicant was engaging in exercise is somewhat unclear.
She said at the hearing that she had had a few
sessions at the gym and done some
simple things like use a treadmill. She had not continued after the neck surgery
despite Associate
Professor Ghahreman recommending that she do so.
19 July 2023,
Professor Ananda noted the applicant reported ongoing pain in the shoulders,
elbows, wrists and shins. Given significant
synovitis in the wrists, the
applicant was referred for MRI scans to exclude inflammatory arthropathy.
10 August 2023,
Coolican, orthopaedic surgeon, completed an NDIS access form. Dr Coolican
diagnosed osteoarthritis in both knees. The condition
would not be lifelong
because the applicant would eventually have a knee replacement and impairments
would largely cease. She needed
physiotherapy, hydrotherapy and other treatment.
applicant told the Tribunal that despite Dr Coolican recommending a knee
replacement in 2023, she had been told more recently
that it was not an option
and she might have to wait until she was 70 years old.
16 August 2023,
Professor Ananda also completed an NDIS access form. Associate Professor Ananda
diagnosed fibromyalgia and osteoarthritis,
for which the applicant had tried a
number of medications. She had had neck surgery and physiotherapy. Like Dr
Coolican, Associate
Professor Ananda recommended physiotherapy and hydrotherapy.
a report dated 24 August 2023,
Ms Yun (Ching) Qing, physiotherapist, said that the applicant had a complex
pattern of pain involving her neck, shoulders, elbows
and low back. There was a
full range of motion in the shoulder and elbow, but reduced range of motion in
the neck. She ‘might
benefit’ from ongoing weekly physiotherapy for
complex pain.
applicant said that she had not seen a physiotherapist since seeing Ms Qing,
which she thought had happened 5 times. She had driven
herself to some of those
appointments. The physiotherapist gave her exercises, but she had not been able
to do much.
a report dated 14 September
Dr Shekarchi said the
applicant had been advised to have knee surgery for years but could not afford
the operation. She had had physiotherapy
and hydrotherapy. She had had surgery
for her spine issue. For her elbow, she needed physiotherapy, hydrotherapy,
acupuncture and
nerve stimulating therapy. For her fibromyalgia, she needed
‘regular team work’, psychology, a pain clinic, physiotherapy
exercise physiology.
nerve conduction study on 20 October
showed no evidence of focal
or generalised neuropathy or radiculopathy. The neurologist recommended a course
of physiotherapy.
2 November 2023,
the applicant
underwent a left great toe metatarsophalangeal joint fusion and
arthrodesis.
a report dated 22 November 2023,
Associate Professor Ananda noted the applicant had had left foot surgery to
correct a bunion and possibly osteoarthritis. The applicant
continued to be
troubled by widespread soft tissue pain which was out of proportion to the
degree of osteoarthritis present.
an NDIS form dated 20 April
Associate Professor
Ghahreman listed diagnoses of fibromyalgia, depression and anxiety,
polyarthropathy (affecting the shoulder,
foot and knee), spinal spondylosis
(causing lower back and neck pain, and canal stenosis), plantar fasciitis,
arthritis of the foot
and migraines. Associate Professor Ghahreman said that the
impairment would be lifelong.
said the applicant had undergone anterior cervical discectomy and fusion and
foot surgery (which appears to be for bunions), and
been treated with
hydrotherapy, physiotherapy, spinal injections, remedial massage. She was
awaiting a knee arthroscopy but would
continue to have pain from spinal
degeneration.
Professor Ghahreman recommended psychology or psychiatry, physiotherapy,
hydrotherapy, acupuncture, and assistance with
domestic activities.
26 April 2024,
Professor Ananda noted the applicant was using a crutch because of left foot
pain. She would see her foot surgeon the following
week. The applicant’s
main issue was ongoing soft tissue pain and osteoarthritis. Associate Professor
Ananda said she had re-referred
the applicant to the OACCP at Westmead Hospital
and she would benefit from hydrotherapy.
14 May 2024,
though, the
Westmead Hospital said it could not re-enrol the applicant as she had previously
attended the program in 2022-23, finishing
hydrotherapy in May 2023, and there
was no current capacity to offer the program to previous participants.
the hearing, the applicant thought she had participated in hydrotherapy more
recently than May 2023 and perhaps as recently as
December 2024. Mr Miszczuk
understood in August 2024 that she was attending hydrotherapy at that time, or
at least had done so recently.
She recalled doing some walking in water after
her November 2023 procedure. She had not explored any alternative to
hydrotherapy,
like using the local public pool.
a report dated 13 September
Associate Professor Ananda
said, against, that the applicant had widespread soft tissue pain related to
fibromyalgia and no clinical
evidence of inflammatory arthritis. She increased
the dosage of Neurontin.
27 September 2024,
Professor Ananda said:
I had a long discussion with her reassuring
her that she does not have any radiological evidence of an inflammatory
arthropathy and
this is consistent with the clinical findings and normal
inflammatory markers. She was getting confused about the intensity of her
symptoms and equating that to inflammation. I have explained to her that that is
not the case. It is imperative that she embark on
some regular exercises and
continue hydrotherapy and also address the significant stress in her life. I
have advised make more frequent
the increased Neurontin.
her report of 14 November 2024,
Associate Professor Ananda said the applicant had had treatment consistent with
best practice, but the cost of physiotherapy, hydrotherapy
and psychology had
been prohibitive. She was taken gabapentin, paracetamol and meloxicam. In Dr
Ananda’s view, regular physiotherapy,
hydrotherapy and psychological, and
some psychiatry, would collectively reduce joint pain, improve function and
improve mental wellbeing.
a report dated 22 November 2024,
Associate Professor Ghahreman said he had seen the applicant for spinal
spondylosis, but she also had polyarthropathy, neck and lumbar
pain, shoulder
pain, knee pain, and depression and anxiety. The applicant’s spinal disc
herniation and nerve root compression
had been resolved through surgery but
there was continued arthropathy limiting the applicant’s ability to carry,
cook and care
for herself. The applicant was not a candidate for further
neurological investigation. She would benefit from ongoing mental health
physiotherapy and hydrotherapy for maintenance. Associate Professor Ghahreman
noted he had previously advised the applicant
12 February 2025,
Professor Ananda said:
She was reviewed earlier than planned because
of ongoing chronic pain. Unfortunately, [the applicant] is having a hard time
to understand the connection between the depression, significant life
trauma, stress and chronic pain. She reports widespread areas
of soft tissue and
intermittent joint pain. The extra dose of Neurontin has not made a difference
to her pain. She is still on the
waiting list for the Westmead pain clinic. She
does not do any exercise and is also experiencing spasms. She has been taking
magnesium as well. ...
I have asked her to check with Westmead pain clinic when her appointment will
be. In the meantime, I have increased Neurontin to 300
mg tds. It is imperative
that she also embark on exercise. I have reduced Magnesium.
above, in his report of 23 April
Dr Shekarchi said that
recommended treatments could help manage symptoms but would not cure the
underlying conditions.
a report dated 2 September 2025,
Associate Professor Ghahreman said that the applicant had exhausted all
treatment that was reasonable for her lower back. Symptoms
were permanent and
irreversible. Lumbar spinal surgery was not advisable due to multisegmental
pathology. Associate Professor Ghahreman
suggested that the report be tendered
in this application, and he ‘strongly supported’ NDIS services for
the applicant.
respondent, in its RSFIC, said that while the applicant’s fibromyalgia and
osteoarthritis were likely to be permanent, the
evidence did not establish that
the applicant had undergone all appropriate treatment to remedy the resulting
impairments. The RSFIC
points to Dr Shekarchi’s treatment recommendations
in his 14 September 2023 report and Associate Professor Ananda’s
recommendations
for regular physiotherapy and hydrotherapy in her 14 November
2024 report.
applicant described at hearing a deterioration in her condition since a number
of the reports in evidence were generated. She
said that until about 2 years
earlier she was able to get to places that were reasonably close by, by car and
train. She had not
driven since 2024.
above, in closing submissions, counsel for the respondent drew attention to the
applicant’s sporadic and inconsistent engagement
with treatment.
the applicant is impaired by pain at a number of anatomical sites. Again, the
question arises as to whether that impairments
are, or are likely to be,
does not appear that the applicant’s impairments arise to a significant
extent from spinal pathology. The applicant’s
cervical nerve root
impingement has been remedied but her symptoms continue. Although radiology has
demonstrated degenerative changes,
those do not appear to account for the
applicant’s pain syndrome. As Associate Professor Ananda has repeatedly
said, the applicant’s
symptoms are explained by soft tissue mechanics and
not any arthropathy seen on radiology or any inflammatory arthritis. That is,
the applicant has fibromyalgia and chronic pain. The apparent lack of
improvement in the applicant’s condition following neck
consistent with Associate Professor Ananda’s diagnosis.
may be separate pathology affecting the knees (osteoarthritis), elbows
(epicondylitis) and hips (the applicant’s more
recent complaint of pain).
I accept the applicant’s evidence, which is consistent with Associate
Professor Ananda’s reports,
that a knee replacement is no longer a current
recommendation.
the proportion of neck, elbow and hip symptoms that results from pathology
demonstrable by radiology rather than fibromyalgia,
in respect of the whole
constellation of musculoskeletal/chronic pain conditions, the evidence is
consistent. The applicant needs
regular physiotherapy, hydrotherapy and
commitment to exercise. Although the applicant went to the gym for a time,
appears to have
participated in hydrotherapy at times, and saw Ms Qing for
physiotherapy in 2023, none of those things have occurred with any apparent
regularity. On Associate Professor Ananda and Dr Shekarchi’s account,
more regular psychology would also help. More than anything,
applicant’s treating specialists appear to have repeatedly expounded the
necessity for the applicant to consistently engage
in an exercise regime and,
other than what seems to be a short period attending a gym to use the treadmill,
that has not tended to
respondent’s submission here must be accepted: the medical evidence
consistently indicates that there is scope for improvement
in the extent of the
applicant’s musculoskeletal impairments if she was to engage in more
regular therapy and exercise.
note this is a different conclusion to the one I have reached in relation to the
applicant’s psychosocial impairments, despite
the applicant having
suffered from both mental health and pain symptoms for a very long time. There
are 2 principal reasons for that.
First, with the psychosocial impairments,
there is at least mixed evidence on the question of whether improvement in the
applicant’s
impairments is likely. There is more consistent evidence in
respect of the applicant’s musculoskeletal impairments that exercise
other things would help. Second, on a wide view of evidence, the applicant has
tried treatments for her mental health condition
(different antidepressant
medications, cognitive behavioural therapy and the like) that have been
unsuccessful, which suggests that
repeating that treatment would not have the
effect of remedying the impairment. For her chronic pain, though, the evidence
exercise treatment has tended to be successful, but it has not been
committed to.
find that the requirement in paragraph 24(1)(b) is not met in relation to the
applicant’s musculoskeletal and chronic pain
impairments.
Neurological impairments
applicant has complained of headaches about as long as she has been concerned
July 2019, she told her general practitioner that although she had had migraine
headaches in the past, she was experiencing
headaches of a different character.
On 17 July 2019, she was referred to neurologist Dr Elizabeth
6 October 2020,
Dr Katelaris (in
the same practice as Dr McCusker) recommended referral to a neurosurgeon for
review of spinal pathology and that
the applicant continue to take Maxalt, which
had previously been prescribed.
a report dated 10 November 2020,
Dr Ruhaida Daud, neurologist, recorded that the applicant had migraine 2 days a
week, as well as neck and back pain. Dr Daud prescribed
a report dated 22 February 2013,
Dr McCusker recorded that the applicant had been having headaches since she was
16 years old. Dr McCusker diagnosed migraine headache
and recommended strategies
to manage the problem and other further treatment if required.
26 September 2013,
Dr McCusker
said that the applicant’s headaches had improved. She thought the
applicant might have early diabetes or glucose
intolerance.
his report of 14 September 2023,
Dr Shekarchi said the applicant had seen a specialist for her migraines but
might benefit from Botox.
his report of 30 August 2024,
Miszczuk recorded that the applicant was still taking Maxalt for migraine, on an
as-required basis.
it is clear enough that the applicant continues to suffer from migraine, and
‘chronic migraine’ was one of the
many conditions identified by Dr
Shekarchi in his report of 20 September
it is not a condition
identified in connection with the applicant’s application to access the
and does not appear to
have been given much attention by the parties thereafter. It is not mentioned in
applicant bears a practical onus of placing before the Tribunal, or pointing to
material before the Tribunal, that can persuade
it that each of the access
criteria are met.
difficulty I come to, in examining whether the applicant’s neurological
impairments are, or are likely to be, permanent,
is a lack of evidence that the
applicant has undergone the available and appropriate evidence-based treatments
that would be likely
to remedy the impairment. The applicant does not appear to
have seen a specialist since about 2013 and there is no explicit discussion
reports from that time about stabilisation or prognosis. The clearest evidence
on point is that the applicant might benefit from
Botox, treatment she has not
the basis of that evidence, I do not find that the in paragraph 24(1)(b) is met
in relation to the applicant’s neurological
impairments.
summary, then, the requirements of paragraph 24(1)(b) are met, but only in
relation to the applicant’s psychosocial impairments.
(c) Do the impairments result in a substantially reduced functional
capacity to undertake one or more activities?
above, the next requirement is that the impairments result in substantially
reduced functional capacity to undertake at least one
of 6 identified
activities.
the disability requirements require that all the criteria be met in relation to
an impairment or impairments, the reference
to ‘the impairment or
impairments’ in paragraph (c) can be taken to be a reference to only those
impairments that are,
or are likely to be, permanent. That is, for reasons
above, the applicant’s psychosocial impairments. There is no use in
determining
whether the applicant’s other impairments result in a
substantially reduced functional capacity because those impairments cannot
ground access to the scheme.
the issue of substantially reduced functional capacity, the Rules
5.8 An impairment results in substantially reduced
functional capacity of a person to undertake one or more of the relevant
activities—communication,
social interaction, learning, mobility,
self-care, self-management (see paragraph 5.1(c))—if its result is
(a) the person is unable to participate effectively or completely in the
activity, or to perform tasks or actions required to undertake
or participate
effectively or completely in the activity, without assistive technology,
equipment (other than commonly used items
such as glasses) or home
modifications; or
(b) the person usually requires assistance (including physical
assistance, guidance, supervision or prompting) from other people to
participate
in the activity or to perform tasks or actions required to undertake or
participate in the activity; or
(c) the person is unable to participate in the activity or to
perform tasks or actions required to undertake or participate in the
even with assistive technology, equipment, home modifications or assistance from
another person.
5.8 operates as a deeming
That is, if any of
rule 5.8(a), (b) or (c) are made out, the person is taken to have substantially
reduced functional capacity. If
not, it remains to be determined whether the
person has substantially reduced functional capacity on the ordinary meaning of
the legislation calls for a functional, practical based assessment of what a
person can and cannot do.
the enquiry is as to what a person can do, and not what a person is prepared to
do, was discussed by the Full Federal Court
, which was handed
down shortly after the hearing in the present matter. The Court
[50] The distinction between functional capacity and
functional performance is fundamental. ... [51] It follows that the task both
for ... the ART is to maintain a distinction between a person’s
functional capacity to carry out a task or action and their
functional performance of that task for the purposes of assessing
whether s 24(1)(c) has been met. Functional performance is relevant
24(1)(d) enquiry and may be impacted by, as French SM helpfully put
“personality, personal
characteristics, and various extrinsic factors in the legal, social and built
environment”, but
that is not relevant to the s 24(1)(c) enquiry as to
‘Substantially’,
in this context, implies a high threshold for the test to be met. It is not
enough that there is a demonstrable
disability, or a reduction in functional
capacity that is less than that high
‘Applying to the NDIS’
sets out the content
of each of the 6 activities as follows:
Communicating
– how you speak, write, or use sign language and gestures, to express
yourself compared to other people your age.
We also look at how well you
understand people, and how others understand you.
Socialising
– how you make and keep friends, or interact with the community, or how a
young child plays with other children. We also look
at your behaviour, and how
you cope with feelings and emotions in social situations.
how you learn, understand and remember new things, and practise and use new
Mobility, or
moving around – how easily you move around your home and community, and
how you get in and out of bed or a chair.
We consider how you get out and about
and use your arms or legs.
– personal care, hygiene, grooming, eating and drinking, and health. We
consider how you get dressed, shower or bathe,
eat or go to the toilet.
Self-management
(if older than 6) – how you organise your life. We consider how you plan,
make decisions, and look after yourself.
This might include day-to-day tasks at
cognitive ability
to manage your life, not your physical ability to do these
I said recently in another
I am satisfied that
those are appropriate descriptions of each of the activities set out in
paragraph 24(1)(c). Those descriptions
as conceptually separate from one another. The question is whether there is
substantially
reduced functional capacity in the whole of the activity, not
whether there is a substantially reduced functional capacity to do
a particular
task or set of tasks that might form part of the
is sufficient, in order to make out the requirement in paragraph 24(1)(c),
that a person has substantially reduced functional capacity
in just one of the
6 identified activities, and so it is necessary to address each in
have set out the evidence about the applicant’s functional capacity
– particularly as it relates to her psychosocial
impairment – before
coming to look at whether there is a substantial reduction in functional
capacity in each of those 6 activity
context, in Ms Kiraz’s report of 13 March
she outlined the
applicant’s living situation as follows, which is consistent with the
applicant’s own oral evidence:
Khadijah currently lives with
her two adult children ... however, she reports a strained relationship with
both. While they remain
physically present in the home, there is minimal
communication and no practical support offered to Khadijah. She reports that her
children "are physically here, their stuff is here, but they don’t talk to
me or help me, they leave early in the morning and
return late at night”
limiting any interaction. ...
Khadijah receives the Disability Support Pension through Centrelink and has
been largely unable to maintain employment due to the
combined impact of her
mental health and chronic pain conditions. Although she attempted to engage in
the workforce following her
divorce, she was unable to sustain this due to her
disabilities. Khadijah completed Certificate III in Disability and Aged Care;
however, she was unable to complete the work placement component due to her
limited physical and emotional capacity. She also attempted
a six‑month
course for a Retail Assistant position but was unable to complete this due to
difficulty sitting or standing for
long periods and challenges with lifting.
These experiences highlight her severely limited functional capacity for
employment and
economic participation.
Khadijah reports limited informal family or community supports. Although she
has two sisters, Khadijah reports that she rarely sees
them due to their own
personal challenges, and she feels disconnected from extended family. Her
primary informal support is her niece,
Noushi, who acts as an informal carer.
However, Noushi's availability is inconsistent due to her own study and
employment commitments,
and she is unable to provide regular care. When
available, Noushi assists approximately five hours a day, 5-6 days per week,
Khadijah with essential tasks such as community access, meal
preparation, laundry, and showering. This informal care arrangement
is unstable
and insufficient to meet Khadijah’s daily care needs, particularly as
Noushi is seeking full-time employment, which
will likely reduce her capacity to
assist further.
the hearing, the applicant confirmed that she lived with her 2 children, at
least ‘on paper’ as there was little contact
between them. The
applicant has 2 sisters in Australia. Noushi is the daughter of a third sister,
who lives in Iran. The applicant
confirmed she had previously studied a TAFE
course that would enable her to work in aged care. She had felt better at that
and had sometimes driven to TAFE and sometimes taken a train.
the NDIS application form completed on 25 October
Dr Shekarchi said
applicant’s mobility and capacity for self-care were restricted due to
applicant’s capacity for socialising was impacted by stress, anxiety and
depression.
Shekarchi did not identify any substantial reduction in functional capacity for
communication, learning or self-management.
Coolican completed an NDIS supporting evidence form on 10 August
He also identified
mobility problems due to a combination of musculoskeletal problems and
fibromyalgia. As to social interaction,
the applicant had a carer helping her
with social interaction and had poor social confidence (partly related to having
limited English).
There was a need for assistance with self-care (showering and
bathing) but Dr Coolican did not identify the cause of that need.
Coolican did not identify any issue with learning or self-management. There was
a need for assistance with communication, but it
related to a language barrier
and not any impairment.
Professor Ananda completed the same form on 16 August
and gave much the same
responses as Dr Coolican. Associate Professor Ananda noted in relation to
self-management that the applicant
took on her own financial management.
Professor Ghahreman also completed the form, giving nearly identical answers to
Dr Coolican and Associate Professor
Vahdani completed an NDIS ‘evidence of psychosocial disability form’
on 24 August 2023.
Vahdani said, of the 6 activities:
interaction: the applicant cannot maintain friendships and harmonious
relationships. She gets irritated and angry easily and
finds it hard to cope
with her emotions.
Self-management:
the applicant finds it difficult to make decisions due to a high level of
anxiety. This impacts her capacity to solve
problems, particularly involving
emotional and psychosocial difficulties.
Self-care: the
applicant needs assistance with personal care due to depression and chronic pain
associated with fibromyalgia and a
neck injury. She needs help with cleaning,
cooking and attending to self-care.
Communication:
at times, the applicant can misconstrue what others say and mean, and can become
hurt easily.
Learning: poor
concentration and memory affect the applicant’s ability to learn and
practice new skills – she cannot manage
a course of study.
there are major musculoskeletal issues which affect her physical mobility.
22 May 2024,
Mr Attai said
that due to the applicant’s illnesses and lack of support she was unable
to participate in activities that would
be beneficial for her such as social
programs, community programs, skills-development programs and hobbies such as
music and painting
workshops. In a supplementary report dated 16 April
Mr Attai said there was
a substantial reduction for functional capacity in self‑care and mobility,
but was apparently not asked
a letter dated 7 September
Seyedeh Noushin Abedini
Kafshgari (Noushi, the applicant’s carer), said the applicant needed help
with personal care, domestic
tasks, appointments, medication management,
gardening and community participation.
her report of 14 November
Associate Professor
Ananda said that the applicant had depression and brain fog, which affected her
concentration and interactions
with other people. She experienced emotional
lability including crying and anger. The applicant had limited social contact
people and was stressed and lonely. She was highly stressed and
unable to interact confidently with people, which was negatively
affecting her
interactions.
her report of 13 March 2025, Ms Kiraz said:
The applicant
mobilised slowly, demonstrating a fear of falling and reduced confidence. Her
psychological symptoms, such as hypervigilance,
fear of injury and diminished
self-efficacy inhibited her capacity to mobilise safely without support. There
had been multiple falls
in the home environment. The applicant had stopped
driving due to back pain.
The applicant
was reluctant to engage in some self-care activities due to depressive symptoms
and low motivation, compounded by her
physical limitations. She had difficulty
dressing due to pain and fatigue. Sleep was significantly impaired.
The applicant
often forgot to take her medication, though that was mitigated by the
involvement of her carer. She reported significant
stress and anxiety when
dealing with financial management tasks, especially if she had to do so over the
phone. She could become
overwhelmed and unable to cope with tasks requiring
decision‑making or problem-solving.
The applicant
attempted grocery shopping with the help of her carer but faced significant
challenges doing so independently because
of psychosocial limitations. Her carer
often completed shopping for her.
The applicant
was socially isolated. She did not want to go out and preferred to remain at
behaviours. She was observed to
cry during the assessment and her frustration and anxiety were triggered by
things not going to plan.
There was impaired emotional regulation in response to
unexpected events or stress, including in social interactions. The applicant
described feeling emotionally isolated and unsupported, particularly in her
relationship with her children, who rarely interacted
with her. She had a
reduced ability to engage in healthy, supportive relationships and was socially
applicant’s psychosocial limitations were more debilitating than her
physical symptoms.
Miszczuk, in his report of 30 August
There was no
need for assistance with communication because of an impairment (like the
treating practitioners, Mr Miszczuk noted the
applicant needed an interpreter,
though she had been able to make herself understood in English during a phone
There was a need
for assistance in the other 5 domains.
The applicant
had a ‘partial capacity for independently accessing community-based
activities’ which she would be able
to build on, reducing her reliance on
a carer. She had some long-term friends she had met as a refugee in Turkey.
Community engagement
was limited. She preferred to be accompanied in the
community by a carer but reported being able to drive and access public
to attend weekly hydrotherapy sessions alone. She managed
independently if her carer was not available.
The applicant
had ‘modified independence in learning tasks’, which means that she
could use a modified technique to complete
tasks and maintain independence.
There were intermittent periods of reduced concentration and attention. She had
been able to participate
in TAFE study in about 2020 or 2021 but her capacity
for learning could be impacted by impaired motivation and other symptoms.
The applicant
also used modified techniques for dressing and grooming tasks, largely related
to having limited energy to attend to
things. Mr Miszczuk indicated the
applicant would be able to improve her capacity and reduce reliance on a carer
The applicant
mobilised with a crutch, though her dependence on it was erratic. She was able
to drive at that time, though apparently
did so rarely.
The applicant,
on Ms Vahdani’s evidence, had difficulty making decisions and
problem-solving, and her propensity for fatigue
also reduced her capacity.
Nonetheless, she was able to organise her own medical appointments, management
her finances, budget, arrange
for commercial services (including occasional
gardening) and pay bills.
Miszczuk recorded that the applicant had a greater capacity than was indicated
in the medical evidence. That opinion appears to
derive from a combination of
the applicant having been able to participate in a TAFE course a few years
earlier, from his observations
from ‘at times vague and contradictory’ answers to questions asked
Miszczuk gave evidence in connection with his report. Counsel for the respondent
put to him, in relation to social interaction,
that he had not known that the
applicant had been taken out for coffee by her sisters on occasion and spoke to
her children on the
phone every few days. He was asked whether that would change
his description of the applicant’s capacity for social interaction
indicated it would depend on what supports were available and the frequency of
engagement.
applicant provided a statement of lived experience (undated) in connection her
Tribunal application.
said, amongst other things:
She could walk
for only 4 to 5 minutes without taking a break. She relied on a walking stick.
She owned a car and could drive short
distances, which she did about twice a
She did not have
friends and had trouble socialising. She would go out for coffee or a meal if
someone took her but that happened
‘rarely’. She might attend a club
or restaurant a couple of times a year.
She required
assistance with self-care due to the risk of falls and a need to be reminded and
encouraged to attend to some things.
She tried to
manage her own finances but sometimes had help from her carer. She needed to be
reminded to take medication almost every
She sometimes
had problems concentrating and expressing herself clearly.
Although she had
previously studied and tried to work, it was now difficult to focus properly so
as to learn new things.
applicant gave evidence at the hearing that she used email and social media. She
did not tend to speak with any friends but spoke
to her sisters on occasion,
usually on the phone. The applicant has a dog and said she could manage the
feeding herself but needed
could not remember the last time she prepared a proper meal.
the RSFIC, the respondent said there was not a substantially reduced functional
capacity in any one activity.
come, then, to examine the question of whether there is a substantial reduction
of functional capacity in each activity, both by
reference to rule 5.8 and the
ordinary meaning of the statutory language.
am readily satisfied that there is no substantial reduction in functional
capacity in mobility, communication, learning or self-management,
resulting from
the applicant’s psychosocial impairments (by reference to rule 5.8 or
otherwise). The applicant’s mobility
problems stem from her
musculoskeletal and chronic pain impairments. There are no notable communication
difficulties other than the
applicant’s difficulties with the English
language, which are not related to any impairment.
applicant’s learning and capacity for self-management are impaired by
reduced concentration and fatigue, but that is no
more than a minor reduction
where the applicant manages her own finances, has previously been able to
complete a TAFE course (though
I accept her function now is not what it was
then) and was able to concentrate through a 2-day Tribunal hearing.
other 2 activities require more detailed consideration.
to social interaction, I note the applicant is largely housebound, preferring to
leave the house rarely and only with her
carer, when she has to attend to
shopping or the like. She is occasionally taken out by someone to have coffee,
as her sisters had
done shortly before the hearing. The applicant does not
appear to have any regular social engagement and does not participate in
community activities. As above, though, the question is what she can do, not
what she prefers to do, when it comes to making
and keeping friends, interacting
with the community, and coping with feelings and emotions in social
situations.
the evidence of the applicant’s treating practitioners, the applicant
cannot maintain friendships and harmonious relationships.
interactions, she finds it hard to cope with her emotions. The applicant has
poor social confidence and is impeded by stress
and anxiety. Her carer helps her
with community interaction.
my view, rule 5.8(b) is made out: on the face of the evidence, the applicant
usually requires assistance, including physical accompaniment,
to participate in
the range of tasks that make up social interaction. That is not to say that the
applicant is unable to participate
in social interaction (and for that reason,
rules 5.8(a) and (c)) are not made out). I accept that she interacts with her
children and medical practitioners, and there may be somewhat more
social interaction than Mr Miszczuk understood. Nonetheless, because
impairment described by her treating practitioners, she usually requires
assistance.
I am wrong about the application of rule 5.8(b), I am nonetheless satisfied that
there is a reduction of functional capacity in
social relationships. As I said
the capacity
required to socially interact with a family member and to make and keep a friend
are very different. It does not follow
that because the applicant is
occasionally taken out of her house by her sisters for coffee that she does not
have a reduced capacity
to engage in the community, with non-family members, for
social, pleasurable or cultural reasons.
the applicant is largely housebound (for a combination of reasons, and I am
cognisant that her preference is irrelevant here),
avoidant of social
interaction, cannot maintain friendships, has trouble with emotional regulation
and is largely dependent on a
carer for social interaction beyond the immediate
family, I am satisfied that the reduction in capacity is substantial.
follows that the requirement in paragraph 24(1)(c) is made out.
is unnecessary to consider whether there is a substantial reduction in
functional capacity in the remaining activity, self-care.
(d) Do the impairments affect the applicant’s capacity for social or
economic participation?
respondent accepts that this requirement is met. I agree. The applicant’s
capacity for social participation is clearly affected
by her psychosocial
impairments, as set out above. Her capacity for economic participation has been
affected by her psychosocial
and other impairments. She cannot work and receives
the disability support pension.
(e) Is the applicant likely to require support under the NDIS for her
relation to this requirement, the Guideline says:
NDIS supports are
investments that help you build or maintain your functional capacity and
independence, and help you work, study
or take part in social life. ... [You may
have an impairment which is caused by a chronic health condition. Many chronic
health conditions
are most effectively managed or remedied through medical
management through the health system. If this is the case, we may decide
you don’t have a lifetime need for support under the NDIS.
relation to the support that the applicant might derive from the NDIS for her
psychosocial impairments, Ms Kiraz said:
With NDIS funding for
personal care, Khadijah will receive the necessary support to maintain basic
hygiene and feel empowered in managing
her own care. Community access support is
also essential, as her mental health barriers prevent her from engaging in
community activities
or attending appointments independently. Support in these
areas will alleviate psychological strain, allowing Khadijah to access
community, attend appointments, and participate in social interactions, thus
reducing her isolation and improving her overall
quality of life. Providing
funding for these services will allow Khadijah to address her psychosocial
limitations, ensuring she has
the necessary resources to improve her mental and
emotional wellbeing and work towards a more independent and fulfilling life.
would not prefer Ms Kiraz’s opinion over other evidence where the report
was prepared for the purposes of supporting the applicant’s
application
for access to the NDIS and not in the capacity as an objective, expert
It is, though,
consistent with other evidence.
Attai in his report of 22 May 2024 noted a need for the applicant to learn about
coping mechanisms. That is, capacity building
and not just symptomatic
Miszczuk, in his report, noted the applicant’s reliance on current
supports (especially on her carer, Noushi) and noted the
capacity-building supports especially in gradually reducing that reliance.
respondent says (in both the RSFIC and closing submissions made at the hearing)
that this requirement is not met because the treatment
recommendations made by
the applicant’s treating practitioners are for therapies and interventions
available in the public
health system, including medicare-subsidised allied
health and potentially referral to a pain clinic.
is largely true, and it may be that the applicant’s treating practitioners
have unrealistic expectations of the sorts of
supports the NDIS might provide
for the applicant. It is not the case, though, that the supports the applicant
is likely to need
are only those available in the public health system.
applicant has a permanent psychiatric condition, causing permanently impaired
mood and motivation. The evidence is that she would
benefit from capacity
building, including long-term psychological assistance and continued support
worker assistance.
are things the NDIS might provide. Given the history of the applicant’s
depression and the treatment she has had historically,
there is no reason she
would not require support for her lifetime even if, as Mr Miszczuk says, the
applicant’s dependence
on supports might gradually decrease over time.
am satisfied, then, that the requirement in paragraph 24(1)(e) is made out.
Conclusion as to disability requirements
I am satisfied that each paragraph 24(1)(a) to (e) is made out, the disability
requirements are met.
follows that the applicant meets the criteria for access to the NDIS. The
decision under review will be set aside.
Does the applicant
meet the early intervention requirements?
is unnecessary to answer this question.
Dates of Hearing:
Representative for the Applicant
15 and 16 September 2025
Ms S Miraki
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Ms A Douglas-Baker
Sparke Helmore Lawyers
Drake and Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
[1979] AATA
The applicant’s
social history is set out in a number of reports, for example at A7 and T3.
The report, at O2, p
282, has an incomplete date. It appears amongst documents that are in roughly
chronological order, and from
its placement I infer it is from about 2017.
See O1, pp 129-132.
T1E and A1.
O7, p 530. The letter is
addressed ‘to whom it may concern’ but appears to address Centrelink
See progress note of 5
July 2012, O2 p 157.
207 to 214.
Foster and National
Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS)
[2025] ARTA 718, endorsed by the Full
Federal Court in
National Disability Insurance Agency v
[2025] FCAFC 139
v National Disability Insurance Agency
[2015] FCA 544
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Foster
[2023] FCAFC 11
National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS)
[2025] ARTA 718 at
Albiol and National Disability Insurance Agency
[2024] AATA 496
The statutory language is
‘social interaction’ and not ‘socialising’. Where the
description of the content
of the activity is consistent with social
interaction, I do not think there is a meaningful distinction.
CEO, National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS)
[2025] ARTA 2406 at
National Disability Insurance Agency
[2021] AATA 2127
T18 – the form
is undated but likely to be from around the same time. The applicant referred in
her oral evidence to Dr Coolican
being unfamiliar with NDIS forms and asking to
see what Dr Shekarchi had done as an example. It seems more likely that Dr
form was copied by the other specialists, but nothing turns on
Counsel for the
respondent made the same point about some things said by Associate Professor
RTF format (25.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format