Cupid Media Pty Ltd: Own motion investigation report [2014] AICmrCN 3 (25 June 2014)
Cupid Media Pty Ltd: Own motion investigation report
Timothy Pilgrim, Australian Privacy Commissioner
Media Pty Ltd (Cupid) operates over 35 niche dating websites based on personal
profile including ethnicity, religion and location.
On 13 December 2013, the
Australian Privacy Commissioner (the Commissioner) opened an own motion
investigation into Cupid. This was
in response to media allegations that
personal information of Cupid users had been acquired by unauthorised persons,
and were found
on a server operated by hackers, which Cupid confirmed.
The Commissioner's investigation focused on whether Cupid took reasonable
steps to protect user information from misuse, loss, unauthorised
modification or disclosure.
After considering the facts of the case, submissions from Cupid and the
relevant provisions of the
(Cth) (Privacy Act), the
Commissioner came to the view that Cupid had breached the
to take reasonable steps to secure personal information it held.
The Commissioner however welcomed Cupid’s collaborative and cooperative
approach in working with the Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner
(OAIC) in this matter, and the significant privacy remedial steps that it took
in response.
21 November 2013, the OAIC received information that Cupid user records had been
stolen and found on a server operated by hackers
(data breach).
Cupid confirmed that the following key events led to the data breach:
On 21 January
2013, Cupid identified a rogue file on one of its webservers.
conducted internal investigations and identified that on 18 January 2013,
attackers exploited a vulnerability within the
application server platform used
by Cupid (ColdFusion), which allowed them to gain access to Cupid’s
webservers.
With access to
Cupid’s webservers, the attackers were able to upload a shell
‘ColdFusion Markup’ (CFM) file that
allowed the attackers to run SQL
queries against Cupid’s databases and gain unauthorised access to
Cupid’s data.
hotfix (patch) for the ColdFusion vulnerability was released on
16 January 2013, however Cupid did not receive notification
developer that the patch was available. Cupid advised that the particular
developer ordinarily sent Cupid an alert when
updates and patches were made
available, but did not do so in this instance. In the absence of the alert,
Cupid’s IT team identified
(through its business as usual internal patch
management processes) that the patch was available on 21 January 2013.
On 21 January
2013, Cupid applied the patch and fixed the vulnerability, which in turn stopped
the attackers from obtaining further
Cupid advised that the categories of
personal information compromised in the data breach consisted of:
(a) full names
(b) dates of birth (for some customers)
(c) email addresses, and
(d) passwords.
Cupid explained that there is no requirement for
Cupid’s users to verify their name to open an account. For this reason,
considers that some of the full names and associated dates of birth
involved in the data breach ‘did not relate to real persons’.
In any case, Cupid estimates that the accounts and personal information of
approximately 254,000 Australian users were compromised
in the data breach.
Relevant provisions of the
21 December 2001 to 11 March 2014, organisations covered by the
required to comply with the ten National Privacy Principles (NPPs), contained in
Schedule 3 of the Act.
were replaced by the Australian Privacy Principles (APPs) on 12 March
The NPPs applied to the handling of ‘personal information’ which
defined as:
information or an opinion (including information or an opinion forming part
of a database), whether true or not, and whether recorded
in a material form or
not, about an individual whose identity is apparent, or can reasonably be
ascertained, from the information
or opinion.
Personal information includes ‘sensitive information’. The
’s definition of ‘sensitive information’ prior to
included information
or an opinion about an individual’s:
racial or ethnic
beliefs or affiliations; or
preferences or practices.
applies to all private
sector organisations with an annual turnover of more than $3 million and some
small businesses. A business
with an annual turnover of less than $3 million
that trades in personal information was also covered by the
Cupid is subject to the
and was subject to the NPPs at the time of the data breach.
NPP 4 (Data security) and NPP 2 (Use and disclosure) were the
provisions relevant to this data breach. In particular:
NPP 4.1 required
organisations to take reasonable steps to protect the personal information they
hold from misuse and loss and from
unauthorised access, modification or
NPP 4.2 stated
that, if an organisation no longer needs personal information for any purpose
under NPP 2, then the organisation must
take reasonable steps to destroy or
permanently de-identify it,
NPP 2.1 provided
that an organisation may only use or disclose personal information for the
primary purpose of collection, unless
an exception
Security of personal information (NPP 4.1)
assessing whether Cupid took reasonable steps to comply with NPP 4.1, the
Commissioner considered information from Cupid about
the security safeguards in
place prior to the data breach, and what steps would have been reasonable in the
circumstances to protect
the personal information held. This included
considering Cupid’s particular circumstances, such as:
the volume and
the sensitivity of the personal information it handled, and
impact in the event that the personal information was
compromised.
The Commissioner also had regard to the guidance set
out in the OAIC’s
Guide to information
Nature of personal information
stated that as it does not store credit card information or bank account data,
less stringent steps could be required of it
than organisations that store
financial or sensitive data.
However, the Commissioner noted that data other than credit and other
financial information may be ‘sensitive information’
definition of that term in the
Particularly, the
Commissioner noted that Cupid offers services via sites categorised as
‘African dating’, ‘Asian
dating’, ‘Latin
dating’, ‘gay and lesbian dating’, ‘special
interest’ and ‘religion’.
The personal information that Cupid
handles in relation to user accounts for these particular sites will include
information’ for the purposes of the
Commissioner therefore found that more stringent steps were required of Cupid to
keep this information secure than may be required
of organisations that do not
handle sensitive information.
Information and patch management
advised that it uses information management tools, including the following:
application and management, including processes to identify and install patches
and security updates as they become available
from Cupid’s third party
software suppliers
software protection on all servers, including updates and maintenance, and
segregation (database information is kept on a separate network to website
information, so that database information is only
accessible by Cupid webservers
and not the public internet).
Installation of malicious software
(malware) detection and prevention software (including antivirus software) is a
reasonably affordable
security step that can assist organisations to prevent
attacks by malicious hackers and the damage caused by malware.
Further, effective use of patches can assist organisations to fix system
vulnerabilities and other problems. Had Cupid received an
alert from the
developer that the patch was available, but not applied the patch, the
Commissioner may have considered there to have
been a failure by Cupid to take
reasonable security steps. However, as Cupid independently identified the patch
and then applied
it immediately, in the circumstances the Commissioner
considered Cupid to have used patches effectively.
Separating an entity’s network into multiple functional and
informational segments makes it more difficult for an intruder to
inside the network. Segmentation can also allow for different security measures
to be applied to different types of information
depending on its sensitivity and
the risks associated with it.
The Commissioner considered that the information and patch management steps
taken by Cupid, including those above, were reasonable
security steps for the
purposes of NPP 4.1 in the circumstances.
Testing and monitoring
stated that it used the following testing and monitoring processes at the time
of the data breach:
vulnerability scans, and
an intrusion
prevention and intrusion detection firewall.
Intrusion detection
systems, which use systems to monitor network or system activities for malicious
activities and anomalous behaviour,
can be an effective way of identifying and
responding to known attack profiles.
On 21 January 2013, Cupid identified a rogue file on one of its servers, and
that a hacker had attempted to gain access to a particular
table within its
fixed the vulnerability, which in turn
stopped the attackers from obtaining
further data.
In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the testing and monitoring steps
taken by Cupid were reasonable steps as required by NPP
Passwords and encryption
advised that it used the following password protection mechanisms at the time of
the data breach:
lockout policy, and
enforcement of
strong password policies on all servers.
Following the data breach,
Cupid also promptly initiated a password reset process for all its users. This
included encouraging users,
as an extra security precaution, to reset passwords
for different online services where the users used the same password as used
Cupid. The Commissioner considers password reset processes to be reasonable
security steps and good privacy practise generally.
However the compromised passwords were not salted or hashed, or otherwise
encrypted, before the data breach. Instead they were stored
insecurely, in plain
Encryption strategies such as hashing and
are simple and effective
means by which organisations can:
securely store
user passwords, and
limit the risk
of unauthorised parties gaining access to user accounts to which the passwords
relate in the event the passwords are
compromised.
Where passwords
are hashed, it is also very difficult for attackers to recover the plain text
version of the password (although the
Commissioner acknowledged that tools are
available to assist hackers with guessing passwords).
Password encryption strategies such as hashing and salting are basic security
steps that were available to Cupid at the time of the
data breach that may have
prevented unauthorised access to user accounts. The Commissioner therefore found
Cupid’s storage
of passwords in plain text to be a failure to take
reasonable security steps for the purpose of NPP 4.1.
Secure destruction or permanent de-identification of personal information that
is no longer required (NPP 4.2)
4.2 required organisations to take reasonable steps to destroy or permanently
de-identify personal information that is not being
used or disclosed for any
purpose under NPP 2 (in other words, where the personal information is no longer
required). To comply with
this obligation, an organisation must have had systems
or procedures in place to identify information the organisation no longer
needed, and a process for how the destruction or de-identification of the
information would occur.
Cupid advised that although the media had reported that 42 million
users’ accounts were compromised as a result of the data
breach, this
figure is not accurate because it includes ‘junk’ accounts and
duplicate accounts. In other words, the personal
information pertaining to a
significant number of accounts was not in use by Cupid. Further, Cupid confirmed
that at the time of
the data breach, it did not have any particular systems in
place to identify accounts that were no longer needed or in use, or a
for how the destruction or de-identification of personal information related to
such accounts would occur.
Therefore, the Commissioner considered that prior to the data breach Cupid
failed to take reasonable steps to destroy or permanently
de-identify the
personal information it held in relation to user accounts that were no longer in
use or needed, in contravention
of NPP 4.2.
Disclosure of personal information (NPP 2.1)
general terms, an organisation discloses
personal information when it
releases information, whether purposely or accidentally, to others outside the
organisation. This requires
the organisation to release the information by its
own action, intentionally or
In respect of the data breach, Cupid customer information was accessed as a
result of a hacking attack, in which the attacker penetrated
security features
to access the personal information online. The Commissioner did not consider
this to be a ‘disclosure’
by Cupid within the meaning of NPP 2.
Therefore, the Commissioner did not consider Cupid to have breached NPP 2 in
this matter.
Rectification
Commissioner found that Cupid acted appropriately in responding to the data
breach. Cupid identified that the ColdFusion vulnerability
caused the data
breach. Once the vulnerability was identified, Cupid immediately obtained and
applied the patch released by the ColdFusion
developer on all its servers to fix
the vulnerability. Cupid also worked with an external ColdFusion security
contractor to ensure
the vulnerability had been successfully patched and that
the then current ColdFusion installation met best practise standards.
Cupid then took the following ancillary steps to contain the data breach:
notification to all affected users with a valid email address, setting out that
Cupid had experienced a data breach and automatically
reset users’
passwords (in the notification, as an extra security precaution, Cupid also
encouraged users to reset passwords
for different online services where they
used the same password as used for their Cupid account)
analysed server
logs and tracked the hack method to ensure the breach had been contained
scan of all servers and removed all compromised files
second scan of all servers using a specific rootkit detector, which confirmed
that the malicious file was removed and that there
were no other malicious
scan of all servers using another type of rootkit detector which confirmed that
there were no malicious files, and
security team which conducted a full audit of Cupid’s servers and
confirmed that all threats had been removed.
Since the data breach,
Cupid has undertaken an extensive privacy and data security remediation program,
to ensure that it is APP compliant
and to prevent attackers from accessing user
data in the event that Cupid’s website is hacked again. Particular
measures include:
development and
implementation of a data breach response plan
hashing of all
user passwords with a unique salt
implementation
of daily hacking and vulnerability scans, with a focus on ColdFusion
development of
additional mechanisms for receiving timely notifications of security flaws,
including through implementation of a monitoring
program to identify software
patches in the event that developers/vendors do not alert Cupid to patch
availability
review of best
practise data storage methods for personal information
conducting a
review of personal information required to ensure Cupid is only collecting and
retaining the personal information that
is necessary
procurement and
installation of additional firewall security hardware
development and
implementation of rules to de-identify personal information relating to old or
inactive user accounts, and
engagement of
its processes generally for APP and
its privacy policy and terms and conditions for APP and
compliance,
a number of other information security best
Recommendations
The Commissioner found that the measures Cupid has taken in response to the data
breach will assist Cupid to:
significantly
strengthen its privacy framework
establish a
obligations under
and the APPs, which replaced the NPPs on
12 March 2014.
The Commissioner also recommended that Cupid
regularly review its data security processes to continue to aim for best privacy
that protects the personal information of its extensive user base.
Cupid did not notify the OAIC about the data breach. Notifying the OAIC can
be a useful step in responding to a data
and the Commissioner
encourages voluntary notification.
Commissioner found that Cupid:
failed to take
reasonable steps to ensure the security of the personal information that it
held, in contravention of NPP 4.1, and
failed to take
reasonable steps to destroy or permanently de-identify the personal information
it held in contravention of NPP 4.2.
Cupid acted appropriately in
response to the data breach including by:
obtaining and
applying a security patch to fix the vulnerability, and
affected individuals and ensuring they reset their passwords (and encouraging
users to reset passwords for different online
services where they used the same
password as used for their Cupid account).
Cupid has also addressed
the OAIC’s recommendations, including by implementing a policy for
determining when personal information
is no longer required.
Based on the information from Cupid about its review and remediation of the
data breach and Cupid’s ongoing implementation of
recommendations made by
the OAIC, the Commissioner decided to close the investigation.
Acronyms and abbreviations
Commissioner
— Australian Privacy Commissioner
NPPs — National Privacy Principles (contained in Schedule 3 of the
OAIC — Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
As required under National
‘SQL’ refers to a
special purpose programming language (called Structured Query Language) designed
for managing data
held in a database management system.
On 12 March 2014, the NPPs were
replaced by the Australian Privacy Principles:
http://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-resources/privacy-fact-sheets/other/privacy-fact-sheet-17-australian-privacy-principles.
http://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-act/australian-privacy-principles.
The definition of
‘sensitive information’ under the current
substantially similar to that which applied at the time of the data breach.
business with an annual turnover of less than $3 million that trades in personal
information is now covered by the APPs.
See APP 11.1 for current
applicable APP.
See APP 11.2 for current
applicable APP.
See APP 6.1 for current
applicable APP.
www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-resources/privacy-guides/guide-to-information-security.
provides that ‘sensitive information’ includes information
or an opinion about an individual’s racial or ethnic
origin, political
opinions, religious beliefs, or sexual orientation or practices.
‘Salting’ is
basically where an additional string of data, such as random numbers or text, is
added to the password to
make it less predictable and harder to attack, and
‘hashing’ is where passwords are processed through cryptographic
that convert them into seemingly random characters. While passwords
may be guessed through computational 'brute-force' attacks, this
becomes very
difficult when strong hash algorithms and passwords are used. Hashed passwords
are therefore more secure to store than
their clear-text passwords.
See ‘Disclosure’
section in Chapter B: Key concepts, APP Guidelines
—http://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/applying-privacy-law/app-guidelines/chapter-b-key-concepts#_Toc380575614.
An organisation's decision
to notify the OAIC on its own initiative is likely to be viewed by the public as
a positive action. It
demonstrates that the agency or organisation views the
protection of personal information as a serious matter, and may therefore
enhance client/public confidence in the organisation.
RTF format (163 KB)
Signed PDF/A format