Master Builders Australia Ltd - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Building and Construction General On-Site Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 989 (31 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
Master Builders Australia Ltd
(AM2009/162)
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION GENERAL ON-SITE AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT LAWLER
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 31 DECEMBER 2009
This decision deals with an application by Master Builders Australia Ltd (MBA) to vary the
Building and Construction General On-site Award 2010
(modern award)
in respect of provisions concerning:
payment whilst on annual leave;
dispute resolution training leave;
apprentices and apprentice wages;
presenting for work but not required;
hourly rate calculation;
safety boots re-imbursement;
limitation of inclement weather provisions to daily hire employees; and
fares and travel patterns allowance – provision of transport.
The MBA submitted that each of the variations is consistent with the objects of the consolidated request and will contribute to the
modern award being simple to understand and easy to apply, economically sustainable, and will result in a more certain, stable and
sustainable modern award system for the building industry in Australia. The variations in large part address ambiguities or errors
in the modern award and should be corrected or clarified before the award commences.
The application was made on 8 December 2009 and, as a result, was dealt with within a truncated program involving the filing of submissions
by the MBA and consultations with interested parties two working days later before Senior Deputy President Watson, who reported to
the Full Bench. In the course of the consultations the unions which appeared expressed a concern that they had not had an opportunity
to fully consider and comment on the effect of the variations proposed.
Each variation, and the submissions of the MBA, was supported by the Civil Contractors Federation and the Australian Federation of
Employers and Industries.
Each variation was opposed by the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU), the “Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering,
Printing and Kindred Industries Union” known as the Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union (AMWU) and the Communications,
Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia (CEPU). They submitted that
the variations sought fell beyond the basis set down by the Full Bench for the variation of modern awards in its decision of 26 June
Applications to vary the substantive terms of modern awards will be considered on their merits. It should be noted, however, that
the Commission would be unlikely to alter substantive award terms so recently made after a comprehensive review of the relevant facts
and circumstances including award and NAPSA provisions applying across the Commonwealth. Normally a significant change in circumstances
would be required before the Commission would embark on a reconsideration. A variation in the Minister’s award modernisation
request made after the modern award might constitute such a change.”
The unions submitted that provisions raised by the MBA were considered by the Full Bench in the making of the modern award and there
exist no circumstances, either within variations to the consolidated request or otherwise which warrant reconsideration. They submitted
that the variations seek to alter the effect of the modern award provisions, rather than address ambiguities.
Payment whilst on annual leave
The MBA application seeks to replace cl.38.2:
Instead of the
base rate of pay
as referred to in
of the NES, an employee under this award, before going on annual leave, must be paid, in advance, the amount which they would have
received for working ordinary time hours if they had not been on leave.”
An employee under this award, before going on annual leave, must be paid, in advance, the amount which they would have received for
working ordinary time hours if they had not been on leave. For the purposes of this clause, ‘amount’ means the employee's
base rate of pay, as defined in
subsection 16(1)
Fair Work Act 2009
In the alternative, MBA sought that cl.38.2(a) be deleted and replaced with the following words:
“Instead of the base rate of pay as referred to in
subsection 90(1)
Fair Work Act 2009
, an employee under this award, before going on annual leave, must be paid, in advance, the amount which they would have received
for working ordinary time hours if they had not been on leave.
For the purposes of this clause, ‘the amount’ is calculated on the basis of the rates, loadings and allowances prescribed
clause 19.1(a)—Minimum wages;
clause 21.1—Special allowance;
clause 21.2—Industry allowance;
clause 21.3—Underground allowance;
clause 20.1—Tool and employee protection allowance;
clause 19.2—Leading hands (if applicable).”
The MBA submitted that the current provision is unclear and could create future argument about what constitutes “the amount
they would have received for working ordinary hours if they had not been on leave.” On the face of it, one interpretation is
that all of the matters otherwise excluded from the definition of “base rate of pay” in
subsection 16(1)
Fair Work Act 2009
(Fair Work Act) would have to be included in the relevant calculation. If this arguable interpretation is correct, it would increase
costs for employers for no concomitant benefit, contrary to the consolidated request. Current award provisions in the
National Building and Construction Industry Award 2000
(NBCIA) in particular set out that employees are paid in respect of their hourly rate of pay (including allowances which are included
in the calculation of the hourly rate – industry allowance, special allowance and tool allowance (if applicable)), and the
follow-the-job loading and leading hand allowance (as applicable) (for example, cl.32.7.1 of the NBCIA).
The unions submitted that cl.38.2(a) is a supplementation of the National Employment Standards, reflecting the terms of the NBCIA,
which has operated without any practical problems and is in the same terms as similar provisions in other modern awards (for example,
cl.41.4(a) of the
Manufacturing and Associated Industries and Occupations Award 2010
The terms of cl.38.2(a) were considered by the Full Bench in the making of the modern award. Clause 38.2(a) was included on the basis
that it reflected the terms of the NBCIA,
which is familiar to and has been applied by industry parties in the past. We see no reason to alter the provision.
Dispute resolution procedure training leave
The MBA application seeks the deletion of the dispute resolution training leave in cl.9.7 of the award. It submitted that none of
the awards - the NBCIA, the
Australian Workers Union Construction and Maintenance Award 2002
(Civil Award), or the counterpart Notional Agreements Preserving State Awards (NAPSAs) - contain provisions that provide non-union
employee representatives with additional leave to undertake training that will assist them in their settlement of disputes role and
the provision will impose major costs on employers given that up to five days paid leave per year may be taken by an employee representative.
The term of cl.9.7 was included on the basis that it reflected the terms of the NBCIA,
although it is restricted in its application in that award to union members appointed as a job steward or delegate. It was expanded
to encompass an employee representative duly elected or appointed by the employees in an enterprise or workplace or part of an enterprise
or workplace for the purpose of representing those employees in the dispute resolution procedure, to avoid discrimination on the
basis of union membership. We are not persuaded that we should now remove the provision or limit it in its application.
Apprentices
The MBA proposed several variations in respect of apprentices:
(a) The insertion of the word “wages” in place of “pay” into cl.15.2(b), so that it would read:
An apprentice/trainee will be permitted to be absent from work, without loss of
or continuity of employment, to attend the off-the-job training in accordance with the contract of training.”;
and the insertion of the additional words:
“For the purposes of this clause, ‘wages’ means the employee's base rate of pay, as defined in
subsection 16(1)
Fair Work Act 2009
(b) An amendment to cl.15.6 to replace the word “conduct” and substituting it with the word “progress”, so
that it would read:
Attendance at technical schools
Apprentices attending technical colleges or schools and presenting reports of satisfactory
must be reimbursed all fees paid by them in respect of their apprentice training.”
(c) Amending cl.19.7(d) to add the words “where applicable,” before the words “as part of the ordinary weekly wage
for all purposes”, so that it would read:
“In addition to the above rates, apprentices will be paid amounts prescribed in:
clause 21.2—Industry allowance;
clause 21.3—Underground allowance;
clause 20.1—Tool and employee protection allowance; and
where applicable
, as part of the ordinary weekly wage for all purposes.”
(d) Adding a further table of apprentice rates, to apply in respect of nominated residential apprenticeships in Western Australia,
of two years duration with payment at 55% and 75% of the standard rate for the first and second years respectively.
In relation to cl.15.2(b), the MBA submitted that apprentices are not currently entitled to fares and travel allowances when attending
off-the-job training (see
Construction Forestry Mining & Energy Union v Master Builders Group Training Scheme
). Such an interpretation will increase costs for employers. The provision should be clarified to make it clear it is without loss
of wages, not pay.
The terms of cl.15.2(b) of the modern award drew on cl.39.2.4(b) of the NBCIA. We are not persuaded that there is uncertainty as
to its effect in light of the decision of the Full Court of the Federal Court in
Construction Forestry Mining & Energy Union v Master Builders Group Training Scheme.
The terminology “without loss of pay” appears in apprentice provisions in other modern awards.
The additional words proposed by the MBA may have the effect of altering the effect of the current award provisions. This variation
is refused.
In relation to cl.15.6, the MBA submitted that the notion of “presenting reports of satisfactory conduct” is not clear,
contrasting it with the terms of cl.13.12 of the
Joinery and Building Trades Award 2010
(Joinery Modern Award) where the wording is much clearer. Further, the additional bureaucratic step required by the modern award
will increase costs of administration and should be changed. Accordingly, the draft order would amend this wording, so that it is
more consistent with the terms of the Joinery Modern Award by referring to “… satisfactory progress”.
Whilst cl.15.6 is drawn from the NBCIA and appears in other modern awards, we will vary this modern award to alter “conduct”
to “progress” to better reflect the intent of the provision.
In respect of nominated residential apprenticeships in Western Australia, the MBA submitted that cl.19.7(b) does not contain rates
of pay for the permitted two year term of nominated residential apprenticeships available in Western Australia and the subclause
should be modified so that the 55% and then the 75% rate may continue to apply to ensure continuity of engagement for the relevant
apprentices.
We will include a new transitional provision, as follows, to regulate wages for those apprentices undertaking two year residential
apprenticeships in Western Australia. We will make the variation as a transitional provision, to allow application to be made to
vary the award substantively, in the context of the setting aside of the Western Australian NAPSA or some later time, if there exists
a continuing need to accommodate such apprenticeships in the award.
The transitional provision will be inserted in the award as a new cl.19.7(d), with subsequent renumbering, in the following terms:
19.7(d) Transitional provisions—Two year residential apprenticeships in Western Australia
An apprenticed employee undertaking a two year residential apprenticeship in Western Australia will be paid the percentage of the
standard rate, as follows:
Nominated residential apprenticeships in Western Australia
Two year apprenticeship
% of the standard rate
Second year
Clause 19.7(d) ceases to operate on 31 December 2014.”
Hourly rate calculation
MBA sought to vary this clause by:
(a) Inserting the words “, where applicable;” after the words “tool and employee protection allowance; and”
in cl.19.3(a)(ii), so the dot point would read “clause 20.1—Tool and employee protection allowance, where applicable;”
(b) amending cl.19.3(b) to move “• clause 21.3 - underground allowance” and “•clause 21.13 - in charge
of plant allowance” and re-inserted in the subclause, under the “and, where applicable” qualification.
The MBA submitted that cl.19.3(b) appears to require an employer to add the underground allowance and in charge of plant allowance
irrespective of whether or not it is “applicable”. These should be placed after the phrase “where applicable”
which appears immediately below it as these are allowances which are contingent on the matters reflected in the relevant provisions
and similar changes should be made to cll.19.3(a)(ii) and 19.7(d) regarding applicability to clarify that the allowances need only
be included in the hourly rate calculation where they are applicable.
Each of the allowances which the MBA seeks to qualify by “if applicable” is conditional on the occurrence of prescribed
circumstances. The variation sought is consistent with the preface “appropriate” to the prescribed amounts to be included
in the daily hire calculation in cl.18.3.1(b) of the NBCIA and the intent that the daily rate calculation incorporates only allowances
which an employee qualifies for. We will vary the modern award as sought by the MBA in relation to this matter.
Presenting for work but not required
The MBA sought to add a new cl.19.4(c) on the basis that it does not apply to casual employees. It submitted that to avoid doubt,
cl.19.4 should expressly exclude casual employees, whose minimum engagement is dealt with separately in the award.
We accept that this variation does clarify the position in respect of casual employees, who have an entitlement to payment for a
minimum of four hours’ work per engagement, and specified other payments, under cl.14.4 of the award, rather than the entitlement
within cl.19.4 of the award. We will add a new cl.19(4)(c) as follows:
This clause does not apply to casual employees.”
Safety boots re-imbursement
The MBA variation would delete cl.20.1(b)(viii), which provides, in respect of all employees other than refractory bricklayers:
“Where employees are required either by the employer or by legislation to wear steel toe capped safety boots the employer will
reimburse employees for the cost of purchasing such boots on commencement of work. Subject to fair wear and tear, boots will be replaced
each six months if required and sooner if agreed.”
The MBA submitted that there is currently no general provision requiring an employer to reimburse an employee the cost of steel-capped
boots in the NBCIA (cl.24.3.4 of the NBCIA only relates to refractory bricklayers), particularly where there is no upper limit on
the amount that must be reimbursed nor any safeguard against an employee seeking reimbursement for the same boots from consecutive
employers. This provision will add significant cost to employers and is inconsistent with the consolidated request.
The CEPU submitted that the provision is common within existing instruments and should be retained. We agree.
Limitation of inclement weather provisions to daily hire employees
The MBA application seeks to add a new cl.23.2, providing that “Clause 23 applies only to daily hire employees” and to
renumber following subclauses. The MBA submitted that cl.23 of the modern award should be limited to daily hire employees. Clause
13 of the NBCIA distinguishes operators at cl.13.1 as weekly hire employees. Clause 13.2 distinguishes tradespersons and labourers
as daily hire employees. Clause 21 of the NBCIA concerns inclement weather – tradespersons and labourers. The current operation
within the industry is that inclement weather provisions are restricted to those award classifications which are daily hire. To extend
the inclement weather provisions in practice to weekly hire award classifications would increase employer costs without any concomitant
benefit. Accordingly, the draft order amends this wording, to clarify that it applies only to daily hire employees.
The CFMEU submitted that the terms of the inclement weather provision and its application to weekly hire employees was sought by
The Australian Workers’ Union (AWU) in the course of the consultations leading to making of the modern award and included in
that form by the Full Bench in light of the views expressed by interested parties. It submitted that there has been no change in
circumstances.
The application of the inclement weather provision reflects a considered judgement by the Full Bench in making the modern award.
The Full Bench included two inclement weather provisions in the exposure draft.
The AWU argued for a single provision in post-exposure draft submissions of 18 February 2009, an argument accepted by the Full Bench
in making the final award. The provision was intended to apply to weekly employees, as it does under the
Australian Workers’ Union Construction and Maintenance Award 2002
There are no circumstances which persuade us to alter that decision.
Fares and travel patterns allowance – provision of transport
The MBA application seeks to add a new cl.25.8 (c):
“In order to be eligible for the allowance prescribed in this clause, the vehicle provided by the employer must be used solely
for purposes related to the employee's employment. Where the vehicle is also used for private use or some other benefit, the allowance
will not be payable.”
The MBA submitted that cl.25.8 of the modern award should be amended to clarify that in order to be eligible for daily fares, the
vehicle provided must be solely for purposes related to the employee’s employment. Use of the word “sole” would
clarify that the eligibility for daily fares must be contingent on the fact that there would be no private use or benefit from provision
of the vehicle.
The unions opposed the variation on the basis that it alters the effect of current award provisions.
The variation sought is inconsistent with the terms of
cl.38.6 of the NBCIA, upon which cl.25.8 is based. No circumstances have been raised which persuade us to give effect to this variation.
As will be evident from our reasons, the MBA applications dealt in most instances with matters considered and decided through the
Stage 2 consultation process, without any relevant change in circumstances in relation to them. Further, the uncertainties raised
by the MBA related to provisions in terms contained in existing instruments in the industry, and contained in other modern awards,
without evidence of any uncertainty in practice as to their operation in the context of existing instruments, other than in respect
of one provision which has been clarified by a Full Bench of the Federal Court of Australia. In our view, the better approach to
uncertainties or ambiguities, should they arise in practice, would be to deal with them through an application under
Fair Work Act
, at which time all interested parties would be in a position to more fully consider and put submissions on the practical affect of
any variations sought.
BY THE COMMISSION:
[2009] AIRCFB 645
AP790741CRV.
[2009] AIRCFB 345
, at para 89.
AP815828CRV
[2009] AIRCFB 345
, at para 73.
(2007) FCAFC 165.
For example, cl.15.14 of the
Manufacturing and Associated Industries and Occupations Award 2010
[2009] AIRCFB 50
, at para 43.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR992158>
No downloadable files available