Carlene Daphne Smith v Canning Division of General Practice Ltd - re s.394 Termination of employment - extension of time [2009] AIRC 959; (14 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
- Application for relief re (Unlawful and Harsh, Unjust or Unreasonable) termination of employment
Ms Carlene Daphne Smith
Canning Division of General Practice Ltd
(U2009/12848)
COMMISSIONER WILLIAMS
PERTH, 14 DECEMBER 2009
Termination of employment – extension of time.
Introduction
This decision follows an application made pursuant to
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(the Act) by Ms Smith (the applicant) who sought relief following her termination of employment by the Canning Division of General
Practice Ltd (the respondent) on 24 June 2009, effective from that date.
The application was filed in the Australian Industrial Registry on 8 October 2009.
Section 643(14)
of the Act prescribes:
“An application under subsection (1) or (3) must be lodged within 21 days after the day on which the termination took effect,
or within such period as the Commission allows on an application made during or after those 21 days”
This application was filed beyond the 21 day time limit prescribed in the Act.
The applicant has requested that the Commission exercise its discretion under
of the Act to extend the time for filing this application. The application indicates the applicant is represented by an industrial
advocate Mr Trainer.
As a consequence I wrote to the applicant and respondent in identical terms explaining the situation as set out above and further
explaining that pursuant to
of the Act I had decided not to hold a hearing and that the applicant and respondent were invited to provide further information
that related to whether the extension of time should be granted by the Commission.
The Extension of Time Application
The decision of Mr Justice Marshall of the Industrial Relations Court of Australia in
Brodie-Hanns v MTV Publishing Ltd
sets out relevant principles for the Commission when considering whether or not to extend the time within which an application may
be lodged. These principles where summarised as follows by Marshall J at 299:
“(1) Special circumstances are not necessary but the Court must be positively satisfied that the prescribed period should be
extended. The prima facie position is that the time limit should be complied with unless there is an acceptable explanation for the
delay which makes it equitable to extend.
(2) Action taken by the Applicant to contest the termination, other than applying under the Act, will be relevant. It will show that
the decision to terminate is actively contested. It may favor the granting of an extension of time.
(3) Prejudice to the Respondent including prejudice caused by delay will go against the granting of an extension of time.
(4) The mere absence of prejudice to the Respondent is an insufficient basis to grant an extension of time.
(5) The merits of the substantive application may be taken into account in determining whether to grant an extension of time.
(6) Consideration of fairness as between the Applicant and other persons in a like position are relevant to the exercise of the Court's
discretion.”
The Applicant’s Explanation for the Delay
The applicant’s letter to the Commission 21 October 2009 explained her views about the merits of the case but did not address
the extension of time application. A later letter from the applicant dated 3 November explains the reason for the delay was that
she was devastated at being terminated, she needed to rest and to await the out come of “ ..the unfair dismissal case”
( which I take to be a reference to a prior application, see the order dated 25 August 2009
dismissing the application ). This left her more stressed and she was unable to cope and was also awaiting the outcome of a workers
compensation case which was accepted 3 weeks earlier.
Applying the Principles
Was there an acceptable explanation for the delay?
In this instance the explanations above do not amount to an explanation for the delay in lodging the application at all and are certainly
not an acceptable explanation for all of the nearly 3 months that has passed since the 21 day statutory time limit had passed.
Was the termination otherwise contested?
There was no action other than the filing of two application to the Commission to contest the termination.
Would the respondent be prejudiced if an extension is granted?
There was no information provided by the respondent to suggest any prejudice.
What are the merits of the substantive application?
On the basis of the submissions and material contained in the application it is only on a full hearing of the issues could the substantive
merits of the claim be determined.
I find that the issue of merit in this instance is neutral in determining the extension of time application.
Consideration of fairness between the applicant and other persons.
The presumption is always against the grant of an extension of time however there is nothing particular known about the respondent’s
position that causes this issue to be a significant factor in this instance. I do not find that the consideration of fairness between
the applicant and other persons in a like position is of relevance in this matter.
Conclusions
The onus is on the applicant to demonstrate that the extension of time should be granted. Accordingly having considered the submissions
filed by the parties and the materials provided in the original application I am not satisfied that I should exercise my discretion
in favor of allowing the extension of time.
This matter is not properly before the Commission and is dismissed.
BY THE COMMISSION:
COMMISSIONER
(1995) 67 IR 298
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code A, PR991848>
No downloadable files available