Turner v GoodStart Childcare Limited T/A ABC Developmental Learning Centres [2012] FWAFB 10463 (12 December 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
—Appeal of decision
Rachel Turner
GoodStart Childcare Limited T/A ABC Developmental Learning Centres
(C2012/5705)
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT O’CALLAGHAN
DEPUTY PRESIDENT HAMILTON
COMMISSIONER CLOGHAN
ADELAIDE, 12 DECEMBER 2012
Appeal against decision
[2012] FWA 8074
of Commissioner Williams at Perth on 27 September 2012 in matter number U2011/1782.
This is an appeal made by Ms Turner under
Fair Work Act 2009
(the FW Act). The appeal is against a decision
issued by Williams C. In this decision the Commissioner dismissed an application made by Ms Turner pursuant to s.394 through which
she sought relief with respect to the termination of her employment with GoodStart Childcare Limited T/A ABC Developmental Learning
Centres (GoodStart).
The parties provided extensive written submissions relative to this appeal. The matter was the subject of a brief hearing in Perth
on 14 November 2012. Written submissions in reply were then provided by the appellant. We have considered all of this material.
The appeal was lodged one day outside of the time limit specified in Rule 12 of the FWA Rules. These rules require that an appeal
be instituted within 21 days of the order or decision appealed against.
In submissions addressing this issue, Ms Turner's representative, Mr King advised that the delay was the result of representative
error. Mr King asserted that the delay did not prejudice the respondent and that the grounds of the appeal are founded in significant
errors of fact and of law such that an extension of time should be granted.
We have adopted the position set out by the Full Bench in
Tokoda v Westpac Banking Corporation
in the following terms:
“[3] Time limits of the kind in Rule 12 should not simply be extended as a matter of course. There are sound administrative
and industrial reasons for setting a limit to the time for bringing an appeal and it should only be extended where there are good
reasons for doing so. The authorities indicate that the following matters are relevant to the exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion
under Rule 12.3(b):
whether there is a satisfactory reason for the delay;
the length of the delay;
the nature of the grounds of appeal and the likelihood that one or more of those grounds being upheld if time was extended; and
any prejudice to the respondent if time were extended.
[4] In broad terms the issue for the Tribunal is whether, in all the circumstances and having regard to the matters set out above,
the interests of justice favour an extension of the time within which to lodge the appeal.”
(Endnote deleted)
We are satisfied that there is an acceptable reason for the delay and that issues of prejudice do not arise in this respect. For
reasons that will become clear later in this decision, we are satisfied that the merits of the appeal support an extension of the
time for lodgement of the appeal and we allow that extension.
The Appeal Grounds
The appeal are numerous and overlapping. The grounds fall into five broad categories.
1. Natural justice complaints.
2. Complaints about the Commissioner’s conclusions generally and with respect to the primary allegations against Ms Turner specifically.
3. Complaints about the Commissioner’s conclusions relative to the suite of other allegations made by GoodStart against Ms Turner,
4. Complaints that the Commissioner failed to properly consider the legislation and other decisions.
5. A request for the admission of new evidence.
The Commissioner’s Decision and Order
GoodStart is a not for profit provider of early childhood education services. In Western Australia its child care services are licensed
Child Care Services Act 2007
Ms Turner was the Centre Director for the GoodStart Armadale Centre. She commenced employment in May 2010. In February 2011 an accident
involving a young child (“the February incident”) occurred at the Armadale Centre whilst Ms Turner was not present at
that Centre. The staff members who saw the accident advised Ms Turner of the circumstances of the matter.
Approximately one month after the accident, one of these three employees, Ms Bell, advised Ms Turner that the initial information
provided relative to the accident was false. The credibility of Ms Bell's advice was a matter in dispute between the parties.
In July 2011 Ms Bell's mother contacted GoodStart and advised it about the circumstances of the accident. GoodStart investigated
the matter. Allegations that Ms Turner had failed to properly act following Ms Bell's earlier advice to her, together with a range
of other conduct related allegations were put to Ms Turner.
Following its investigations, GoodStart summarily dismissed Ms Turner on 22 August 2011.
In his decision, the Commissioner considered the extensive submissions and material before him. He detailed his conclusions about
the factual matrix. He then addressed each of the criteria specified in s.387. In reaching his conclusions, the Commissioner placed
significant emphasis on Ms Turner’s actions in response to a conversation with Ms Bell about the February 2011 incident. His
consideration of that incident was a central rather than a peripheral or minor component of his decision.
He concluded that Ms Turner's
"deliberate inaction when made aware by Ms Bell"
of the circumstances of the accident involving the child, was a valid reason for her dismissal. Further, in terms of the suite of
other allegations and complaints made by GoodStart against Ms Turner, the Commissioner concluded that, taken together, these represented
a valid reason for termination of employment with notice, rather than on a summary basis.
The Commissioner considered the disciplinary process followed by GoodStart, which concluded with the termination of Ms Turner's employment.
He concluded:
“[162] Considering all of the above then and having found that the applicant was properly dismissed for serious misconduct and
that in addition there were separately other reasons that would have warranted dismissal with notice I do not accept that in any
way what occurred was harsh, unjust or unreasonable. The applicant was not unfairly dismissed.”
Appeal Findings
Section 604 states:
“604 Appeal of decisions
(1) A person who is aggrieved by a decision:
(a) made by FWA (other than a decision of a Full Bench or the Minimum Wage Panel); or
(b) made by the General Manager (including a delegate of the General Manager) under the
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
may appeal the decision, with the permission of FWA.
(2) Without limiting when FWA may grant permission, FWA must grant permission if FWA is satisfied that it is in the public interest
Note: Subsection (2) does not apply in relation to an application for an unfair dismissal (see section 400).
(3) A person may appeal the decision by applying to FWA.”
An appeal pursuant to s.604 is an appeal by way of rehearing, but Fair Work Australia's powers on appeal are only exercisable if
there is error on the part of the Commissioner at first instance.
Section 400 states:
“400 Appeal rights
(1) Despite subsection 604(2), FWA must not grant permission to appeal from a decision made by FWA under this Part unless FWA considers
that it is in the public interest to do so.
(2) Despite subsection 604(1), an appeal from a decision made by FWA in relation to a matter arising under this Part can only, to
the extent that it is an appeal on a question of fact, be made on the ground that the decision involved a significant error of fact.”
The Commissioner’s decision involves a degree of subjectivity and must be broadly characterised as a discretionary decision.
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission and others
the High Court stated:
“Because a decision-maker charged with the making of a discretionary decision has some latitude as to the decision to be made,
the correctness of the decision can only be challenged by showing error in the decision-making process. And unless the relevant statute
directs otherwise, it is only if there is error in that process that a discretionary decision can be set aside by an appellate tribunal.
The errors that might be made in the decision-making process were identified, in relation to judicial discretions, in House v The
King in these terms:
"If the judge acts upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes
the facts, if he does not take into account some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the appellate
court may exercise its own discretion in substitution for his if it has the materials for doing so."”
(Footnote deleted)
A failure to afford natural justice is an error of law within
House v King.
TWU v Carpentaria Transport Pty Ltd
a Full Bench of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission addressed the issue of natural justice in the following terms:
“The Angliss Case (R v Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission [122 CLR 546]) includes the following passage at
pages 552 and 553 on the application of the principles of natural justice to proceedings before the Commission.
`There can be no doubt as to this Court's jurisdiction under
Constitution
to grant prohibition to a member of the Commission. Nor can there be any doubt that members of that Commission under the Act are
bound to act in a judicial manner or that the common law principles of natural justice are applicable to the Commission and its members
in relation to such hearings. But it must be borne in mind that these principles are not to be found in a fixed body of rules applicable
inflexibly at all times and in all circumstances. Tucker L.J. said in Russel v. Duke of Norfolk:
(1949) 1 All E.R. 109
, at p.118.
`The requirements of natural justice must depend on the circumstances of the case, the nature of the inquiry, the rules under which
the tribunal is acting, the subject matter that is being dealt with, and so forth.'
This passage was approved by the Privy Council in University of Ceylon v. Fernando (1960) I All E.R. 631, and was used by Kitto J.
in Mobil Oil Australia Pty. Ltd v. Federal Commissioner of taxation
[1963] HCA 41
(1963) 113 CLR 475
, at p.504. There His Honour observed:
`What the law requires in the discharge of a quasi-judicial function is judicial fairness ... What is fair in a given situation depends
upon the circumstances.'
We agree with the foregoing statements of the relevant law. It is plain that when it is necessary to consider a question of fairness
in relation to a tribunal the whole of the circumstances in the field of the inquiry are of importance. The nature of the jurisdiction
exercised and the statutory provisions governing its exercise are amongst those circumstances.' "
Then, after referring to and quoting from Mobil Oil (see above), said:
"The appropriate course for us to take is to determine whether proper standards of fairness were applied to the union by Maddern
J. Having regard to the circumstances was the union given a fair go?"
There are two broad allegations of a breach of natural justice. Firstly, Ms Turner argues that she was denied procedural fairness
in her attempt to have the Commissioner take account of correspondence to and from a member of the Western Australian Parliament.
We do not accept that the Commissioner denied Ms Turner natural justice or procedural fairness relative to this correspondence. That
issue is irrelevant to the matter before the Commissioner and we endorse his conclusion in that respect.
Secondly, Ms Turner submits that the Commissioner failed to afford her natural justice when he refused to adjourn the proceedings
on 6 June 2012 after advice of Ms Turner's absence because of illness. That absence was supported by a medical certificate. The Commissioner
determined to proceed after a brief delay so as to hear the evidence of Ms Bell. As we have noted, that evidence was significant
to the primary reason for Ms Turner's dismissal and the Commissioner subsequently made findings of credit in this respect.
In the initial hearing Mr King submitted to the Commissioner that an adjournment was necessary as Ms Turner's absence meant that
he could not receive instructions. The Commissioner decided to proceed with the hearing:
“THE COMMISSIONER: All right, what I propose is this: in part, I will grant the adjournment - whilst I am significantly concerned
at the manner in which the adjournment has been sought. The only information before me is a medical certificate and whilst I agree
with Mr Harris there is scant information provided, that medical certificate does indicate that the doctor's opinion is that Mrs
Rachel Turner is unfit to work, including any proceedings relating to Fair Work Australia. In those circumstances, I think I am
obliged, on the face of it, to accept that medical advice that Mrs Turner is not able to be present today. Mrs Turner is the instructor
of Mr King. Mrs Turner is the applicant in this matter and to that extent I agree with Mr King. It is not appropriate for the matter
to proceed in her absence.
I am unsurprisingly concerned at the disruption and the cost that will be incurred by the respondent if this matter is adjourned today.
However, to the extent that we can usefully use the time we have available today, I am considering - and I want to hear from both
parties on this - whether we should adjourn now and resume at 2 pm to take the evidence of Ms Bell and have Ms Bell cross-examined.
Her evidence is very limited and I see very little difficulty in that. Mr King, what's your view about that?”
The adjournment issue was the subject of further consideration:
“MR KING: I'm not in a position to take instruction from Mrs Turner as to the cross-examination if something comes up that
I don't know and I don't know child care. Mrs Turner is not here to correct it. If I do something wrong then Mrs Turner has every
right to seek compensation from me under my professional indemnity insurance.
THE COMMISSIONER: The decision won't be yours, Mr King. It'll be mine. The transcript will show that.
MR KING: Further to that, Mrs Turner apparently didn't see her GP until 5 pm last night, or didn't have an appointment until 5 pm
and her husband phoned me early in the evening
THE COMMISSIONER: Yes, whatever, Mr King. We've moved on from there.
MR KING: I wouldn't be in a position today to carry on with Mrs Bell
THE COMMISSIONER: Well, in my view, you should be. Thank you Mr King.
MR KING: - - - and that would prejudice
THE COMMISSIONER: Thank you, Mr King. I've heard enough. Mr Harris, what is your view about proceeding with Ms Bell - and I have
no discomfort if in your view it's - for want of a better word - not worth bothering with? If you have concerns with her evidence
being out of sequence and so forth I'm happy for her evidence to be dealt with another day but I'm concerned about her inconvenience
and potentially at least using some of today to make some progress.
MR HARRIS: We thank you for your consideration, sir, and we've just been instructed that we're happy to proceed with Ms Bell's evidence
at 2 o'clock.
THE COMMISSIONER: All right. This is what we will do: we will now adjourn. We will resume at 2 pm and we will take the evidence
of Ms Bell and, Mr King, you will then have your opportunity to cross-examine. You have the balance of the time between now - it's
10 past 9 in the morning - and 2 pm to take any additional instructions you need to for cross-examination of Ms Bell. On that basis,
we are adjourned.”
In our respectful view, the Commissioner was in error in refusing the adjournment application. This was an error within
House v King.
The evidence of Ms Bell and Ms Turner was in conflict in relation to a conversation held between the two about the February incident.
Evidence given by Ms Bell about that conversation was central to the main allegation made against Ms Turner, namely that she did
not act appropriately when advised by Ms Bell that the February incident was of a different nature to what she had been told. The
Commissioner preferred that evidence to contrary evidence given by Ms Turner, and then found that Ms Turner had accordingly engaged
in serious misconduct.
He noted that Ms Bell was not cross examined on important aspects of her evidence.
Because Ms Turner was denied the opportunity to be present to give her advocate instructions on the cross examination of Ms Bell,
she was not given the opportunity to put her case on a central aspect of the allegations made against her. She was therefore denied
natural justice.
Ms Turner's her absence meant that Mr King was unable to obtain from her, instructions that may well have been relevant to the cross-examination
process. We consider that it is conceivable that Ms Bell's evidence in this respect could have assisted the case Ms Turner was arguing,
to the effect that Ms Bell's remarks to her were fleeting and that she was entitled to attach little or no weight to Ms Bell's advice
of the falsification of the report into the February 2011 incident.
We have considered the effect of this error in the context of the Commissioner’s overall decision. The Commissioner took account
of Ms Turner's own admissions that her inaction was a mistake or a lapse in judgement. Her evidence was that:
“MR HARRIS: Thank you, sir. Do you now sitting there regret that you did not tell Ms Standfield or another senior manager
The possibility that different questions put to Ms Bell may have elicited different information means that we are unable to rely
on Ms Turner's concession of a judgement error as the sole basis for the conclusion reached by the Commissioner, in the following
“[146] However viewed objectively Mrs Turner’s inaction was more serious than that. The applicant was the Supervising
Officer under the CCSA and her most important job was the care of the children. She was responsible for the centre’s staff
and ensuring that the respondent’s policies where followed by staff. The applicant’s decision to reject Ms Bell’s
statements out of hand without any enquiry of her, let alone of others, was a dereliction of her duty as the Centre Director.”
In reaching his conclusion the Commissioner preferred the evidence of Ms Bell to that of Ms Turner. He stated:
“[129] I have considered the conflicting versions of the conversation between Mrs Turner and Ms Bell. Ms Bell’s evidence
in these proceedings about this conversation was consistent with what she told the respondent’s staff during the workplace
investigation meeting and consistent with what she stated in her response to the respondent’s show cause letter. Ms Bell gave
her evidence openly and was not challenged in cross examination. On balance I prefer the evidence of Ms Bell to that of Mrs Turner
Again, had different evidence been given by Ms Bell in cross examination, this may have altered his position.
We have reached this conclusion notwithstanding the manner in which Mr King presented his case was inefficient and inherently frustrating.
The Commissioner showed patience and care in responding to the manner in which the case was presented. The case put to us on appeal
was of a similar nature.
Further, the Commissioner concluded that the various other allegations against Ms Turner collectively represented a valid reason
for the termination of employment, other than on a summary basis. This means that, if these matters alone were relied upon in the
context of a valid reason, the Commissioner’s overall conclusion about the criteria in s.387 may have been different.
Whilst we are unable to determine the matter by way of rehearing without giving the parties the opportunity to recall Ms Bell, it
is appropriate that we comment briefly on a number of the other many grounds for the appeal as this decision cannot be taken as any
form of unilateral endorsement of those grounds.
On the appeal, Ms Turner's repeated characterisation of the decision outcome as erroneous will depend on the evidence of Ms Bell
presented in any rehearing.
We are not satisfied that the Commissioner’s conclusions with respect to the
Child Care Services Act 2007
or the Commissioner’s conclusions about reporting obligations reflected an appealable error in the circumstances of this case.
Ms Turner asserts that in reaching his conclusions about the fairness of her dismissal, the Commissioner erred by not giving consideration
to s392(3) of the FW Act. Section 392(3) of the FW Act is simply not relevant.
We are not satisfied that Ms Turner has established any appealable error relative to the Commissioner’s consideration of the
various other allegations made by GoodStart relative to Ms Turner or that any other appeal ground has been substantiated.
A compelling reason for the admission of new evidence from persons not called in the proceedings before Williams C would need to
be made out. The material before us on appeal does not establish a basis for the admission of new evidence.
The Commissioner’s decision not to grant an adjournment on 7 June 2012 such that Mr King was unable to be instructed by Ms
Turner whilst Ms Bell was giving evidence, was an error of a jurisdictional nature. We are satisfied that, in these circumstances,
the public interest is enlivened and it is appropriate to allow the appeal. We do so on a limited basis so as to allow the Tribunal
to review the evidence of Ms Bell. The Commissioner’s decision is quashed. The matter is referred back to Williams C for determination.
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
for the appellant.
solicitor for the respondent.
Hearing details:
November 14.
[2012] FWA 8074
[2012] FWAFB 3995
[2012] FWA 8074
, paras [86] - [156]
Ibid, para [155]
Ibid, para [156]
[2000] HCA 47
203 CLR 194
(2000), para 21
Print P5907, 17 October 1997
[2012] FWA 8074
, paras [129] and [130]
Transcript, 7 June 2012, PN2563 and PN2564
Ibid, PN2567 - PN2576
Ibid, paragraphs 143-148
Ibid, paragraph 122
Transcript, 4 April 2012, PN1610
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR532277>
No downloadable files available