Australian News Channel Pty Ltd and eSafety Commissioner (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 178 (31 October 2025)
Australian News Channel Pty Ltd and eSafety Commissioner (Freedom of
information)
[2025] AICmr 178 (31 October 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of Justin Lodge, Acting
General Manager Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the
Australian Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Australian News Channel Pty Ltd
eSafety Commissioner
Decision date
Freedom of Information —
Respondent to process request following removal of practical refusal reason claim
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the decision of the eSafety Commissioner (eSafety) of 3 July 2024. In
considering eSafety’s indication
that it no longer maintains that
processing the applicant’s revised request would amount to a substantial
and unreasonable
diversion of eSafety’s resources from its other
operations, I substitute my decision that a practical refusal reason does not
of this decision, eSafety
must process the applicant’s request and notify the applicant of its
decision in accordance with
s 26 of the FOI Act, and must also advise whether it
has fully implemented my decision.
decision sets aside eSafety’s practical refusal decision on the basis that
eSafety no longer maintains a practical refusal
reason exists.
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
20 May 2023, the applicant
two part request to eSafety which can be broadly summarised as seeking access
various types of
specified correspondence between Julie Inman Grant and Toby Allan Dagg
mentioning certain terms for a specified period
of 12 months (Part 1), and
daily reports
and emails associated with them which were compiled by a meltwater application
showing the number of social media posts
mentioning certain terms from the last
60 days (Part 2).
7 June 2024, eSafety provided the applicant with a s 24AB notice stating that it
intended to refuse the request under s 24AA(1)(a)(i)
of the FOI Act on the
grounds that a practical refusal reason exists, as processing the request would
substantially and unreasonably
divert the resources of eSafety from its other
operations.
24 June 2024, the applicant responded revising the scope of Part 1 of their
request by narrowing the date range by six months.
3 July 2024, eSafety refused the applicant’s revised request under
s 24AA(1)(a)(i) on the basis that processing the request
would amount to a
substantial and unreasonable diversion of resources from eSafety’s other
operations.
4 July 2024, the applicant sought IC review of eSafety’s decision under s
54L of the FOI Act.
the course of the IC review, eSafety released documents relating to Part 2 of
the applicant’s request through administrative
access arrangements. The
applicant subsequently agreed to narrow the scope of this IC review to documents
relating to Part 1 of the
request. The applicant also agreed to further revise
Part 1 of the request by narrowing the date range to a period of four months,
and only requesting specified emails. Subsequently, eSafety indicated that it no
longer maintains that processing the applicant’s
revised request would
amount to a substantial and unreasonable diversion of its resources from its
other operations (s 24AA(1)(a)(i)),
and that it is able to process the revised
an IC review of an access refusal decision, eSafety bears the onus of
establishing that their decision is justified or that I should
give a decision
adverse to the IC review applicant (s 55D (1)).
on the information before me, I am satisfied that the practical refusal reason
no longer exists.
Accordingly,
eSafety must now process the applicant’s request and notify the applicant
of its decision within 30 days of receipt
Justin Lodge
Acting General Manager, Freedom of
Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian Information
Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Whether a practical refusal reason exists (ss 24 and
Section 24 of the FOI Act
enables an agency or Minister to refuse access to a document where the agency
has undertaken a request consultation
process in accordance with s 24AB of the
FOI Act, and after that process the agency or Minister is satisfied that the
practical refusal
reason still exists.
Subparagraph 24AA(1)(a) of the FOI Act lists the following practical refusal
(1) For the purposes of section 24, a practical refusal reason exists in
relation to a request for a document if either (or both)
of the following
(a) the work involved in processing the request:
(i) in the case of an agency--would substantially and unreasonably divert
the resources of the agency from its other operations;
(ii) in the case of a Minister--would substantially and unreasonably
interfere with the performance of the Minister's functions;
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
On the question of the
processing deadlines that now apply, see
Fletcher and Prime Minister of
The request was made by a
journalist at SkyNews. In their IC review application, and in correspondence
during the IC review dated
25 July 2024, they advised that Australia News
Channel Pty Ltd is the FOI and IC review applicant.
RTF format (22.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format