Application by New South Wales Minerals Council (No 3) [2021] ACompT 4 (4 August 2021)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by New South Wales Minerals
Council (No 3) [2021]
Decision of the Commonwealth Treasurer under
Competition
and Consumer Act
(Cth) not to declare services at the Port of
Newcastle made on 16 February 2021
File number:
ACT 1 of 2021
O'Bryan (Deputy President)
ABRAHAM (Member)
PROF K DAVIS (Member)
Date of determination:
Catchwords:
TRADE PRACTICES
– application under
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth) for review
of the decision of the Commonwealth Treasurer under
not to declare the
shipping channel service at the Port of Newcastle – consideration of
statutory framework for review –
consideration of declaration criteria in
– whether declaration criterion (a) satisfied – whether
access on reasonable terms and conditions as a result of declaration
promote a material increase in competition in the coal tenements market in the
Hunter Valley – consideration of commercial,
regulatory and economic
constraints facing the Port – consideration of prices likely to be charged
by the Port for the shipping
channel service in the future with and without
declaration – whether declaration criterion (d) satisfied – decision
the Commonwealth Treasurer affirmed
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION
– meaning of paragraph 44ZZCA(1)(a) – meaning of the phrase
“access on reasonable terms and conditions” –
meaning of the
word “would” – meaning of the phrase “promote a material
increase in competition” –
time horizon over which criterion to be
Tribunal is empowered by
to award costs in a review under
of a decision under
declare a service
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Competition and Consumer Amendment (Competition Policy Review) Act
Competition Policy Reform Act 1995
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
Trade Practices Amendment (National Access Regime) Act 2006
Ports and Maritime Administration Act 1995
Ports and Maritime Administration Regulations 2012
Cases cited:
ACCC v Pacific National
[2020] FCAFC 77
(2020) 277 FCR 49
Application by Medicines Australia Inc
[2007] ACompT 4
Application by New South Wales Minerals Council (No 2)
[2021] ACompT
Application by New South Wales Minerals Council
[2021] ACompT
Application by Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd
[2019] ACompT
Brandy v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[1995] HCA 10
Builders Licensing Board v Sperway Constructions (Syd) Pty Ltd
[1976] HCA 62
(1976) 135 CLR 616
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations
(2000) 203 CLR 194
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 2 ALD
East Australian Pipeline Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2007] HCA 44
(2007) 233 CLR 229
Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Competition
[2020] FCAFC 145
(2020) 280 FCR 194
O’Sullivan v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2018] FCA 228
(2018) 160 ALD 233
Pilbara Infrastructure Pty Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2012] HCA 36
(2012) 246 CLR 379
Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Competition
[2017] FCAFC 124
(2017) 253 FCR 115
Re Australian Consumers’ Association’s Application
(1987) 82 ALR 115
Re Duke Eastern Gas Pipeline Pty Ltd
[2001] ACompT 2
Re Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
[2010] ACompT 2
271 ALR 256
Re Glencore Coal Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2016] ACompT 7
309 FLR 358
Re Glencore Coal Pty Ltd
[2016] ACompT 6
Re Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
(1978) 17 ALR 281
Re Queensland Co‑operative Milling Association Ltd
Re Services Sydney Pty Ltd
[2005] ACompT 7
227 ALR 140
Re Sydney International Airport
[2000] ACompT 1
Re Virgin Blue Airlines Pty Ltd
[2005] ACompT 5
195 FLR 242
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR
Sydney Airport Corporation Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2006] FCAFC 146
(2006) 155 FCR 124
Tasty Chicks Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (NSW)
(2011) 245 CLR 446
Telstra Corporation Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2009] FCAFC 23
Date of hearing:
22-24 June 2021
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for New South Wales Minerals Council:
N De Young QC with D Tynan
Solicitor for New South Wales Minerals Council:
Clifford Chance LLP
Counsel for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
D Roche with P Strickland
Solicitor for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty
Clayton Utz
Counsel for National Competition Council:
P Crutchfield QC with C Van Proctor
Solicitor for National Competition Council:
Johnson Winter & Slattery
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 1 OF 2021
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW LODGED BY NEW SOUTH WALES
MINERALS COUNCIL UNDER
SUBSECTION 44K(2)
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT
(CTH) OF THE DECISION OF THE DESIGNATED MINISTER UNDER
SUBSECTION 44H(1)
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT 2010
NEW SOUTH WALES MINERALS COUNCIL
DETERMINATION
JUSTICE O’BRYAN (Deputy President)
DR D ABRAHAM
PROF K DAVIS (Member)
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES AND DIRECTS THAT
decision dated 16 February 2021 by the designated Minister, the Hon Joshua
Frydenberg MP, Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia,
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
), not to declare the
service provided at the Port of Newcastle comprising the provision of the right
to access and use all the shipping
channels and berthing facilities required for
the export of coal from the port, by virtue of which vessels may enter a port
and load and unload at relevant terminals located within the port
precinct, and then depart the port precinct, currently being provided
Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd, be affirmed.
14 days after the date of this determination, Port of Newcastle Operations Pty
) is to notify the Tribunal, the New South Wales Minerals Council
) and the National Competition Council (
) whether it
seeks an opportunity to make further written submissions on the question of the
Tribunal’s power under
of the Act to make an order for costs in
this proceeding.
PNO gives notice under direction 2 that it seeks an opportunity to make further
written submissions on the question of the Tribunal’s
power under
of the Act:
(a) PNO must file such submissions, and any
supplementary submissions on the exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion to
order for costs (should the Tribunal reach the view that it has power to
make an order for costs), limited to 10 pages, within 28
days after the date of
this determination;
(b) NSWMC must file any submissions in reply, limited to 10 pages, within 42
days after the date of this determination;
(c) the Tribunal will determine the application for costs on the papers
unless PNO or NSWMC indicate in their written submissions
that they seek an
opportunity to advance oral submissions on the application.
INTRODUCTION
STATUTORY FRAMEWORK FOR THE
TRIBUNAL’S REVIEW
Nature of the Tribunal’s
The applicable statutory
The Port and the Hunter Valley coal
Port charges
The declaration of Port
Arbitration of Port
The revocation of the
declaration
PNO’s current
Authorisation of collective
TREASURER’S
NSWMC SUBMISSIONS
The test to be applied
“Hold-up” risk of
Competitiveness of the tenements
Port charges relative to coal mining
PNO’s ability and incentive to
exercise market power
Period of declaration
Decisions of the Queensland
Competition Authority
CONSIDERATION OF CRITERION
Meaning of criterion
How access may affect the conditions
and environment for competition in dependent markets
Framework for the
The shipping channel
The coal tenements
Access without
declaration
Comparing the effect of access with
declaration to access without declaration
Conclusion on criterion
CONSIDERATION OF CRITERION
CONCLUSION AND COSTS
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
A. INTRODUCTION
Port of Newcastle (
) is one of the larger coal export ports in the
world, with coal extracted from the Hunter Valley being shipped through the
The Port can be described as a bottleneck facility as coal producers in
the Hunter Valley have no practicable alternative to the
Port for the export of
their coal.
May 2014, the Port was privatised by the grant of a 98 year lease to The
Infrastructure Fund (managed by Hastings Funds Management)
and China Merchants
Group as joint venturers. The Port is now operated by Port of Newcastle
Operations Pty Ltd (
), a company owned by the joint venturers. As the
operator of the Port, PNO controls the terms and conditions of access to the
including, relevantly, the shipping channels and berthing facilities
required for the export of coal from the Port.
23 July 2020, the New South Wales Minerals Council (
) applied to the
National Competition Council (
Competition
and Consumer Act 2010
) asking the NCC to recommend that a
service at the Port provided by PNO be declared. The service comprises the
provision of the right
to access and use all the shipping channels and berthing
facilities required for the export of coal from the Port, by virtue of which
vessels may enter a Port precinct and load and unload at relevant terminals
located within the Port precinct, and then depart the
Port precinct (which we
will refer to as the
shipping channel service
for convenience).
18 December 2020, the NCC provided its final recommendation (
Recommendation
) to the designated Minister, the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP,
Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia (
recommended that the shipping channel service not be declared on the basis that
the criteria in paragraphs 44CA(1)(a) and
(d) of the Act had not been satisfied.
Those criteria are as follows:
(a) that access (or increased access) to the service,
on reasonable terms and conditions, as a result of a declaration of the service
would promote a material increase in competition in at least one market (whether
or not in Australia), other than the market for
the service;
(d) that access (or increased access) to the service, on reasonable terms and
conditions, as a result of a declaration of the service
would promote the public
16 February 2021, the Treasurer decided under
of the Act not to declare
the shipping channel service on the same basis, namely that the criteria in
paragraphs 44CA(1)(a) and (d)
had not been satisfied. The Treasurer’s
decision and reasons for the decision were published the same day in accordance
Treasurer’s Reasons
this proceeding, NSWMC has applied to the Tribunal under
of the Act for
a review of the Treasurer’s decision.
principal contention advanced by NSWMC to the NCC and maintained in this review
is that, without declaration of the shipping channel
service, companies
considering investments in the coal tenements market in the Hunter Valley region
will face uncertainty with respect
to future prices to be charged by PNO for the
shipping channel service. The uncertainty will increase the risk associated with
investments in tenements, as compared to access on reasonable terms and
conditions as a result of declaration. The elevated risk
increases the
likelihood that investors will delay their investments until the uncertainty is
resolved. The uncertainty will therefore
harm the conditions for competition in
the coal tenements market. In contrast, access to the shipping channel service
on reasonable
terms and conditions as a result of declaration will remove or
reduce that uncertainty and thereby promote a material increase in
competition.
principal contention to the NCC was not supported by any empirical evidence
concerning the coal tenements market. NSWMC
failed to present to the NCC any
financial or quantitative evidence concerning the coal tenements market
conditions, structure, prices
or expected returns. No financial evidence was
presented as to how investment decisions are made in the coal tenements market
how Port charges figure in investment decisions. Instead, NSWMC relied on
assertions by a limited number of existing coal mining
companies to the effect
that investment decisions would be affected if the shipping channel service were
not declared, supported
by a theoretical economic report from Synergy
Consulting.
the NCC nor the Treasurer were persuaded by NSWMC’s principal contention.
The NCC concluded (at [7.125], [7.126], [7.154]
and [7.155]) that:
(a) It is not in PNO’s long-term interests for
Port users to experience such uncertainty around access charges at the Port if
this risks significantly less investment in coal mining activity in the
Newcastle catchment.
(b) PNO has published open access arrangements that set out terms and conditions
of access for coal exports and also offered access
prices for coal exports under
a long term (10 year) deed. Both the open access arrangements and the deed make
provision for dispute
resolution. These arrangements assist coal producers in
mitigating the risks that may otherwise arise from pricing and other
uncertainties
at the Port.
(c) Coal producers and exporters seeking access to the Port face significant
uncertainty from other factors that are more likely
to influence their ability
to compete in export coal markets, particularly future changes in coal prices,
labour costs and taxes.
Relative to these factors, charges for the shipping
channel service are likely to remain a small proportion of the cost of
and sale of coal for export. The risks associated with uncertainty
over access charges for the shipping channel service would not
significantly to an investor’s expected valuation of future mining
projects in the Newcastle catchment.
Treasurer accepted the conclusions reached by the NCC in the
Recommendation.
Tribunal has also reached the conclusion that the criteria in paragraphs
44CA(1)(a) and (d) of the Act have not been satisfied,
for largely the same
reasons as explained in the NCC Recommendation. The Tribunal therefore affirms
the Treasurer’s decision
not to declare the shipping channel service.
the assumption that NSWMC would not be successful in its application for review,
PNO applied for an order under
of the Act that NSWMC pay its costs of
the proceeding. For the reasons set out below, the Tribunal doubts that it has
power under
to make an order for costs in this proceeding, which is a
proceeding for review of the Treasurer’s decision not to declare
shipping channel service under
(and not a proceeding for a review of a
declaration under
section 44K(1)).
However, as neither party addressed the
question of power during the hearing, the Tribunal will afford PNO and NSWMC the
opportunity
to make further written submissions on the question of power (if
they so choose) and any supplementary submissions on the exercise
Tribunal’s discretion (should the Tribunal reach the view that it has
power to make an order for costs).
B. STATUTORY FRAMEWORK FOR THE TRIBUNAL’S REVIEW
Nature of the Tribunal’s review
the course of two interlocutory applications made in this proceeding, the
Tribunal has summarised the statutory framework that
is applicable to the
Tribunal’s power to review the Treasurer’s decision under
of the Act: see
Application by New South Wales Minerals Council
Application by New South Wales Minerals Council (No 2)
[2021] ACompT 3.
It is nevertheless appropriate to restate the principal
features of the statutory framework which govern the Tribunal’s task
this proceeding.
it was first enacted, the relevant provisions of
have been subject to
significant amendment on three occasions: by the
Trade Practices Amendment
(National Access Regime) Act 2006
2006 Amendment Act
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
Amendment Act
); and by the
Competition and Consumer Amendment
(Competition Policy Review) Act 2017
2017 Amendment Act
is necessary to keep the amendments in mind when considering earlier Tribunal
and Court decisions.
s 44F(1), a person may apply in writing to the NCC asking the NCC to recommend
that a particular service be declared. Section
44F(2)(b) stipulates that the NCC
must, after having regard to the objects of Part IIIA of the Act, recommend to
the designated Minister
that the service be declared (with the expiry date
specified in the recommendation) or that the service not be declared. Section
44G provides that the NCC cannot recommend that a service be declared unless it
is satisfied of all of the declaration criteria for
the service. The declaration
criteria are set out below. Section 44GA requires the NCC to make a
recommendation within a period of
180 days, although the NCC may extend that
period in certain circumstances. Section 44GC provides that the NCC must publish
its recommendation
under section 44F and its reasons for the
recommendation.
s 44D, the designated Minister is defined as the Commonwealth Minister unless
the provider of the service is a State or Territory
body. At the time of the
decision the subject of this proceeding, the relevant Commonwealth Minister was
the Commonwealth Treasurer.
s 44H(1), on receiving a declaration recommendation, the designated Minister
must either declare the service or decide not to
declare it. Section 44H(1A)
stipulates that the designated Minister must have regard to the objects of Part
IIIA in making his or
her decision and s 44H(4) stipulates that the designated
Minister cannot declare a service unless he or she is satisfied of all of
declaration criteria for the service. Section 44H(9) provides that if the
designated Minister does not publish his or her decision
on the declaration
recommendation within 60 days, the designated Minister is taken, at the end of
that 60-day period, to have made
a decision in accordance with the declaration
recommendation.
the present case, the Treasurer published his decision not to declare the
shipping channel service, and the reasons for the decision,
within the 60-day
period specified by s 44H(9).
Tribunal is empowered by s 44K(2) to review the Treasurer’s decision not
to declare the service. Section 44K provides as
44K Review of declaration
(1) If the designated Minister declares a service, the provider may apply in
writing to the Tribunal for review of the declaration.
(2) If the designated Minister decides not to declare a service, an application
in writing for review of the designated Minister’s
decision may be made by
the person who applied for the declaration recommendation.
(3) An application for review must be made within 21 days after publication of
the designated Minister’s decision.
(4) The review by the Tribunal is a re‑consideration of the matter based
on the information, reports and things referred to
in section 44ZZOAA.
Note: There are limits on the information to which the Tribunal may have regard
(see section 44ZZOAA) and time limits that apply
to the Tribunal’s
decision on the review (see section 44ZZOA).
(5) For the purposes of the review, the Tribunal has the same powers as the
designated Minister.
(6) The member of the Tribunal presiding at the review may require the Council
to give assistance for the purposes of the review
(including for the purposes of
deciding whether to make an order under section 44KA).
(6A) Without limiting subsection (6), the member may, by written notice,
require the Council to give information, and to make reports,
specified in the notice, within the period specified in the notice, for the
purposes of the review.
(6B) The Tribunal must:
(a) give a copy of the notice
(i) the person who applied for
review; and
(ii) the provider of the service; and
(iii) the person who applied for the declaration recommendation; and
(iv) any other person who has been made a party to the proceedings for review
by the Tribunal; and
(b) publish, by electronic or other means,
the notice.
(7) If the designated Minister declared the service,
the Tribunal may affirm, vary or set aside the declaration.
(8) If the designated Minister decided not to declare the service, the Tribunal
may either:
(a) affirm the designated Minister’s
decision; or
(b) set aside the designated Minister’s decision and declare the service
in question.
(9) A declaration, or varied declaration, made by the
Tribunal is to be taken to be a declaration by the designated Minister for
purposes of this Part (except this section).
Tribunal’s review power under s 44K was the subject of detailed
consideration by the High Court in
Pilbara Infrastructure Pty Ltd v
Australian Competition Tribunal
[2012] HCA 36
(2012) 246 CLR 379
), while recognising that that case considered s 44K in its form
prior to the amendments made by the 2010 Amendment Act.
s 44K(4), the review by the Tribunal is defined as, and limited to, a
“re‑consideration of the matter based on the
information, reports
and things referred to in section 44ZZOAA”. Four aspects of s 44K(4)
should be noted.
the “matter” to be reviewed by the Tribunal is the Treasurer’s
decision not to declare the relevant service,
not the NCC Recommendation. In the
Pilbara case
, the plurality stated (at [37]):
The “matter” referred to in s 44K(4) was
identified in s 44K(1) and (2). In a case where the Minister has declared a
the “matter” is “the declaration” made by the
Minister. In a case where the Minister decided not to declare
a service, the
matter is “the designated Minister’s decision” not to make a
declaration. In both cases, the hinge
“matter” turns is what the Minister has done, not what the NCC did
when it made
its declaration recommendation. The requirement of s 44K(4) –
that the Tribunal review the matter and that the review be “a
re-consideration of the matter” – necessitates identification of the
Minister’s task. It is that task, and the
result of its performance, which
is to be subject to “re-consideration” by the
the Treasurer’s decision, which is the subject of review by the Tribunal,
is defined by s 44H(1). The plurality in the
Pilbara case
the Minister’s decision-making task as follows (at [45]-[47]):
Minister had only a short time to decide how to respond to a declaration
recommendation. While the NCC could extend (s 44GA) the
time for making its
recommendation about an application for a declaration, the Minister was given
sixty days after receiving the
NCC’s declaration recommendation to decide
whether to declare the service. Section 44H(9) provided that, if the Minister
not publish his or her decision on the declaration recommendation within
sixty days after receiving it, the Minister was taken, at
the end of that
period, to have decided not to declare the service and to have published that
decision. In such a case, the Minister
would publish no reasons for decision but
the NCC’s reasons for recommending a declaration would be published
pursuant to s
44GC. If the Minister made a decision, the Act obliged (s 44HA(1))
the Minister to publish that decision and the reasons for it.
is one other aspect of the Act’s treatment of the Minister’s task to
which attention should be drawn. The Minister,
unlike the Tribunal (s 44K(6)),
was given no express power to request any further information, assistance or
report from the NCC.
The statutory supposition appears to have been that the
Minister could and would make a decision on the NCC’s recommendation
without any need for further information from the NCC.
content of those provisions of Pt IIIA to which reference has been made suggests
that it was expected that, armed with a recommendation
from an expert and
non-partisan body (the NCC), the Minister would make a decision quickly and
would do so according to not only
the Minister’s view of the public
interest but also the expert advice given by the NCC about the more technical
criteria of
which the Minister had to be satisfied before a declaration could be
made. And it is the Minister’s decision, not the NCC’s
recommendation, that was the matter that was to be reviewed by the
a review which is a “re-consideration” is a more limited form of
review than a “re‑hearing” (as
might be conducted by the
Tribunal under Part IX of the Act). The plurality in the
Pilbara case
contrasted the two forms of review as follows (at [60] and [65]):
s 101(2) of the Act used “re-hearing” to describe the task of the
Tribunal reviewing a determination of the Commission,
it was using
“re-hearing” in a context wholly divorced from the exercise of
judicial power. And when s 44K(4) referred
to “re-consideration”, it
too used that word in a context divorced from the exercise of judicial power.
Nonetheless,
some different meaning must presumably be intended by the use of
the different words in identifying the review to be undertaken by
the Tribunal.
The contrast is best understood as being between a “re-hearing”
which requires deciding an issue afresh
on whatever material is placed before
the new decision maker and a “re-consideration” which requires
reviewing what the
original decision maker decided and doing that by reference
to the material that was placed before the original decision maker
(supplemented,
in this kind of case, only by whatever material the NCC provides
in answer to requests made by the Tribunal pursuant to s 44K(6)).
has already been noted, the Tribunal treated its task as being to decide afresh
on the new body of evidence and material placed
before it whether the services
should be declared. That was not its task. Its task was to review the
Minister’s decisions by
reconsidering those decisions on the material
before the Minister supplemented, if necessary, by any information, assistance
given to the Tribunal by the NCC in response to a request made under s
fourth aspect of s 44K(4) to be noted is the requirement, introduced by the 2010
Amendment Act, that the re-consideration of the
Treasurer’s decision is to
be based on the information, reports and things referred to in s 44ZZOAA. That
section (which was
also introduced by the 2010 Amendment Act) relevantly
provides as follows:
44ZZOAA Tribunal only to consider particular
For the purposes of a review under this Part, the Tribunal:
(a) subject to paragraph (b), must have regard to:
(i) information that was given to the
Tribunal under subsection 44ZZOAAA(3); and
(ii) any information given to the Tribunal in accordance with a notice given
under subsection 44ZZOAAA(5); and
(iii) any thing done as mentioned in subsection 44K(6) ...; and
(iv) any information or report given to the Tribunal in relation to the review
under subsection 44K(6A) ... within the specified
(b) may disregard:
(i) any information given to the Tribunal
in response to a notice given under subsection 44ZZOAAA(5) after the period
specified in
the notice has ended; and
(ii) any information or report of the kind specified in a notice under
subsection 44K(6A) ... that is given to the Tribunal after
the specified period
the present case, the “information, reports and things referred to in s
44ZZOAA” comprise the following:
(a) first, the material that was given to the Tribunal
by the Treasurer under s 44ZZOAAA(3) on 21 April 2021, which consisted of a
Treasury Ministerial Submission dated 18 December 2020, attaching the NCC
Recommendation, and a further Treasury Ministerial Submission
dated 12 February
2021, attaching a proposed decision and statement of reasons, together with
correspondence to the NCC, NSWMC and
PNO notifying them of the Treasurer’s
(b) second, the material given to the Tribunal by the NCC pursuant to a notice
issued by the Tribunal under s 44K(6A) on 16 June
2021, which consisted of three
pro forma deeds offered by PNO to Port users
(i) the Port User Pro Forma Long Term
Pricing Deed (
Port User Pricing Deed
), which was offered from December
(ii) the Producer Pro Forma Long Term Pricing Deed (
Producer Pricing
) and the Vessel Agent Pro Forma Long Term Pricing Deed (
Vessel Agent
Pricing Deed
), which were offered from March 2020 in replacement of the Port
User Pricing Deed,
(collectively, the
Pro Forma Pricing Deeds
), and which were annexed to
NSWMC’s original application to the NCC;
(c) third, the material given to the Tribunal by PNO
pursuant to a notice issued by the Tribunal under s 44ZZOAAA(5) on 16 June 2021,
which consisted of paragraphs 41 to 45 and 50 of PNO’s confidential
submission to the NCC dated 26 August 2020 and which related
to the Pro Forma
Pricing Deeds.
is necessary to say something more about the nature of the Tribunal’s
statutory task of reviewing the Treasurer’s decision.
As already noted, in
Pilbara case
the High Court concluded that the statutory task of
“re-considering” the decision of the designated Minister is not to
decide the issue (whether to declare or not to declare) afresh on whatever
material is placed before the Tribunal, but to review
the original decision by
reference to the material that was placed before the designated Minister.
Following the 2010 Amendment Act,
the review is to be based on the
“information, reports and things referred to in s 44ZZOAA”. The High
Court did not elaborate
further on the Tribunal’s statutory task of
“reviewing” or “re-considering” the decision of the
nature of review or appeal rights depends upon the terms of the statute
conferring the rights (see
Tasty Chicks Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue (NSW)
(2011) 245 CLR 446
at [5] per French CJ, Gummow, Crennan,
Kiefel and Bell JJ;
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
235 CLR 286
) at [25] per Kirby J, at [92] per Hayne and
Heydon JJ and at [132] per Kiefel J;
East Australian Pipeline Pty Ltd v
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2007] HCA 44
(2007) 233 CLR 229
per Gummow and Hayne JJ;
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian
Industrial Relations Commission
(2000) 203 CLR 194
at [11] per Gleeson CJ,
Gaudron and Hayne JJ and at [118] per Callinan J citing
Builders Licensing
Board v Sperway Constructions (Syd) Pty Ltd
[1976] HCA 62
(1976) 135 CLR 616
per Mason J, with whose judgment Barwick CJ and Stephen J agreed). In
v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[1995] HCA 10
(1995) 183 CLR 245
CJ, Brennan and Toohey JJ observed (at 261):
In considering the nature of the 'review' contemplated
by s25ZAC, it is relevant to note that the expression 'review' is commonly
in the context of judicial control of administrative action and in the context
of comprehensive administrative review by an
administrative tribunal of
administrative decisions. But what emerges from the judicial decisions and, for
that matter, from statutes
is that 'review' has no settled pre-determined
meaning; it takes its meaning from the context in which it
already noted, s 44K(4) describes the Tribunal’s task as a
“re-consideration” of the decision of the designated
Minister. The
ordinary meaning of the word “re-consider” is to consider again.
Together, ss 44K(5), (7), (8) and (9)
provide that:
(a) the Tribunal has the same powers as the designated
(b) the Tribunal may affirm, vary or set aside the decision of the designated
Minister and, if the Minister decided not to declare
the service, the Tribunal
may declare the service; and
(c) the Tribunal’s declaration of the service is taken to be a declaration
by the designated Minister for all purposes of Part
language of those subsections is similar to that found in many statutes that
provide for review by an administrative tribunal
of administrative decisions
including, for example,
and (6) of the
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth). The combined effect of ss 44K(4), (5), (7), (8) and
(9) indicate that the Tribunal’s review task is to determine whether
decision made by the designated Minister was objectively the correct or
preferable decision to be made: cf
Drake v Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 2 ALD 60
at 78 (Smithers J). In that sense, the
Tribunal “stands in the shoes” of the designated Minister:
O’Sullivan v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2018] FCA 228
(2018) 160 ALD 233
at [40], [100] and [134]. However,
the Tribunal is to conduct the review and make that determination based on the
information, reports
and things referred to in s 44ZZOAA, not on whatever
material the participants seek to place before the Tribunal.
follows that the Tribunal’s power of review is not limited to the
identification and correction of error in the Treasurer’s
Reasons. The
Tribunal is required to review the Treasurer’s decision not to declare the
relevant service, not the reasons for
decision. In that respect, the review task
is analogous to that required under
of the Act: see for example
Queensland Co‑operative Milling Association Ltd
(1976) 8 ALR 481
) at 486 (Woodward J, Mr J Shipton and Prof M Brunt);
Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
(1978) 17 ALR 281
Re Herald &
Weekly Times
) at 295-296 (Deane J, Mr J Shipton and Mr J Walker);
Australian Consumers’ Association’s Application (Re Media Council
of Australia (No 2))
(1987) 82 ALR 115
at 126 (Lockhart J, Prof M Brunt and
Dr B Aldrich);
Application by Medicines Australia Inc
[2007] ACompT 4
ATPR 42-164 (
Medicines Australia
) at [135] and [138] (French J, Mr
G Latta and Prof C Walsh). As those decisions of the Tribunal make clear, the
task of the Tribunal
is not to review the reasons of the decision-maker, but the
reasons may “prove a convenient reference point for defining the
which are truly in dispute” (
Re Herald & Weekly Times
Ultimately, the Tribunal must make its own decision with respect to the
application of the statutory criteria, based on
the material taken into account
by the Treasurer supplemented by any additional material obtained by the
Tribunal in exercise of
its powers under ss 44K(6), 44K(6A) and
44ZZOAAA(4).
The applicable statutory criteria
decision of the Treasurer, which the Tribunal is required to reconsider, was
made under s 44H which relevantly provides as follows:
44H Designated Minister may declare a
(1) On receiving a declaration recommendation, the designated Minister must
either declare the service or decide not to declare
Note: The designated Minister must publish his or her decision: see section
(1A) The designated Minister must have regard to the objects of this Part in
making his or her decision.
(4) The designated Minister cannot declare a service unless he or she is
satisfied of all of the declaration criteria for the service.
are stated in
as follows:
44AA Objects of Part
The objects of this Part are to:
(a) promote the economically efficient operation of, use of and investment in
the infrastructure by which services are provided,
thereby promoting effective
competition in upstream and downstream markets; and
(b) provide a framework and guiding principles to encourage a consistent
approach to access regulation in each industry.
declaration criteria are defined by s 44CA as follows:
44CA Meaning of declaration criteria
(1) The declaration criteria for a service are:
(a) that access (or increased access) to
the service, on reasonable terms and conditions, as a result of a declaration of
the service
would promote a material increase in competition in at least one
market (whether or not in Australia), other than the market for
the service;
Note: Market is defined in section
(b) that the facility that is used (or will
be used) to provide the service could meet the total foreseeable demand in the
(i) over the period for which
the service would be declared; and
(ii) at the least cost compared to any 2 or more facilities (which could
include the first-mentioned facility); and
(c) that the facility is of national
significance, having regard to:
(i) the size of the facility;
(ii) the importance of the facility to constitutional trade or commerce; or
(iii) the importance of the facility to the national economy;
(d) that access (or increased access) to
the service, on reasonable terms and conditions, as a result of a declaration of
the service
would promote the public
(2) For the purposes of paragraph
(a) if the facility is currently at
capacity, and it is reasonably possible to expand that capacity, have regard to
the facility
as if it had that expanded capacity; and
(b) without limiting paragraph (1)(b), the cost referred to in that paragraph
includes all costs associated with having multiple
users of the facility
(including such costs that would be incurred if the service is
(3) Without limiting the matters to which the Council
may have regard for the purposes of section 44G, or the designated Minister
have regard for the purposes of section 44H, in considering whether paragraph
(1)(d) of this section applies the Council or designated
Minister must have
(a) the effect that declaring the service
would have on investment in:
(i) infrastructure services;
(ii) markets that depend on access to the service;
(b) the administrative and compliance
costs that would be incurred by the provider of the service if the service is
noted earlier, the Treasurer decided not to declare the shipping channel service
on the basis that the criteria in paragraphs 44CA(1)(a)
and (d) had not been
satisfied. In this proceeding, all participants accepted that the criteria in
paragraphs 44CA(1)(b) and (c)
were satisfied. Accordingly, it is only necessary
for the Tribunal to consider criteria (a) and (d).
declaration criteria in
of the Act were amended by the 2017 Amendment
Act with effect from 6 November 2017. Prior to the amendment, the declaration
were located in s 44H(4). After the amendment, the declaration
criteria were relocated to a new s 44CA(1). Each of criterion (a)
were the subject of material revision.
Criterion (a)
Part IIIA was first enacted by the
Competition Policy Reform Act 1995
(Cth), criterion (a) was expressed as follows: “that access (or increased
access) to the service would promote competition
in at least one market (whether
or not in Australia), other than the market for the service”.
first enacted, the criterion focussed on the question whether access would
“promote competition”. In
Re Sydney International Airport
[2000] ACompT 1
Re Sydney International Airport
Tribunal construed that expression as follows (at [106]-[107]):
The Tribunal does not consider that the notion of
"promoting" competition in s 44H(4)(a) requires it to be satisfied that there
be an advance in competition in the sense that competition would be
increased. Rather, the Tribunal considers that the notion of
"promoting"
competition in s 44H(4)(a) involves the idea of creating the conditions or
environment for improving competition from
what it would be otherwise. That is
to say, the opportunities and environment for competition given declaration,
will be better than
they would be without declaration.
We have reached this conclusion having had regard, in particular, to the two
stage process of the
access regime. The purpose of an access declaration
is to unlock a bottleneck so that competition can be promoted in a market other
than the market for the service. The emphasis is on "access", which leads us to
the view that s 44H(4)(a) is concerned with the fostering
of competition, that
is to say it is concerned with the removal of barriers to entry which inhibit
the opportunity for competition
in the relevant downstream market. It is in this
sense that the Tribunal considers that the promotion of competition involves a
consideration
that if the conditions or environment for improving competition
are enhanced, then there is a likelihood of increased competition
that is not
Tribunal’s explanation of the meaning of the phrase “promote
competition” has been consistently followed in
subsequent Tribunal
decisions: see
Re Duke Eastern Gas Pipeline Pty Ltd
[2001] ACompT 2
Re Virgin Blue Airlines Pty Ltd
[2005] ACompT 5
195 FLR 242
Re Virgin Blue
) at [146];
Services Sydney Pty Ltd
[2005] ACompT 7
227 ALR 140
Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
[2010] ACompT 2
271 ALR 256
Re Fortescue
) at [1060]. In
Telstra Corporation Ltd v Australian
Competition Tribunal
[2009] FCAFC 23
(2009) 175 FCR 201
Telstra Corporation
the Full Court approved that understanding of the phrase when used in an
analogous context in the telecommunications access regime
(at [224]-[225]). So too in
Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd v Australian
Competition Tribunal
[2017] FCAFC 124
(2017) 253 FCR 115
Port of Newcastle
the Full Court used the same explanation of the meaning of the phrase
“promote competition” (at [86]). The Tribunal
discusses further the
phrase “promote competition”, and particularly the meaning of the
word “competition”,
Re Sydney International Airport
and the Tribunal decisions that followed,
criterion (a) was understood to require an assessment of the effect of
declaration on the
promotion of competition. In
Re Virgin Blue
Tribunal expressed the relevant enquiry as follows (at [148]):
In order to determine whether access or increased access
“would promote competition” in a dependent market, it is necessary
to undertake an analysis of the future with declaration (which is referred to as
the “factual”) as against the future
without declaration (which is
referred to as the “counterfactual”). As the Tribunal in
Sydney Airports Corp
observed at [108], a comparison of the factual and the
counterfactual requires a forward-looking analysis which involves a comparison
of the competitive conditions and environment likely to arise in the future with
and without declaration.
on application for review of the decision in
Re Virgin Blue
Court of the Federal Court in
Sydney Airport Corporation Ltd v Australian
Competition Tribunal
[2006] FCAFC 146
(2006) 155 FCR 124
Sydney Airport
concluded that criterion (a) required a comparison between access and no access,
and limited access and increased access, to the
service (at [81]). In other
words, the criterion required a comparison of the future state of competition in
the dependent market
with a right or ability to use the service and the future
state of competition in the dependent market without any right or ability
with a restricted right or ability to use the service (at [83]). The criterion
did not involve an enquiry about the effect of
declaration under
discussed below, criterion (a) was amended by the 2017 Amendment Act to overcome
the interpretation in
Sydney Airport
and, to a considerable extent,
revert to the interpretation in
Re Virgin Blue
(a) was amended by the 2006 Amendment Act, which inserted the phrase “a
material increase in” before the word
“competition”. Thus,
criterion (a) became “that access (or increased access) to the service
would promote a material
increase in competition in at least one market (whether
or not in Australia), other than the market for the service”. In relation
to the meaning of the phrase “material increase”, the Explanatory
Memorandum to the
Trade Practices Amendment (National Access Regime) Bill
(Cth) stated (at [1.9]):
The Government has agreed to amend the ‘promote
competition’ declaration criteria contained in paragraph 44G(2)(a), to
ensure that access declarations are only granted where the expected increase in
competition in an upstream or downstream market is
Re Fortescue Metals
, the Tribunal concluded (at [584]) that the inclusion
of the phrase “material increase” brought no change to the existing
law as the Tribunal had always taken the position that criterion (a) required a
non-trivial increase in competition (referring to
Sydney International Airport
Port of Newcastle
, the Full Court approved the interpretation of
criterion (a) adopted in
Sydney Airport
(at [136]), and concluded that
the proper construction of criterion (a) was not affected by the amendment made
by the 2006 Amendment
Act (at [144]). In respect of the phrase “material
increase”, the Full Court also noted (at [144]) the statement in the
Explanatory Memorandum (reproduced above) to the effect that the criterion only
applies where the expected increase in competition
in an upstream or downstream
market is not trivial.
(a) was amended in a more significant way by the 2017 Amendment Act. Since 6
November 2017, criterion (a) has become “that
access (or increased access)
to the service, on reasonable terms and conditions, as a result of a declaration
of the service would
promote a material increase in competition in at least one
market (whether or not in Australia), other than the market for the
It can be seen that the phrase “access (or increased
access) to the service” has now been qualified by the phrase “on
reasonable terms and conditions, as a result of a declaration of the
service”. This is the first decision of the Tribunal to
consider criterion
(a) as so amended.
its plain terms, the amended criterion no longer requires a comparison of access
and no access. The relevant enquiry has become:
what effect would access to the
service on reasonable terms and conditions as a result of a declaration of the
service have on the
promotion of competition in a dependent market? That enquiry
invites a comparison of (i) access on reasonable terms and conditions
result of a declaration of the service and (ii) the circumstances that would be
likely to prevail with respect to access in
the absence of declaration. While
the enquiry is forward looking, the prevailing circumstances relating to access
(in particular,
whether access is presently given and on what terms) will be
relevant to the required forward looking comparison.
foregoing understanding of the amended criterion (a) is confirmed by the
relevant extrinsic materials. The Explanatory Memorandum
Competition and
Consumer Amendment (Competition Policy Review) Bill 2017
Competition
Policy Review Explanatory Memorandum
) explained the background to the
amendments as follows:
12.9 The declaration criteria have been examined in a
number of cases heard by both the Federal and High Courts. The declaration
criteria have been subject to several different interpretations in these cases,
with particular implications for how competition
in dependent markets should be
assessed. For investment to continue to be made in nationally significant
infrastructure, it is important
that the Regime is easily understood, creates
outcomes that are predictable and addresses the economic problem of natural
in markets for infrastructure services.
12.10 The Regime has been reviewed three times, by the Productivity Commission
in 2001 and 2013, and then by the Harper Review in
2015. Both the 2013 and 2015
reviews examined the application of the declaration criteria and whether they
were achieving the objectives
of the Regime. These two reviews involved
extensive consultation with the public and the States and Territories.
12.11 The Government decided in 2014 that it would respond to both reviews
following the conclusion of the Harper Review.
12.12 The Government decided to implement all of the recommendations of the
Productivity Commission as part of its response to the
Harper Review. These
amendments seek to refocus and clarify the intent of the Regime. In particular,
they seek to clarify the declaration
criteria that the Council and Minister must
be satisfied of in order to recommend that a service be declared, or declare the
respectively. This then determines when arbitration by the Commission
will be available to access seekers or access providers.
Explanatory Memorandum stated, in respect of criterion (a) that:
12.19 The amendments require the Council and the
Minister to consider whether access (or increased access) on reasonable terms
conditions as a result of declaration would promote a material increase in
competition in a market other than the market for the
service. That is, the
amendments focus the test on the effect of declaration, rather than merely
assessing whether access (or increased
access) would promote
competition.
stated in the Competition Policy Review
Explanatory Memorandum, the
Government decided to implement the recommendations of the Productivity
Commission as part of its response
to the 2015 Final Report of the Competition
Policy Review chaired by Professor Ian Harper (and commonly referred to as the
Harper Review
). In its Inquiry Report No 66 titled “National Access
Regime” (25 October 2013) (
2013 Productivity Commission Report
the Productivity Commission recommended that criterion (a) be amended so that it
“becomes a comparison of competition with
and without access on reasonable
terms and conditions through declaration” (recommendation 8.1). In
summarising its proposed
reform to criterion (a), the Productivity Commission
said (at p 249):
Criterion (a) should be amended so that it is only
satisfied where access to an infrastructure service on reasonable terms and
declaration
(rather than access per se) would promote
a material increase in competition in a dependent market. This amended criterion
require a comparison of the future state of competition under the status
quo (including where access may already be available under
the status quo)
against the future state of competition where access is granted on reasonable
terms and conditions through declaration.
A declaration-focused competition test is the most effective way to target the
economic problem that the Regime is intended to address.
This competition test
would not be satisfied where there is already effective competition in dependent
markets. It would also not
be satisfied where access is already granted to all
third parties on reasonable terms and conditions, as declaration would not be
expected to alter the terms and conditions of access.
(Original emphasis.)
Final Report of the Harper Review agreed with the Productivity
Commission’s recommendation to re-focus criterion (a) on
the effect of
declaration, but expressed concern that criterion (a) set a low threshold for
declaration (at p 433). The Harper Review
recommended that criterion (a) should
require that access on reasonable terms and conditions through declaration
promote a substantial
increase in competition in a dependent market that is
nationally significant (at p 437). That recommendation was not adopted by
when enacting the 2017 Amendment Act.
foregoing review of the legislative history and text supports the following
propositions:
(a) Criterion (a) requires an assessment of the effect
of access (or increased access) to the service on reasonable terms and
as a result of declaration.
(b) The criterion requires that such access would promote a material increase in
competition in at least one market other than the
market for the service. A
material increase in competition is promoted if the conditions, opportunities or
environment for competition
are improved in more than a trivial way.
(c) The criterion necessitates a forward looking analysis focussed upon the
effect of access as a result of declaration. The necessary
comparator is the
commercial environment without declaration. An important consideration in
applying the criterion is whether access
will be, or is likely to be, available
without declaration and the commercial features of such access including the
nature and scope
of access, the terms and conditions of access and any capacity
limitations to access. The existing availability of access will be
relevant to
assessing the likely future availability of access. However, due consideration
must also be given to the prospect of
future changes in the commercial,
regulatory and economic circumstances that might alter the incentives, and
likely behaviour, of
the service provider.
these reasons, we will use the descriptive phrase “the effects of
declaration” as an abbreviation of the statutory
criterion which concerns
the effects of access (or increased access) to the service on reasonable terms
and conditions as a result
of declaration. A similar abbreviation is used in the
2013 Productivity Commission Report and the Competition Policy Review
Explanatory
Memorandum, as seen in the extracts reproduced above. We emphasise,
though, that in using that abbreviation we do not lose sight
of the statutory
the hearing, the parties advanced arguments about the proper construction, and
approach to the application, of criterion (a).
Those arguments are considered
Criterion (d)
Part IIIA was first enacted, criterion (f) (in s 44H(4)) was expressed as
follows: “that access (or increased access) to
the service would not be
contrary to the public interest”.
Pilbara case
, the plurality confirmed the breadth of the phrase
“public interest” in criterion (f) (at [42], citations
Criterion (f) was “that access (or increased
access) to the service would not be contrary to the public interest”. It
is well established that, when used in a statute, the expression “public
interest” imports a discretionary value judgment
to be made by reference
to undefined factual matters. As Dixon J pointed out in
Water Conservation
and Irrigation Commission (NSW) v Browning
, when a discretionary power of
this kind is given, the power is “neither arbitrary nor completely
unlimited” but is “unconfined
except in so far as the subject matter
and the scope and purpose of the statutory enactments may enable the Court to
pronounce given
reasons to be definitely extraneous to any objects the
legislature could have had in view”. It follows that the range of matters
to which the NCC and, more particularly, the Minister may have regard when
considering whether to be satisfied that access (or increased
access) would
be contrary to the public interest is very wide indeed. And
conferring the power to
on the Minister (as distinct from giving
to the NCC a power to
) is consistent with legislative
recognition of the great breadth of matters that can be encompassed by an
inquiry into what is or
is not in the public interest and with legislative
recognition that the inquiries are best suited to resolution by the holder of
political office.
(Original emphasis.)
reason of the breadth of the phrase, the plurality also observed that a Tribunal
reviewing the Minister’s decision should
be slow to reach a conclusion
with respect to criterion (f) to the contrary of the Minister’s conclusion
(at [112]):
In neither case is it to be expected that the Tribunal,
reconsidering the Minister’s decision, would lightly depart from a
ministerial
conclusion about whether access or increased access would not be in
the public interest. In particular, if the Minister has not found
that access
would not be in the public interest, the Tribunal should ordinarily be slow to
find to the contrary. And it is to be
doubted that such a finding would be made,
except in the clearest of cases, by reference to some overall balancing of costs
and benefits.
noted above, the declaration criteria in s 44H(4) were amended by the 2017
Amendment Act and relocated to s 44CA(1). Criterion
(f) became criterion (d) in
the new section and was rephrased as follows: “that access (or increased
access) to the service,
on reasonable terms and conditions, as a result of a
declaration of the service would promote the public interest”. Thus, like
criterion (a), criterion (d) is now focussed on the effect of access (or
increased access) to the service on reasonable terms and
conditions as a result
of declaration. The new criterion necessitates a forward looking analysis
focussed upon the effect of access
as a result of declaration and requires that
such access would promote the public interest. Consistently with the conclusion
High Court in the
Pilbara case
, the criterion imports a
discretionary value judgment to be made by reference to undefined factual
matters confined only by the subject
matter, scope and purpose of the Act.
noted above, s 44CA(3) stipulates that, in considering whether criterion (d)
applies, the designated Minister must have regard
to the following
(non-exhaustive) factors:
(a) the effect that declaring the service would have on
investment in infrastructure services; and markets that depend on access to
service; and
(b) the administrative and compliance costs that would be incurred by the
provider of the service if the service is declared.
Competition Policy Review Explanatory Memorandum stated, in respect of criterion
12.37 Subsection 44CA(1)(d) asks if access or increased
access to the service as a result of declaration of the service, on reasonable
terms and conditions, would promote the public interest. This means that a
decision maker must be satisfied that declaration is likely
to generate overall
gains to the community.
statement reflected the recommendation in the 2013 Productivity Commission
Report that “Criterion (f) should be a rigorous
test, which only enables
the declaration of infrastructure services where the decision maker is satisfied
that declaration is likely
to generate overall gains to the community” (at
pp 181, 251).
C. BACKGROUND
Port has been the subject of a number of contested declaration decisions since
its privatisation in May 2014, which have resulted
in previous decisions of the
Tribunal and the Full Federal Court. This section briefly summarises that
history to contextualise the
present application. The background information has
largely been drawn from the NCC Recommendation, but includes certain
uncontroversial
facts that have been drawn from the previous declaration
decision of the Tribunal in
Re Glencore Coal Pty Ltd
[2016] ACompT 6
Re Glencore Coal
) which were reproduced in the Full Court’s
decision in
Port of Newcastle
The Port and the Hunter Valley coal industry
May 2014, the Port was operated by the State of NSW. It is one of the larger
coal export ports in the world, with coal extracted
from the Hunter Valley being
shipped through the Port. In 2018, the Port handled 158.6 million tonnes of coal
with a value of approximately
$23.6 billion.
Re Glencore Coal
, the Tribunal noted that the Hunter Valley coal industry
and associated supply chain are the largest coal export operations in the
The Hunter Valley/Newcastle coalfields produce over 170 million tonnes of
saleable coal per year. There are more than 30 operating
coal mines in the
Hunter Valley operated by 11 coal producers as well as other coal projects in
various stages of exploration and
development. There are three main rail haulage
providers who transport coal from the mines to export terminals at the Port.
is then loaded onto vessels at one of the loading terminals.
the 2019 financial year, the Hunter Valley mining sector directly supported
3,282 businesses, directly employed 13,347 people,
paid $1.4 billion in wages
and salaries and directly spent $4.0 billion on goods and services. In total,
Region’s workforce was supported by mining.
NCC described the Port as a bottleneck facility. That description is
uncontroversial. In practical terms, the Port facilities,
including particularly
the shipping channel service, is necessary for the export of coal from the
Hunter Valley. Coal producers in
the Hunter Valley have no practicable
alternative to the Port for the export of their coal.
Port was privatised in May 2014 by the grant of a 98 year lease to the joint
venture parents of PNO, The Infrastructure Fund managed
by Hastings Funds
Management and China Merchants Group. The transaction generated gross proceeds
of some $1.75 billion to the State
of NSW. PNO operates the Port under a 98-year
sublease. As the operator of the Port, PNO controls the terms and conditions of
to the Port including, relevantly, the shipping channels and berthing
facilities required for the export of coal from the Port.
Port charges
the port operator in respect of the Port, PNO is empowered under
Ports and Maritime Administration Act
to fix and levy three types of charges on the users of Port services:
(a) the navigation service charge, which is payable in
respect of general use by a vessel of the Port and its infrastructure, and
paid by the owner of the vessel (as defined in s 48 of the PAMA Act) on
each entry by the vessel into the Port calculated by reference
to the gross
tonnage of the vessel (ss 50 and 51 of the PAMA Act);
(b) the wharfage charge, which is payable in respect of the availability of a
site at which stevedoring operations may be carried
out, and is paid by the
owner of the cargo at the time immediately before it is loaded or immediately
after it is unloaded at the
site by reference to the quantity of cargo loaded or
unloaded (s 61 of the PAMA Act); and
(c) the site occupation charge, which is payable by occupiers of land-side
facilities such as stevedoring at terminals (s 60 of the
67 of the PAMA Act empowers PNO, as the port operator in respect of the Port, to
enter into an agreement with a person otherwise
liable to pay a charge under
Part 5 of the PAMA Act in respect of such charges. It provides as follows:
Agreements in respect of charges
(1) The relevant port authority may enter into an
agreement with a person liable to pay any kind of charge under this Part.
(2) Such an agreement may make provision for or with respect
(a) fixing the amount of any charge payable
by the person to the relevant port authority, and
(b) any other matter which the relevant port authority is permitted by or under
this Part to determine in respect of the charge,
(c) any right or privilege which by or under this Part accrues to the person
liable to pay the charge, or which the relevant port
authority may confer on the
(3) To the extent that provision is so made, the
agreement displaces any determinations of the relevant port authority in
to the charge or to the matter, right or privilege
6 of the PAMA Act establishes a price monitoring scheme in respect of charges
imposed at various ports in NSW including the Port.
Section 77 states the
objective of the scheme:
The objective of the price monitoring scheme established
by this Part (the
scheme objective)
is to promote the economically
efficient operation of, use of and investment in major port facilities in the
State by monitoring
the prices port operators charge users of those facilities,
so as to promote a competitive commercial environment in port operations.
s 79, PNO is required to publish, on its website, a list of the Port charges
charged by it (other than charges made pursuant to
an agreement under s 67).
Under s 80, PNO is required to give prior notice of any change in its charges to
the Minister (responsible
for the administration of the PAMA Act in NSW) and by
publication on its website, and must state the reason for the change. Under
81, PNO must provide an annual report to the Minister in respect of its charges
and the revenue received from the charges.
publishes a Schedule of Service Charges that apply to the use of the Port,
pursuant to the PAMA Act, which includes the navigation
service charge and the
wharfage charge.
should be noted that s 50 of the PAMA Act requires that the navigation service
charge be calculated by reference to the gross tonnage
of the vessel using the
shipping channel, and not the quantity of coal shipped on the vessel. Further,
Ports and Maritime Administration Regulations 2012
Regulations
) provide for the conversion of a vessel’s volume into a
gross tonnage measurement. Accordingly, the cost of shipping one tonne
through the Port is not necessarily the prevailing rate of the navigation
service charge. There was no evidence before the
Tribunal concerning the average
conversion ratio of the prevailing navigation service charge into a cost per
tonne of coal shipped
through the Port in any given period, and no party
submitted that the conversion ratio would make any material difference to the
issues arising on the review.
Re Glencore Coal
, the Tribunal noted that, after PNO assumed the role of
Port operator, the price for coal ships using the shipping channels to enter
exit the Port was increased by between approximately 40% and 60% for some vessel
vessels (at
The declaration of Port services
May 2015, Glencore Coal Pty Ltd (
) made an application for the
declaration of the shipping channel and berthing service at the Port. In January
2015, the NCC recommended
against declaration, and in January 2016 the Treasurer
decided not to declare the Port service. In concluding that criterion (a)
then was) was not satisfied, the Treasurer took account of the fact that PNO
provided access to vessels shipping coal at published
prices. Glencore applied
to the Tribunal for review of that decision.
31 May 2016, the Tribunal published its reasons for deciding to set aside the
Minister’s decision and make an order to declare
the Port service for a
period of 15 years, commencing July 2016 and expiring July 2031:
Re Glencore
. That order was made on 10 June 2016:
Re Glencore Coal Pty Ltd (No
[2016] ACompT 7
309 FLR 358
Re Glencore Coal No 2
relation to criterion (a), the Tribunal in
Re Glencore Coal
that it was bound to apply the test as stated by the Full Court in
(at [100]) and, on that basis, criterion (a) was satisfied (at
[112]-[113], [121]). Although unnecessary to its decision, the Tribunal
considered whether criterion (a) would have been satisfied if it were relevant
to consider the effect of declaration (with access
being provided on reasonable
terms and conditions by reason of the declaration) on the promotion of
competition, taking into account
the likely terms of access in the absence of
declaration. The Tribunal concluded that criterion (a) would not have been
on that approach (at [157]). That latter approach is now required to
be taken following the amendments made by the 2017 Amendment
Tribunal’s decision in
Re Glencore Coal
was upheld by the Full
Port of Newcastle
Arbitration of Port charges
recorded in the NCC Recommendation, Glencore notified the ACCC of an access
dispute with respect to the navigation service and
wharfage charges at the Port
under Division 3 of Part IIIA of the Act. In its arbitral determination made on
18 September 2018, the
ACCC set out the following information concerning
PNO’s published rates for the two charges, the rates of the charges
by each of PNO and Glencore in the arbitration and the ACCC’s
determination of the charges (all in 2018
Navigation service charge ($ per gross tonne
Wharfage charge ($ per revenue tonne)
PNO 2015 port pricing schedule
PNO 2018 port pricing schedule
PNO proposed pricing
Glencore proposed pricing
ACCC determination
determining the initial rates for the navigation service and wharfage charges,
the ACCC used a building block model to calculate
the maximum allowable revenue
that PNO could recover from the two charges. The parties agreed to use the
depreciated optimised replacement
) methodology to value the
Port assets and establish the regulated asset base upon which the capital
components of the allowed revenue
were to be calculated. As noted in the NCC
Recommendation, the rate for the navigation service charge determined by the
ACCC represented
a significant decrease below the rate published by PNO as at 1
January 2018. The term of the determination made by the ACCC coincided
term of declaration of the shipping channel service, expiring July 2031 (with
the arbitral prices to apply from the commencement
of declaration, July 2016).
Under the determination, the initial prices were to be adjusted over the
declaration period as follows:
(a) The wharfage charge was to be indexed annually by
reference to CPI.
(b) The navigation service charge was to be reviewed on an annual and five
yearly basis. In the annual review, the inputs to the
building block model to be
reviewed were limited to the forecast cargo volumes and gross tonnage coal
vessels and non-coal vessels
for the year. The five yearly review allowed review
of the primary integers of the building block model including the roll forward
of the regulated asset base, rates of depreciation and the useful life of
assets, the weighted average cost of capital, forecast
capital expenditure and
forecast operating expenditure. In both categories of review, account could be
taken of material change events,
being a change in law that was expected to
cause an increase in costs that would cause a change in the charges of more than
is relevant to note that a material area of dispute between Glencore and PNO in
the arbitration before the ACCC was the treatment
in the regulated asset base of
user funded capital contributions, being historic payments made by Port users to
the Port owner which
funded, amongst other things, channel dredging to allow
larger ships to berth at the Port. Glencore argued that user funded
contributions
should be deducted from the Port's regulatory asset base, upon
which the capital components of Port charges were calculated. The
deduction of
user funded contributions from the regulatory asset base would reduce the amount
of capital costs PNO was able to recover
through charges for the navigation
service charge.
applied to the Tribunal for review of the prices that had been determined by the
ACCC. In its arbitral determination made on 30
October 2019, the Tribunal
determined an initial arbitral price for the navigation service charge of
$1.0058 per gross tonne (as
at 1 January 2018) and the rate of wharfage charge
agreed in the ACCC arbitration was maintained:
Application by Port of
Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd
[2019] ACompT 1
Re Port of Newcastle
). In its decision, the Tribunal disagreed with the
ACCC’s deduction of historic user funded contributions from the regulatory
asset base of the Port.
applied to the Full Federal Court for judicial review of the 2019 arbitral
decision of the Tribunal. In August 2020, the
Full Court determined that the
Tribunal’s decision was affected by errors of law, in failing to take into
account the value
of expansions of capacity to the shipping channels the cost of
which was historically borne by Port users, and remitted the arbitral
determination to the Tribunal for re-determination:
Glencore Coal Assets
Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2020] FCAFC 145
(2020) 280 FCR 194
Glencore Coal
). The Full Court rejected a submission of Glencore
that the Full Court should order that the Tribunal’s determination be
by substituting the navigation service charge as determined by the ACCC.
The Full Court concluded that such an order was not one
that could be made by
the Court (at [317]). The Full Court further concluded that its findings did not
mean that, on remittal, the
Tribunal was bound to adopt the navigation service
charge as determined by the ACCC, stating (at [320]-[321]):
[320] ...the statutory task to be undertaken by the
Tribunal required it to have regard to the user contributions and not simply to
bring them to account in the manner reasoned by the ACCC in its determination.
It is not for this Court on review to undertake that
task which involves regard
to matters other than user contributions alone.
[321] Therefore, the question of user contributions and any consequence for the
access price arising from a determination of that
issue is a matter for the
Tribunal and that aspect must be referred back to the
has subsequently applied for, and been granted, special leave to appeal the Full
Court decision to the High Court.
a consequence of the foregoing reviews and appeals, neither the navigation
service charge nor the wharfage charge is the subject
of an arbitral
determination under Division 3 of Part IIIA of the Act, and the current level of
those charges are as set by PNO under
the PAMA Act.
The revocation of the declaration
s 44J of the Act, the NCC may recommend to the designated Minister that the
declaration of a service be revoked if it is satisfied
that, at the time of the
recommendation, the declaration criteria would prevent the service being
the amendments made to the declaration criteria by the 2017 Amendment Act, in
July 2019 the NCC recommended to the Treasurer
that the 2016 declaration of Port
services should be revoked. The Treasurer did not publish a decision on that
recommendation within
60 days of receiving it. As a result, he was deemed by s
44J(7) of the Act to have made a decision that the declaration be revoked.
revocation decision under s 44J is not reviewable by the Tribunal.
note for completeness that the revocation of the 2016 declaration of Port
services does not affect accrued rights. Accordingly,
Glencore is able to
maintain its application, originally made to the ACCC, for an arbitral
determination of the navigation service
and wharfage charges at the
PNO’s current charges
NCC Recommendation records that, in December 2019 (and subsequent to the
revocation decision), PNO published on its website new
“open access”
rates for the navigation service and wharfage charges for vessels using the
shipping channel service taking
effect from 1 January 2020. The “open
access” rates published by PNO, available to any coal vessel entering the
are a navigation service charge of $1.0424 per gross tonne and a wharfage
charge of $0.0802 per revenue tonne. In addition to publishing
access” rates on its website, PNO also published, and offered on a
standing basis, the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds.
As noted earlier, the Port User
Pricing Deed was published in December 2019 but was replaced by the Producer
Pricing Deed and Vessel
Agent Pricing Deed in March 2020. The Pro Forma Pricing
Deeds were offered as an agreement in respect of the navigation service charge
and wharfage charge pursuant to s 67 of the PAMA Act which could be entered into
by, relevantly, coal producers or vessel agents.
The Pro Forma Pricing Deeds
have a 10 year term. Under each of the three deeds, PNO offered a navigation
service charge of $0.8121
per gross tonne and a wharfage charge of $0.0802 per
revenue tonne, subject to an annual price adjustment (the greater of CPI
and 4%) and other adjustment terms. It is convenient to reproduce the
NCC’s summary of the terms offered by PNO under each
set of arrangements
(pp 25-26):
Developments at the Port since the Revocation of the
2016 Glencore Declaration
Vessel Open Access Regime
5.23 In December 2019 PNO published a number of documents which collectively
establish formal terms and conditions of open access
arrangements at the Port
for any vessel seeking to enter the Port and use its facilities. Relevant to the
Council's consideration,
the open access arrangements provide:
(a) An initial NSC rate of $1.0424 per GT, with effect from 1 January 2020.
(b) That PNO may vary its schedule of charges from time to time, including
varying or introducing any new fees or charges. PNO will
publish a notice of the
proposed change on its website at least 10 Business Days before the variation is
proposed to take effect.
(c) As at 13 March 2020, it was PNO's intention to adjust the NSC and wharfage
charge for coal vessels annually by an amount equal
to the CPI. PNO intends that
these charges may also be increased to reflect additional investment by PNO in
port services, any increases
in government charges or taxes or changes in law
and any material change events.
(d) Established a dispute resolution process (mediation and commercial
arbitration).
Port User Deed
5.24 In December 2019, PNO published a long term pricing Deed which could be
entered into by Vessel Agents, Vessel Operators, Coal
Producers and free on
board coal consignees involved in the shipment of coal from the Port (the Port
User Deed). The Port User Deed
has now been superseded and is no longer offered
by PNO. Its terms included, in part:
(a) An initial term of 10 years.
(b) An initial NSC rate of $0.8121 per GT, with effect from 1 January 2020.
(c) An 'annual adjustment', being the greater of CPI or 4%.
(d) Provided for ad hoc variations to the NSC in response to changes in tax or
other law which increased PNO's costs or decreased
its revenues.
(e) Provided for ad hoc variations to the NSC in response to material change
events (to allow PNO to recover additional costs and
to sustain its equity rate
of return).
(f) Established a dispute resolution process (mediation and commercial
arbitration).
(g) Established 'pricing principles' to be applied in mediation and arbitration.
The pricing principles include elements consistent
with those the ACCC must take
into account when making an arbitration determination under Part IIIA of the
(h) Established 'excluded disputes' which include disputes about the NSC when
the NSC does not exceed the value of $0.8121 plus each
subsequent annual
adjustment.
(i) Established an 'initial capital base' being the value established by
reference to the depreciated optimised replacement cost
as at 31 December 2014
of the assets used in the provision of all of the services at the Port and,
unless otherwise agreed by PNO,
without deduction for user contributions.
(j) Established a number of information requirements.
Producer Deed and Vessel Agent Deed
5.25 In March 2020, PNO published the Producer Pro Forma Long Term Pricing Deed
and Vessel Agent Pro Forma Long Term Pricing Deed
(collectively, the Deed). The
Deed replaced the Port User Deed.
5.26 The Deed maintained the terms described at items 5.23 (a) - (c) and (f) -
(j) but removed the specific provisions that permitted
variation to the NSC in
response to tax and law reform and amended the approach to material change
events. The Deed also introduced
capital expenditure transparency measures and
non-discriminatory pricing provisions.
of the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds were in evidence before the Tribunal, together
with an extract of PNO’s submission to
the NCC explaining those documents.
It will be necessary to refer to the terms of the Producer and Vessel Agent
Pricing Deeds (together,
) in more detail below. However, it
should be noted that both the Producer and the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds
constitute an agreement
under s 67 of the PAMA Act in respect of the navigation
service charge, while only the Producer Pricing Deed governs the wharfage
charge. The Producer Pricing Deed enables coal producers to agree the navigation
service charge and wharfage charge with PNO in respect
of “Covered
Vessels” which are defined as a vessel that is loaded with and carries out
of the Port (a) the producer’s
coal (i.e. coal mined from one of the
producer’s mines) and no other coal or (b) the producer’s coal and
other coal in
respect of which PNO has agreed that the navigation service charge
and wharfage charge are the same for that other coal as for the
producer, and no
other coal. The Vessel Agent Pricing Deed enables vessel agents to agree the
navigation service charge with PNO
in respect of “Covered Vessels”
which are defined as a vessel that is loaded with coal at the Port in respect of
the Vessel Agent is named as the vessel's inward agent in the vessel
berthing application lodged with PNO in respect of that vessel's
visit to the
submission to the NCC in respect of the Deeds states that PNO has (through their
agents) entered into, with effect from
1 April 2020, deeds with all of the coal
vessels calling at the Port. As the Deeds have a 10 year term, the Deeds will
the charges in respect of navigation services supplied at the Port in
respect of the covered vessels for the next ten years (in the
absence of another
declaration which results in lower charges). The terms of those Deeds are the
same as the pro forma Vessel Agent
Pricing Deed. As a result, PNO has been
charging all coal vessels calling at the Port the navigation service charge as
in accordance with that pro forma Deed. No charges have been levied
on any coal vessel under s 50 of the PAMA Act since that date
and PNO does not
expect to levy any charges under s 50 of the PAMA Act in relation to any coal
vessel for the ten year duration of
those s 67 agreements. PNO stated that it
has made it clear by way of open offer on its website that the same s 67
agreement is available
to any other coal vessel that should choose to call at
the Port to carry export coal. This would include operators of vessels that
should choose to call at the Port in the future in respect of any new mine which
is developed over the period of the term of the
pricing arrangement offer.
NSWMC submitted that no coal producer had entered into the Producer Pricing Deed
with PNO, it is uncontroversial that coal producers
presently have the benefit
of the navigation service charge rate in the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds which
applies to all coal vessels
using the shipping channel service at the
Authorisation of collective bargaining
March 2020, the NSWMC and ten mining companies sought authorisation from the
ACCC to bargain collectively with PNO in respect of
the terms and conditions of
access for the export of coal from the Port. The ACCC granted authorisation on
27 August 2020. The authorisation
permits the NSWMC and ten of its nominated
members to negotiate collectively with PNO in relation to the terms and
conditions of
access, including price, at the Port. The authorised conduct
allows for joint discussion and negotiation of common industry issues.
Participation in the collective bargaining is voluntary for all parties and the
authorisation does not permit boycotts. As such,
PNO may be invited, but is not
required, to attend and cannot be compelled to participate in the bargaining
17 September 2020, PNO applied to the Tribunal for review of the ACCC’s
determination. The review is yet to be heard by the
Tribunal. PNO’s
application to the Tribunal for review has the effect that the authorisation has
not come into effect (see
s 91(1A) of the Act).
D. TREASURER’S DECISION
16 February 2021, the Treasurer decided under s 44H(1) of the Act not to declare
the shipping channel service because he was not
satisfied that the criteria in
paragraphs 44CA(1)(a) and (d) were satisfied. In accordance with s 44HA, the
Reasons set out the Treasurer’s
reasons for his decision. The Reasons
stated that:
In making this decision, I have had regard
the objects of
the declaration
criteria in section 44CA of the CCA; and
Recommendation provided to me on 18 December 2020.
I have considered the findings and reasoning in the
NCC's Recommendation, including the NCC's consideration of the submissions it
received, and I accept the conclusions reached by the NCC in the Recommendation.
Having considered those conclusions, I have independently
decided that I am not
satisfied that either paragraph 44CA(l)(a) or (d) are met.
relation to criterion (a), the Reasons record that the Treasurer reached the
following conclusions.
there are likely to be five functionally distinct dependent markets relevant to
access to the shipping channel service being:
(a) a coal export market (the
coal export
(b) markets for the acquisition and disposal of exploration and/or mining
authorities (the
tenements market
(c) markets for the provision of infrastructure connected with mining
operations, including rail, road, power and water (the
infrastructure
(d) markets for services such as geological and drilling services, construction,
operation and maintenance (the
specialist services market
(e) a market for the provision of shipping services involving shipping agents
and vessel operators, of which ships exporting coal
from the Port of Newcastle
are a party (the
bulk shipping market
the tenements market, infrastructure market, specialist services market and bulk
shipping market are derivative markets of
the coal export market. It follows
that if declaration is unlikely to promote a material increase in competition in
the coal export
market, there would be unlikely to be a material increase in
competition in any derivative market.
the Port is a bottleneck, with Hunter Valley coal producers having no practical
alternative to the Port for the export of their
coal. This gives PNO
considerable bargaining power over coal producers who have sunk costs in the
Newcastle catchment.
PNO’s incentive to deny access to the shipping
channel service or otherwise exercise market power is limited for the following
(a) PNO is not vertically integrated into dependent
markets in any meaningful way and has no incentive to deny access to firms
in dependent markets;
(b) PNO is not capacity constrained at the Port, nor is it likely to become so
over the foreseeable future;
(c) PNO has provided an open access arrangement and offered a ten-year deed to
coal exporters wishing to use the Port;
(d) the potential for regulatory intervention by the NSW Government is likely to
provide a low level of constraint on PNO’s
pricing absent declaration;
(e) given the importance to PNO of coal mining revenue, and its long lease,
where there is the prospect of further investment and
continued demand for coal
export services, PNO is likely to be mindful of reputational effects caused by
its pricing.
in relation to the coal export market,
the market is
likely to be effectively competitive and PNO is unlikely to have an incentive to
diminish competition in coal export
markets or to price discriminate in a way
that will inhibit coal exporters’ ability to compete. Port charges are
remain a comparatively small component of the cost of production and
export of coal, with or without declaration. While there is
uncertainty around
the price the Tribunal will re‑determine for the navigation service charge
in its re-determination of the
Glencore-PNO access dispute, the NCC considered
that it is not clear that a navigation service charge set with declaration will
materially different to that offered by PNO absent declaration and, in a
future without declaration, users are expected to have the
option of entering a
long-term deed and PNO has also published open access arrangements.
Coal producers face uncertainty from factors other
than Port charges that are more likely to influence their ability to compete in
export coal markets. Therefore, access or increased access to the shipping
channel service, on reasonable terms and conditions, as
a result of
declaration
, would not promote a material increase in
competition in that market.
in relation to the other dependent markets, as those markets are derivative of
the coal export market, it follows that declaration
would not be likely to
promote competition in those markets.
those reasons, the Treasurer was not satisfied that access, or increased access,
to the service on reasonable terms and conditions,
as a result of declaration of
the service, would promote competition in any dependent market.
relation to criterion (d), the Reasons record that the Treasurer
considered the NCC’s approach and adopted that
approach in making his decision. In particular, the Treasurer accepted and
the NCC’s conclusions that declaration:
(a) is unlikely to significantly affect investment in
the infrastructure necessary to provide the shipping channel service as it is
unclear how different (if at all) prices for the shipping channel service would
be in a future with and without declaration;
(b) is unlikely to significantly affect investment in dependent markets;
(c) is, on balance, unlikely to materially affect administrative and compliance
costs, as these costs are likely to arise in the
future both with, and without,
declaration; and
(d) is not likely to lead to material improvements in
productive, allocative or dynamic efficiency relative to the future absent
declaration,
or materially promote efficiency in dependent
those reasons, the Treasurer was not satisfied that access, or increased access,
to the service on reasonable terms and conditions,
as a result of declaration of
the service, would promote the public interest.
the course of submissions, NSWMC drew attention to the following statement
concerning the amendment to criterion (a) made by the
2017 Amendment Act which
appeared in a briefing note dated 18 December 2020 to the Treasurer from an
officer in the Department of
Treasury (the Director of the Competition
The 2017 amendments were intended to ensure that the
[National Access Regime] only applies to vertically-integrated natural
monopolies,
consistent with the original policy
submitted that the statement is legally erroneous and reveals a fundamental
error in the Treasurer’s decision.
Tribunal accepts that the statement is legally erroneous. The declaration
criteria in s 44CA do not exclude the possibility that
a service will be
declared even though the service provider is not vertically integrated into any
dependent market. As discussed
below, whether a service provider is vertically
integrated into a dependent market will be relevant to the assessment of the
declaration
criteria, and particularly criterion (a), but it is not a
determinative consideration. However, the erroneous statement in the
Departmental
briefing note has no bearing on the Tribunal’s review. There
is nothing in the Treasurer’s Reasons to suggest that the
Treasurer based
his decision on that statement. Nor does the NCC Recommendation contain a
statement to that effect, and the Treasurer
stated that he adopted the
NCC’s reasoning and conclusions.
E. NSWMC SUBMISSIONS
noted earlier, it was common ground that declaration criterion (b) and (c) were
satisfied. Accordingly, NSWMC’s submissions
were directed to criterion (a)
and criterion (d).
relation to criterion (a), NSWMC’s submissions were focussed solely on the
effect of declaration on the tenements market.
It submitted that
access (or increased access) to the shipping channel
service on reasonable terms and conditions as a result of declaration, by
to the counterfactual without declaration under Part IIIA, would
promote a material increase in competition in the dependent tenements
the following reasons:
(a) There will be greater certainty for investment in
tenements, as market participants will have the assurance of reasonable terms
and conditions of access (or increased access) to the shipping channel service
against future likely price increases by PNO.
(b) Absent declaration, substantial price increases are likely given PNO’s
unconstrained market power and its stated views
as to the limited time period
for operation of coal mining in the Hunter Valley and because of PNO’s
major shareholders’
interest in container terminal operations.
(c) In addition, the continued or increased participation of smaller coal
producers would result in an increased demand for mining
licences and result in
a material increase in competition in the bidding for the award of mining
(d) Declaration is consistent with the objects of Part IIIA as it is likely to
lead to greater efficiency in the operation of, use
of, and investment in supply
chain infrastructure, and will thereby promote an increase in competition in
dependent markets with
the effect being material in at least the tenements
relation to criterion (d), NSWMC submitted that the Treasurer’s
conclusions were derivative of the conclusions reached with
respect to criterion
(a). In particular, the Treasurer did not find that declaration would cause any
public detriments such as adverse
effects on investment in the facilities used
to provide the shipping channel service or in dependent markets, nor increases
in administrative
and compliance costs. Rather, the Treasurer was not satisfied
that declaration would promote the public interest because he considered
declaration would not promote competition in any dependent market and would not
promote efficiency. NSWMC submitted that, if
the Tribunal were satisfied that
declaration would promote a material increase in competition in a dependent
market, it should for
that reason be satisfied that declaration would promote
the public interest. NSWMC further submitted that the following additional
public benefits would also arise:
(a) The continued or
increased participation of major and smaller coal producers would result in an
improvement in the opportunities
and environment for competition in the
provision of the infrastructure (including coal terminals) required for the
development of
coal projects, including in particular in relation to the
development and output from smaller more marginal projects.
(b) The continued or increased participation of major
and smaller coal producers would also result in further demand in the markets
for specialist services in the Hunter Valley region.
(c) Declaration would address the prospect of discrimination by a vertically
integrated shareholder in PNO (China Merchants Group)
which has coal vessels and
a possible ability to influence the nature and type of vessels and cost of those
vessels accessing the
(d) If the Service were declared, PNO would not be able to refuse to meet coal
industry representatives in collective bargaining
without the threat of
arbitration. Such collective bargaining would give rise to public benefits, and
accordingly is in the public
advanced the following submissions in relation to the NCC’s analysis of
the effect of declaration on competition in the
tenements market (which analysis
was adopted by the Treasurer).
The test to be applied
submitted that, in its Recommendation, the NCC applied an incorrect test in
respect of criterion (a) by enquiring whether declaration
would have the effect
of increasing competition rather than the effect of improving the conditions for
competition. NSWMC submitted
that on numerous occasions the NCC framed the
enquiry by reference to the effect on competition; for example, at [1.22], the
stated: “Criterion (a) requires consideration of the effects on
competition in dependent markets (i.e., markets other than
the market for the
Service), of access or increased access on reasonable terms and conditions as a
result of declaration”.
NSWMC referred the Tribunal to similar statements
at [1.2.6], [7.155] and [7.157].
“Hold-up” risk of investment
submitted that, in the future without declaration
market participants in the tenements market will face higher levels of
uncertainty with respect to the PNO’s charges (such
as the navigation
service charge), which increases the risk associated with making investments in
tenements, as compared to the future
with access (or increased access), on
reasonable terms and conditions, as a result of declaration. Further, the
increased risk associated
with investing in new tenements increases the
borrowing costs to finance the investment, which increases the return required
on investments.
This elevated risk also increases the likelihood that investors
will delay their investments until the uncertainty is resolved. This
allocative efficiency and the productivity of the Australian economy.
submitted that the foregoing risks are commonly referred to as the
“hold-up” risk of investment. The risk arises
when one party makes
long-lived investments that are both “sunk” and are specific to
transactions with another party.
In these instances, the investing party is
locked into a relationship with the second party, and the risk arises that the
party will behave opportunistically to expropriate the value of the first
party’s sunk investment. Given that investors in
tenements make
significant long-term, location-specific investments that ultimately depend for
viability on access to the shipping
channel service, the tenements market is apt
to produce “hold-up” risk. In contrast, access to the shipping
channel service
on reasonable terms and conditions as a result of declaration
would materially reduce the level of risk associated with investments
tenements market. Ensuring that PNO’s access terms and conditions are
reasonable would likely promote efficient entry
(and efficient participation)
such that there would be a non-trivial, material improvement in the environment
for competition in
the tenements market
argued that the likelihood of hold-up risk is supported by evidence given to the
NCC by coal mining companies, specifically
by Yancoal, Malabar Resources,
Bloomfield Group, Glencore and Port Waratah Coal Services. The evidence given by
those companies is
considered below.
Competitiveness of the tenements market
submitted that the NCC’s analysis of the tenements market did not support
a conclusion that the market is effectively
competitive at present. The NCC
based its conclusion on two matters: that there are a large number of licence
holders; and that the
State’s reforms to how coal tenements can be
acquired from the State can be expected to improve the transparency of tenement
acquisition and enable greater competition amongst investors seeking to acquire
. NSWMC submitted that those two matters do
not establish that the tenements market is effectively competitive. NSWMC
asserted (without
evidence or development of the contention) that there are
concerns about the extent of competition in the tenements market.
Port charges relative to coal mining costs
did not dispute that the navigation service charge and wharfage charge levied by
PNO at the Port are small relative to coal
mining costs and that there are a
range of commercial and regulatory uncertainties and risks that will impact on
decisions of investors
or potential investors in the tenements market. NSWMC
submitted, however, that it does not follow that reduced uncertainty in
future Port charges with declaration would not promote a material
increase in competition in the tenements market. NSWMC argued that
commercial and regulatory uncertainties and risks faced by coal miners will be
faced regardless of the location of the mine.
The risk caused by PNO’s
ability to increase prices absent the declaration will be specific to coal
exporters in the Newcastle
catchment area. This will detract from the
attractiveness of investing in that area, in comparison to other
PNO’s ability and incentive to exercise market
submitted that criterion (a) does not require demonstration that the service
provider has the incentive to deny access to the
service or to otherwise
exercise market power. While the incentive to exercise market power may be
relevant, it is not a controlling
nor determinative evaluation (referring to
Re Virgin Blue
at [296]). NSWMC contended that the NCC’s analysis,
which was adopted by the Minister, was confined to a consideration of
incentives to exercise market power.
further submitted that the NCC’s analysis involved an erroneous assessment
of PNO’s ability and incentive to exercise
market power. It argued that
the starting point for any assessment of PNO’s market power must be that
PNO is a monopolist.
The Port is a bottleneck facility and Hunter Valley coal
producers have no practical alternative to the Port for the export of their
coal. As such, PNO is able to set terms and conditions of access to the shipping
channel service free of any competitive constraint;
it is not constrained from
exercising its market power by the availability of substitute facilities, by the
countervailing power
of users or by the threat of a new facility. It follows
that PNO has the ability to exercise market power in the provision of the
shipping channel service. Further, PNO’s conduct since the privatisation
of the Port, implementing very substantial increases
in charges, demonstrates
its unconstrained market power.
argued that the NCC downplayed the extent of PNO’s market power, by
focussing on whether PNO has an incentive to “deny
access” to any
users of the Port. It submitted that the NCC was wrong to conclude that there
were other factors that would
likely act as a constraint on PNO in setting the
terms and conditions of access in a future without declaration being: (i) that
is likely to be mindful of harm to its reputation; (ii) the potential for
regulatory intervention by the State of NSW; (iii) that
PNO is not vertically
integrated; (iv) that PNO has offered terms to Port users through the Producer
and Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds;
and (v) the Port is not capacity
constrained.
relation to reputational constraints, NSWMC submitted that PNO’s dealings
with coal producers, specifically PNO’s refusal
to participate in
collective bargaining with coal producers, is inconsistent with the conclusion
reached by the NCC.
relation to the likelihood of regulatory intervention by the State of NSW, NSWMC
submitted that the State has not intervened in
relation to PNO’s setting
of new terms and conditions in relation to the shipping channel service to date
despite the coal
industry’s concerns and there is nothing to suggest this
would likely change in the future. PNO is not constrained by regulation
PAMA Act and PAMA Regulations do not allow the State to intervene and set prices
at the Port. While the prices levied by PNO
are subject to price reporting to
the relevant Minister of the State under Part 6 of the PAMA Act, and the
Minister may refer the
pricing for investigation to NSW’s Independent
Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal (
), this does not allow IPART to set
maximum prices or determine prices relevant to the shipping channel
relation to vertical integration, NSWMC submitted that PNO’s 50%
shareholder, China Merchants Group, has interests in container
operations. If PNO develops a container terminal at the Port, as is its stated
intention, PNO may set its charges for the
shipping channel service in a manner
that sees the coal industry cross-subsidise container freight (by setting port
access charges
to coal vessels so as to recover part of the capital costs of the
development of the container terminal).
relation to the terms of the Producer and Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds, NSWMC
submitted that they will not constrain PNO because
it is not required to offer
the Deeds and is entirely free to withdraw or change the terms of those
arrangements at any time. NSWMC
observed that PNO has not given an irrevocable
undertaking, or a promise by deed poll (a deed binding a single person), not to
its present offer to enter into the Producer and Vessel Agent Pricing
Deeds with any coal producer and vessel agent respectively.
Further, in contrast
to the likely duration of a declaration, the Deeds only have a term of 10 years.
NSWMC also submitted that,
in any event, the terms of the Producer and Vessel
Agent Pricing Deeds are unreasonable (and can be contrasted with reasonable
and conditions of access as a result of declaration) in the following
(a) The navigation service charge rate under the Deeds
includes a return on user funded assets which was rejected by the ACCC. While
the inclusion of such a return was accepted by a previous decision of the
Tribunal, the Full Federal Court concluded that that decision
was affected by
errors of law.
(b) The navigation service charge rate under the Deeds may be increased
unilaterally by PNO on an annual basis (in addition to the
annual CPI/4%
increase) (Item 7(b) of the Deeds). While any such increase must be in
accordance with the Pricing Principles (as defined
in cl 4.2 of Sch 3 to the
Deeds), the Pricing Principles are not identical to the principles that would
apply to the arbitration
of a dispute under Division 3 of Part IIIA of the Act
(by s 44X(1)). In particular, cl 4.2 of Sch 3 does not contain an
principle to that stated in s 44X(1)(e) (the value to the provider of
extensions, including expansions of capacity and expansions
of geographical
reach, whose cost is borne by someone else), which was the subject of the
dispute concerning user funded contributions
in the Tribunal’s decision in
Re Port of Newcastle Operations
and the Full Court’s decision in
Glencore Coal
(c) The dispute mechanisms in the Deeds are not reasonable terms and conditions
of access and are no substitute for arbitration under
Part IIIA of the Act
(Items 8 and 9 of the Deeds). In particular, the previous arbitration conducted
by the ACCC on the application
of Glencore resulted in the adoption of a
regulated asset base and building block methodology to determine allowed
revenues and prices,
with disclosure of relevant financial inputs to the model.
In contrast, arbitration in accordance with the ACICA Arbitration Rules
stipulated by cl 3.3 of Sch 3 to the Deeds) does not necessitate any particular
methodology to determining prices or disclosure
of financial information.
(d) While the Producer Pricing Deed requires PNO to provide capital expenditure
forecasts to coal producers on a rolling five-year
basis and coal producers have
an opportunity to comment, PNO is not obliged to implement any comments (Item 7
of the Producer Pricing
relation to Port capacity, NSWMC did not dispute that the shipping channel
service is not presently capacity constrained, nor is
it likely to be in the
foreseeable future. NSWMC submitted that it does not follow that PNO’s
ability to set the terms and
conditions of access, including by way of
discriminating on access terms and conditions (including price) between users
through bilateral
negotiations, is constrained. PNO could charge each mine a
different price for the use of Port services and, if it is able to do
effectively, PNO could achieve an outcome in which there is no reduction in
throughput.
Period of declaration
requested the Tribunal to declare the shipping channel service for a period of
20 years. It argued that a 20 year declaration
would provide certainty to
participants in the tenements market enabling them to invest in the exploration
and development of coal
resources in the Hunter Valley knowing that they will be
able to access shipping channel services on reasonable terms and conditions
under Part IIIA of the Act.
Decisions of the Queensland Competition Authority
the course of oral submissions, the NSWMC made extensive reference to recent
decisions of the Queensland Competition Authority
) regarding
applications for declaration of services provided by Aurizon Network Pty Ltd
(the use of a coal system for providing transportation
by rail), Queensland Rail
Limited (the below rail service on certain routes) and DBCT Management Pty Ltd
(the handling of coal at
the Dalrymple Bay Coal Terminal by the terminal
operator) pursuant to
Queensland Competition Authority Act
(Qld). NSWMC submitted that those decisions illustrated the proper
approach to the issues that arise in this matter and that the
approach of the
QCA could be contrasted with the analysis undertaken by the NCC, and adopted by
the Minister, in this matter.
Tribunal does not find that those decisions of the QCA are of any assistance to
the present review. They are administrative decisions
made in respect of
different types of facilities in different market circumstances. Indeed, in its
decision concerning the below
rail service provided by Queensland Rail, the QCA
referred to the NCC Recommendation in this matter and noted that the service
by Queensland Rail is materially different from the service provided by
PNO (QCA, Part B: Queensland Rail declaration review, p 4).
It is unnecessary to
refer further to the QCA decisions.
F. CONSIDERATION OF CRITERION (A)
Meaning of criterion (a)
(a) is that access (or increased access) to the service, on reasonable terms and
conditions, as a result of a declaration
of the service would promote a material
increase in competition in at least one market (whether or not in Australia),
the market for the service. As discussed earlier, criterion (a)
requires a forward looking assessment of the effect of access (or
access) to the service on reasonable terms and conditions as a result of
declaration. An important consideration in applying
the criterion is whether
access will be, or is likely to be, available without declaration and the
commercial features of such access
including the nature and scope of access, the
terms and conditions of access and any capacity limitations to access.
number of aspects of criterion (a) require further elaboration in order to
address arguments advanced by the parties in the proceeding.
The meaning of “competition”
meaning of the word “competition” in the Act has been explained in
many cases. By and large, the cases refer back
to the explanation provided by
the Tribunal in
at 511-512, which made the following
(a) At its most fundamental, competition is a mechanism
for discovery of market information: the types and quantities of goods and
services that are demanded and how they may be supplied at least cost. Prices
and profits are the signals which register the play
of these forces of demand
and supply. Competition is also a mechanism for enforcement of business
decisions in light of this information:
firms disregard these signals at the
threat of losing sales to alternative suppliers.
(b) Effective competition connotes that no one seller, and no group of sellers
acting in concert, has the power to choose its level
of profits by giving less
and charging more, because they will be constrained by existing competitors or
potential new entrants.
(c) Competition expresses itself as rivalrous market behaviour. Effective
competition requires both that prices should be flexible,
reflecting the forces
of demand and supply, and that there should be independent rivalry in all
dimensions of the price-product-service
packages offered to customers.
(d) While competition is a process rather than a situation, the nature and
extent of competition is affected by the conditions of
the relevant market,
particularly market concentration, the height of barriers to entry, the extent
of product differentiation, the
character of vertical relationships between
customers and suppliers and the extent of vertical integration and the existence
of horizontal
relationships between suppliers or between
Re Fortescue Metals
, the Tribunal described both the process of
competition and the extent of competition. In relation to the process of
competition,
the Tribunal said (at [1050]):
In economics, the word “competition” (as a
process) has many meanings. Stigler’s well-known definition is
between individuals (or groups or nations) and it arises whenever
two or more parties strive for something that all cannot gain”.
definition, competition refers to behaviour, and especially to patterns of
business behaviour. Relevantly, it relates
to behaviour that may affect the
price or quality or conditions of sale of goods exchanged in the relevant
market. Hence competition
may be described as rivalry that amounts to a process
that leads to an increase in economic efficiency.
relation to the extent of competition, the Tribunal said (at [1051]):
The extent of competition is another matter. Economists
describe markets as perfectly competitive, effectively competitive or
imperfectly
competitive (such as monopolies or oligopolies). The state of
competition in a market is the result of internal and external factors
bear upon the nature and extent of the rivalry. Hence, in
Application by
Chime Communications Pty Ltd (No 2)
(2009) 257 ALR 765
[2009] ACompT 2
tribunal said (at [48]):
[48] In the Tribunal’s view a market
is sufficiently competitive if the market experiences at least a reasonable
degree of rivalry
between firms each of which suffers some constraint in their
use of market power from competitors (actual and potential) and from
The criteria for such competition are structural (a sufficient number of
sellers, few inhibitions on entry and expansion),
conduct-based (for example no
collusion between firms, no exclusionary or predatory tactics) and
performance-based (for example firms
should be efficient, prices should reflect
costs and be responsive to changing market
The meaning of “promote a material increase in
competition”
noted earlier, the Tribunal in
Re Sydney International Airport
that the notion of "promoting" competition in criterion (a) involves the idea of
creating the conditions or environment
for improving competition from what it
would be otherwise. That interpretation of the phrase has been followed in
subsequent Tribunal
decisions, was approved by the Full Court in an analogous
Telstra Corporation
and was also adopted by the Full Court in
Port of Newcastle
. Despite that, PNO contends that the amendments made to
criterion (a) by the 2006 Amendment Act, which introduced the words
increase in”, altered the meaning of the criterion. PNO
argued that criterion (a) requires the decision maker to be satisfied
declaration would result in an increase in competition in a dependent market.
Tribunal considers that the Full Court decision in
Port of Newcastle
requires it to reject PNO’s contention. Even if that were not the case,
the Tribunal would not accept PNO’s contention.
The ordinary meaning of
the word “promote” is to support, encourage, facilitate or further.
The ordinary meaning is consistent
with the use of the word in its statutory
context. The object of the national access regime in Part IIIA is to promote the
economically
efficient operation of, use of and investment in the infrastructure
by which services are provided, thereby promoting effective competition
upstream and downstream markets (s 44AA(a)). The creation of such rights of
access, on reasonable terms and conditions under Part
IIIA, may remove or reduce
a barrier or impediment to competition in a dependent market. As explained by
the Tribunal in
Re Sydney International Airport
, the notion of promoting
competition refers to enhancing the conditions or environment for competition in
a dependent market by creating
rights of access on reasonable terms and
conditions.
to PNO’s submission, the 2006 amendment to criterion (a) did not alter the
meaning of the word “promote”.
The relevant phrase changed from
“promote competition” to “promote a material increase in
competition”. Each
phrase is introduced by the verb “promote”.
In support of its contention, PNO relied on the statement in paragraph 1.9
the Explanatory Memorandum to the
Trade Practices Amendment (National Access
Regime) Bill 2005
(Cth) to the effect that the amendment was made “to
ensure that access declarations are only granted where the expected increase
competition in an upstream or downstream market is not trivial”. That
statement does not indicate a different meaning of
“promote”. The notion of promoting an increase in competition by
creating rights of access is entirely consistent
with the notion of expecting an
increase in competition as a result of access.
it should be observed that the distinction sought to be drawn by PNO is more
semantic than real. Any difference between enhancing
the conditions or
environment for competition and increasing competition is subtle. As the
Tribunal explained in
(at 512), competition is a process, not a
situation and expresses itself as rivalrous market behaviour (quoted in
Virgin Blue
at [145]). In the ordinary course, if the conditions or
environment for competition are enhanced it can be expected that competition
will be increased.
The meaning of “would”
(a) requires that access as a result of declaration
material increase in competition. The meaning of the word “would”
was considered by the Tribunal in
Re Virgin Blue.
The access seeker,
Virgin Blue, submitted that the phrase “would promote competition”
meant that “there is a significant
finite probability, rather than that
such a consequence be ‘more probable than not’” (at [160]),
whereas the facility
owner, Sydney Airports Corporation Ltd, submitted the
opposite. The Tribunal accepted the submission of Virgin Blue and expressed
view that the phrase required the Tribunal to be satisfied that there would be a
“significant, finite probability”
of competition being promoted (at
contends that the Tribunal’s interpretation of the word
Re Virgin Blue
was incorrect. PNO argued that the
word has its ordinary meaning, which is the conditional tense of the verb
The Tribunal accepts that contention and, respectfully, does
not agree with the interpretation adopted in
Re Virgin Blue
meaning of the word “would” in criterion (a) was not addressed by
the Full Court in
Sydney Airport
. Subsequently, in
, the Full Court stated (at [86], in respect of criterion (a) prior
to its amendment by the 2017 Amendment Act) that:
Criterion (a) requires the decision-maker to be
satisfied that if an event or circumstance (access or increased access to the
happens, then a state of affairs
will follow
(the promotion of a
material increase in competition in a dependent market). The decision-maker is
required to make a prediction
or forecast of the conditions or environment for
improving competition in a dependent market with access or increased access on
one hand, and without access or increased access on the other. The latter
circumstance is often referred to (perhaps not entirely
accurately) as the
counterfactual. (Emphasis added.)
the above passage, the Full Court adopted the ordinary meaning of the word
“would” (if access is given, a promotion
of competition will
word “would” is commonly used in the Act as many of the provisions
of the Act address the future competitive consequences
of particular conduct.
Recently, in
ACCC v Pacific National
[2020] FCAFC 77
(2020) 277 FCR 49
), the Full Court considered the meaning of the phrase “if
the acquisition would have the effect, or would be likely to have
the effect, of
substantially lessening competition in any market” in s 50 of the Act. The
plurality (Middleton and O’Bryan
JJ) observed that the section contains
two legal standards: the section is contravened if the acquisition
have the effect of substantially lessening competition and the section is also
contravened if the acquisition
would be likely
to have the effect of
substantially lessening competition (at [220]). In respect of the first legal
standard, “would have the
effect of substantially lessening
competition”, the plurality considered that the standard conveyed
certainty (i.e. the consequence
will follow), although the legal standard must
be proved to the civil standard of proof, on the balance of the probabilities
[223]). In respect of the second legal standard, “would be likely to
have the effect of substantially lessening competition”,
the plurality
considered that the longstanding interpretation of the phrase as a likelihood
that is less than probable should not
be overturned (at [243]).
Consistently
with the approach adopted in both
Port of Newcastle
, the Tribunal considers that the word “would” in
criterion (a) should be construed in accordance with its ordinary meaning.
civil administrative context, the word requires the decision maker to be
satisfied that, if the service is declared and access
given on reasonable terms
and conditions, a material increase in competition will be promoted by that
the present matter, though, the Tribunal considers that the same ultimate
conclusion on criterion (a) must be reached whether the
word “would”
is interpreted as the conditional tense of the verb “will” (which,
in a civil administrative
context, requires the Tribunal to be satisfied on the
balance of probabilities) or is interpreted as including a “significant
finite probability” that is less than 50%.
The meaning of “access ... as a result of
declaration”
assessing whether access (or increased access) to the service on reasonable
terms and conditions as a result of declaration would
promote a material
increase in competition, it is necessary to assess whether access is likely to
be available without declaration
and the commercial terms of such access. In the
present case, and as discussed below, an important part of the argument focussed
upon the existing terms of access to the shipping channel service at the Port,
particularly under the Producer and Vessel Agent Pricing
Deeds, and whether
those terms of access would remain available in the future and, if they do, the
degree to which the terms will
constrain price increases in the future. NSWMC
submitted that there is no certainty that, in the future, PNO will continue to
access under the terms of the Deeds and, even if it does, the terms of the
Deeds afford no certainty as to the navigation service
charge and the wharfage
charge in the future because PNO has the ability to increase the charges. In
response, PNO submitted that
the determination of access prices at the Port in
an arbitration under Part IIIA as a result of declaration has been demonstrated
to involve considerable disputation and uncertainty, with the Glencore initiated
arbitration currently before the High Court. Indeed,
PNO submitted that the
future without declaration (pricing determined by the Deeds) is more certain
than a future with declaration.
the NCC Recommendation, the NCC observed that there is a degree of uncertainty
regarding precisely what terms and conditions, including
price, of access might
be set for the shipping channel service as a result of declaration (at [7.78]).
To some extent, the NCC appears
to have taken that into account as a factor in
applying criterion (a).
Tribunal considers that criterion (a) does not permit the comparison advocated
by PNO and seemingly adopted by the NCC. The position
would be different if the
criterion referred to whether “declaration” or “access as a
result of declaration”
would promote a material increase in competition.
Instead, the criterion refers to access on reasonable terms and conditions as a
result of declaration. The assumption inherent in the language of criterion (a)
is that declaration will result in access to the
relevant service on reasonable
terms and conditions. The phrase “on reasonable terms and
conditions” is not defined in
the Act. The Competition Policy Review
Explanatory Memorandum stated (at [12.21]):
This is an objective test that may involve consideration
of market conditions. It does not require that the Council or Minister come
view on the outcomes of a Part IIIA negotiation or arbitration. The requirement
that access is on reasonable terms and conditions
is intended to minimise the
detriment to competition in dependent markets that may otherwise be caused by
the exploitation of monopoly
power. Reasonable terms and conditions include
those necessary to protect the legitimate interests of the owner of the
experience shows that access as a result of declaration may involve considerable
disputation with resulting delays and cost,
criterion (a) requires the decision
maker to assume that declaration will result in access on reasonable terms and
conditions. In
relation to price terms, the appropriate assumption is that
prices would be determined in accordance with the principles specified
Division 3 of Part IIIA (specifically, s 44X) and would provide the facility
owner with a normal expected rate of return. The
matter that must be assessed is
whether that outcome, which is to be assumed, will promote a material increase
in competition. The
enquiry necessarily focusses on the future market and
commercial circumstances without declaration (in particular, whether access
likely to be available and the likely terms of access) in order to assess
whether access as a result of declaration would promote
a material increase in
competition.
those reasons, the Tribunal has had no regard to arguments concerning the
uncertainty of future access terms and conditions as
a result of declaration.
The Tribunal makes the assumption that such access terms and conditions will be
determined and will be reasonable.
The Tribunal notes for completeness, though,
that the delay and costs associated with disputes over the terms and conditions
under Part IIIA are not ignored in the declaration criteria. Section
44CA(3)(b) requires the decision maker, in the context of assessing
(d) (promotion of the public interest) to have regard to the administrative and
compliance costs that would be incurred
by the provider of the service if the
service is declared.
The time horizon
evaluation of markets, competition and the expected behaviour of economic actors
depends upon the time horizon specified for the
evaluation. The parties did not
address the Tribunal as to the time horizon that is relevant to the assessment
of criterion (a),
but the Tribunal considers it important to be clear about the
time horizon to be applied in its evaluation. The criterion requires
that access
as a result of declaration would promote a material increase in competition in a
dependent market, which requires that
the conditions, opportunities or
environment for competition are improved in more than a trivial way. The
criterion is necessarily
forward looking and invites the question: over what
time horizon should the potential for improvement be assessed?
NCC expressed the view (at [4.23]) that “when making judgements about
likely future conditions and the environment for competition,
it is necessary to
look beyond short-term static effects” and that “it is appropriate
to consider the effects of declaration
on investment incentives in dependent
markets and for the service provider, and the effects of foreseeable changes in
and/or market conditions”. The Tribunal agrees with that
economic issues with which Part IIIA is concerned indicates that the time
horizon relevant to the assessment is across the medium
“across”, we mean that the effects of declaration should be assessed
having regard to the present market conditions,
opportunities and environment
and forecasting how those conditions, opportunities and environment may evolve
and change into the
medium term with and without declaration. The object of Part
IIIA is economic: to promote the economically efficient operation of,
investment in the infrastructure by which services are provided, thereby
promoting effective competition in dependent
markets. The infrastructure liable
to declaration under Part IIIA is typically long-lived. Most significantly,
changes in the terms
of access to the infrastructure may not have immediate
effects on competition in dependent markets and may only have effects in the
medium term. This is because firms in dependent markets may have sunk costs.
Provided the terms of access do not result in dependent
market firms’
marginal costs exceeding their marginal revenues, the terms may have no
immediate effect on existing firms’
consumption or production decisions.
However, over the medium term, the terms of access may decrease the existing
firms’ incentives
to undertake further investment or otherwise increase
consumption and production in the dependent market and may deter entry by new
constitutes the medium term in a given case may vary depending on the
characteristics of the industries that are the subject
of consideration.
However, we consider that the assessment of the medium term should be guided by
one practical consideration: over
what time period is it feasible to make
reasonable predictions about the conditions, opportunities or environment for
competition
in relevant dependent markets with and without declaration? In the
present proceeding, the Tribunal defines the medium term as 10
to 15 years. In
that regard, it should be noted that the refusal of declaration at a given point
in time, based on the information
available to the decision-maker at that point
in time, does not preclude future applications for declaration. Indeed, there is
legislative restriction on the number of applications that can be made over
time. Accordingly, if the decision-maker’s predictions
conditions, opportunities or environment for competition in relevant dependent
markets with and without declaration across
the medium term prove to be
inaccurate, an access seeker may apply again for declaration of the relevant
service. Contrary to a submission
advanced by NSWMC, an access seeker should
feel no lack of confidence in making a future application if it can be
demonstrated that
the behaviour of the facility owner, or some aspect of the
conditions, opportunities or environment for competition in relevant dependent
markets, are materially different from that previously predicted.
How access may affect the conditions and environment for
competition in dependent markets
IIIA of the Act was first enacted in response to recommendations made in Chapter
11 of the 1993 report of the Independent Committee
of Inquiry into a National
Competition Policy (the ‘Hilmer Report’). That chapter explained (at
p 239) that some economic
activities exhibit natural monopoly characteristics,
in the sense that they cannot be duplicated economically, and occupy strategic
positions in an industry such that access to the facility is required if a
business is to be able to compete effectively in upstream
or downstream markets.
The Hilmer Report referred to facilities displaying those characteristics as
"essential facilities". It is
also common to use the description
“bottleneck facility”, an expression we prefer to use in this
Hilmer Report described two broad categories of economic problems that may arise
with bottleneck facilities (at pp 240-241). The
first is where the owner of the
facility is not competing in upstream or downstream markets. The Hilmer Report
expressed the view
that, in those circumstances, the owner of the facility will
usually have little incentive to deny access. However, the owner of
the facility
may be able to use its monopoly position to charge higher prices and derive
monopoly profits at the expense of consumers
and economic efficiency. The Hilmer
Report indicated that monopoly pricing issues could be addressed, where
appropriate, through
price monitoring or surveillance, implying that monopoly
pricing is not an issue to be addressed by the recommended access regime.
will return to that point. The second category of economic problem described in
the Hilmer Report is where the owner of the facility
is vertically integrated
with potentially competitive activities in upstream or downstream markets. The
Hilmer Report expressed the
view that, in those circumstances, the potential to
charge monopoly prices may be combined with an incentive to inhibit competitors'
access to the facility.
Productivity Commission, in the 2013 Productivity Commission Report, described
the economic problems that may arise with bottleneck
facilities in similar terms
(at pp 6 – 7 ), stating:
Where there is an enduring
lack of effective competition in markets for infrastructure services, a provider
might deny access to,
or restrict output and charge monopoly prices for, its
infrastructure service. This can reduce economic efficiency where access to
service is required for third parties to compete effectively in dependent
(upstream and downstream) markets. As a consequence,
transactions that would
enhance community wellbeing may not proceed.
Both vertically integrated and vertically separated infrastructure service
providers can have an ability and incentive to engage
in monopoly pricing of
access. Incentives to deny access to some or all access seekers will be
heightened where service providers
are vertically integrated — that is,
where service providers also operate in markets upstream or downstream of the
A vertically integrated monopolist may deny access to its
infrastructure services to an upstream or downstream competitor if that
increases total profits across its operations.
The only economic problem that access regulation
should address is an enduring lack of effective competition, due to natural
in markets for infrastructure services where access is required for
third parties to compete effectively in dependent markets. Access
should not be used to avoid the duplication of infrastructure per se, or to
address wider social and economic issues such
as income distribution or
environmental concerns.
Tribunal agrees that where the owner of a bottleneck facility is vertically
integrated with potentially competitive activities
in upstream or downstream
markets, there may be commercial incentives to deny or restrict access to the
bottleneck facility by third
parties for the purpose of protecting profits in
the relevant dependent market. The denial or restriction of access may take many
forms including: a refusal to supply access to the facility; a constructive
refusal to supply access by offering a price that renders
access uneconomic;
imposing restrictions on access as to quantity or other terms that either render
access uneconomic or that inhibit
the manner and extent of access. The denial or
restriction of access may harm the conditions or environment for competition in
markets by preventing or limiting entry to such markets or expansion
or other competitive behaviour in such markets.
and as recognised by the Productivity Commission, where the owner of a
bottleneck facility is not vertically integrated,
there remains the potential
for the facility owner to set terms of access that harm the conditions or
environment for competition
in dependent markets. For example, in
International Airport
, the Tribunal considered whether a tender process by
which Sydney International Airport made available access to the airport for
provision of ramp handling services (the loading and unloading of freight and
passenger baggage at the aircraft on the apron)
was harmful to competition in
the market for such services. The Tribunal reached the conclusion that
the treatment of incumbent suppliers in the tender
process biased the selection criteria towards entities with similar operating
characteristics
and economics as the main incumbents, which in turn effectively
precluded competitive entry by lower cost operators offering a novel
different mix of service and price (at [124], [145]). The Tribunal ultimately
concluded (at [149]) that a future with declaration
offered the opportunity for
a range of competitive behaviour and outcomes (in the market for ramp handling
services) that were superior
in depth and variety than available without
declaration. In
Re Virgin Blue
, the Tribunal
considered whether Sydney Airport’s method of charging fees to airlines
for airside services had discriminatory
effects on the airlines (according to
their different business models) and thereby harmed the conditions or
environment for competition.
The Tribunal reached the conclusion (at [222]) that
Sydney Airport changed the basis of its airside charges to a methodology which
it had been told by Virgin Blue was inefficient and anti-competitive when it
also knew that Qantas believed it would give it a competitive
advantage over
Virgin Blue and wanted it changed for that reason. As each of
Re Sydney International Airport
Virgin Blue
make clear, criterion (a) does not require proof that the
facility owner intended to harm the conditions or environment for competition
the dependent market. The Tribunal discusses the separate question of the
facility owner’s incentives to offer particular
terms of access
important question that arises in this proceeding is whether, and in what
circumstances, “mere” monopoly pricing by
a non-vertically
integrated facility owner may harm the conditions or environment for competition
in a dependent market. By “monopoly
pricing”, we mean simply that
the facility owner increases the price for access to the facility above that
consistent with
a normal expected rate of return. As noted above, the Hilmer
Report implied that monopoly pricing by a non-vertically integrated
owner was not an issue to be addressed by the recommended access regime.
However, the Productivity Commission acknowledged
in the 2013 Productivity
Commission Report that, in some circumstances, monopoly pricing may affect
competition in dependent markets.
Under the heading “What about monopoly
pricing?”, the Productivity Commission commented (at p 173):
The Commission agrees that where the terms of access are
so ‘inadequate or unreasonable’ they disrupt competition in
markets, the consequent efficiency losses represent a problem that
access regulation should address. However, competition can be
an imprecise proxy
for efficiency in some circumstances, particularly with regard to monopoly
pricing. This may be the case where
monopoly pricing by an infrastructure
service provider does not affect the level of competition in dependent markets.
For example,
in the Virgin Blue case, the NCC considered that even a large
increase in airside service charges by Sydney Airport would not reduce
sufficiently to cause an exit from the market or a contraction in the number of
flights offered on Sydney routes such that
competition would be adversely
affected. It therefore recommended against declaration on the basis that it
would not promote competition
(NCC 2003).
The Commission considers that it is appropriate that criterion (a) —
reframed to consider the effect of declaration rather
than access — allows
for declaration where the prevailing terms and conditions of access are so poor
that they disrupt competition
in another market.
this context, it is necessary to distinguish between the efficiency consequences
of monopoly pricing by the facility owner and
the consequences for competition
in dependent markets. As the Productivity Commission observed in the passage
cited earlier, an infrastructure
service provider charging monopoly prices for
access to their infrastructure can lead to allocative inefficiency where output
a dependent market is lessened as a result. However, the reduction in output
and associated allocative inefficiency cannot be equated
with a reduction in the
conditions or environment for competition or competition itself. As observed by
the Tribunal in
Re Glencore
(at [133]), the effect of monopoly pricing is
simply to raise the price of one of myriad input prices to a dependent market
when one of an industry’s costs goes up, there is no presumption of
an adverse effect on competition. Similarly, the Tribunal
accepted (at [208]) the contention of Sydney Airport that the impact
that a change in tariff structure has on airlines’ costs
distinguished from an impact on competition (while observing that the extent of
competition in the dependent market can still
be inhibited by the imposition of
a discriminatory charge). An increase in an industry’s cost structure has
no necessary effect
on the degree of rivalry or the competitive process in the
dependent market, because the increase in the cost structure does not
market structure and behavioural factors that determine the competitive
Tribunal therefore agrees with the following statement of principle of the NCC
(at [7.12]):
Criterion (a) is not met merely by establishing that a
service provider is a natural monopolist with respect to the provision of a
service, possesses market power or is able to charge a price above what would be
charged in a competitive market for the service.
For instance, even where lower
prices for access to a service may arise in a future with declaration of a
service, compared to a
future without declaration, this does not necessarily
mean that competition will be promoted in a dependent market. This might be
case if, for example, a lower price for access would lead to little or no change
in consumption or production decisions with
respect to the service the subject
of a declaration application. In these circumstances, a lower price for access
may merely have
the effect of redistributing the economic surplus generated
within a supply chain. Criterion (a) will not be satisfied by establishing
regulated access will result in a different distribution of rents between access
seekers and a provider of a service.
a transfer of economic rents between parties in a supply chain, which does not
affect the willingness of existing producers
to consume or produce, will not
have an adverse effect on allocative efficiency, let alone an adverse effect on
competition, in the
dependent markets. However, even if monopoly pricing were to
cause a reduction in consumption or production, that will not
necessarily
affect the conditions or environment for competition in the dependent market.
Tribunal emphasises though, that each case is fact specific and depends upon the
nature of the facility, the nature and extent
of competition in the dependent
markets, and the potential significance of access prices (and increases in the
access prices) to
competition in the dependent markets. The Tribunal
acknowledges the possibility that, in a given case, the potential for
monopoly pricing may cause firms to exit a market or prevent
firms from entering a market or otherwise create circumstances where
possible to conclude that there has been a material decrease in the conditions
or environment for competition in the market.
Framework for the evaluation
foregoing discussion of the meaning of criterion (a), and the manner in which
access may affect the conditions and environment
for competition in dependent
markets, sets the framework for the evaluation of criterion (a). The criterion
requires an assessment,
across the medium term, of the effect on the promotion
of competition of access (on reasonable terms and conditions) as a result
declaration, which necessitates a comparison with the market and commercial
circumstances without declaration.
being exhaustive, the necessary steps in the assessment are:
(a) first, identify the relevant service to be declared
and the relevant dependent markets;
(b) second, examine the nature and extent of competition in the market for the
relevant service (if any) and in the relevant dependent
(c) third, evaluate whether, to what extent and on what terms the relevant
service provider is likely to provide access to the service
in the future
without declaration and how any such access may impact on the conditions or
environment for competition in the relevant
dependent markets; and
(d) finally, evaluate whether access as a result of declaration will promote a
material increase in competition in a dependent market
in comparison to access
(if any) without declaration.
the present case, there is no dispute with respect to the first step of the
analysis. The relevant service to be declared is the
shipping channel service
and, while numerous dependent markets were identified by the NCC, NSWMC’s
application for review is
focussed on the promotion of competition in the coal
tenements market. The consideration of the issues is therefore directed to the
coal tenements market, although it will be necessary to refer to the overall
supply chain for the export of coal from Australia.
The shipping channel service
description of the Port of Newcastle and the shipping channel service has been
provided earlier in these reasons. To recap, the
Port is one of the larger coal
export ports in the world, with coal extracted from the Hunter Valley being
shipped through the Port.
In 2018, the Port handled 158.6 million tonnes of coal
with a value of approximately $23.6 billion. The Hunter Valley coal industry
associated supply chain are the largest coal export operations in the world,
producing over 170 million tonnes of saleable coal
per year with more than 30
operating coal mines operated by 11 coal producers as well as other coal
projects in various stages of
exploration and development. There are three main
rail haulage providers who transport coal from the mines to export terminals at
the Port. Coal is then loaded onto vessels at one of the loading terminals. The
Port is operated by PNO under a 98-year sublease.
As the operator of the Port,
PNO controls the terms and conditions of access to the Port including,
relevantly, the shipping channels
and berthing facilities required for the
export of coal from the Port.
is uncontroversial that the Port is a bottleneck facility for coal producers in
the Hunter Valley. As stated by the NCC (at [7.33]‑[7.34]):
7.33 The Port is a bottleneck: Hunter Valley coal
producers have no practicable alternative to the Port for the export of their
While some coal is exported through Port Kembla, that port is not
currently an effective competitive constraint on PNO.
7.34 As the Port is a bottleneck, PNO has considerable bargaining power over
Hunter Valley coal producers who have already sunk
costs in exploration and
extraction in the Newcastle catchment, where these producers have no other
economically viable means to
load coal for export markets. This enables PNO to
set terms and conditions of access to these coal producers free from any
from alternative nearby providers of coal export terminal services.
did not contest that conclusion. However, it does not follow from that
conclusion that PNO has unconstrained market power. A key
issue that arises on
the review is the extent of PNO’s market power, specifically its ability
and incentive to set terms and
conditions of access in a manner that would
negatively impact the competitive conditions in the coal tenements market. That
requires an examination of all commercial, regulatory and economic factors
bearing upon PNO as supplier of the shipping channel service
and the extent to
which those factors constrain PNO’s commercial decisions.
submitted that where, as in the present case, the facility that provides the
relevant service is a bottleneck facility (it cannot
be bypassed), the necessary
starting point for the analysis is the unarguable ability for the facility owner
to set terms and conditions
of access that harm competitive conditions in
dependent markets. NSWMC argued that, in a practical sense, the facility owner
the burden of persuading the Tribunal that it is constrained to act in a
manner that will not harm competitive conditions. The Tribunal
accepts that
submission to a point. However, the Tribunal considers that it is wrong to start
position. All of the commercial, regulatory and
economic factors bearing upon the facility owner in respect of the supply of the
relevant service, and upon suppliers in dependent markets, must be assessed in
order to arrive at a conclusion in respect of criterion
(a). It is necessary to
examine the available information concerning the existing industry structure,
behaviour and performance,
and contemplated and foreseeable changes to
structure, in order to make reasonable predictions about future industry
The coal tenements market
its application to the NCC, NSWMC identified the coal tenements market as
markets for the acquisition and disposal of exploration
and/or mining
authorities and submitted that the coal tenements market should be divided
(a) early stage exploration licences - the market for
trading exploration licences for coal in the Hunter Valley, Gunnedah Basin,
Gloucester Basin, Newcastle Coalfield and parts of the Western Coalfield;
(b) advance stage exploration licences that are likely to be developed into
operating coal mines - the market for the supply and
acquisition of late stage
exploration licences in the Hunter Valley, Gunnedah Basin, Gloucester Basin,
Newcastle Coalfield, and parts
of the Western Coalfield catchment; and
(c) operating coal mines, typically mining licences - the market for the supply
and acquisition of operating mines in the Hunter
Valley, Gunnedah Basin,
Gloucester Basin, Newcastle Coalfield and parts of the Western
is relevant to note that the coal tenements market, as identified and defined by
NSWMC, might be described as an “asset market”.
It is a market for
the acquisition and disposal of exploration and/or mining authorities. That
observation has some significance
for considering the likely effect of an
increase in charges for the shipping channel service at the Port. As discussed
increase in charges may affect the valuation of such exploration
and/or mining authorities without any necessary effect on the conditions
environment for competition in the market for the acquisition and supply of such
authorities.
NCC explained (at [7.130]-[7.132]) that a ‘tenement’ or
‘exploration authority’ is the right under licence
to carry out
prospecting, exploration or mining activity in respect of a specific piece of
land. Such licences are required because
all mineral resources in Australia are
owned by the Crown. In NSW, all exploration and mining activity must be
conducted in accordance
with an authority issued under the
(NSW). Acquiring rights to mineral deposits generally begins with
acquiring an ‘exploration licence’, which grants an
exclusive right
to search for specific resources in a defined area. An exploration licence
enables the licence holder to explore
areas where mineral and petroleum
resources may be present, to establish the quality and quantity of those
resources, and to investigate
the viability of extracting the resource. If
valuable minerals have been discovered, the owner of the exploration licence may
apply for a production/mining lease. A mining lease permits the business to
mine for minerals over a specific area of land. The grant
of an exploration
licence does not guarantee the grant of a mining lease. As part of the process
of applying for a mining lease,
the applicant (the exploration licence holder)
must go through a separate assessment process (including an environmental impact
and extensive public consultation).
NCC reached the conclusion (at [7.146(a)]) that, while it is possible that the
geographic scope of the coal tenements market extends
beyond the Newcastle
catchment, it is not necessary to determine precisely the geographic scope in
order to assess whether declaration
would be likely to promote a material
increase in competition in this market. The NCC reasoned that, if declaration
would not promote
a material increase in competition where a narrow geographic
view of the market is applied, it is even less likely that declaration
promote a material increase in competition in a more broadly defined geographic
market. The NCC therefore analysed whether
declaration would be likely to
promote a material increase in competition in a market for coal tenements in the
Newcastle catchment.
No participant in the review sought to persuade the
Tribunal that that approach was erroneous, and the Tribunal considers that the
approach is appropriate.
NCC concluded (at [7.147]) that the coal tenements market is effectively
competitive. It observed that there are a large number
of licence holders, which
suggests that the holding of tenements in the Newcastle catchment is not
significantly concentrated in
the hands of only one or two market participants.
The NCC also observed that there appears to also be a number of holders of
licences that have significant market capitalisations, including
multi‑nationals with diversified operations. The NCC considered
reforms to how coal tenements can be acquired from the State of NSW can be
expected to improve the transparency of tenement
acquisition and enable greater
competition amongst a large pool of potential investors seeking to acquire
tenements in the Newcastle
catchment (which will not necessarily be limited to
existing investors in the Newcastle catchment).
argued that the matters referred to in the preceding paragraph were an
insufficient foundation for the NCC’s conclusion
that the coal tenements
market is effectively competitive. The Tribunal agrees that other factors may
have a bearing on an assessment
of the competitiveness of the coal tenements
market, including a more detailed examination of market concentration and
barriers to
entry in particular. However, NSWMC did not refer the Tribunal to
any evidence adduced by it before the NCC that would contradict
assessment. In the absence of such evidence, the Tribunal is not persuaded that
there is any reason to doubt the
NCC’s conclusion.
significant majority of the coal produced from mines in the Hunter Valley is
thermal coal sold in export markets. The NCC referred
(at [7.114]) to its
revocation recommendation in which it observed that coal is traded and shipped
internationally and Australian
coal exporters participate in this international
trade and compete against coal produced and sold through other ports in
and overseas. Export coal miners from the Newcastle catchment are
likely to be price takers: that is, decisions by individual coal
regarding how much coal they will export in any given period are unlikely to
materially affect prices for coal in overseas
export markets. In the present
application, the NCC did not receive any submissions suggesting that the coal
export market is not
effectively competitive (see [7.115]).
Access without declaration
this section, the Tribunal considers whether, to what extent and on what terms
PNO is likely to provide access to the shipping
channel service to coal vessels
in the future without declaration and how any such access will impact on the
conditions or environment
for competition in the coal tenements market. The
section commences by considering PNO’s ability and incentive to exercise
market power in setting the terms of access to the shipping channel service, and
particularly the commercial, regulatory and economic
factors that may afford or
constrain the exercise of market power. The section then considers PNO’s
commercial behaviour to
date and the extent to which it has constrained its
future pricing discretion by the Producer and Vessel Agent Deeds.
Ability and incentives to exercise market power
stated earlier, it is uncontroversial that the Port is a bottleneck facility for
Hunter Valley coal producers. There is no alternative
means to export coal
produced from the Hunter Valley.
discussed above, the owner of a bottleneck facility has the potential ability to
harm competition in an upstream or downstream
dependent market by denying access
to services provided by the facility or by setting terms and conditions of
access that adversely
affects competition in dependent markets. However, whether
the owner of a bottleneck facility is likely to behave in that manner
an assessment of the constraints and incentives that are likely to affect the
facility owner’s behaviour. A consideration
of the constraints and
incentives facing the facility owner is not, as NSWMC submitted, an enquiry as
to idiosyncratic and subjective
attitudes of the facility owner; rather, it is
an enquiry as to objective market conditions that are likely to influence and
the behaviour of a rational profit-maximising facility owner. As the
Tribunal observed in
Re Virgin Blue
(at [296]), the facility
owner’s past conduct provides a basis for judgment as to its future
conduct. Respectfully, we would
not endorse the Tribunal’s further
statement that it is unnecessary to consider the facility owner’s
incentives to act
in a manner that harms competition. We consider that a
facility owner’s past conduct provides a basis for judgment as to its
likely future conduct assuming there has been no change to the commercial,
regulatory and economic factors bearing upon the facility
owner. A prediction
due regard is had to the factors
that influenced the firm’s past conduct
and are likely to influence its future conduct.
as discussed above, there are two different circumstances in which economic
problems may arise with bottleneck facilities: one
is where the owner of the
facility is vertically integrated with potentially competitive activities in
upstream or downstream markets
and the other is where the owner of the facility
is not competing in upstream or downstream markets. NSWMC contends that both
circumstances
exist in the present matter. The first is said to arise because
one of PNO’s joint venture owners, China Merchants Group, has
interests in
container terminals. The second circumstance is associated with NSWMC’s
principal concern about the “hold-up”
risk of investment: that
uncertainty over PNO’s future pricing decisions, and the risk that
investments will be subject to
“hold-up” (the extraction of economic
rents from the investment by PNO increasing prices), will result in a deferral
of investment. It is necessary to consider whether such circumstances are likely
to arise having regard to the commercial, regulatory
and economic factors
bearing upon PNO.
what follows, we describe the main commercial, regulatory and economic factors
bearing upon PNO and which may afford or constrain
its market power in the
supply of the shipping channel service. Those factors are: vertical integration;
asset life and dependence
on upstream customers; capacity constraints;
PNO’s position within the coal supply chain; and the threat of future
of the Port. Those factors were considered in the NCC
Recommendation.
Vertical integration
Tribunal does not accept NSWMC’s submission that PNO is vertically
integrated in any relevant sense. The submission is premised
on the contention
that PNO has an incentive to favour the interests of one of its joint venture
owners, China Merchants Group, over
the interests of coal producers using the
Port. There are two difficulties with the premise. First, it ignores PNO’s
joint venture owner, The Infrastructure Group, whose interests can be
expected to be the maximisation of long run profits at the
Port. Second, it
assumes that the China Merchants Group will derive a financial benefit from the
development of container terminal
capacity at the Port (other than as a joint
venture owner of the Port). The mechanism by which that would occur and the
of it happening were not explained or supported by evidence. Further
and in any event, and as acknowledged by NSWMC in its submissions,
the proposed
development of additional container capacity at the Port is forecast not to be
completed for 15 years.
all the circumstances, the contention that PNO is likely to set charges for coal
producers at the Port across the medium term so
as to cross-subsidise the
development of container terminal capacity has no reasonable foundation. The
Tribunal therefore has no
reason to doubt the correctness of the NCC’s
conclusion that PNO is not vertically integrated in any meaningful way (at
The Revocation Recommendation considered the commercial
interests of certain of PNO’s owners in bulk carrier vessels and container
liners and concluded that these interests are indirect and in the (then)
circumstances would be unlikely to materially impact PNO’s
operations at
the Port. While noting the submissions of the NSWMC and stakeholders regarding
PNO’s proposed expansion of container
terminal services at the Port, the
Council does not consider that PNO is vertically integrated into dependent
markets in any meaningful
Asset life and dependence on upstream customers
(and its joint venture owners) purchased a 98-year lease over the Port that
commenced in 2014. The Tribunal agrees with the conclusion
of the NCC (at
[7.43]) that PNO has an incentive to contract with Port users in a way that has
regard to its ability to maximise
its expected profits over the term of the
lease (which we will refer to as long run profit maximisation). If PNO were to
in a way that reduced future investment in coal mining activity in
the Newcastle catchment, this may reduce the future profits it
can earn from its
operation of the Port.
NCC noted (at [7.55]-[7.56]) that the major part of the Port’s current
business is export coal and the provision of services
for containers remains a
small proportion of the Port’s activities. In 2019, the Port received
2,296 ships, 1,813 of which
were coal vessels (approximately 80%); the remaining
483 ships providing shipment of other products (including containers). In
to a submission that the Port has an incentive to transition its
business away from coal toward containers, the NCC acknowledged
(at [7.47]) that
the global transition to other forms of energy generation can be expected to
affect future coal production and exploration
in the Hunter Valley and the
future utilisation of the Port. Nevertheless, having regard to documents such as
the June 2020
Strategic Statement on Coal Exploration and Mining in NSW
released by the NSW Government, the NCC concluded (at [7.49]) that coal export
activities are the major source of revenue at the
Port and are likely to remain
so in the short-to-medium term. The NCC expressed the view that, while PNO may
wish to increase the
level of container terminal services provided at the Port
into the future, it will not want demand for coal export terminal services
NSWMC maintained the submission before the Tribunal that PNO will seek to
transition the Port’s business away from coal
exports towards containers,
NSWMC accepted that the current timeframe for any redevelopment of a container
terminal is 15 years.
On the evidence before it, the Tribunal has no reason to
doubt the NCC’s conclusion that coal export activities are currently
major source of revenue at the Port and are likely to remain so across the
medium term. It follows that revenues at the Port
in the medium term are highly
dependent on coal mining activities, and PNO’s business has a high degree
of dependence on the
ongoing viability of coal mining in the Hunter
Capacity constraints
NCC observed (at [7.54]) that, if the Port is not capacity constrained, it will
be likely to set terms and conditions of access
for unrelated groups of users
(e.g. coal exporters and container terminal service providers) independently of
each other. If, however,
the Port were to become capacity constrained, its
profit maximising set of prices for different groups of users may change. For
if container terminal service users generated greater levels of
marginal profit than coal exporters, the Port would likely have an
incentive to
increase the level of container terminal services it provides at the expense of
coal export terminal services. The Tribunal
agrees with those observations.
NCC referred (at [7.55]) to data provided by PNO about present and forecast
capacity at the Port which indicated that the shipping
channel can accommodate
the safe movement of over 10,000 vessels per annum, vessel movements in 2017
were less than 50% of its capacity
and, by 2031, PNO forecast the Port may
receive up to 3,666 vessels per annum. On that basis, the NCC concluded that the
not presently capacity constrained and is unlikely to become capacity
constrained in the foreseeable future (at [7.59]). That conclusion
Commodity supply chain
its 2013 Report, the Productivity Commission discussed the incentives and
expected behaviour of a facility owner within a commodity
export supply chain.
The Commission observed (at pp 89-92) that, where Australian exporters have no
ability to affect world prices,
private incentives to maximise profits will
generally be aligned with the efficient use of export infrastructure. Operators
of commodity
export facilities have an incentive to operate efficiently because
they do not have any capacity to affect downstream prices where
suppliers are price takers in bulk commodity export markets.
the present matter, the Treasurer’s Reasons expressed the view that,
because the coal tenements market (amongst other markets)
is a derivative market
of the coal export market, if declaration is unlikely to promote a material
increase in competition in the
coal export market there would be unlikely to be
a material increase in competition in the coal tenements market. The NCC
Recommendation
expressed a similar view (at [1.26] and [7.148]-[7.151]). While
the Tribunal ultimately agrees with this conclusion, it is necessary
why this is likely to be the case.
is no dispute in the present matter that the coal export market is effectively
competitive and that the prices for coal in overseas
export markets are unlikely
to be materially affected by the volume of coal supplied from the Newcastle
catchment. In other words,
the Hunter Valley coal supply chain is in competition
with other coal supply chains within Australia and around the world and is
price taker in world markets. In the long run, international competition between
the Hunter Valley and other actual and potential
coal supply chains will tend to
limit all participants in the supply chain (miners, port, rail and shipping) to
normal expected returns
on investments (adjusted for any supernormal returns
associated with, for instance, specialised capital or grades of coal
resources).
is certainly feasible that pricing decisions of PNO could adversely impact the
valuation of tenements in the coal tenements market
notwithstanding that the
coal export market is effectively competitive and the coal tenements market is
derivative of the coal export
market. Given that the current navigation service
charge is small relative to the other production costs of Hunter Valley coal
(which are set out below), it is reasonable to assume that, in the
short run, the demand from Hunter Valley coal producers for the
shipping channel
service is highly inelastic over a significant range of the navigation service
charge. It is also reasonable to
assume that the incremental cost of additional
vessel movements is a very small proportion of PNO’s costs. Consequently,
principle, PNO could increase its short run profits from coal vessels by
increasing the price for the shipping channel service to
the level at which coal
producers began to reduce their output and the consequent demand for Port
services. Setting the navigation
service charge at or above that level could
cause coal mining and export from the Hunter Valley to become uneconomic for
some mines,
which would harm allocative efficiency.
PNO’s position as operator of the Port assets (under a 98 year lease)
within the Hunter Valley coal supply chain, in
which the coal export market is
effectively competitive and coal producers are price takers, significantly
constrains PNO’s
pricing behaviour. As noted above, given the asset life
of the Port, PNO has an incentive to set prices in a way that has regard
ability to maximise its expected profits over the term of the lease. If PNO were
to increase prices in a manner that caused
coal mining and export to decline, it
is likely that its long term revenue and profits would be adversely affected,
leaving the Port
with even greater spare capacity which is highly unlikely to be
utilized in the near term by other potential users of its services.
if PNO were to increase prices to users such that their marginal costs were just
covered by marginal revenue (the price
received in the coal export market),
production and coal export may continue at existing levels, but existing coal
miners would not
receive an adequate return on their past investment. In turn,
this would cause prices in the secondary markets for coal tenements
to fall and
there would be no activity in the primary market for exploration and development
of new coal tenements, since it would
not be possible to recover sunk and fixed
costs. Again, such outcomes are likely to impact negatively on PNO’s long
term profits.
those reasons, the Tribunal agrees with the conclusions of the NCC (at [7.43])
... where PNO prices in a way that reduces future
investment in coal mining activity in the Newcastle catchment, this may reduce
profits it can earn from its operation of the Port. This is likely to be
an important consideration over the long-term duration of
PNO’s lease, as
future investors who have not made sunk investments yet will have the option to
invest in other opportunities,
including in developing coal mines in other areas
not served by the Port. In this context, harm to PNO’s reputation as the
operator of the Port can be expected to impact on its commercial returns.
and (at [7.44]) that:
...pricing today by PNO to maximise its short-term profits (by, for instance,
expropriating or ‘holding-up’ those miners
that have already sunk
costs in coal exploration/mining) would risk sending a signal to potential
future investors that it might
act in the same way after they make sunk
investments in the future. Where investors fear PNO might act in this way in the
they may be less likely to invest in coal exploration/mining activity in
the Newcastle catchment in a way that would reduce PNO’s
profits over the
longer term.
noted above, the NCC concluded that, while the global transition to other forms
of energy generation can be expected to affect
future coal production and
exploration in the Hunter Valley, coal export activities are likely to remain
the major source of revenue
at the Port in the short-to-medium term.
Accordingly, across the medium term, PNO’s pricing behaviour would be
expected to
be constrained by its position within the Hunter Valley supply chain
which is exposed to international competition in the coal export
market. In so
far as PNO sets prices higher than is necessary to recover its long run costs,
it would be likely to harm the competitive
position of Hunter Valley coal
producers and the associated supply chain, thereby deterring future investment
in the coal tenements
market and, as a consequence, reducing demand for its
shipping channel service.
The threat of regulation
its Recommendation, the NCC considered the level of constraint on PNO’s
commercial behaviour that may be provided by other
regulatory or government
policy actions in the absence of declaration. In that respect, the NCC noted
that the NSW Government has
a clear interest in the continued development and
operation of coal mining in the Newcastle catchment, given its significant
contribution to the State, and that the PAMA Act and PAMA Regulations
provide a degree of transparency over the charges levied by
PNO and a price
monitoring framework (at [7.36]). The NCC noted, though, that the PAMA Act and
PAMA Regulations do not directly limit
or regulate the level at which prices may
be set by PNO for services provided to users of the Port and those laws are not
as effective access regimes under Part IIIA of the Act (at [7.37]).
The NCC also noted that, while the lease arrangements between
the State of NSW
and PNO include provisions designed to ‘constrain’ the behaviour of
PNO, these arrangements are private
contractual arrangements between the two
parties and any third party with concerns about PNO’s behaviour would have
on the State of NSW taking action in order to obtain redress (at
[7.38]). The NCC concluded as follows (at [7.39]):
On balance, the Council expects the NSW Government would
be likely to intervene if PNO imposed excessive price increases or other
limitations that had the potential to have a material adverse impact on
competition in dependent markets; or otherwise harm
the public interest. Such an
intervention might be via the terms of PNO’s lease, under the terms of the
PAMA Act by referral
to IPART; or by introducing new statutory restrictions. The
Council considers that the threat of such action by the NSW Government
likely to provide a low level of constraint on PNO when it sets its terms and
conditions of access in a future without declaration
of the Service. The Council
further considers the effect of this constraint falls well short of that which
would result from an access
regime capable of certification. The Council
considers that these constraints are not a substitute for the type of access
contemplated by the National Access Regime.
Tribunal has no reason to doubt the NCC’s conclusion that possible
regulatory intervention by the NSW Government is no substitute
for the type of
access regulation contemplated by the national access regime in Part IIIA of the
issue not expressly addressed by the NCC is whether the threat of declaration
under Part IIIA is presently acting, and will in
the future act, as a constraint
on PNO’s commercial behaviour. The Tribunal considers that, although it
has decided to affirm
the Treasurer’s decision not to declare the shipping
channel service in the present review, the ongoing threat of declaration
relevant constraint on PNO’s commercial behaviour and ought not to be
lessened by the Tribunal’s decision. As the
Tribunal has sought to
emphasise, the application of criterion (a) in the context of a service provided
by means of a bottleneck
facility requires a close examination of the
commercial, regulatory and economic factors bearing upon the facility owner.
Those factors
can change over time. In the present case, the evidence shows that
in the medium to long term the Port’s business may transition,
extent, away from thermal coal toward container cargo. Such a change in the
market environment may in the future affect the
commercial constraints on
PNO’s behaviour in respect of coal vessels. The refusal of an application
for declaration today does
not prevent another application being made at a later
point in time. If at that time the market environment and PNO’s behaviour
has altered, a different conclusion on declaration may be reached.
Summary of relevant factors
similar manner to the NCC (at [7.72]-[7.73]), the Tribunal considers that there
are a range of factors that are likely to constrain
PNO’s market power
across the medium term in setting prices for the shipping channel service.
PNO’s primary incentive
is to maximise long term profits. In doing so, it
can be expected to take account of the facts that: it holds a lease of the Port
for 98 years; its dominant source of revenue over the medium term will be from
coal exports; it has substantial unused capacity at
the Port; coal export
markets are competitive and the coal supply chain, of which the Port forms a
part, is a price taker in coal
export markets; and the shipping channel service
will remain susceptible to declaration in the future should PNO’s pricing
behaviour cause competitive harm in dependent markets. In the circumstances, PNO
would be expected to set prices so as to recover
long run costs, but not to
further increase prices in a manner that would lessen future investment in the
coal tenements market or
coal production more generally.
Evidence of PNO’s commercial conduct to
following section considers PNO’s commercial behaviour to date. The
Tribunal’s overall assessment is that PNO’s
commercial conduct
appears to be consistent with the expected behaviour of a rational facility
owner, within a commodity export supply
chain for which the final commodity
market is competitive and in which the supply chain (as a whole) is a price
taker, and which
seeks to maximise long run profits. Further, as discussed
below, PNO has offered to commit itself, and has committed itself, over
medium term, through the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds, to rates of the navigation
service charge and wharfage charge that provide
a reasonable degree of pricing
certainty to coal producers.
Tribunal has drawn the following conclusions from the evidence.
No denial of access
there is no evidence that PNO has denied access to the shipping channel service
to any coal producer.
PNO’s refusal to participate in collective
NSWMC placed some emphasis on PNO’s refusal to participate in collective
bargaining with coal producers, submitting
that the refusal was evidence of
market power. The NCC accepted that PNO has considerable bargaining power over
Hunter Valley coal
producers, but concluded that PNO’s refusal to
participate in collective bargaining is not indicative of market power (at
bargaining is not a feature of competitive markets and the refusal to bargain
collectively is not, of itself, indicative
of market power. Rather, collective
bargaining is typically a response to an actual or perceived imbalance in
bargaining power. If
a group of firms perceive that a common supplier has
substantial bargaining power, the firms may seek to bargain collectively with
the supplier to redress the imbalance. Under certain market conditions,
collective bargaining may result in terms and conditions
of supply that better
reflect efficient market outcomes. However, collective bargaining may also have
detrimental effects on efficiency,
particularly in so far as it introduces
inefficient price uniformity or rigidity.
a bottleneck facility for Hunter Valley coal producers, the Port (through its
operator, PNO) has a degree of market power. It is
understandable that coal
producers perceive that they will have more equal bargaining power with PNO if
they are able to bargain
collectively. However, collective bargaining does not
guarantee terms and conditions of supply that better reflect efficient market
outcomes. Further, it cannot be concluded that the terms and conditions of
access offered by PNO to coal producers are (or will be
in the future)
unreasonable or inefficient merely because PNO has refused to participate in
collective bargaining with coal producers.
concern expressed by coal producers is that PNO’s refusal to participate
in collective bargaining means that PNO is free
to engage in price
discrimination in the supply of the shipping channel service. Whether or not
price discrimination in the supply
of the shipping channel service would result
in inefficient pricing, the concern expressed by coal producers is not evident
pricing practices to date. PNO has announced uniform “open
access” rates for the navigation service and wharfage charges,
offered Producer and Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds with uniform pricing and
non-discrimination provisions.
those reasons, the Tribunal does not consider that PNO’s refusal to
participate in collective bargaining with coal producers
is a material factor in
applying criterion (a). It can be assumed that, without declaration, PNO will
continue to refuse to bargain
collectively with coal producers. However, that
behaviour does not have a material bearing on the question whether declaration
promote a material increase in competition.
PNO’s pricing behaviour to date
third conclusion drawn by the Tribunal is that the evidence concerning
PNO’s pricing behaviour to date does not demonstrate
unconstrained market
placed considerable emphasis on increases in the rates of the navigation service
and wharfage charges since the Port was privatised
in 2014. It submitted that
the increases demonstrated that PNO had unconstrained market power to increase
prices and, left unregulated,
PNO would continue to exercise that market power
and increase prices into the future. NSWMC also submitted that the prices and
of access offered under the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds are not comparable to
reasonable terms of access that would be afforded as a
declaration.
Tribunal does not accept that the increases in the navigation service charge and
wharfage charge since privatisation demonstrate
unconstrained market power. It
cannot be assumed that the rates of the two charges prior to privatisation, when
the Port was state-owned,
were set at economically efficient levels. Indeed, the
subsequent arbitration of those charges by the ACCC indicates that they were
(with the rate of charges determined by the ACCC being above the
pre-privatisation level). It is only necessary to consider the
service charge because the rate of the wharfage charge was ultimately agreed
between PNO and Glencore in the arbitration
(and was the rate adopted by PNO in
its 2018 pricing schedule). In relation to the navigation service charge, the
ACCC’s determined
rate of $0.6075 per gross tonne was less than the rate
adopted by PNO in its 2018 pricing schedule of $0.7553 per gross tonne. The
Tribunal, on review of the ACCC determination, considered that the ACCC should
not have adjusted the DORC valuation of the Port’s
regulatory asset base
by the value of user funded contributions and determined a rate of $1.0058 per
gross tonne. The Tribunal’s
decision was subsequently set aside by the
Full Federal Court which considered that the decision was affected by errors of
respect of the treatment of user funded contributions. PNO has appealed
the Full Court’s decision to the High Court. While
the outcome of the
legal challenges and any necessary re-determination of the navigation service
charge by way of arbitration is
not presently known, it is significant that the
rate of that charge levied by PNO since privatisation lies within the bounds
by the ACCC and the Tribunal by way of arbitration under Division 3
of Part IIIA. That is inconsistent with a conclusion that the
rate of the
navigation service charge levied by PNO since privatisation demonstrates
unconstrained market power.
noted earlier, in December 2019, PNO published on its website a new “open
access” rate for the navigation service charge
of $1.0424 per gross tonne
for vessels using the shipping channel service taking effect from 1 January
2020. The NCC confirmed that
that rate is almost identical to that determined by
the Tribunal in its 2019 arbitration determination (at [6.36]). PNO also
and offered on a standing basis, the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds
constituting an agreement in respect of the navigation service charge
to s 67 of the PAMA Act. As noted earlier, the Port User Pricing Deed,
which was published first, has been replaced by the
Producer and Vessel Agent
Pricing Deeds. The Deeds have a 10 year term. Under the Deeds, PNO offered an
initial navigation service
charge of $0.8121 per gross tonne (in 2020 dollar
terms), subject to an annual price adjustment of the greater of CPI increases
4%. Assuming a 4% annual increase, the navigation service charge will be
$1.1559 per gross tonne in 2029 (at [7.89]).
evidence shows that PNO has entered into Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds in respect
of all of the coal vessels calling at the Port.
As a result, PNO has been
charging all coal vessels calling at the Port the navigation service charge
calculated in accordance with
those Deeds.
as at the beginning of 2020, the relevant facts relating to PNO’s pricing
behaviour can be summarised as follows:
(a) The declaration of the shipping channel service
under Part IIIA had been revoked.
(b) In an earlier arbitration conducted under Division 3 of Part IIIA, the ACCC
had determined a rate for the navigation service
charge of $0.6075 per gross
tonne (in 2018 dollars), equivalent to $0.63 per gross tonne in 2020 dollars. On
review, the Tribunal
determined a rate for the navigation service charge of
$1.0058 per gross tonne (in 2018 dollars), equivalent to $1.04 per gross tonne
in 2020 dollars.
(c) PNO published its standing rate for the navigation service charge of $1.0424
per gross tonne, being a rate equivalent to the
Tribunal determination. It also
published a lower rate of $0.8121 per gross tonne (in 2020 dollar terms) offered
on the terms of
the Producer and Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds that included price
escalations. It is apparent that the lower rate is approximately
the mid-point
of the ACCC and Tribunal arbitrated prices.
(d) PNO has entered into Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds in respect of all of the
coal vessels calling at the Port and has been charging
all coal vessels calling
at the Port the navigation service charge calculated in accordance with those
advanced a number of criticisms of the pricing terms and conditions offered
publicly by PNO from December 2019.
NSWMC submitted that the “open access” navigation service charge
rate of $1.0424 per gross tonne and the lower
rate of $0.8121 per gross tonne
under the Deeds includes a return on user funded contributions which was
rejected by the ACCC. The
fact that prices charged by PNO include a return on
user funded contributions does not demonstrate that such prices are likely to
have a negative impact on the conditions or environment for competition in the
coal tenements market on a forward looking basis.
While NSWMC is critical of the
fact that PNO’s current rate of navigation service charge includes a
return (in whole or in
part) on the value of historic user funded contributions,
it did not submit that the current rate was such as to impact negatively
conditions or environment for competition in the coal tenements market. Further,
there is no evidence to suggest that the current
rate is having any such effect.
The Tribunal also notes that the navigation service charge levied by PNO under
the Deeds does not
include a full return on the user funded contributions
identified by the ACCC. The rate is set approximately mid-way between the
determined by the ACCC (which excluded a return on user funded contributions)
and the rate determined by the Tribunal (which
included such a return).
NSWMC submitted that there is no guarantee that PNO will continue to offer the
Producer and Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds in
the future. It noted that PNO had not
given any undertaking to do so, whether by way of deed poll or otherwise. The
Tribunal accepts
that submission as far as it goes, but the Tribunal does not
consider that it goes very far. The Producer and Vessel Agent Pricing
published on PNO’s website as a standing offer. The Vessel Agent Pricing
Deed has been entered into by vessel agents
for all coal vessels currently
shipping coal from the Port. Thus, those Deeds will be in effect for the next 10
years and PNO will
be obligated to set the navigation service charge at rates
determined in accordance with those Deeds over that period. It is possible
at some point in the coming years PNO will cease offering the Deeds. However,
that would not affect the ongoing operation of
the existing Deeds. As discussed
further below, the Tribunal does not consider that it is necessary to speculate
may be charged at the expiry of the current Deeds (i.e., in
shipping channel service will remain open if the terms and conditions of access
offered by PNO can be shown to be harmful
to competition in any dependent market
at that time.
NSWMC submitted that the navigation service charge under the Deeds may be
increased unilaterally by PNO on an annual basis.
NSWMC accepted that any coal
producer or vessel agent who is a party to the Deeds may object to a price
increase and that the dispute
is subject to arbitration based upon the pricing
principles set out in the Deeds. However, NSWMC argued that the pricing
are not identical to the principles that would apply to the
arbitration of a dispute under Division 3 of Part IIIA of the Act (by
It is necessary to consider NSWMC’s criticisms of the pricing principles
in more detail by reference to the terms
and conditions of the Deeds.
The terms and conditions of the Producer and Vessel Agent
Pricing Deeds
Producer Pricing Deed enables coal producers to agree the rates of both
navigation service and wharfage charges with PNO in respect
of vessels carrying
the producer’s coal, while the Vessel Agent Pricing Deed enables vessel
agents to agree the rate of the
navigation service charge with PNO in respect of
coal vessels for which the agent is the vessel’s inward agent. In response
to a question, PNO submitted that if a producer and a vessel agent had entered
into Deeds that, on their terms, were applicable to
a shipment of coal and the
Deeds contained different rates for the navigation service charge, the rate that
would ultimately be charged
by PNO would be the lower rate. The Tribunal accepts
that that is the practical effect of the Deeds.
terms and conditions of the Producer and Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds are
materially the same. The following terms and conditions
of the Deeds are
significant:
(a) The Deeds have an initial term of 10 years. Not
later than 36 months prior to the expiry of the initial term, either party may
issue a written notice to the other requesting that the parties enter into
discussions with respect to agreeing pricing arrangements
to apply following the
expiry of the initial term. The parties must then commence discussions regarding
such pricing arrangements
and must continue such discussions in good faith for a
period of up to 6 months (or such other period as they agree in writing).
the Deeds contemplate a process by which the parties will commence negotiations
of the charges to apply after the expiry of
the initial term 36 months before
that date. The Tribunal observes that, if the parties are unable to reach
agreement in the allotted
6 month period, the producer or vessel agent has the
benefit of the Deed for a further 30 months, which provides ample opportunity
renew an application for declaration of the service if considered appropriate at
(b) Under the Deeds, PNO represents that the rate of the navigation service
charge levied under the Deed, including variations, will
not adversely
discriminate against the producer or vessel agent by comparison with the
navigation service charge applicable to like
circumstances to other producers or
vessel agents (as the case may be) who have entered into materially similar
deeds. PNO also covenants
that it will not enter into an agreement with any
other producer or vessel agent (as the case may be) concerning the navigation
charge to apply over the initial term, or give effect to any variations
made to that charge, which are materially dissimilar to the
relevant provisions
of the Deed.
(c) The rate of the navigation service charge during the initial term may be
adjusted in two ways. First, the rate is adjusted annually
by the greater of the
applicable annual CPI increase (if any) and 4%. Second, PNO may increase the
navigation service charge for
other reasons if the resulting increase is
material (greater than 5%) and the increase is consistent with the pricing
defined in cl 4.2 of Sch 3 of the Deeds. PNO must provide written
notice of any proposed variations to the navigation service charge
than 45 days before the proposed date for commencement of the proposed
variation. If the proposed variation is made on
the second basis, PNO must also
issue a copy of a report prepared by an independent appropriately qualified
professional which sets
out the opinion of that person, and the material facts
(including all relevant cost, capital expenditure and revenue data) on which
that opinion was based, as to whether the proposed variation is consistent with
the pricing principles. The counterparty may issue
a price objection notice to
PNO within 14 days and the dispute must be resolved in accordance with the
dispute resolution process
set out in the Deeds. The dispute resolution process
contemplates discussions between senior representatives of the parties, followed
by mediation if necessary. If the dispute cannot be resolved by agreement
between the parties, either party can refer it to arbitration
to be conducted in
accordance with the ACICA Arbitration Rules. The arbitrator is required to apply
the pricing principles set out
in the Deeds.
the Deeds, PNO undertakes to prepare and provide to the coal producer or vessel
agent (as applicable) on an annual basis a forward
looking 5 year forecast of
its projected capital expenditure that may impact the applicable charges and
meet with the coal producer
or vessel agent to discuss those forecasts and any
potential associated variations to the applicable charges. The Deeds states
that PNO is not obliged to implement any comments made by the coal
producer or vessel agent. NSWMC criticised that provision, but
the Tribunal does
not consider that there is anything untoward or exceptional about the provision.
The Deeds require PNO to keep
the coal producer or vessel agent informed of
capital expenditure projections and consult in relation to those projections. If
proposes a variation to the navigation service charge, the coal producer or
vessel agent is entitled to object and have the variation
reviewed by an
independent arbitrator applying the pricing principles defined in cl 4.2 of Sch
3 of the Deeds.
pricing principles defined in the Deeds closely follow the mandatory
considerations that the ACCC must take into account under
s 44X(1) of the Act
when conducting an arbitration or terms and conditions of access under Division
3 of Part IIIA, but they are
not identical. It is necessary to consider the
differences.
44X(1) provides as follows:
The Commission must take the following matters into
account in making a final determination:
(aa) the objects of this Part;
(a) the legitimate business interests of the provider, and the provider’s
investment in the facility;
(b) the public interest, including the public interest in having competition in
markets (whether or not in Australia);
(c) the interests of all persons who have rights to use the service;
(d) the direct costs of providing access to the service;
(e) the value to the provider of extensions (including expansions of capacity
and expansions of geographical reach) whose cost is
borne by someone else;
(ea) the value to the provider of interconnections to the facility whose cost
is borne by someone else;
(f) the operational and technical requirements necessary for the safe and
reliable operation of the facility;
(g) the economically efficient operation of the facility;
(h) the pricing principles specified in section
objects of Part IIIA are set out in s 44AA and have been reproduced earlier. The
pricing principles in s 44ZZCA are as follows:
The pricing principles relating to the price of access
to a service are:
(a) that regulated access prices should:
(i) be set so as to generate expected
revenue for a regulated service or services that is at least sufficient to meet
the efficient
costs of providing access to the regulated service or services;
(ii) include a return on investment commensurate with the regulatory and
commercial risks involved; and
(b) that the access price structures
(i) allow multi-part pricing and price
discrimination when it aids efficiency; and
(ii) not allow a vertically integrated access provider to set terms and
conditions that discriminate in favour of its downstream
operations, except to
the extent that the cost of providing access to other operators is higher;
(c) that access pricing regimes should provide
incentives to reduce costs or otherwise improve productivity.
pricing principles in cl 4.2 of Sch 3 of the Deeds are as follows (noting that
PNO is designated as PON in the Deeds):
The matters that must be taken into account by a
mediator and applied by the arbitrator in resolving a Permitted Price Dispute
(a) the provisions in Item 7 of this deed (but only in relation to whether the
requirements of Item 7(a) or 7(b)(i) are met (not
in relation to the requirement
in Item 7(b)(ii) that any proposed increase in the Covered Vessel NSC is
consistent with the Pricing
Principles, which will be measured solely by
reference to the remaining principles below);
(b) PON's legitimate business interests and investment in the Port or Port
facilities, including a reasonable opportunity to recover
over the Leasehold
Period the efficient cost of the service provided at the Port, which recovery
shall include:
(i) the value of its Initial Capital Base
and any updates thereof, including efficient additional capital investments;
(ii) a reasonable rate of return, commensurate with the commercial risks
involved on the value of all assets comprising its Initial
Capital Base and any
updates thereof, including efficient additional capital investments; and
(iii) the return over the Leasehold Period of the total value of the assets
comprising its Initial Capital Base and any updates
thereof, including efficient
additional capital investments;
(c) the revenue expected to be derived from all users
of the service;
(d) the costs to PON of providing the service (including the costs of any
necessary modification to, or extension of, a Port facility)
but not costs
associated with losses arising from increased competition in upstream or
downstream markets;
(e) the economic value to PON of any additional investment that the Vessel
Agent (or any other user of the service) or PON has agreed
to undertake;
(f) the interests of all persons holding contracts for use of any relevant Port
facility or otherwise having rights to use the service;
(g) firm and binding contractual obligations of PON or other persons (or both)
already using any relevant Port facility;
(h) the operational and technical requirements necessary for the safe and
reliable provision of the service;
(i) the economically efficient operation of any relevant Port facility;
(j) the benefit to the public from having competitive markets;
(k) that prices should allow multi-part pricing and price discrimination when
it aids efficiency;
(l) that prices should not allow a vertically integrated service provider to
set terms and conditions that would discriminate in
favour of either its
upstream or downstream operations, except to the extent that the cost of
providing services to others would
be higher; and
(m) that prices should provide incentives to reduce costs or otherwise improve
productivity.
“Initial Capital Base” referred to in cl 4.2(b) is defined to mean
the value established by reference to the DORC,
as at 31 December 2014, of the
assets used in the provision of all of the services at the Port and, unless
otherwise agreed by PNO,
without deduction for user contributions. In context,
the reference to “user contributions” must refer to historic user
funded contributions (i.e. contributions which pre-date the DORC valuation date
of 31 December 2014) and alludes to the dispute in
respect of user funded
contributions in the Glencore arbitration. In its 2018 arbitral determination,
the ACCC adopted the same capital
base (ie the DORC valuation as at 31 December
2014, indexed to 2018) save that the ACCC deducted its assessment of historic
funded contributions.
can be seen that the pricing principles in cl 4.2 of Sch 3 of the Deeds address
most of the considerations stated in s 44X(1),
with some of the considerations
being reproduced in identical language, some reproduced with minor variations
and some addressed
with more material variations. Paragraphs (aa) and (ea) of s
44X(1) are not addressed in cl 4.2 of Sch 3 of the Deeds, but NSWMC
contend that the omission of those considerations was significant.
criticised the pricing principles in paragraph (b) and (e) of cl 4.2.
NSWMC’s concerns with respect to each principle
are related.
pricing principle in paragraph (b) of cl 4.2 is an amalgam of the mandatory
consideration in s 44X(1)(a) and the statutory pricing
principle in s
44ZZCA(a). The opening phrase, PNO's legitimate business interests and
investment in the Port or Port facilities,
is materially the same as the
consideration in s 44X(1)(a). Those interests are then stated to include the
“recovery of efficient
cost” principle, which is based upon the
pricing principle in s 44ZZCA(a). The two matters are closely connected
and, in itself,
there can be no concern about locating the “recovery of
efficient cost” principle as a subset of the “legitimate
interests” consideration. The core of NSWMC’s criticism is that the
pricing principle in paragraph (b) of cl
4.2 requires the arbitrator to adopt
the Initial Capital Base, as defined, as the capital base upon which the capital
of the allowed return are to be determined (the return on capital and
the return of capital). As noted above, the Initial Capital
Base is defined by
reference to the DORC valuation of the assets used in the provision of all of
the services at the Port as at 31
December 2014 and, unless otherwise agreed by
PNO, without deduction for user funded contributions. While the principle allows
Initial Capital Base to be updated (for example, by reference to
depreciation or efficient additional capital investments), the principle
prevents the arbitrator from adjusting the DORC valuation as at 31 December 2014
by the value of historic user funded contributions
unless PNO agrees.
pricing principle in paragraph (e) of cl 4.2 is based upon the mandatory
consideration in s 44X(1)(e). NSWMC’s criticism
is that the pricing
principle in paragraph (e) of cl 4.2 is expressed as forward looking (referring
to the value of investments that
a person has agreed to undertake), whereas the
consideration in s 44X(1)(e) arguably applies to historic investments. On that
NSWMC again submitted that the arbitrator is precluded by paragraph (e)
of cl 4.2 from taking into account the capital value of historic
user funded
contributions.
did not contend that NSWMC’s interpretation of paragraphs (b) and (e) of
cl 4.2 was erroneous in any way. For the purposes
of this application, the
Tribunal assumes the correctness of NSWMC’s interpretation, while
recognising the potential for debate
in any future pricing arbitration under the
Deeds. It follows that the Tribunal accepts that a pricing arbitration conducted
the Deeds may produce a different outcome to a pricing arbitration
conducted under Division 3 of Part IIIA of the Act, by reason
of the inclusion
or exclusion of historic user funded contributions in the valuation of the
capital base of the Port used to determine
allowed revenue. However, three
matters must be noted.
at this time it is not certain that a pricing arbitration conducted under
Division 3 of Part IIIA of the Act would exclude
historic user funded
contributions in the valuation of the capital base of the Port. As discussed
earlier, the ACCC determined that
such costs should be excluded, but another
Tribunal determined that the costs should not be excluded. The Tribunal’s
determination
was set aside by the Full Court on the basis of errors of law, and
the determination was remitted to the Tribunal for reconsideration.
Court’s decision is currently on appeal by PNO to the High Court. Even if
the appeal is dismissed, the Full Court’s
decision does not pre-determine
the Tribunal’s reconsideration of the treatment of historic user funded
contributions or its
assessment of the value of such contributions.
even if it be the case that a pricing arbitration conducted under Division 3 of
Part IIIA of the Act would exclude historic
user funded contributions in the
valuation of the capital base of the Port whereas a pricing arbitration under
the Deeds would not,
that does not demonstrate that prices set under the Deeds
are likely to have a negative impact on the conditions or environment for
competition in the coal tenements market on a forward looking basis. Critically,
and as NSWMC submitted, historic user funded contributions
have been built into
PNO’s current rate of the navigation service charge. The available
evidence does not demonstrate that
the current rate of the navigation service
charge is having a negative impact on the competitive environment in the coal
looking forward, the pricing principle in paragraph (e) of cl 4.2 requires an
arbitrator to take account of the economic value
to PNO of investments that a
person has agreed to undertake. The Tribunal expects that a Port user would not
in the future agree
to fund capital investments at the Port without first
reaching an agreement with the Port about the financial return on the
investment,
whether by way of an adjustment to the Port charges or otherwise.
Further, any future user funded capital investments at the Port
required to be taken into account by the arbitrator in any dispute with respect
to future price variations. In that respect,
future user funded contributions
can be expected to be treated in the same manner in an arbitration conducted
under the Deeds and
in an arbitration conducted under Division 3 of Part IIIA of
follows, in the Tribunal’s view, that the differences identified by NSWMC
between the pricing principles defined in cl 4.2
of Sch 3 to the Deeds and the
equivalent principles that must be applied in an arbitration under Division 3 of
Part IIIA will not
have a negative impact on competition in the coal tenements
market. While the inclusion or exclusion of historic user funder contributions
in the capital base of the Port is the subject of significant dispute between
PNO and coal producers who use the Port, it has not
been demonstrated that the
financial magnitude of the difference is likely to impact negatively on
competition in the coal tenements
completeness, the Tribunal notes another potential difference between the
pricing principles defined in paragraph (b) of cl 4.2
of Sch 3 to the Deeds and
the equivalent principles that must be applied in an arbitration under Division
3 of Part IIIA. The difference
concerns the ability of the arbitrator to re-open
the DORC valuation of the Port assets by, for example, re-assessing the
replacement cost of the Port assets at some future point in time.
Under paragraph (b) of cl 4.2 of the Deeds, the capital base upon
PNO’s capital return is to be determined is described as “the value
of all assets comprising its Initial Capital
Base and any updates thereof,
including efficient additional capital investments”. The meaning of that
phrase may be open to
debate. The Tribunal understands the phrase to indicate
that the arbitrator may update the DORC valuation over time by reference
depreciation, efficient additional capital investments and asset disposals. It
is less clear whether the word “update”
allows the arbitrator to
re-assess the optimised replacement cost of the Port assets, including by
deducting the value of redundant
assets. In contrast, the equivalent principles
that must be applied in an arbitration under Division 3 of Part IIIA do not
restrict the ability of the ACCC to re-assess the value of the capital
base upon which the capital return is to be determined. While
the Tribunal has
identified this point of possible difference between a price arbitration under
the Deeds and a price arbitration
under Division 3 of Part IIIA, the Tribunal
places no weight upon that consideration in making its decision. That is for two
which may be related. First, NSWMC made no submissions in respect of
that point of possible difference. Second, the question whether
and in what
circumstances it would become appropriate, in the context of a price arbitration
under Division 3 of Part IIIA, to re-open
the DORC valuation of the Port assets
by, for example, re-assessing the optimised replacement cost of the Port assets
at some future
point in time is a complex question. It raises a number of
competing considerations having regard to the principles that must be
under Division 3 of Part IIIA. To contemplate such a re-assessment occurring in
the medium term would involve considerable
speculation. In the Tribunal’s
view, such speculation does not materially bear upon the Tribunal’s
present assessment
of criterion (a).
also criticised the dispute mechanisms in the Deeds, submitting that they are
not reasonable terms and conditions of access
and are no substitute for
arbitration under Part IIIA of the Act. In that respect, NSWMC observed that the
previous arbitration conducted
by the ACCC on the application of Glencore
resulted in the adoption of a regulated asset base and building block
methodology to determine
allowed revenues and prices, with disclosure of
relevant financial inputs to the model. NSWMC submitted that arbitration in
with the ACICA Arbitration Rules (as stipulated by cl 3.3 of Sch 3 to
the Deeds) does not necessitate any particular methodology
to determining prices
or disclosure of financial information.
Tribunal agrees that the dispute resolution provisions of the Deeds do not
mandate the use of a building block methodology to
determine allowed revenues
and prices. However, nor does arbitration under Division 3 of Part IIIA. While a
building block methodology
is commonly used by regulatory authorities when
seeking to determine efficient costs and prices, and was used by the ACCC in the
Glencore initiated arbitration, such an approach is not the only methodology
that can be applied. For the reasons explained above,
the pricing principles
required to be applied to resolve a pricing dispute under the Deeds follow
closely the principles to be applied
in an arbitration under Division 3 of Part
IIIA. Further, the pricing principle in cl 4.2(b), which directs attention
capital base, a reasonable rate of return on capital and a
return of capital over the term of the Port lease, lend themselves to
block methodology for determining allowed revenue and prices.
to the disclosure of information for the purposes of any arbitration, two
matters can be noted. First, and as referred to earlier,
under the Deeds PNO has
undertaken to provide to the coal producer or vessel agent (as applicable) on an
annual basis a forward looking
5 year forecast of its projected capital
expenditure that may impact the navigation service charge and meet with the coal
or vessel agent to discuss those forecasts and any potential associated
variations to that charge. Further, when proposing any variation
navigation service charge, PNO has undertaken to provide a report prepared by an
independent appropriately qualified professional
which sets out the opinion of
that person, and the material facts (including all relevant cost, capital
expenditure and revenue data)
on which that opinion was based, as to whether the
proposed variation is consistent with the pricing principles. Second, the ACICA
Arbitration Rules afford an arbitrator broad powers in relation to the procedure
to be applied in an arbitration, including the power
to require the production
of relevant documents and information.
those reasons, the Tribunal considers that the dispute mechanisms in the Deeds
are consistent with reasonable terms and conditions
of access and are reasonable
substitutes for arbitration under Part IIIA of the Act.
Overall conclusions about PNO’s pricing behaviour
Tribunal draws the following three conclusions from the above discussion of the
evidence of PNO’s pricing behaviour to date.
First, it can be inferred
that PNO considers that its long run profits will be maximised by setting the
rate of the navigation service
charge in accordance with the Pro Forma Pricing
Deeds (and the “open access” arrangements if a Port user is
to agree to the terms of the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds). It can be
assumed that the prices so charged cover PNO’s assessment
of its long run
costs. Second, the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds provide a reasonable degree of
pricing certainty to coal producers. While
the Deeds allow PNO to propose
adjustments to the rate of the navigation service charge, any such adjustment is
subject to arbitration
applying pricing principles which are similar to those
governing arbitrations under Division 3 of Part IIIA. Third, there was no
substantive evidence before the NCC that the prices currently being charged by
PNO under its open access arrangements or the Pro
Forma Pricing Deeds are having
any detrimental impact on investment and competition in the coal tenements
Comparing the effect of access with declaration to access
without declaration
explained above, criterion (a) requires the Tribunal to assume that declaration
of the shipping channel service will result in
access on reasonable terms and
conditions. The matter that must be assessed is whether that outcome will
promote a material increase
in competition in a dependent market (here, the coal
tenements market). The enquiry necessarily focusses on the future market and
commercial circumstances without declaration in order to assess whether the
effect of declaration would promote a material increase
in competition.
Tribunal accepts that the rate of the navigation service charge across the
medium term may differ depending on whether the shipping
channel service is
declared or not declared. However, as noted by the NCC (at [7.93], [7.122]), it
is not certain whether the rate
will be higher or lower without declaration or
with declaration.
declaration, for at least the current term of the Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds,
the navigation service charge will largely be
determined in accordance with
those Deeds (as all coal vessels presently using the Port are covered by those
Deeds). Under those
arrangements, the starting rate of the navigation service
charge is the mid-point of the ACCC and Tribunal arbitrated rates. That
implicitly includes a partial return on historic user funded contributions. The
rate of the navigation service charge is subject
to an annual increase of the
greater of CPI and 4%. There is the possibility of other adjustments, but those
adjustments are subject
to arbitration. The rate to be charged after the expiry
of the Deeds is not known, but the Deeds enable a period of negotiation over
price during the third last year of the term, affording access seekers an
opportunity to apply for declaration at that time if they
consider that the
price proposed by PNO is unreasonable.
declaration, the precise level of the navigation service charge is uncertain.
Criterion (a) requires the Tribunal to assume that
the rate will be reasonable.
The ACCC has previously determined that a reasonable rate of navigation service
charge should be based
on the DORC value of the Port assets excluding the value
of historic user funded contributions (as assessed by the ACCC), while the
Tribunal has previously determined that a reasonable rate of navigation service
charge should be based on the DORC value of the Port
assets without that
deduction. The Tribunal considers that a reasonable rate of navigation service
charge as a result of declaration
lies within those bounds, but it is
unnecessary to be more precise. The NCC formed the same conclusion (at
the purposes of its evaluation, the Tribunal accepts that the rate of the
navigation service charge in the future may be higher
if the shipping channel
service is not declared by reason of the inclusion of a return on historic user
funded contributions. However,
the inclusion or exclusion of a return on the
value of historic user funded contributions is largely irrelevant to the
of criterion (a). It is not sufficient for NSWMC to demonstrate that
reasonable terms and conditions of access to the shipping channel
service as a
result of declaration would be at a price lower than access without declaration.
It is necessary to demonstrate that,
in comparison to reasonable terms and
conditions of access to the shipping channel service as a result of declaration,
of access without declaration would negatively impact the conditions
or environment for competition on a forward looking basis. NSWMC
did not submit
that the current rate was such as to negatively impact the conditions or
environment for competition in the coal tenements
market, and there is no
evidence to suggest that the current rate is having any such effect.
principal argument advanced by NSWMC on this application is that declaration
would remove, or materially reduce, the “hold-up”
risk of investment
in the coal tenements market in the Hunter Valley and thereby promote a material
increase in competition in that
market. NSWMC argued that, in the future without
declaration, participants in the coal tenements market will face higher levels
uncertainty with respect to the navigation service charge which will increase
the risk associated with making investments, as compared
to the future with
declaration. NSWMC argued that the elevated risk increases the likelihood that
investors will delay their investments
until the uncertainty is resolved and
that delay reduces allocative efficiency and the productivity of the Australian
Tribunal accepts that the asserted “hold-up” risk of investment will
not be present in circumstances where access
to the shipping channel service is
given on reasonable terms and conditions as a result of declaration. Having
considered the available
evidence concerning the Port, the coal export market
and the coal tenements market as set out above, however, the Tribunal is not
persuaded that the “hold-up” risk of investment will arise in the
absence of declaration. That is for five reasons.
Absence of financial analysis
NSWMC’s hold-up risk contention was not supported by any empirical
evidence concerning the coal tenements market. NSWMC
failed to present to the
NCC any financial or quantitative evidence concerning the coal tenements market
conditions, structure, prices
or expected returns. No financial evidence was
presented as to how investment decisions are made in the coal tenements market
how Port charges figure in investment decisions.
only evidence relied on by NSWMC in support of its hold-up risk contention
consists of generalised assertions by various coal
producers which were
summarised in the NCC Recommendation as follows:
(a) Yancoal submitted that PNO’s prices were
“inefficiently high” because they include a return on user funded
contributions
(at [6.17](a)). Yancoal acknowledged that PNO’s prices will
not cause coal volumes to decrease (at [6.18]), but submitted that
the ability
to increase prices in the future gives rise to a significant hold-up problem for
investment in the coal tenements market
(at [6.20]).
(b) Malabar Resources and Bloomfield Group both submitted that PNO should not be
entitled to charge a price that includes a return
on user funded contribution
(at [6.21] and [6.22]. They also submitted that the risk of PNO levying higher
navigation service charges
makes the Hunter Valley an increasingly unattractive
market for coal mining investment (at [7.106]) and [7.142]).
(c) Glencore submitted that the differential between the navigation service
charge determined by the ACCC (being $0.61 per gross
tonne) compared to the
current navigation service charge being offered by PNO is likely to give rise to
a risk of hold-up of investment
in development stage coal tenements in the
Hunter Valley region (at [7.141]).
(d) Port Waratah Coal Services submitted that the inability to forecast shipping
channel access charges and future returns with any
degree of certainty increases
the potential for hold-up of new investments or cancellation of proposed
investments (at [7.143]).
central aspect of the complaints made by the coal producers was that PNO’s
current prices (particularly the navigation service
charge) include a return on
historic user funded contributions, which coal producers consider is unjustified
and involves a transfer
of economic surplus in favour of PNO. The Tribunal
infers that coal producers wish to prevent such a transfer and perceive that
declaration
of the shipping channel service under Part IIIA is a means to that
end. However, a transfer of economic rents between participants
in a supply
chain does not necessarily involve any allocative efficiency effects in
dependent markets, and does not necessarily involve
negative impacts on
competition in dependent markets. For the reasons discussed above, the inclusion
or exclusion of a return on
the value of historic user funded contributions is
largely irrelevant to the assessment of criterion (a).
from the evidence presented to the NCC by NSWMC and the coal companies referred
to above is any financial analysis of the impact
of the rates of the navigation
service and wharfage charges on returns in the coal mining sector in the Hunter
Valley. The Tribunal
expects that coal exploration and mining companies
regularly undertake detailed financial analysis and forecasting in respect of
all significant investments, whether in respect of minerals exploration, mine
development or production. The Tribunal also expects
that, as the peak industry
body for the NSW mineral’s industry, NSWMC would regularly collate
financial and economic analysis
of that kind to assist in policy development and
industry advocacy. Despite that, no such evidence was presented to the NCC. The
Tribunal considers that generalised assertions are no substitute for proper
financial and economic analysis. For that reason, the
Tribunal places little
weight on the assertions made.
PNO’s incentives
it is not in PNO’s long-term interests for Port users to experience such
uncertainty around access charges at the Port
if this risks significantly less
investment in coal mining activity in the Newcastle catchment. As discussed
earlier, PNO’s
position within the Hunter Valley coal supply chain, in
which the coal export market is effectively competitive and coal producers
price takers, significantly constrains PNO’s pricing behaviour. PNO has an
incentive to set prices in a way that has regard
to its ability to maximise its
expected profits over the term of the lease, which would require it to take
account of the negative
effect on future investment of any attempt to extract
economic rents through price increases in the short term.
PNO’s pricing behaviour and the effect of the
PNO’s pricing behaviour since the revocation of the previous declaration
is inconsistent with NSWMC’s principal
“open access” rate of the navigation service charge published by PNO
in December 2019 was set at a rate equivalent
to that determined as reasonable
by the Tribunal (albeit under a decision that was set aside by the Full Federal
significantly, PNO also offered access terms under the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds.
By those Deeds, PNO agrees to bind itself, and
has bound itself, for a period of
10 years to a starting rate of navigation service charge which is the mid-point
of the rates determined
by the ACCC and the Tribunal. The Deeds provide for an
annual increase in the navigation service charge and other adjustments to
made pursuant to arbitration to be conducted pursuant to pricing principles
which are similar to those that would be applied in
an arbitration under
Division 3 of Part IIIA. PNO has entered into Vessel Agent Pricing Deeds in
respect of all of the coal vessels
calling at the Port.
the open access arrangements and the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds make provision for
dispute resolution. Those arrangements assist
coal producers in mitigating the
risks that may otherwise arise from pricing and other uncertainties at the
Investment risks in the coal tenements market
the navigation service charge represents only a small proportion of the overall
cost of the production and sale of coal for
export from the Hunter Valley. The
risks associated with uncertainty over access charges for the shipping channel
service would not
contribute significantly to an investor’s expected
valuation of future mining projects in the Newcastle catchment.
NCC Recommendation included publicly available information about the average
production costs per tonne disclosed by Hunter Valley
coal producers in the 2019
reporting period, which were as follows
Peabody Energy
Whitehaven Coal
observed by the NCC, the navigation service charge represents only a small
component of the overall cost of the production and
sale of coal for export from
the Hunter Valley (at [7.118]). The NCC also observed (at [7.126]) that coal
producers face commercial
uncertainty from a range of factors including coal
(export) prices, labour costs and taxes. The NCC concluded that the investment
uncertainty that arises from those factors is far more significant to investment
decisions than any uncertainty over charges for
the shipping channel service
(given its relative proportion of production costs or sale prices), and that
uncertainty associated
with the charges for the shipping channel service would
not contribute significantly to an investor’s expected valuation of
mining projects in the Newcastle catchment.
would have been helpful if the NCC Recommendation had contained further
information and data concerning fluctuations in relevant
costs, prices and taxes
over time, correlated with investments in the coal tenements market in the
Hunter Valley. However, the NSWMC
did not provide financial data to the NCC to
support its assertions with respect to investment uncertainty and the Tribunal
reason to doubt the NCC’s conclusions with respect to the relative
insignificance of the navigation service charge on investment
decisions in the
coal tenements market.
Tribunal does not accept, in absolute terms, PNO’s submission that the
fact that the navigation service charge is only a
small proportion of the
overall cost of production and sale of coal means that the charge could never
impact negatively on investment
decisions in the coal tenements market. The
Tribunal agrees with the view expressed by the NCC (at [7.121]) that a range of
data will inform a decision to invest in the coal tenements market and
that expectations of cost are a material consideration that
inform expectations
of profitability. Nevertheless, the relative size of the navigation service
charge compared to the overall cost
of production and sale of coal is relevant
to an assessment of the materiality of the “hold-up” risk,
particularly in
light of PNO’s pricing behaviour and the effect of the Pro
Forma Pricing Deeds that have been entered into. Taken together,
the Tribunal
considers that the prospect of PNO increasing the rate of the navigation service
charge to an extent that would give
rise to a material effect on future
investment decisions is remote.
The threat of future declaration
notwithstanding the Tribunal’s decision in the present proceeding to
affirm the Treasurer’s decision not to declare
the shipping channel
service, PNO will continue to face an ongoing threat of declaration which will
be a continuing constraint on
PNO’s commercial behaviour. That threat will
be most relevant in the third last year of the current Vessel Agent Pricing
at which time the parties have an opportunity to negotiate an extension
of the term of the Deeds. PNO’s proposed terms of access
at that time will
be able to be assessed by relevant Port users, and the negotiations will occur
under the threat of a renewed application
for declaration.
Conclusion on criterion (a)
regard to all of those matters, the Tribunal is not persuaded that, across the
medium term, any difference between the rate
of the navigation service charge
with and without declaration would have any material impact on the conditions or
environment for
competition in the coal tenements market. In particular, the
Tribunal is not persuaded that, without declaration, participants in
tenements market face a material “hold-up” risk of investment across
the medium term by reason of PNO increasing
the rate of the navigation service
charge. It follows that declaration would not affect any such risk.
all the circumstances, the Tribunal is not satisfied that access (or increased
access) to the shipping channel service, on reasonable
terms and conditions, as
a result of a declaration of the service would promote a material increase in
competition in the coal tenements
market or any other dependent market. In those
circumstances, the Treasurer’s decision not to declare the shipping
service must be affirmed.
G. CONSIDERATION OF CRITERION (D)
submissions with respect to criterion (d) were dependent on the Tribunal being
satisfied in relation to criterion (a).
In circumstances where the Tribunal is
not satisfied in relation to criterion (a), there is no need to consider
criterion (d) further.
Nevertheless,
the Tribunal records its general agreement with the following findings of the
NCC with respect to the mandatory considerations
in s 44CA(3):
(a) In relation to investment in Port infrastructure
(used to provide the shipping channel service), the risk of error (thereby
future investment) may arise in both regulatory arbitration and in
commercial arbitration and, while it is possible that declaration
shipping channel service could have an adverse effect on efficient investment in
Port infrastructure, it is possible that
this risk is also present absent
declaration (at [10.29]). On balance, it is not clear that the risk of deterring
future investment
in the Port is substantial (at [10.30]).
(b) In relation to investment in the coal tenements market, there is a range of
commercial and regulatory uncertainties that will
impact on investment decisions
and, relative to these, uncertainty arising from the difference in the pricing
of access to the shipping
channel service with and without declaration would be
unlikely to be material (at [10.38]).
(c) The administrative and compliance costs that would arise if the shipping
channel service were declared are unlikely to be materially
different if the
service were not declared (at [10.44]).
H. CONCLUSION AND COSTS
conclusion, for the reasons given above, the Tribunal affirms the
Treasurer’s decision not to declare the shipping channel
service at the
the assumption that NSWMC would not be successful in its application for review,
PNO applied for an order of costs against NSWMC
under s 44KB(1). At the hearing
of this matter, PNO and NSWMC made submissions as to whether the Tribunal should
exercise a discretion
to award costs against NSWMC and in favour of PNO. Neither
party addressed the question whether s 44KB empowered the Tribunal to
costs in a review of a decision not to declare a service under s 44K(2), as
opposed to a review of a declaration under s 44K(1).
44KB relevantly provides as follows:
44KB Tribunal may order costs be awarded
(1) If the Tribunal is satisfied that it is appropriate to do so, the Tribunal
may order that a person who has been made a party
to proceedings for a review of
a declaration under section 44K pay all or a specified part of the costs of
another person who has
been made a party to the proceedings.
(3) If the Tribunal makes an order under subsection (1), it may make further
orders that it considers appropriate in relation to
the assessment or taxation
of the costs.
(4) The regulations may make provision for and in relation to fees payable for
the assessment or taxation of costs ordered by the
Tribunal to be paid.
(5) If a party (the first party) is ordered to pay some or all of the costs of
another party under subsection (1), the amount of
the costs may be recovered in
the Federal Court as a debt due by the first party to the other party.
can be seen that s 44KB(1) empowers the Tribunal to order that a person who has
been made a party to
proceedings for a review of a declaration under section
pay all or a specified part of the costs of another person who has been
made a party to the proceedings. Thus, the power is only
enlivened in the
context of a proceeding for a review of a declaration under section 44K.
s 44H(1), the Minister is empowered to make one of two decisions: to declare the
relevant service or not to declare the relevant
service. The right to apply to
the Tribunal under s 44K to review the designated Minister’s decision
reflects the binary decision-making
power of the Minister under s 44H.
Subsection 44K(1) provides that, if the designated Minister declares a service,
the provider may
apply in writing to the Tribunal for
review of the
declaration
. Subsection (2) provides that, if the designated Minister
decides not to declare a service, an application for
review of the designated
Minister’s decision
may be made by the person who applied for the
declaration recommendation.
its literal terms, s 44KB(1) refers only to a proceeding for a review of a
declaration; it does not refer to a proceeding for a
review of a decision not to
declare a service. The present proceeding is of the latter kind. There was no
declaration and, accordingly,
this proceeding does not involve a review of a
declaration.
is no apparent ambiguity in the language of s 44KB(1). If the legislature had
intended the power to award costs in s 44KB(1)
to extend to proceedings under s
44K(2), the subsection could have been expressed in a number of ways to refer to
proceedings under
either ss 44K(1) or (2) – for example “proceedings
for a review of a decision of the designated Minister under section
is no obvious reason why the legislature would confine s 44KB(1) to proceedings
for a review of a declaration and exclude proceedings
for a review of a decision
not to declare a service. In that regard s 44KB(1) can be contrasted with a
number of other provisions,
such as ss 44I(2) and 44KA(2), which also apply when
there is an application and proceedings for a review of a declaration. Those
sections empower the Tribunal to make an order staying the operation of the
declaration, whereupon the declaration will not begin
to operate until the
Tribunal makes its determination on the review. Section 44W(4A) is to similar
extrinsic materials do not assist in explaining the purpose of the limitation in
s 44KB(1). Section 44KB was inserted into the
Act by the 2010 Amendment Act.
Indeed, the extrinsic materials suggest that the limitation was unintentional.
The Explanatory Memorandum
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure
Access) Bill 2009
explained the object of the section as follows (at [5.8] and
5.8 Unlike most court proceedings, and unlike matters
arising in the Tribunal in relation to the regulation of gas pipelines, there
are no provisions for costs to be paid or awarded with respect to applications
to the Tribunal for review of a decision-maker’s
decision in relation to a
declaration application. Requiring unsuccessful applicants to pay costs should
reduce incentive for delaying
tactics, frivolous review applications or other
inappropriate behaviour. This amendment was proposed by the NCC in its Annual
2007-08 as a means to reduce the substantial costs and delays currently
experienced during review proceedings.
5.14 The Tribunal has a discretion to order that a party pays all or part of the
costs of another party in a review of a declaration
decision under section
5.8 assumes that the proposed s 44KB(1) will apply to “applications to the
Tribunal for review of a decision-maker’s
decision in relation to a
declaration application”. Paragraph 5.14 likewise assumes that the
proposed section will apply to
“a review of a declaration decision under s
44K”. The language used in the Explanatory Memorandum is sufficiently
to cover reviews under ss 44K(1) and (2). However, that language is not
the statutory language.
44KB was considered by the Tribunal in
Re Glencore Coal No 2
present proceeding,
Re Glencore Coal
was a proceeding under s 44K(2) for
review of a decision made by the designated Minister (the Acting Federal
Treasurer) not to declare
the shipping channel service at the Port. Glencore was
successful in its application for review and applied for an order of costs
against PNO. The Tribunal declined to order costs. It appears that no party
questioned the power of the Tribunal to make an order
for costs under s 44KB(1)
in a proceeding for review of a decision not to declare a service. The Tribunal
did not address the issue
and proceeded on the assumption that s 44KB(1)
empowered it to make an order for costs, commenting that: “Clearly s 44KB
inserted to provide the Tribunal with a discretion to order costs in reviews
of decisions of the Minister to declare, or not to declare,
a service under
of the Act” (at [5]).
presently advised, the Tribunal doubts that it has power under s 44KB(1) to make
an order for costs in this proceeding, which is
a proceeding for review of the
Treasurer’s decision not to declare the shipping channel service under s
44K(2). However, as
neither party addressed the question of power during the
hearing, the Tribunal will afford PNO and NSWMC the opportunity to make
written submissions on the question of power and any supplementary submissions
on the exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion
(should the Tribunal reach
the view that it has power to make an order for costs).
I certify that the preceding two hundred and
seventy eight (278) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Determination
herein of the Honourable Justice O'Bryan, Dr D Abraham and Prof K
Dated: 4 August 2021
RTF format (1.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format