URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/cth/AUSStaCSDLM/2025/42.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:28:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ongoing matters
Compliance with authorising legislation—manner of incorporation;9 incorporation by reference;10 adequacy of explanatory materials11
Minister’s response13
Committee view
Conferral of discretionary powers;14 adequacy of explanatory materials15
Minister’s response19
Committee view
Minister’s response21
Committee view
Availability of independent merits review22
Minister’s response24
Committee view
Significant elements of a regulatory scheme25
Minister’s response26
Committee view
1.10 The committee requests further information
from relevant ministers about its significant technical scrutiny concerns in
to the instruments listed below.
Directions 2025
F2025L00682
The instrument directs Housing Australia in relation to the performance of
Housing Australia’s functions under the
administer the Help to Buy program, which aims to assist eligible Australians to
purchase new or existing homes by accessing an
equity contribution from the
Commonwealth.
Authorising legislation
Disallowance
Exempt from disallowance.
(the Act) establishes the Help to Buy
which is a Commonwealth
shared equity scheme administered by Housing Australia, under which Housing
Australia provides eligible participants
with a Commonwealth equity contribution
of up to 30 per cent of the purchase price of an existing home, and up to 40 per
the purchase price of a new home.
1.12 The Help to Buy Program Directions 2025 (the instrument) are made under
section 24 of the Act, with the purpose of directing
Housing Australia in
relation to the performance of its functions under that Act. Section 25 of the
Act prescribes a non-exhaustive
list of matters that the instrument may include.
The instrument prescribes a range of matters relating to the operation of the
to Buy program, including key terms, initial eligibility and ongoing
participation requirements, entry, variation and exit from the
monitoring of compliance, allocation of places in the program, and other
administrative arrangements.
1.13 The committee first raised scrutiny concerns with the instrument on
31 July 2025, in
Delegated Legislation Monitor 4 of
(Monitor 4)
Minister for Housing provided a response
dated 22 August 2025.
The committee has resolved to raise with the minister the matters where it
retains concerns and conclude its examination of those
matters where its
concerns have been addressed, as outlined below.
Compliance with authorising legislation—manner
of incorporation;
incorporation by reference;
adequacy of explanatory
1.14 Senate standing order 23(3)(a) requires the committee to scrutinise each
instrument as to whether it is in accordance with its
enabling Act and otherwise
complies with all legislative requirements. This includes the requirement in
paragraph 15J(2)(c) of the
Legislation Act 2003
(the Legislation
Act) that the explanatory statement to an instrument that incorporates a
document describe the document, the manner
in which it is incorporated and how
it may be obtained. The committee also assesses the incorporation of documents
by reference under
Senate standing order 23(3)(f), which additionally requires
consideration of whether incorporated documents may be freely accessed
Further, Senate standing order 23(3)(g) requires the committee to scrutinise
each instrument as to whether the explanatory
statement provides sufficient
information to gain a clear understanding of the instrument.
1.15 In Monitor 4, the committee sought the minister’s advice as to
whether the Intergovernmental Agreement on the Help to Buy
scheme (the
Agreement) was incorporated into the
instrument;
and, if so, the manner
of incorporation; as well as whether and how the Agreement can be freely
accessed and used.
1.16 In her response, the minister confirmed that the Agreement is
incorporated, as in force at commencement of the instrument, consistent
subparagraph 14(1)(b)(i) of the Legislation Act. Further, the minister
stated that while the Agreement was not currently available,
she would direct
officials in the Department of the Treasury to make it available online.
1.17 Finally, the minister advised that the explanatory statement would be
updated to state the manner of incorporation and identify
how the Agreement can
be accessed.
Committee view
1.18 The committee thanks the minister for confirming that the Agreement is
intended to be incorporated into the instrument, the manner
of incorporation and
that it will be made available online. The committee also welcomes the
minister’s undertaking to update
the explanatory statement to set out the
manner of incorporation and identify how the Agreement can be accessed. This is
in accordance
with the committee’s expectations under its guidelines for
principles (a) and (f).
1.19 However, the committee reiterates its expectations that all documents
incorporated into the law should be able to be freely accessed
by those subject
to the law, including those likely to be affected by the particular law. The
committee emphasises that any incorporated
documents should be freely accessible
at the time the instrument is made, to ensure that users of the law are able to
fully interpret
and apply the law from the moment the instrument commences.
1.20 In light of the minister’s advice and undertaking to amend the
explanatory statement, the committee concludes its examination
Conferral of discretionary
of explanatory
1.21 Senate standing order 23(3)(c) requires the committee to scrutinise each
instrument as to whether it makes rights, liberties,
obligations or interests
unduly dependent on insufficiently defined administrative powers. This includes
where instruments confer
broad discretionary powers. Further, under Senate
standing order 23(3)(g), the committee scrutinises instruments as to whether
explanatory statements provide sufficient information to gain a clear
understanding of the instrument.
1.22 The instrument confers a range of discretionary powers on Housing
Australia to administer the Help to Buy program, including:
• Subsections 29(1) and 30(1), which require Housing Australia to
exempt an agreement participant from complying with a participation
requirement
if satisfied, based on satisfactory evidence provided by the participant, that
it is impractical for the participant
to meet the relevant requirement due to
listed circumstances including ‘hardship’ or ‘other
compassionate grounds.’
• Subsection 37(11), which enables Housing Australia to choose not to
enforce a repayment requirement if it considers it reasonable
circumstances after considering, among other factors, the
‘participant’s personal circumstances.’
• Paragraphs 58(2)(b) and 58(2)(c), which enable Housing Australia to
ascertain the value of a property based on ‘any
other valuation that
Housing Australia considers is appropriate to take into account’ and
‘any other matter that Housing
Australia thinks is relevant.’
• Section 63, which enables Housing Australia to rely on information
supplied by a participating lender, participant or other
person or entity, that
Housing Australia reasonably believes to be accurate.
1.23 In Monitor 4, the committee sought the minister’s advice as to the
relevant factors or examples of factors that Housing
Australia may or must take
into account in exercising discretionary powers under the above provisions, and
the weight to be given
to each of those factors. The committee also sought the
minister’s advice as to the definitions and/or examples of
‘hardship,’
‘other compassionate
‘participant’s personal
circumstances.’
1.24 Finally, the committee requested the minister’s advice as to the
nature and source of any relevant safeguards and limitations
on the exercise of
powers under these provisions, in line with the expectations under its
guidelines.
1.25 In her response, the minister advised that the discretionary provisions
which the committee raised concerns about are ‘principles-based’
it is expected that Housing Australia will apply ‘appropriate judgement
and take relevant circumstances and considerations
into account’ in making
discretionary decisions. The minister added that it is expected that this would
be informed by applying
the ordinary meaning of terms such as
‘hardship’, ‘other compassionate grounds’ and ‘a
participant’s
personal circumstances.’
1.26 The minister also advised that Housing Australia would publish material
for the Help to Buy program, including terms and conditions
that apply to
individual participants with the principles that Housing Australia will
consider, where relevant, for the discretionary
decisions. Further, she advised
that Housing Australia would put in place policies and procedures to apply these
key concepts.
1.27 In relation to safeguards, the minister indicated that decisions by
Housing Australia would be subject to a review process that
initially involves
internal review by Housing Australia and, if a participant remains unsatisfied,
external merits review by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (the ART). To
this end, she outlined the Government’s intention to recommend to the
Governor-General
the making of regulations providing for review of Housing
Australia’s decisions ‘in the near term’. The minister
that the Government is monitoring the program to ensure it is operating as
intended, as provided for in section 45 of the Act,
which requires a review
of the program as soon as possible at the end of three years from the
Act’s commencement.
1.28 Finally, the minister gave an undertaking to update the explanatory
statement to explain that Housing Australia would publish
material for the
program, including the terms and conditions, principles and policies and
procedures noted at paragraph 1.26 above.
Committee view
1.29 The committee welcomes the minister’s advice that Housing
Australia will publish material for the program, including conditions
to participants, the principles that it will consider, where relevant, for the
discretionary decisions, and that it will
put in place the policies and
procedures applying to these concepts.
1.30 The committee considers that this guidance may be somewhat helpful in
the future, to assist actual and potential participants
in the program to
understand the factors that may be taken into account in making discretionary
decisions affecting them under the
instrument. However, the committee is
concerned that currently neither the instrument nor the explanatory statement
sets out the
factors that may be taken into account in making decisions or
define the key terms, under the discretionary provisions outlined above
the guidance referred to in the minister’s response is not yet available.
1.31 Accordingly, it remains unclear to users of the law and, in particular,
actual or potential program participants, what factors
may be taken into account
or how key terms are applied in making decisions under the discretionary
provisions outlined at paragraph
1.22 above, for example, in choosing not to
enforce a participation requirement or in ascertaining the value of a property.
also unclear from the minister’s correspondence the content of this
guidance. In this regard, the minister states that Housing
Australia will
publish material for the program including the principles that it will consider,
where relevant, for the discretionary
decisions and that it will put in place
policies and procedures to apply these key concepts. However, it is unclear what
those principles,
policies and procedures entail and whether and how they will
set out the factors to be taken into account in making decisions under
discretionary provisions above.
1.32 This is of further concern to the committee as this guidance is not yet
available and, as the committee only has one opportunity
to scrutinise
instruments when they are registered on the Federal Register of Legislation, it
will be unable to assess the content
of such guidance when it is published in
future. Further, the committee notes that such guidance is non-binding and is
distinct from
the explanatory statement which has an established role as an
interpretive tool.
1.33 Under the committee’s guidelines, the committee expects that where
an instrument confers broad discretionary powers on
a person, the instrument
should set out the factors the decision-maker must or may consider in exercising
that discretion. Where
an instrument does not set out those factors, the
committee considers that at a minimum the explanatory statement should provide
guidance for users of the law, for example, by providing non-exhaustive examples
of factors that may be considered by a decision
maker, or outlining scenarios
which illustrate how key terms will be applied in the course of making
discretionary decisions.
1.34 While the committee appreciates the minister’s undertaking to
amend the explanatory statement to explain that Housing Australia
will publish
guidance material relating to the Help to Buy program, the committee considers
that further information is required
to address its scrutiny concerns.
1.35 In light of the above, the committee requests the minister’s
further advice as to:
the factors, or examples thereof, that will be taken into account
in making discretionary decisions under subsections 29(1), 30(1),
paragraphs 58(2)(b) and 58(2)(c) and section 63 of the instrument; and
the definitions and/or examples of ‘hardship’,
‘other compassionate grounds’ and a ‘participant’s
personal circumstances’ under the instrument.
1.36 Senate standing order 23(3)(h) requires the committee to scrutinise each
legislative instrument as to whether it trespasses unduly
on personal rights and
liberties, including the right to privacy. The committee considers that
provisions which enable the collection,
use and/or disclosure of personal
information may trespass on an individual's right to privacy, and should
generally be included
in primary, rather than delegated, legislation.
1.37 It appears that there are provisions in the instrument that permit the
collection, use and disclosure of personal information.
Accordingly, in Monitor
4, the committee requested the minister’s advice as to the nature and
scope of any personal information
that may be collected, used or disclosed under
the instrument; why these provisions are considered necessary and appropriate;
any applicable safeguards, including under the
1.38 In her response, the minister provided details regarding the numerous
provisions of the instrument that require the collection,
use and disclosure of
personal information.
example, section 17 of the instrument which provides for who is an eligible
applicant. To be satisfied that an applicant is eligible,
Housing Australia is
required to collect information regarding their age and citizenship, taxable
income and assets and liabilities,
place of residence, receipt of any other home
buyer assistance, property holdings and relationship status.
1.39 The minister also explained why the collection, use and disclosure of
personal information was necessary and appropriate. Namely,
this information is
required to ensure that the program is appropriately targeted to eligible
applicants given the significant Commonwealth
support under the program, and
that the Commonwealth’s share in the property is appropriately protected.
In order to participate
in the program individuals’ personal and financial
circumstances must require that they need support to achieve home ownership
do not have significant income or assets that would enable them to readily
purchase or construct a residence. Accordingly, the
minister indicated that a
range of information will be sought to establish their eligibility.
1.40 In relation to safeguards on the handling of personal information, the
minister advised that Housing Australia has an obligation
to – and will
– manage, safeguard and use personal information consistently with the
requirements of the Privacy Act.
Further, she stated that Housing Australia has
completed a preliminary privacy impact assessment which will be finalised
once the administrative systems for operation of the program have been
1.41 In addition, the minister undertook to amend the explanatory statement
to explain that Housing Australia has an obligation to
manage, safeguard and
protect personal information consistently with the requirements of the Privacy
Committee view
1.42 The committee thanks the minister for her advice outlining the nature
and scope of personal information that may be collected,
used and disclosed
under the instrument; why this is necessary and appropriate; and the applicable
safeguards. The committee also
welcomes the minister’s undertaking to
amend the explanatory statement in relation to the applicable safeguards.
1.43 However, the committee notes that, under its guidelines for principle
(h), it also expects the amended explanatory statement
to set out the nature and
scope of the personal information that may be collected, used and/or disclosed
under the instrument, as
set out in the minister’s response, in addition
to the applicable safeguards under the Privacy Act.
1.44 In light of the minister’s advice and undertaking to amend the
explanatory statement in relation to privacy, the committee
concludes its
examination of this issue.
Availability of independent merits
1.45 Senate standing order 23(3)(i) requires the committee to consider
whether an instrument unduly excludes, limits or fails to provide
independent review of decisions affecting rights, obligations or interests.
1.46 In Monitor 4, the committee sought the minister’s advice
confirming that the numerous discretionary powers conferred on
Housing Australia
under the instrument are not subject to independent merits review and, if this
is the case, what characteristics
of the decisions justify the exclusion of
review, by reference to the Administrative Review Council’s guidance
What decisions should be subject to merits
1.47 In her response, the minister noted that section 43 of the Act
provides a power for the making of regulations to enable applications
to the ART for review of specified decisions made by Housing Australia in the
performance of its functions under that
Act. Further, she advised that it is the
Government’s intention to recommend to the Governor-General the making of
regulations
under this power, to allow the review of ‘a range of
discretionary decisions’ by Housing Australia, having regard to
Committee view
1.48 The committee welcomes the minister’s advice regarding an
intention to progress the making of regulations to provide for
independent
merits review for certain decisions by Housing Australia, having regard to the
ARC guide. However, it is unclear which
specific decisions would be encompassed
in ‘a range of discretionary decisions’ and whether all of the
discretionary
provisions in the instrument which the committee has raised
concerns about would therefore be subject to independent merits review.
1.49 The committee’s expectations, as outlined in its guidelines for
principle (i), are that where an instrument provides for
discretionary decisions
with the potential to affect rights, liberties, obligations or interests, such
decisions should ordinarily
be subject to independent merits review. Due to the
potential impact of such decisions in this regard, individuals should ordinarily
be afforded the right to seek review on the merits of such decisions. However,
where they are not, the exclusion of each decision
from merits review should be
justified with reference to the ARC guide which acknowledges that, in some
certain circumstances, it
may not be appropriate to provide for independent
merits review.
1.50 In light of the Government’s stated intention to recommend that
the Governor-General make regulations providing for merits
discretionary decisions made under the instrument, the committee concludes its
examination of this issue.
1.51 However, the committee requests that the minister advise the
committee in writing once such regulations have been made. If these
regulations
do not provide for merits review of all discretionary decisions made under the
instrument, the committee expects that
the explanatory statement to the
instrument will be further amended to include an explanation of the
characteristics of those decisions
which justify their exclusion from merits
review, with reference to the factors outlined in the ARC guide.
Significant elements of a regulatory
1.52 Senate standing order 23(3)(j) requires the committee to consider
whether a legislative instrument contains matters more appropriate
parliamentary enactment, including whether an instrument contains significant
elements of a regulatory scheme. This principle
is underpinned by the
committee's view that significant matters should ordinarily be included in
primary legislation and accordingly
subject to a greater level of parliamentary
oversight than delegated legislation.
1.53 In this regard, the instrument defines key terms central to the Help to
Buy program, which constitute significant elements of
the program. Further, the
committee considers that this is a program of national significance, as it is a
new shared equity scheme
that aims to improve housing outcomes for eligible
Australians by reducing costs and repayments associated with purchasing a home.
Accordingly, in Monitor 4, the committee sought the minister’s advice as
to why it was considered necessary and appropriate
to include significant
elements of a regulatory scheme – being key definitions central to the
operation of the program –
in delegated, rather than primary, legislation.
1.54 The minister advised in her response that the program forms part of a
range of support that the Government is providing to support
Australians to own
their own home. The minister explained that, given the urgency of addressing the
housing issue in Australia, the
Government received legislative authority from
the Parliament when legislation to establish the program passed Parliament in
The minister noted that in passing the legislation, Parliament was aware
and accepted that significant elements of the regulatory
scheme for the program
would be included in delegated legislation to enable early delivery of the
program for eligible home buyers.
Committee view
1.55 The committee thanks the minister for this explanation and notes in
particular, her advice as to the urgency of the program and
that the inclusion
of such measures in delegated legislation was authorised by the Parliament.
However, the committee remains concerned,
as a matter of principle, about the
inclusion of significant elements of the scheme in delegated legislation. In
this regard, the
committee’s general view is that significant matters
should generally be included in primary legislation which is subject to
greater level of parliamentary oversight.
1.56 In light of the above, the committee reiterates its view that
significant elements of a regulatory scheme should be contained
legislation, rather than delegated legislation, as a matter of
1.57 The committee has therefore resolved to draw its concerns about the
inclusion of significant elements of a regulatory scheme
in delegated
legislation to the attention of the Senate under standing order 23(4).
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation, Help to Buy
Program Directions
Delegated Legislation Monitor 5 of 2025
AUSStaCSDLM 187.
The program is a Commonwealth
shared equity scheme administered by Housing Australia to improve housing
outcomes for low and middle-income
earners by reducing the upfront deposit
hurdle and ongoing mortgage repayments with purchasing a home.
Senate Standing Committee for
the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation,
Legislation Monitor 4 of 2025
(31 July 2025), pp. 3-10.
This correspondence was tabled
with this monitor and is accessible via the
committee’s
Senate standing order
Senate standing order
Senate standing order
Subsection 52(1) of the
instrument prescribes actions to be taken when a participating State to the Help
to Buy program provides
notice, in accordance with the Agreement that it intends
to stop participating in the program. In addition, paragraph 65(c) requires
Housing Australia to administer the program in a manner consistent with the
Agreement, as existing at the time the instrument commenced.
This correspondence was
tabled with this monitor and is accessible via the
Legislation Monitors
page on the committee’s website.
Senate standing order
Senate standing order
See subsection 29(1).
See subsections 29(1) and
See subsection 37(11).
This correspondence was
tabled with this monitor and is accessible via the
Legislation Monitors
page on the committee’s website.
Senate standing order
This correspondence was
tabled with this monitor and is accessible via the
Legislation Monitors
page on the committee’s website.
Senate standing order
Administrative Review
decisions should be subject to merits review?
(January 1999).
This correspondence was
tabled with this monitor and is accessible via the
Legislation Monitors
page on the committee’s website.
Senate standing order
This correspondence was
tabled with this monitor and is accessible via the
Legislation Monitors
page on the committee’s website.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (149 KB)
PDF format (142 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter