The Veterinary Pharmacy Pty Ltd v Elnakeeb and Mostafa Pty Ltd [2025] ATMO 220 (30 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Oppositions by The
Veterinary Pharmacy Pty Ltd to registration of trade mark application numbers
(class 39 and 44) –
DOCBAG EXPRESS (composite)
(class 39 and 44) -
DocBags (word)
- both in the name of
Elnakeeb and Mostafa Pty Ltd
Benjamin Goldsworthy
REPRESENTATION:
Self-represented
Susan Gatford of Counsel instructed by Baxter Patent
Attorneys Pty Ltd
2025 ATMO 220
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – oppositions under
– ground of opposition under
in respect of both trade marks –
other grounds referred to not in the SGP –
not established in respect
of 2353552 – 2353552 may proceed to registration –
established
in respect of 2374634 – 2374634 refused.
decision concerns two applications (‘Applications’) to register two
trade marks (‘Trade Marks’) under
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) (‘Act’),
details of which I reproduce below:
Elnakeeb and Mostafa Pty Ltd
(‘Applicant’)
Filing date
: 3 May 2023
(‘2353552’)
: Class 39: Delivery of emergency supplies of medicines to
medical practices including PBS
Class 44: Pharmacy dispensary services.
(‘Designated Services’)
Endorsement
: It is a condition of registration that, in use, the cross
device contained within the trademark will be rendered in colours other
on a white or silver background, or white or silver on a red background.
Trade mark number
Filing date
: 25 July 2023
: DocBags (‘2374634’)
: Classes 39 and 44: Designated Services.
Trade Marks were each examined under
and acceptance was advertised for
2374634 on 26 December 2023 and for 2353552 on 4 October 2023. The Opponent
filed Notices of Intention
to Oppose as well as Statements of Grounds and
Particulars (‘SGPs’) in respect of each of the Trade Marks. The
filed its Notices of Intention to Defend for each of the Trade Marks
in the required period.
19 May 2023, the Opponent filed Evidence in Support (‘EIS’) in
respect of 2353552
consisting of a declaration of Susan Dale, Director of
the Opponent, dated 19 May 2024 (‘Dale-1’). On 22 May 2024, the
Opponent filed its EIS in respect of 2374634 consisting of a declaration of
Susan Dale, dated 22 May 2024 (‘Dale-2’).
22 August 2024, the Applicant filed its EIA in respect of 2353552 consisting of
declarations made by Monna Mostafa, Director and
co-founder of the Applicant,
dated 1 September 2024, with Exhibits MM-1 to MM-33 (‘Mostafa-1’).
On 2 and 3 September
2024, the Applicant filed its Evidence in Answer
(‘EIA’) in respect of 2374634 consisting of a declaration of Monna
dated 1 September 2024, with Exhibits MM-1 to MM-33
(‘Mostafa-2’).
Applicant also filed 12 declarations (‘Third Party Declarations’)
with the EIS for 2374634.
Third Party Declarations are made by the following persons:
Tim Rose, dated
29 August 2024;
Rosevear, dated 2 September 2024;
Annshu Malhotra,
dated 2 September 2024;
Puneet Malhotra,
dated 2 September 2024;
Sahana Asokan,
dated 2 September 2024;
Yogeswaran, dated 2 September 2024;
Gowers, dated 3 September 2024;
Dr Kate Bessey,
dated 3 September 2024;
Dr Rob Burton,
dated 3 September 2024;
Dr Jane Hunt,
dated 3 September 2024;
Dr Dick Quan,
dated 3 September 2024; and
Dr Jacqueline
Engelander, dated 3 September 2024.
4 November 2024, the Applicant filed its Evidence in Reply (‘EIR’)
in respect of 2374634 consisting of a declaration
of Susan Dale, dated 4
November 2024 (‘Dale-3’). On 28 October 2024, the Applicant also
filed its EIR in respect of 2353552
consisting of a declaration Susan Dale dated
28 October 2024 (‘Dale-4’).
matters concerning both of the Trade Marks were set down for a joint hearing. On
17 and 18 July 2025, the Opponent filed its written
outline of submissions
(‘Opponent’s Written Submissions’) in respect of each of the
Trade Marks. On 24 July 2025,
the Applicant filed its written outline of
submissions (‘Applicant’s Written Submissions’). On 31 July
heard the matter by teleconference. The Opponent did not appear and
relies on its written submissions. Susan Gatford of Counsel appeared
of the Applicant, instructed by Warren Chandler of Baxter Patent Attorneys Pty
Ltd. I am to decide this matter as a delegate
of the Registrar of Trade Marks
(‘Registrar’).
Grounds and onus
Opponent has the onus of establishing one of the nominated grounds of
opposition.
The standard of proof
is the ordinary civil standard of the balance of
probabilities.
Opponent nominated a ground of opposition under s 41 in its SGPs.
time at which I must assess the rights of the parties in terms of a ground of
opposition under s 41 is as at the filing dates
for each of the Trade Marks. I
note that the filing dates of each of the Trade Marks are different.
Dale-1 and Dale-2 are different, their contents are substantially the same and
the following serves as an effective summary
and Dale-2 make various statements around the whether Trade Marks are capable of
distinguishing the Designated Services. Relevant
in 2374634 are the following
statements in Dale-2:
2.1. The pharmacy services and therapeutic
goods provided by the Applicant are not unique. The official name of the goods
being supplied
is a “prescriber bag”, which is provided in the
definitions of the [NHA]. It is however more commonly known as a doctor’s
bag, and it is still referred to as a doctor’s bag by the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (as can be seen in the URL of the
live page on the PBS
2.2. Any PBS approved community pharmacy in Australia has authority under the
[NHA] to supply medicines to approved prescribers for
emergency use. Other
traders, including ourselves, use the words “doc bags” or
“doctor’s bags” to describe
the goods which we supply.
also provides a list of Australian government and related medical organisations
which the declarant states use the term ‘doctor's
bag’ in various
No extracted examples of
these are included in Dale-1. However, the list mentions an app called
‘The Doctor’s Bag’
and the RACGP Guidelines which apparently
makes mention of ‘doctor’s bags’. There are no materials
exhibited to
Dale-2 which corroborates this statement and list.
also notes several alleged examples of, ‘other businesses and resources in
Australia that refer to and advertise using
terms like “doc bags”,
“doctors bags” or “doctor’s
There are no
materials exhibited to Dale-2 which corroborate this statement and list.
otherwise alleges the use of the word ‘docbags’ before the filing
date for 2374634 since 2022.
and Dale-2 also refer to and mention several hyperlinks for which there is no
corresponding and extracted material.
number of other matters in the nature of bare assertions and submissions are
also made in Dale-1 and Dale-2 which I need not summarise.
reasons which will follow, the EIA concerning 2374634 is of most relevance.
Therefore, this forms the focus of the summary that
notes that the owners of the Applicant working as pharmacists
recognised:
...the need to work cooperatively with medical practices
to assist maintaining a supply of emergency medicines. We were aware that
pharmaceutical benefits may be provided without charge to a prescriber who in
turn can supply the pharmaceutical(s) free to patients
for emergency use. Our
business is an authorised supplier of PBS pharmaceutical
also introduces matters under the PBS noting:
For the supply of
emergency medicines, eligible prescribers need to obtain a “Prescriber Bag
Supply Order Book”. The pharmaceutical
benefits that can be supplied
through an approved supplier are listed in schedule 1 to the
National Health
(Prescriber Bag Supplies) Determination 2024
Mostafa-2 refers to Exhibit MM-1 as being a copy of the
National Health
(Prescriber Bag Supplies) Determination
this does not
appear to be in the EIS on my review.
declares that in 2013:
...my husband and I coined the term
‘Docbags’ as a pun or play on a lollie bag or a doggie bag filled
with goodies, which
in context translate to medical goodies in an emergency
medical sense such that a prescriber can select from a list and be supplied
matter of priority as in an emergency.
then declares that the alleged first use of 2374634 occurred in at least 2014
and that the use has been extensive and continuous
since. Various companies were
incorporated by Mostafa and her husband which conducted business under the Trade
Marks. At Exhibits
MM-4 to MM-13 to Mostafa-2 is what is described as a
cross-section of the use of 2374634. At each of these Exhibits are copies of
several prescriber bag orders from authorised prescribers for each of the years
2015 to 2024. Mostafa-2 states that the cost of PBS
medicines alone for
Prescriber Bag Orders can range between $15 and $2000.
Exhibits MM-14 to MM-23 are copies of monthly account statements to authorised
prescribers using services provided by the Applicant
or its predecessor in the
years 2015 to 2024.
states that because of concerns around the Opponent being a trade competitor,
the Applicant has not elected to provide its
turnover data. However, Mostafa-2
declares that the turnover ‘since 2014 has increased, with each year
turning over significantly
more than the previous
also provides advertising expenditure figures. At [56], Mostafa-2 provides a
table of annual expenditure on promotional,
marketing and advertising activities
said to be in relation to the use of 2374634 in financial years starting 2017 to
2024. These
amounts are moderately sizeable. At Exhibits MM-24 to MM-30 are
examples of material concerning the advertising approach and registration
domain name www.docbagexpress.com.au (‘Applicant’s
declares that there has been confusion in the marketplace because of the conduct
of the Opponent. At Exhibits MM-31 and
MM-32 are copies of the order forms
apparently made by the declarant of Dale-2 in 2022 and 2023 for orders made with
the Applicant.
Mostafa-2 declares that since the Applicant received the orders
referred to in Exhibits MM-31 and MM-32, they have received a number
enquiries from customers (ie existing medical practices). Three instances are
mentioned. At Exhibit MM-33 is a copy of an order
form sent to the Applicant
from one such customer. Mostafa-2 declares that ‘the medical practice
thought the request form had
originated from our business, hence sent the order
form back to our business’.
otherwise comments on the hyperlinks provided in Dale-2, though it also does not
exhibit any material which corroborates
those statements made in
Third party declarations
Third-Party Declarations all appear to be in a near identical formula, almost as
a form. I reproduce text which represents this
authorised prescriber of PBS medicines under the [NHA] (the
I am currently working as a medical practitioner in a general clinical
In my day-to-day role, my responsibilities include ordering of PBS
I confirm that PBS medicines can only be prescribed by doctors,
dentists, optometrists, midwives and nurse practitioners who are issued
unique prescriber number and are approved to prescribe PBS medicines under the
I confirm that PBS medicines can only be supplied by an approved
To obtain a PBS medicine as an authorised prescriber, I need to complete
a prescriber bag supply order form and sign. The signed order
is given to an
approved supplier.
I have been asked to provide my understanding of
“Doc Bag Express”.
I make this declaration from my personal and professional knowledge, and
knowledge I have obtained from my general practice.
I confirm that I have prepared numerous repeat prescriber bag supply order
forms with “Doc Bag Express”, which is a pharmacy
operated by
pharmacists Ahmed Elnakeeb and Monna Mostafa that is an approved supplier of PBS
I have been using the supply services under the brand “Doc Bag
Express” for at least [insert number] years.
I understand that the term ‘Doc Bag Express’ is an indication of
services provided by the business operated by Ahmed Elnakeeb
need not summarise the evidence concerning 2353552 though I note it is
substantially the same as that for 2374634.
most relevantly declares that:
The term “DocBags” is
widely used to describe PBS Prescriber Bag Supplies, colloquially known as
bags” or “prescriber’s bags,”
which contain essential medications for healthcare professionals. We have built
substantial goodwill in the “DocBags” brand since our establishment
in November 2022, a fact supported by our marketing
reach, customer engagement,
and high website traffic. The Applicant’s application is both untimely and
unjustified, and we
urge that IP Australia deny this registration to uphold fair
competition and prevent monopolisation of descriptive terms within the
otherwise makes numerous statements that are repetitive of matters I have
already discussed and do not assist, or that amount
to submissions rather than
statements of fact. Much of this matter is reflected in the Opponent’s
Written Submissions which
I address later.
need not summarise the contents Dale-4 which whilst different to Dale-3, is of
similar effect in respect of 2353552.
Preliminary matters
the hearing Counsel for the Applicant raised issues with various matters
referred to throughout the proceedings, including the
EIS, EIR and
Opponent’s Written Submissions, but which are not particularised in the
5.7 provides:
5.7 Filing of statement of grounds and
particulars
(1) A statement of grounds and particulars must be filed within
one month from the day the notice of intention to oppose is filed.
(2) The statement must be in an approved form.
words ‘statement of grounds and particulars’ are defined in reg 5.2
statement of grounds and particulars
statement by an opponent that sets out:
(a) the grounds on which the opponent intends to
(b) the facts and circumstances forming the basis for the
SGP only particularises s 41 as a ground of opposition. However, in the EIS, EIR
and the Opponent’s Written Submissions,
the Opponent appears to make a
mixture of statements and submissions as to the facts regarding purported
additional grounds of opposition
under ss 58A, 60 and 62A. These grounds do not
appear in the SGPs and there has been no request to amend the SGPs, for example
reg 5.12(3).
Opponent has the onus in the oppositions. It should be unsurprising that these
grounds not mentioned in the SGP are unlikely to
enjoy any traction given the
sparsity of evidence other than in bald statements made in the EIS and
Section 58A cannot even
apply as there is no application of s 44(4), which is a requisite to the
application of s 58A. The material
in both Dale-1 and Dale-2 is so minimal that
it cannot reasonably support any of these purported additional grounds of
and does not change the outcome. This weighs heavily against
considering these additional grounds further. Accordingly, I only have
considered and addressed in detail the ground of opposition under s 41
throughout these written reasons.
Applicable principles
41 provides:
mark not distinguishing applicant’s goods or services
(1) An application for the registration of a trade mark must be rejected
if the trade mark is not capable of distinguishing
the applicant’s goods
or services in respect of which the trade mark is sought to be registered
designated goods or services
) from the goods or services
of other persons.
goods of a person
services of a
see section 6.
(2) A trade mark is taken not to be capable of distinguishing the
designated goods or services from the goods or services
of other persons only if
either subsection (3) or (4) applies to the trade mark.
(3) This subsection applies to a trade mark if:
(a) the trade mark is not to any extent inherently adapted to distinguish
the designated goods or services from
the goods or services of other persons;
(b) the applicant has not used the trade mark before the filing date in
respect of the application to such an
extent that the trade mark does in fact
distinguish the designated goods or services as being those of the
(4) This subsection applies to a trade mark if:
(a) the trade mark is, to some extent, but not sufficiently, inherently
adapted to distinguish the designated
goods or services from the goods or
services of other persons; and
(b) the trade mark does not and will not distinguish the designated goods
or services as being those of the
applicant having regard to the combined effect
of the following:
(i) the extent to which the trade mark is inherently adapted to
distinguish the goods or services from
the goods or services of other
(ii) the use, or intended use, of the trade mark by the applicant;
(iii) any other circumstances.
Note 1: Trade marks that are not
inherently adapted to distinguish goods or services are mostly trade marks that
consist wholly
of a sign that is ordinarily used to indicate:
(a) the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value,
geographical origin, or some other characteristic, of goods or services;
(b) the time of production of goods or of the rendering of
Note 2: For
services of a person
Note 3: Use of a trade mark by a
predecessor in title of an applicant and an authorised use of a trade mark by
another person
are each taken to be use of the trade mark by the applicant (see
subsections (5) and 7(3) and section 8).
deciding whether the s 41 ground of opposition can be established, I must ask
whether each of the Trade Marks is capable of distinguishing
the Designated
Services as those of the Applicant from those of other traders. If I am
satisfied that any of the Trade Marks are
not so capable, s 41 requires that
Trade Mark be rejected. Relevant to the assessment of capacity to distinguish is
whether the Trade
Marks have inherent adaptation to distinguish. If a Trade Mark
has sufficient inherent adaptation to distinguish the Designated Services,
41 ground of opposition will not be established for that Trade Mark. However, if
I am satisfied that a Trade Mark does not
have sufficient inherent adaptation to
distinguish, the next question will be whether it has
adaptation to distinguish the Designated Services. If a Trade Mark has no
inherent adaptation, the ground of opposition
will be established only if I am
satisfied that as at the filing date it did not in fact so distinguish, taking
account of the extent
of the Applicant’s use of that Trade
If a Trade Mark has
inherent adaptation to distinguish, the ground of opposition will be
established only if I am satisfied that, after considering the
level of inherent
adaptation of the Trade Mark, the extent of the Applicant’s use, and other
relevant circumstances, the Trade
Mark does not and will not distinguish the
Designated Services.
deciding a trade mark’s inherent adaptation to distinguish, Kitto J in
Clark Equipment Co v Registrar of Trade Marks
’) found that:
[T]he question whether
a mark is adapted to distinguish be tested by reference to the likelihood that
other persons, trading in goods
of the relevant kind and being actuated only by
proper motives - in the exercise, that is to say, of the common right of the
to make honest use of words forming part of the common heritage, for the
sake of the signification which they ordinarily possess
- will think of the word
and want to use it in connexion with similar goods in any manner which would
infringe a registered trade
mark granted in respect of
High Court has recognised that the assessment of inherent adaptation to
distinguish will involve a two-step process being: (1)
determining the ordinary
signification of the sign to those who would purchase, consume or trade in the
goods or services; and (2)
having determined the ordinary signification, the
likelihood of the sign being honestly desired for use by other
SGP in respect of 2374634 particularises the ground of opposition under s 41 as
The term ‘doc bags’ is a commonly abbreviated
term to describe doctors’ bags or prescriber bags used to carry medical
pharmaceutical supplies in the course of a trader providing, delivering or
transporting medical or pharmaceutical services. Other
traders, without improper
motive, would desire to use the Mark or a similar mark, in the ordinary course
of trade in respect of similar
services or closely related goods to those of the
Application. Accordingly, the Mark is not capable of distinguishing the services
in respect of the Application.
the EIS and EIA acknowledge and corroborate the existence of the
‘prescriber bag’ ordering system under the PBS.
I consider this to
be a system with which medical centres and other health professionals such as
doctors, registered nurses, pharmacies
and suppliers of emergency medicinal
delivery service to be well acquainted.
are also examples which the Opponent says show online businesses and resources
in Australia referring to the terms ‘doc
bags’, ‘doctors
bags’ or ‘doctor’s bags’. Dale-2 mentions instances
where organisations have
allegedly used the words ‘doctor’s
bag’ in various contexts. The EIA contains several statements which
or contextualise the alleged use of these words descriptively. These
examples are not extracted and there is no dated material placed
before me in
this respect by either of the parties. For example, whilst website addresses are
provided, screen captures of the websites,
including before or as at the filing
date of 2374634 have not been provided in these proceedings.
also declares that the word ‘doc’ is the abbreviated form of the
word ‘doctor’. The basis for the submission
that 2374634 has an
ordinary signification appears to be that a ‘doctor’s bag’ may
describe the order which forms
the subject of delivery or dispensary services in
terms of the prescriber bag system in place under the PBS. There is also a
ordinary signification of 2374634 as simply describing a physical bag
containing unspecified medications for use by a doctor, which
may form the
subject matter of delivery or dispensary services.
‘prescriber bag’ refers to the administrative mechanism or system in
Australia whereby certain medicines are supplied
to medical practitioners, which
would include doctors and medical centres, for emergency use and distribution to
patients. The medications
in this context are those that a prescriber can
give to a patient in an emergency situation outside of a typical clinic or
where those medications would more ordinarily be prescribed and
distributed. Also, it is readily apparent that a ‘doctor’
important trader who would obviously fall within the description of a
‘prescriber’ in either an ordinary or statutory
Applicant submits that:
in terms of descriptiveness
“doc” is most commonly an abbreviation for a document. It is also,
less commonly, an abbreviation
for a doctor. Thus the nature of the
“descriptiveness” sought to be inferred is not clear in any event,
with at least
2 possible meanings
Applicant also says that a combination of descriptive words or a combination of
a word and an abbreviation is distinctive as a
combined and whole new word. They
refer me to the examples of the sign ‘CLICKCALL’ for online
telecommunications and
‘MULTIFIX’ for electrical and building
maintenance and contracting, which were each held to be distinctive by delegates
of the Registrar.
The Applicant
also placed some reliance on the conjoining of the elements ‘Doc’
and ‘Bag’ without spacing
or the inclusion of a hyphen in asserting
that 2374634 is inherently adapted to distinguish the Designated Services.
Aldi Foods Pty Ltd v Moroccanoil Israel Ltd
Perram J said of the relevant
test for s 41:
... it is not just the desire of traders to use the
word which is relevant;
it is also their potential desire to use words nearly
resembling that word
. So here one must examine not just the inherent
adaptability to distinguish the Respondent’s goods of MOROCCANOIL but also
of MOROCCAN OIL, MOROCCAN-OIL and perhaps, without deciding, OIL OF
MOROCCO. The necessity so to reason was referred to by Kitto
(at 513) and reflects the reality that once
registration of a mark is achieved, it will be infringed not only by persons
without its owner’s permission but also by those using ‘a
sign that is substantially identical with, or deceptively similar
to, the trade
mark’: s 120(1) of the Act. Furthermore, account must be taken of the fact
that no attempt has been made in this
case to limit the mark by stylistic or
device elements; it is purely a word. As Yates J explained
at 517 [18] that matters because it means that if the
word proceeds to registration it will give the Respondent a monopoly on the
of the word (or words) in whatever form they may be ultimately rendered.
The implications of these matters for word marks were spelled out by Yates J
where his Honour concluded that APP STORE was not
inherently adapted to distinguish Apple’s App Store because other traders
might legitimately wish to call the trade channels by which they sold small
software applications app stores. At 515 [11] his Honour
noted that the s 41(3)
inquiry was one made examining only the word itself and divorced from the
effects, or likely effects, of registration.
Where a mark consists of words, his
Honour observed, ‘attention is directed to whether these words are taken
from the common
stock of the language and, if so, the degree to which those
words are, in their ordinary use, descriptive of the goods or services
registration is sought, and would be used for that purpose by others seeking to
supply or provide, without improper motive,
such goods or services in the course
of trade’. I respectfully agree with his Honour’s lucid summary
word ‘DocBags’ consists of two elements being ‘Doc-’ and
‘-Bags’. The relevant services here
are for the ‘delivery of
emergency supplies of medicines to medical practices including PBS
medicines’, as well as ‘pharmacy
dispensary services’.
Broadly, these services are both forms of medical and/or pharmaceutical delivery
or dispensary services
and have a close relationship with medical contexts.
Ultimately,
I must decide what, if any, is the ordinary signification of the trade mark. I
accept that the word element ‘doc’
is often used a short form of the
word ‘doctor’ in the context of the Designated Services. I also
accept that the word
‘DocBags’ would be considered by consumers as
referring to ‘doctor’s bags’ or ‘doctor
at Exhibit MM-23 shows what I consider to be use of the words
‘Doctor’s Bags’ in a manner which refers to
the characteristic
of the Designated Services on offer. I extract an example of this
screen capture shows a testimonial of Margarat Clee Road Street Medical Clinic,
the text of which reads, ‘Thanks for
the doctors bag with the gift inside,
so nice of you. I can’t believe it was here today. Thanks for your
a description contained in a screen capture of the Applicant’s Website the
following text appears:
Who is Doc Bag Express?
We are the biggest supplier of emergency PBS medications to medical practices
across Australia. Our commitment to provide swift, reliance
overnight delivery
for orders placed before 4pm AEST, which most importantly is free of charge!
Specialising in the Doctor’s
Bag we maintain substantial stock levels,
ensuring consistent supply even during stock shortages, making certain you
always have
access to your urgent medications. Beyond the Doctor’s Bags
List, we extend special pricing for a variety of additional medications
be essential for your
practitioners.
screen capture also appears in Mostafa-2 of the Applicant’s Website which
contains a table above which there is the tile,
‘Current List of Doctors
Bag Medication’.
consider this to evidence that the words ‘Doctors Bag’ are likely
not adapted to distinguish and objectively appear
as being a reference to the
nature or characteristics of the Designated Services. Mostafa itself also even
appears to acknowledge
that the words ‘Doctor’s Bag’ is a term
of which other persons may desire to
Regardless, the
Applicant’s own evidence weighs in favour of there being a meaning in the
area of the Designated Services for
the words ‘Doctor’s Bag’.
Howard Auto-Cultivators Ltd v Webb Industries Pty Ltd
Dixon J found that
although the word ‘ROHOE’ was not a commonly used way to refer to a
‘rotary hoe’ or that
it was commonly shortened in such a manner, the
word ‘ROHOE’ would still be considered by consumers to be an
abbreviation
of the name of the designated
I consider the lack of
spacing or a hyphen between the ‘Doc-’ and ‘-Bag’
elements to be of little to no impact
for the purposes of the word having
ordinary signification. The word ‘DocBags’ has an ordinary
signification which refers
to a bag which in part relates to doctors – ie
a ‘doctor’s bag’. This clearly is subject matter amounting
a characteristic of the Designated Services. The dispensary or delivery services
being for delivery or dispensing of those goods.
are not the only consumers of the Designated Services. For example, the
Designated Services in class 39 refer specifically
to ‘medical
centres’. An additional and separate basis for a likely ordinary
signification is that ‘DocBags’
would, for some consumers, refer to
one form of prescriber bags. Fortifying this conclusion is that a doctor is a
clear and well
known example of a prescriber for the relevant purposes. The
Designated Services in class 39 are targeted at medical centres and
their staff
who are likely to be acquainted with the PBS system including the prescriber bag
system. I am satisfied, for example,
that a doctor calling on a supplier of the
Designated Services or an assistant working on their behalf, being either
delivery or
dispensary services, and asking for delivery or dispensing of a
‘doc bag’, ‘doctor bag’ or ‘doctor’s
bag’, would readily be understood as referring in a more causal manner to
an order for emergency medications.
have taken account of the Third Party Declarations in deciding whether there is
an ordinary signification. These do not weigh greatly
on the matter as none of
these specifically mention the word ‘DocBags’ as being a word they
view as a trade source and
none expressly contradict or cast any doubt on my
finding that there is an ordinary signification in this word. I have noted that
the Third Party Declarations all mention that in the process of obtaining
emergency supplies persons must fill out something called
a ‘prescriber
bag form’. However, this does not rule out other words, including
‘DocBags’ as having a similar
and more causal ordinary
signification. Nor do the Third Party Declarations rule out
‘DocBags’ as being a word meaning
‘Doctor’s Bags’
or ‘Doctor Bags’. I do not consider the formulaic declarations to
weight greatly on
the question of there being an ordinary signification or the
likelihood of traders in services similar to the Designated Services
as desiring
use of the word ‘DocBags’ or something nearly resembling that.
Applicant correctly submits that what I must consider is not whether
‘Doctor’s Bag’ has an ordinary signification,
but whether
‘DocBags’ has an ordinary signification. I am satisfied that 2374634
has an ordinary signification which
has the same meaning. The word
‘DocBags’ also nearly resemble the words ‘doctor’s
bag’ or ‘doctor
bag’ and amount to a readily perceived short
form of that. My assessment is that this is not a skilful or covert allusion to
the Designated Services.
shortening of the word ‘doctor’ to ‘doc-’ for these
particular Designated Services clearly does not detract
from the meaning which
would be readily understood, especially by medical centres and other traders. I
am also satisfied that other
traders would likely legitimately desire use of
these words, or words nearly resembling them, when offering similar services.
is, they will think of the word and want to use it in connection with
similar services in a manner which would infringe a registered
granted in respect of it.
assessment of 2374634 and the evidence insofar as it weighs on the matter, I
consider 2374634 to have little if any inherent
adaptation to distinguish. I
also consider it likely that other traders would desire to use 2374634 for the
sake of the ordinary
signification. I find that 2374634 has no inherent
adaptation to distinguish and from here should consider the evidence of the
Applicant’s
Evidence of use of 237434
my findings above, I must consider the Applicant’s use of 237434 and
whether at its filing date, 2374634 did in fact distinguish
the Designated
declares use since at least 2014, much of this use appears in the context of a
use alongside 2353552 which I have found
below to be inherently adapted to
distinguish the Designated Services. Many documents in Exhibits MM-15 to MM-23
also appear to make
use of the words ‘Doc Bag Express’. The Exhibits
to Mostafa-2 also include what are known as ‘prescriber bag’
These forms are used to order emergency supplies of pharmaceutical goods under
the PBS. Under the field titled ‘name
of approved pharmacist dispensing
goods’ often appears the words ‘Doc Bag Express’. These date
from 2015 to 2023
and various types of medicine which would be used in emergency
situations are listed as having been ordered. One example of the order
dated 2 September 2016 which indicates the ‘company’ as being
‘Doc Bag Express’ and the ‘subject’
‘Doctors Bag
Many of the
facsimile cover sheets for the order forms mention either ‘emergency
supplies’, ‘practice stock’
or other specified emergency
medications such as adrenaline injections or Ventolin inhalers. I note that some
of the prescriber bag
order forms in evidence do not show the use of the word
‘DocBags’ and show use of ‘DocBag Express’ as the
‘name of approved Pharmacy dispensing this order’ or prescriber at
the signature portion of the form. In almost every
case the details of the
customers on the prescribing forms are redacted. As such, I am unable to verify
the number and spread of
customers who have been engaged.
Applicant has elected not to provide turnover or sales figures. Therefore, there
is nothing in evidence which indicates the total
turnover for the Designated
Services offered and sold by reference to 2374634. Accordingly, it is difficult
to measure the level
of trade in the context of the industry for the Designated
Services. Whilst the declared advertising figures have been moderately
I do not consider it to be such that 2374634 would at the filing date
distinguish the Designated Services. I also note
that there is little in the EIA
which shows specific examples of activities which resulted from this
expenditure, and which feature
2374634 rather than 2353552 prominently displayed
or promoted.
recognise that declarations such as the Third Party Declarations can be relevant
in determining whether the use of a trade mark
in fact distinguishes goods and
services. Surveys have also at times formed evidence of recognition of a trade
mark by third parties
as an indicator of trade origin but even survey evidence
which has demonstrated sizeable sections of the population may sometimes
fail to demonstrate the relevant recognition such that a trade mark is
distinctive.
Chocolaterie Guylian NV v Registrar of Trade Marks
, Sundberg J observed
... cases confirm that association evidence on its own does
not prove distinctiveness; the evidence must establish that the public
educated to understand the sign as an identifier of the origin of the
this matter, the Third Party Declarations are formulaic and present as forms
which appear to have been distributed for signature.
I also note that the
contents of the Third Party Declarations all have a focus on the words
‘Doc Bag Express’ and these
words appear as administrative on the
forms, or as a business name. The Third Party Declarations at best show a few
persons which
have business relationships with the Applicant making statements
which may refer to 2353552 rather than 2374634. The Third Party
Declarations
individually and together do not represent a consistent recognition of 2374634
by the broad consuming public or that
the consuming public have been educated
that 2374634 itself amounts to a badge of origin. I give the Third Party
Declarations little
weight in determining the matter concerning 2374634. I also
note that the few examples of alleged confusion provide little context
the statements where these matters are alleged and these are of similar
careful consideration for the evidence, I am satisfied that 2374634 did not in
fact distinguish the Designated Services at the
filing date for 2374634.
also note that even if I assume that 2374634 has some though not sufficient
adaptation to distinguish, in the way asserted by the
Applicant, I am also
satisfied that noting the extent of the Applicant’s use, the level of
inherent adaptation of 2374634 asserted
by the Applicant, and other relevant
circumstances, 2374634 does not and will not distinguish the Designated
Accordingly,
the ground of opposition in respect of 2374634 under s 41 has been established.
SGP in respect of 2353552 states the following:
1. The Mark is not capable of distinguishing the services of the Application,
from the goods or services of other persons –
section 41 of the Act.
Particulars – The term ‘DOC BAG’ is a commonly abbreviated
term to describe a doctor’s bag or a prescriber
bag used to carry medical
or pharmaceutical supplies in the course of a trader providing, delivering or
transporting medical or pharmaceutical
services. The term ‘EXPRESS’
is also commonly known as ‘fast’ or ‘rapid’.
Accordingly, DOC BAG
EXPRESS explains a service in which medical or prescriber
bags are delivered by a special service to ensure speed in an emergency.
Other traders, without improper motive, would desire to use the Mark or a
similar mark, in the ordinary course of trade in respect
of similar services or
closely related goods to those of the Application. Accordingly, the Mark is not
capable of distinguishing
the services in respect of the Application.
relevance are the comments of Dodds-Streeton J in
Fry Consulting Pty Ltd v
Sports Warehouse Inc (No 2)
It is established that
a combination mark may be capable of distinguishing by the overall
impression it creates, even if the individual
elements in isolation lack any
such capacity, because, for example, they are commonplace in a trade, or, by
parity of reasoning,
merely or highly descriptive. When assessing whether a
combination trade mark such as the Fry trade mark is adapted to distinguish,
is necessary to consider the combination as a total composition, rather than the
individual constituent elements in
in 2353552 are the words ‘DOCBAG EXPRESS’. I note my findings
regarding the word ‘DocBags’. The word
‘express’ in
2353552 refers to the expeditious provision of the Designated Services and does
not add much to this combination.
However, I also note the additional visual
device element of a depiction of an individual rushing towards the right and
what appears to be a bag marked with a cross element. This visual
device element in 2353552 is prominent and distinctive.
evidence and Opponent’s Written Submissions do not persuade me that other
traders would honestly desire to use the combination
of elements forming 2353552
for the sake of its ordinary signification in relation to their own similar
services, or something so
nearly resembling 2353552. The total combination of
the device and word elements have sufficient inherent adaptation to distinguish
the Designated Services.
Accordingly,
the ground of opposition under s 41 is not established in respect of
55(1) relevantly
(1) Unless subsection (3) applies to the proceedings, the Registrar
must, at the end, decide:
(a) to refuse to register the trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations)
in respect of the goods and/or services
then specified in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
am not satisfied that the ground of opposition under s 41 has been established
in respect of 2353552. Accordingly, trade mark number
2353552 may proceed to
registration.
am satisfied that the ground of opposition under s 41 has been established in
respect of 2374634. Accordingly, I refuse registration
of trade mark number
the Registrar is served with a notice of appeal, I direct that registration of
2353552 shall not occur until the appeal has been
decided or discontinued. The
disposition of both of Trade Marks should be in accordance with the
Court’s order or direction
in the event of an appeal.
parties have requested their costs. Whilst it is normal for costs to follow the
event, both parties had a measure of success
and I decline to make an award of
Benjamin Goldsworthy
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
Unless I have otherwise
indicated, any references to sections or regulations in this decision are
references to sections or regulations
Trade Marks Act
(Cth) (‘Act’) or the
Trade Marks Regulations
(Cth) (‘Regulations’) respectively.
The word ‘PBS’
refers to the ‘Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme’.
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd
v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and
Telstra Corporation Ltd v
Phone Directories Co Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot and
Edelman JJ).
Dale-2, [2.3].
Dale-2, [2.4].
Mostafa-2, [9].
Mostafa-2, [10].
Mostafa-2, [46].
Dale-4, [2].
Elite Fitness LC Pty Ltd
v Velvet Publications Pty Ltd
[2025] ATMO 49
2025 ATMO 49
, [9] (Hearing
Officer Makrigiorgos).
Section 41(3).
Section 41(4).
[1964] HCA 55
(1964) 111 CLR 511
cited with approval in
Cantarella Bros Pty Ltd v Modena Trading Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 48
, [26] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ)
Applicant’s Written
Submissions, [13].
NAS Communications Pty
Ltd v 1300 Directory Pty Ltd
[2006] ATMO 93 (Hearing
Officer Nancarrow) and
Multiplex Ltd v Eastcoast Holdings Pty Ltd
[2005] ATMO 39 (Hearing
Officer McDonagh).
[2018] FCAFC 93
, [125]-[126]
(Perram J) (with my emphasis). See also
, Progressive Green Pty Ltd v Flo
Energy Pty Ltd
[2025] FCA 1315, [157]-[158] and [381] (Bennett J).
Mostafa-2, 325.
Mostafa-2, 327.
Mostafa-2, 328.
Mostafa-2, 332.
Mostafa-2, [64](g).
[1946] HCA 15
(1946) 72 CLR
, 183-185. See also, [186] (McTiernan J).
Mark Foy's Ltd v Davies
Coop & Co Ltd
[1956] HCA 41
95 CLR 190.
Section 41(3).
Exhibit MM-5, 32. See also,
MM-6, 48 and 53.
[2009] FCA 891
, [100]. See
Woolworths Ltd v BP plc (No 2)
[2006] FCAFC 132 (Heerey
, Allsop and
Young JJ) and
Unilever’s Application
[2003] EWHC 2709
[2003] RPC 35 (Jacob
[2012] FCA 81
RTF format (6.46 MB)
Signed PDF/A format