Adler & Adler [2013] FMCAfam 311 (10 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2013] FMCAfam 311
FAMILY LAW – Parenting – interim
application – relocation.
Family Law Act 1975
Godfrey & Sanders
(2007) 208 FLR 287
[2007] FamCA 102
Goode & Goode
(2006) 206 FLR 212;
(2006) 36 Fam
(2006) FLC 93-286
[2006] FamCA 1346
In the Marriage of C
(1998) 143 FLR 400
(1998) 22 Fam LR 776
(1998) FLC 92-801
[1998] FamCA
Richard Chisholm, ‘The meaning of ‘meaningful’:
Exploring a key term in the
Family Law Act
amendments of 2006’
22 AJFL 175
Respondent:
File Number:
MLC 665 of 2013
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Septimus Jones and Lee
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Dixon SC
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Blissenden Lawyers
(1) The matter be adjourned to 16 April 2013 at 10am for
mention in the relocation list before Federal Magistrate Hartnett.
(2) The mother return [X] born [in] 2008 (“[X]”) and [Y] born [in]
2011 (“[Y]”) to reside in the former matrimonial
before 20 April 2013.
(3) [X] and [Y] spend time with their father:
(a) from 9am
Saturday 30 March 2013 until 4pm Sunday 31 March 2013 in Tasmania;
(b) from 9am
Saturday 6 April 2013 until 6pm Sunday 7 April 2013 in Tasmania;
(c) commencing
on [X] and [Y]’s return to Victoria in accordance with order 2
(d) from 2pm
until 6pm on Sunday 21 April 2013;
(e) from after
kinder / daycare on Tuesday until 9am on Wednesday each week; and
(f) from after
kinder / daycare on Friday until 6pm Sunday each alternate weekend commencing 26
April 2013; and
otherwise agreed.
(4) The parents do all things necessary to obtain a private family report as
soon as possible.
(5) Pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
, the particulars of
the obligations these orders create and the particulars of the consequences that
may follow if a person contravenes
these orders are set out in Attachment A and
these particulars are included in these orders.
AND THE COURT NOTES THAT:
Pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
information about courses, programs and services to help with adjusting to the
consequences of those orders are set out in Attachment
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the pseudonym
Adler & Adler
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
MLC 665 of 2013
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
are the reasons for interim orders that were pronounced in a duty list on 26
March 2013. The application is for parenting orders
in respect of [X], born [in]
2008 (“[X]”), and [Y], born [in] 2011 (“[Y]”).
father sought orders on an interim basis that the mother return [X] and [Y] to
live in Melbourne and on a final basis that [X]
and [Y] remain living in
Melbourne. In her original response, the mother did not seek any interim
orders. However, in her amended
response, the mother sought orders on an
interim and final basis that [X] and [Y] remain living with her in Hobart.
the court indicated that there would be an order requiring the return of [X] and
[Y] to Melbourne on an interim basis, counsel
for the father and mother agreed
on the form of orders to be made by the court for the timing of the return, and
for the time to
be spent by [X] and [Y] with their father pending further
basic chronology in this matter is as follows:
both parents were born in Hobart;
the parents commenced a relationship as teenagers;
the mother attended [omitted] University in Melbourne, while the father
travelled elsewhere in Australia;
the mother continued to study at [omitted] while the father studied in
the father transferred to [omitted University] and the parents commenced
cohabitation in Melbourne;
to 2004: the father finished his degree in Melbourne and the mother started
working in Melbourne;
2005 to July 2008: the mother and father lived in London together;
the mother and father bought a house together in [P];
2008: the mother and father returned to Melbourne for the birth of [X], and
lived in their house in [P];
2008 to March 2009: with the exception of a two week holiday in Hobart over
Christmas, the father worked overseas while the
mother stayed in Melbourne with
2009 to November 2010: the mother and father and [X] lived in
2010 to December 2010, the mother returned to Melbourne with [X] while the
father continued to work overseas;
2011 to May 2011: the mother and father lived in Melbourne with [X], and with
[Y], after he was born in Melbourne in April
2011: the father returned to London;
2011: the mother returned to London with [X] and [Y];
afterwards, the relationship between the parents broke down;
2011 to January 2012: the mother and father lived separately in Hobart; [X] and
[Y] lived with their mother;
2012 to July 2012: the father lived and worked in Melbourne while the mother
lived in Hobart with [X] and [Y];
2012 to January 2013: the mother and [X] and [Y] returned to live in the [P]
property while the father rented a property nearby;
the parents had marriage
counselling and were attempting to reconcile;
2012: [X] and [Y] began attending [P] Children’s Centre in [P];
2012: [X] was enrolled by both parents to attend [A] Pre-School in Melbourne
commencing 5 February 2013;
January 2013: the mother discovered that the father had booked accommodation for
the family to attend a wedding in Bali in January
2014 with the mother and
father to have separate bedrooms;
January 2013: the mother returned to Hobart with [X] and
February 2013: the father filed his application; an abridgement was refused by a
February 2013: both parents took [X] to his first day of kindergarten in
father spent time with [X] and [Y] in Hobart:
the weekends commencing 8 February, 1 March and 15 March 2013;
Wednesday 20 February 2013; and
father spent time with [X] and [Y] by Skype, every day, although the father says
[Y] cannot really participate in the calls because
of his young age and [X] is
generally distracted;
March 2013: the matter came on for interim
Best interests of the child
parents accepted that the best interests of [X] and [Y] are the paramount
consideration in this case. However, very few of the
parents’ submissions
in this case directly addressed the best interests of [X] and [Y].
Family Law Act 1975
(“the Act”) deals with
Section 60B
of the Act sets out the objects and underlying principles
of the Act as follows:
(1) The objects of this Part
are to ensure that the best
are met by:
(a) ensuring that
have the benefit of
both of their
having a meaningful
involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best
(b) protecting
from physical or
psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to,
, neglect or
family violence
(c) ensuring that
receive adequate and
to help them achieve their full
potential; and
(d) ensuring that
fulfil their duties,
and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of
(2) The principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or
would be contrary to a
to know and be cared for by both their
regardless of whether their
are married,
separated, have never married or have never lived together; and
to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with,
and other people significant to
their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other
jointly share duties and responsibilities
concerning the care, welfare and development of their
should agree about the future
to enjoy their culture (including the
enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
(3) For the purposes of subparagraph (2)(e), an Aboriginal child's or
Torres Strait Islander child's right to enjoy his or her Aboriginal
Strait Islander culture includes the right:
maintain a connection with that culture; and
(b) to have
the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary:
explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's age and
developmental level and the child's views; and
develop a positive appreciation of that culture.
(4) An additional object of this Part is to give effect to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child done at New York on 20 November
Note: The text of the Convention is set out in Australian Treaty Series 1991
No.4 ([1991] ATS 4). In 2011, the text of a Convention
in the Australian Treaty
Series was accessible through the Australian Treaties Library on the AustLII
website (www.austlii.edu.au).
of the Act provides that:
In deciding
whether to make a particular
in relation to a
must regard the best
as the paramount consideration.
However, the best
interests of the child are not the only consideration.
of the Act relevantly provides that:
subsection (5), in determining what is in the
must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3).
The matters set out in subsection (2) are primary
considerations and the matters set out in subsection (3) are additional
considerations.
Subsection 60CC(2A)
provides that:
In applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to
give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph
I will address the relevant considerations in
Section 60CC(2)(a)
the benefit to the
having a meaningful relationship with both of the
was no dispute that [X] and [Y] would benefit significantly from having a
meaningful relationship with both of their parents.
However, the mother
submitted that the court should bear in mind the dicta of Kay J in
(2007) 208 FLR 287
[2007] FamCA 102
where his Honour
the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the
legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful
relationship, not an optimal
relationship.
statement was criticised by the Honourable Professor Richard Chisholm AM, a
former judge of the Family Court of Australia, in
The meaning of
‘meaningful’: Exploring a key term in the
Family Law Act
(2008) 22 AJFL 175
at pages 193 to 194 in the following
In my view,
with respect, this is an unhelpful way of looking at it, and it led the appeal
court into error. It suggests that the
legislation seeks to ensure that children
have a meaningful relationship with parents, but nothing more. This is not so.
to anything: it speaks of the
the child of a meaningful relationship. Thinking in terms of various grades of
relationships can to lead to the mistaken conclusion
that the legislative
intention is satisfied provided that ultimately the child still has a
‘meaningful relationship’
with the non-relocating parent. Since it
is plausible to say that visits every few months, plus electronic
communications, can often
sustain a ‘meaningful relationship’, this
approach would suggest that so long as this minimal threshold is met, the court
should routinely permit relocations. In my view that would be an erroneous
interpretation, and would deflect the court from the careful
analysis that the
legislation requires.
that as it may. This court, is, of course, bound by the judgment in
mother, in effect, further submitted that [X] and [Y] could have the benefit of
a meaningful relationship with their father by
the father travelling to Hobart
frequently. The mother noted that the father earns about $180,000 per year and
implied that, consequently,
he is able to afford the
Section 60CC(2)(b) the need to protect the
from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to,
, neglect or
family violence
parent expressly addressed this issue. It was not suggested that this factor
had any application in this case.
Section 60CC(3)(a) any views expressed by the
and any factors (such as the
’s maturity
or level of understanding) that the
are relevant to the weight it should give to the
and [Y]’s views, if any, have not been made known to the court.
Section 60CC(3)(b) the nature of the relationship of the
(i) each of the
(ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other
was common ground that the mother was [X] and [Y]’s primary carer. The
father was frequently away from the family home. The
mother has cared for [X]
and [Y] for extended periods with minimal input from the father. Nevertheless,
it was not suggested that
there was anything lacking in the relationship between
the father and [X] and [Y].
Section 60CC(3)(c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has
taken, or failed to take, the opportunity:
(i) to participate in making
decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child; and
spend time with the child; and
(iii) to communicate with the child
father was away from the family home for extended periods for work reasons. With
that exception, both parents have taken the opportunity
to be fully involved in
[X] and [Y]’s lives.
Section 60CC(3)(ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has
fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s
obligations to maintain the
father has been the family’s breadwinner. The mother has not worked
outside the home since [X] was born.
Section 60CC(3)(d) the likely effect of any changes in the
’s circumstances, including the likely
effect on the
of any separation from:
(i) either of his or her
(ii) any other
, or other person
(including any grandparent or other
), with whom he or she has been living
father has affirmed that during July 2012 to January 2013 he visited the family
with [X] and [Y] before going
to work in the morning and would return in the evenings after work and on
weekends. He said that he
would help to bathe and feed them. The father said
that he was with [X] and [Y] whenever he was not at work or asleep. The mother
did not dispute these claims. She acknowledged that, during that period, the
father saw [X] and [Y] “regularly”.
seems reasonable to expect that, if [X] and [Y] were to remain in Hobart, the
closeness of their relationship with their father
would be adversely
Section 60CC(3)(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a
spending time with and communicating with a
and whether that difficulty or expense will
substantially affect the
to maintain personal relations and direct
on a regular basis
are obviously difficulties and expenses involved in [X] and [Y] spending time
with their father if they are living in Hobart
and he is living in Melbourne.
The distance and expense could be expected to substantially affect [X] and
[Y]’s right to maintain
personal relations and direct contact with their
father on a regular basis.
Section 60CC(3)(f) the capacity of:
(i) each of the
(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other
to provide for the needs of the
, including
emotional and intellectual needs
was no suggestion that either parent has an impaired capacity to provide for [X]
and [Y]’s needs.
Section 60CC(3)(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including
lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the
of either of the
, and any other characteristics of the
thinks are relevant
was not suggested that this factor has any particular relevance in this
Section 60CC(3)(h) if the child
or a Torres
Strait Islander child:
the child’s
right to enjoy his or her Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture
other people who share that culture); and
(ii) the likely impact any
proposed parenting
order under this Part will have on that right;
was not suggested that this factor applies in this case.
Section 60CC(3)(i) the attitude to the
to the responsibilities of
, demonstrated
by each of the
submissions were made to the court about this factor. Both parents appear to
have a good attitude to the responsibilities of
parenthood.
Section 60CC(3)(j) any
family violence
involving the
was no suggestion that there has been any family violence in this
Section 60CC(3)(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the
child or a member of the child’s family –
any relevant inferences
that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:
(i) the nature of the order;
(ii) the circumstances in which the order
(iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the
(iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the
(v) any other relevant matter
was not suggested that this factor applies in this case.
Section 60CC(3)(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would
be least likely to lead to the institution of further
proceedings
in relation to the
is an interim application. There will inevitably be a continuation of the
existing legal proceedings, unless the parents are
able to agree on the
arrangements that are in the best interests of their
Section 60CC(3)(m) any other fact or circumstance that the
thinks is relevant
mother and [X] and [Y] would be able to return to the family home in [P]. Many
of [X] and [Y]’s toys and other possessions
are still there. The home is
familiar to [X] and [Y].
mother and [X] and [Y] are presently living with the maternal grandmother, who
is providing emotional and other support to the
mother and [X] and [Y].
is a dispute about the degree of social support that the mother has in
Melbourne. The father says that the mother has numerous
friends in Melbourne,
as she attended university in Melbourne and spent a large part of her adult life
in Melbourne. The father
also says that the mother has some family members in
Melbourne. The mother says that she has only one real friend and no family in
court is not able to resolve the dispute about the level of the mother’s
support in Melbourne at an interim hearing. However,
as the mother’s own
mother is in Hobart, it seems likely that there is a quality to the support that
the mother enjoys in Hobart
that would not be available to her in
commenced kindergarten in Hobart in February 2013.
for the mother relied on the doctrine of acquiescence. In particular, counsel
for the mother relied on a passage that he
said was from paragraph 23 of
Goode & Goode
(2006) 206 FLR 212;
(2006) 36 Fam LR 422
[2006] FamCA 1346.
In fact, the passage counsel relied on was from
paragraph 23 of
In the Marriage of C
(1998) 143 FLR 400
(1998) 22 Fam LR
(1998) FLC 92-801
[1998] FamCA 19.
Paragraph 23 of
In the Marriage of
is as follows:
Fourthly, the Court is entitled to place such weight upon the importance of
retaining the child’s current living arrangements
as it sees fit in all
the circumstances. In determining what weight to place upon that factor, it is
appropriate for the Court to
take account of the circumstances giving rise to
the current status quo. In particular, the Court may examine the following
whether the current circumstances have arisen by virtue of some agreement
between the parties or as a result of acquiescence.
whether the current arrangements have been unilaterally imposed by one party
upon the other.
the duration of the current arrangements and whether there has been any undue
delay in instituting proceedings or in the
proceedings being listed for
In the Marriage of C
was quoted by the Full Court in paragraph 67
Goode & Goode
in the context of considering whether paragraph 23,
and the rest of
In the Marriage of C
, was still good law in the light of
the 2006 amendments to the Act. The Full Court in
Goode & Goode
resolved that question at paragraphs 68 to 74 of
Goode & Goode
are as follows:
view some of the comments of the Full Court at paragraph [18] [of In the
Marriage of C] are still apposite. For example,
the procedure for making interim
parenting orders will continue to be an abridged process where the scope of the
enquiry is “significantly
curtailed”. Where the Court cannot make
findings of fact it should not be drawn into issues of fact or matters relating
the merits of the substantive case where findings are not possible. The Court
also looks to the less contentious matters, such as
the agreed facts and issues
not in dispute and would have regard to the care arrangements prior to
separation, the current circumstances
of the parties and their children, and the
parties’ respective proposals for the future.
remains the case that the Court must regard the best interests of the child as
paramount in deciding what interim parenting
order to make. However, there are
passages in
In the Marriage of C
that do not sit comfortably with the
Act as amended. It is the following passage in particular which calls into
question the applicability
In the Marriage of C
Act as presently drafted (at [22]):
where the evidence clearly establishes that, at the date of hearing, the child
is living in an environment in which he
or she is well settled, the
child’s stability will usually be promoted by the making of an order which
provides for the continuation
of that arrangement until the hearing for final
orders, unless there are strong or overriding indications relevant to the
welfare to the contrary. Such indications would include but are
not limited to convincing proof that the child’s welfare would
endangered by his/her remaining in that environment.
are many elements in the
Act as amended that would militate against the continued application of the
principles in
In the Marriage of C
, and in particular the passage cited
above. While the ultimate goal in the legislation is to provide for an outcome
in the best interests
of the child, if the presumption in s
61DA applies, then the Court is obliged by s
65DAA to consider the outcomes previously discussed.
First, whether the
child spending equal time would be in the best interests of the child and
whether that is reasonably practicable.
Second, if an order to that effect is
not made, there is an obligation to consider whether an order that the child
spend substantial
and significant time would be in the best interests of the
child and whether that is reasonably practicable. Section
61DA must be
applied in any case, including interim proceedings, where a
court is considering making a parenting order.
reasoning in
In the Marriage of C
, particularly at [22] of the reasons
for decision to the effect that the best interests of the child are met by
stability when the
child is considered to be living in well-settled
circumstances, must now be reconsidered in light of the changes to the
Act, particularly
changes to the objects (s 60B), the inclusion of the
presumption of equal shared parental responsibility (s 61DA), and the necessity
if the presumption is not rebutted to consider the outcomes of equal time and
substantial and significant time.
view, it can be fairly said there is a legislative intent evinced in favour of
substantial involvement of both parents
in their children’s lives, both as
to parental responsibility and as to time spent with children, subject to the
need to protect
children from harm, from abuse and family violence and provided
it is in their best interests and reasonably practicable. This means
where there
is a status quo or well settled environment, instead of simply preserving it,
unless there are protective or other significant
best interests concerns for the
child, the Court must follow the structure of the
Act and consider accepting, where applicable, equal
or significant
involvement by both parents in the care arrangements for the child.
is not to say that stability derived from a well-settled arrangement may not
ultimately be what the Court finds to be in
the child’s best interests,
particularly where there is no ability to test controversial evidence, but that
decision would
be arrived at after a consideration of the matters contained in
60CC, particularly s
60CC(3)(d) and (m) and, if appropriate, s
60CC(4) and (4A).
also acknowledge that, because of the circumscribed nature of the proceedings,
the reasons given at an interim hearing may
be brief. So too, the filing of
lengthy affidavits is unlikely to be helpful where the Court is unable to make
findings about disputed
appears that, in
Goode & Goode
, the Full Court overturned some
In the Marriage of C
. The court did not expressly overturn
the dicta concerning delay and acquiescence. However, the gravamen of the
decision in
Goode & Goode
is that the court must regard the best
interests of the child as the paramount consideration, as required by the
legislation. That
would tend to suggest that the status quo, however it has
arisen, or for how ever long it has been in place, is a subsidiary
consideration,
unless the status quo happens to coincide with the child’s
best interests.
principle, that would seem to be correct. The parents in a particular case may
have agreed on certain arrangements for their children
and acted in accordance
with that agreement for a period of time. However, if the court considered that
those arrangements were
not in the children’s best interests, the court
would not endorse them. That would be so regardless of issues of acquiescence
or delay. Nevertheless, in case I am wrong about that, I will address the
evidence regarding acquiescence.
mother argued that the father had agreed that the mother and [X] and [Y] could
affidavit sworn on 7 February
2013 an email exchange between the parents shortly before the mother agreed to
with [X] and [Y] in June 2012. That exchange culminated in
the father saying, by email:
Of course I
wouldn’t keep you here against your will – I couldn’t do that
and wouldn’t do that – but
I’m saying if you decided to go
back down there it would be your decision.
father said that he only meant that he would not try to keep the mother in
Melbourne against her will, not that he would not try
to keep [X] and [Y] in
Melbourne against the mother’s will. The father noted that, since the
email exchange in June 2012,
the mother and father together had enrolled [X] in
[A] Pre-School in Melbourne to commence in February 2013. Moreover, the father
said that the mother well knew that, at the time that she took [X] and [Y] to
Hobart on 23 January 2013, the father was opposed to
[X] and [Y] relocating to
father reproduced in his affidavit sworn on 31 January 2013 various emails
exchanged on the day the mother took [X] and [Y] to
Hobart. He also exhibited a
note that he found when he returned home from work on that day. In the note,
the mother said that she
had made a “flash decision” to take [X] and
[Y] to Hobart and said:
you didn’t want me to take the boys. ... I assumed there would be no
argument from you because I believed you when
you said you wouldn’t stop
me. ... Sorry I didn’t tell you [I was taking the boys] but I know you
would have tried to
stop me and I couldn’t bare (sic)
circumstances give rise to a real question about whether there was acquiescence,
as that term is used in the authorities. Being
a contested issue, that question
cannot be determined at an interim hearing, but can only be determined at final
Equal shared parental responsibility
61DA of the Act provides as follows:
parenting order
in relation to a
apply a presumption that it is in the best
to have equal shared
parental responsibility
presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a
person who lives with a
) has engaged in:
at the time, was a
’s family (or that other person’s
family); or
family violence
(3) When the
is making an interim order,
the presumption applies unless the
that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be
applied when making that order.
(4) The presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the
that it would not be in the best
to have equal shared
parental responsibility
42. The parents jointly
submitted proposed orders to the court that did not deal with the question of
parental responsibility.
Equal or substantial and significant time with each parent
the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for a child, subsections
(1) to (5) inclusive of s.65DAA of the Act require
the court to consider the
child spending equal time, or a substantial and significant time, with each
parent. Subsections (1) to
(5) inclusive of s.65DAA provide as
parenting order
provides (or is to
provide) that a
are to have equal shared
parental responsibility
(a) consider
whether the
spending equal time with each of
would be in the best
(b) consider
whether the
spending equal time with each of
is reasonably practicable; and
is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order)
to spend equal time with each of the
1: The effect of section 60CA is that in deciding whether to go on to make a
parenting order for the child to spend time equal
time with each of the parents,
the court will regard the best interests of the child as the paramount
consideration.
2: See subsection (5) for the factors the court takes into account in
determining what is reasonably practicable.
Substantial
and significant time
(2) ... if:
parenting order
provides (or is to provide)
are to have equal shared
parental responsibility
court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the
to spend equal time with each of the
(c) consider
whether the
spending substantial and
significant time with each of the
in the best
(d) consider
whether the
spending substantial and
significant time with each of the
reasonably practicable; and
is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order)
to spend substantial and significant
time with each of the
1: The effect of section 60CA is that in deciding whether to go on to make a
parenting order for the child to spend time equal
time with each of the parents,
the court will regard the best interests of the child as the paramount
consideration.
2: See subsection (5) for the factors the court takes into account in
determining what is reasonably practicable.
(3) For the
purposes of subsection (2), a
will be taken to
spend substantial and significant time with a
spends with the
includes both:
that fall on weekends and holidays; and
that do not fall on weekends or holidays; and
spends with the
to be involved in:
’s daily routine; and
(ii) occasions
and events that are of particular significance to the
spends with the
be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the
(4) Subsection
(3) does not limit the other matters to which a
can have regard in determining whether the time
spends with a
would be substantial and significant.
practicality
determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably
practicable for a
to spend equal time, or
substantial and significant time, with each of the
must have regard to:
(a) how far
live from each other; and
’ current and future capacity to
implement an arrangement for the
equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the
’ current and future capacity to
communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in
implementing an arrangement
of that kind; and
impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the
other matters as the
considers relevant.
Note: Paragraph (c)
reference to future capacity – the court has power under section 13C
to make orders for parties to attend
family counselling or family dispute
resolution or participate in courses, programs or services.
parents dealt with the issue of the time to be spent by [X] and [Y] with their
father in their jointly proposed minute. The court
was not required to
specifically address this issue.
my view, it is in [X] and [Y]’s best interests, in so far as their best
interests can be determined at this interim stage,
to return to Melbourne to
live, pending the final hearing. [X] and [Y] have a familiar home here in
Melbourne. There is no impediment
to them returning immediately to that home.
They have a better prospect of having the benefit of a meaningful relationship
father if they are living in proximity to him, rather than an
aeroplane flight away from him. On an interim basis, these factors
outweigh the
benefit to [X] and [Y] of their mother having the support of her own mother in
I certify that the preceding forty-five (45) paragraphs
are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Riley FM
Date: 10 April 2013
RTF format (381 KB)
Signed PDF/A format