Q v Law Firm [2010] PrivCmrA 20 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
Q v Law Firm
[2010] PrivCmrA
Subject Heading:
Improperly collecting and disclosing personal information
National Privacy
Principles 1.1 and 2 in Schedule 3 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the Privacy Act were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
A law firm collected personal information from its client (a medical
practitioner) about the alleged mental health of the complainant.
The law firm
then disclosed it to a state healthcare complaints body which was investigating
a complaint against the law firm’s
The complainant believed the collection and disclosure of their personal
information was inappropriate.
NPP 1.1 states that an organisation must not collect personal information
unless the information is necessary for one or more its
functions or
activities.
NPP 2 provides that an organisation must not use or disclose personal
information other than for the primary purpose of collection,
exception applies. One exception, NPP 2.1(g), allows an organisation to
disclose personal information if the disclosure
is required or authorised by or
The Commissioner investigated the matter under section 40(1) of the Privacy
In response to the Commissioner’s investigation, the law firm stated
that one of its functions was to provide legal advice.
The collection of the
information from the client was necessary to provide legal advice to that
client. The Commissioner accepted
In addition, the law firm advised that its disclosure of the personal
information to the healthcare complaints body was authorised
under law. It
relied on Schedule 1, Clause 11(1)(k) of the
Health Records and Information
which authorises a disclosure which is
‘reasonably necessary’ to enable an investigative agency to exercise
its complaint
handling functions
or investigative functions
The Commissioner took the view that the healthcare complaints body was an
investigative agency. In addition, the information provided
to the healthcare
complaints body was used to consider how it would investigate/resolve the matter
and which documents it would provide
to the complainant. Therefore, the
Commissioner took the view that the disclosure was ‘reasonably
necessary’ under the
Health Records and Information Privacy Act 2002
(NSW). As the disclosure was authorised under a state law, the disclosure
was consistent with NPP 2.1(g) of the Privacy Act, which
allows a disclosure
that is authorised under other laws.
The Commissioner closed the investigation under section 41(1)(a) of the
complainant’s privacy.
Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner
December 2010
RTF format (128 KB)
Signed PDF/A format