Cleanaway Operations Pty Ltd [2025] FWCA 3799 (12 November 2025)
[2025] FWCA 3799
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Enterprise agreement
Cleanaway Operations Pty Ltd
(AG2025/3326)
CLEANAWAY RIVERINA ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT 2025
Waste management industry
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SAUNDERS
NEWCASTLE, 12 NOVEMBER 2025
Application for approval of the Cleanaway Riverina Enterprise Agreement
An application has been made for approval of an enterprise agreement
known as the
Cleanaway Riverina Enterprise Agreement 2025
). The application was made pursuant to
section 185
Fair Work Act 2009
The Agreement is a
single enterprise agreement.
Section 205A(1) of the Act provides that
an enterprise agreement must include a delegates’ rights term for
workplace delegates
to whom the agreement applies. The Agreement does not
contain a delegates’ rights term. Pursuant to subsection 205A(2)(b) of
Act, the delegates’ rights term contained in the Waste Management Award
2020 is taken to be a term of the Agreement.
The Employer has provided written undertakings
Undertakings
). A copy of the Undertakings is attached in Annexure
A to this decision. I am satisfied that the effect of accepting the Undertakings
is not likely to:
(a) cause financial detriment to any employee covered by the
Agreement; or
(b) result in substantial changes to the Agreement.
The views of each person who the Fair Work Commission knows is a
bargaining representative for the Agreement have been sought in relation
Undertakings.
Pursuant to subsection 190(3) of the Act, I accept the Undertakings.
The Undertakings are taken to be a term of the Agreement.
Subject to the Undertakings, I am satisfied that each of the
requirements of sections 186, 187, 188 and 190 of the Act as are relevant
this application for approval have been met.
The Agreement is approved and, in accordance with section 54 of the
Act, will operate from 19 November 2025. The nominal expiry date
Agreement is 30 September 2028.
Variation application
An application was also made pursuant to s 218A of the Act to vary
the Agreement to correct or amend an obvious error, defect or irregularity
the Agreement.
The Applicant submits that the Agreement contains an obvious error,
defect or irregularity, the details of which are set out and considered
Statutory Provisions
Section 218A, which came into effect on 7 December 2022 as part of
the reforms contained within the
Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Secure
Jobs, Better Pay) Bill 2022
, provides for the variation of an enterprise
agreement to correct or amend an obvious error, defect or irregularity and
provides as follows:
(1) The FWC may vary an enterprise agreement to correct or
amend an obvious error, defect or irregularity (whether in substance or
(2) The FWC may vary an enterprise agreement under subsection (1);
(a) on its own initiative; or
(b) on application by any of the following:
(i) one or more of the employers covered by the agreement;
(ii) an employee covered by the agreement;
(iii) an employee organisation covered by the agreement.
(3) If the FWC varies an enterprise agreement under subsection (1), the
variation operates from the day specified in the decision
to vary the agreement.
The Explanatory Memorandum (
) that supports the
above-referred Bill relevantly states as follows:
772. This part would remove unnecessary complexity in the
agreement-making process by amending the FW Act to:
• simplify the process for correcting any obvious errors, defects or
irregularities in enterprise agreements; and
• provide a simple remedy to address the situation where the wrong
version of an enterprise agreement or variation has been
inadvertently submitted
to, and approved by, the FWC.
Consideration
The Applicant seeks to vary the contents page of the Agreement so
that the references to clause 10 of the Agreement as contained at
various points
within clause 10 read “10” instead of “Error! Reference source
not found.”. The Applicant
submits that this is an obvious error which
occurred during the conversion of the Agreement from a Microsoft Word document
As Deputy President Masson sets out in
Doctors in Training
(Victorian Public Health Sector) (AMA Victoria/ASMOF) (Single Interest
Employers) Enterprise Agreement 2022-2026
[9] It is apparent from the text of s. 218A and the supporting
EM that s. 218A is intended to overcome the statutory limitation
s.602 of the Act that was most recently identified by the Full Bench in
Advantaged Care Pty Ltd v Health Services
(Advantaged
Care). In that decision the Full Bench confirmed that the Commission could not
amend the text of an agreement to correct
an obvious error, defect or
irregularity pursuant to s. 602 of the Act and that other provisions within the
Act, ss. 210 or 217,
might be used to rectify such error, defect or
irregularity.
[10] There are limitations to the use of ss. 210 and 217 of the Act in
varying an agreement to address an obvious error, defect or
irregularity. For
example, it may be considered costly and impractical to conduct a ballot of
employees for the purpose of obtaining
approval for the variation of an
agreement pursuant to s. 210 of the Act, where the variation sought is not
substantive. Section
217 might also not be amenable to correcting an obvious
error, defect or irregularity where the error does not create uncertainty
ambiguity. It is accepted that s. 218A confers an additional discretion for the
Commission to amend an error, defect, or irregularity
in an agreement, be that
in form or substance.
In the present case the contended errors are the failure to
accurately refer to clause 10 at various places within that clause in
The errors were not identified until after the voting process was
completed and are clearly errors of substance and omission.
For the reasons advanced by the Applicant and as set out above, I am
satisfied that the errors in the Agreement are obvious errors
within the meaning
of s 218A(1) of the Act. I am further satisfied that the application to vary the
Agreement has been made by an
employer covered by the Agreement, thus satisfying
the requirements of s 218A(2)(b)(i) of the Act. Having regard to all the
circumstances,
I am satisfied that it is appropriate to exercise my discretion
to vary the Agreement to correct the obvious errors identified by
The variation sought will operate from 19 November 2025. An order
giving effect to this decision will be separately issued.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<AE531092 PR793663>
RTF format (5.87 MB)
Signed PDF/A format