Chang & Song [2021] FamCA 652 (26 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Chang & Song
[2021] FamCA 652
File number(s):
SYC 4261 of 2018
Judgment of:
HENDERSON J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PRACTICE AND PRODUCE
–Urgency not established- adjournment granted
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v
[2006] HCA 46
[2006] 227 CLR 57
In the Marriage of Sieling
[1979] FamCA 23
(1979) 4 Fam LR 713
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr McInerney SC
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr Campton SC
Solicitor for the Second, Third and Fourth Respondents:
SYC 4261 of 2018
First Respondent
Second Respondent
(and another named in the
Third Respondent
HENDERSON J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The adjournment application made by the wife and supported by the second,
third and fourth respondents is granted.
2. This matter will be allocated a hearing date of 2 days on a date to be
fixed after the new listing arrangements are settled.
3. Within 2 weeks from the date of these orders, the husband file and serve a
consolidated affidavit together with an affidavit setting
out his financial
circumstances, in accordance with the rules, upon which he intends to rely.
4. Within 7 weeks from the date of these orders, the wife file and serve an
affidavit in response together with affidavit setting
out her financial
circumstances, in accordance with the rules, upon which she intends to rely.
5. Within 9 weeks from the date of these orders, the second, third and fourth
respondents file and serve an affidavit in response,
in accordance with the
rules, upon which they intend to rely.
6. Within 11 weeks from the date of these orders, the husband file and serve
any documents in reply upon which he intends to rely.
7. Liberty be granted to the parties to issue as many subpoena as deemed
appropriate
8. Each party’s costs of today be reserved.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to
Family Law Rules 2004
Section 121
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in very
limited circumstances, to publish proceedings that identify persons, associated
or witnesses involved in family law proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Chang & Song
has been approved pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
EX-TEMPORE REASONS FOR
1 In the matter of Chang & Song. I know I’m pronouncing those names
incorrectly, and I apologise at the outset.
2 This is an application by the husband for urgent injunctions on the basis
of what he said was urgency and that the Court should
move quickly. The wife and
the second to fourth respondents dispute the urgency and seek an adjournment of
the application so that
they can properly plead in a fulsome manner the matters
they say are essential for Court to be cognisant of in making orders.
3 The matter was only listed on 18 August for hearing today and has come on
quickly on the basis of the assertion by the husband of
4 The husband filed an application in a case and two affidavits on 16 August
2021 and 26 August 2021.
5 A case outline on 25 August 2021.
6 The wife filed a response and an affidavit on 25 August 2018.
7 A case outline on 25 August 2021.
8 The second to fourth respondents filed a case outline on 26 August 2021 and
relied on the affidavit of the wife.
9 Mr McInerney, senior counsel, represented the husband, Mr Campton, senior
counsel, the wife, and Mr Gray, solicitor, the second
to fourth respondents.
10 This is a complicated matter, and I have no intention today of going
through all the issues in the long and convoluted chronology.
concerns property only, involves businesses, trusts, shareholdings and real
estate. The matter involves not just the
husband and wife. It involves the
wife’s parents, potentially the husband’s parents, and various third
parties who have
nothing to do with the marriage, but are business partners
involved in these extensive companies, groups, trusts, holdings and the
The husband seeks what I can only describe as an extraordinary raft of
injunctive and other orders against the wife and the
second to fourth
respondents.
11 He seeks the wife be restrained from selling, transferring, assigning,
encumbering, alienating shares in any entities she has an
interest in being, K
Pty Ltd, L Pty Ltd, M Pty Ltd and all the properties that she has an interest in
at, Suburb C, Suburb N, Suburb
Q, Suburb O, Suburb P, Suburb R; S Street,
Sydney; T Street, Suburb V, and seeks that the wife be restrained from resigning
any office she holds in any of the companies aforementioned.
12 In relation to the second respondent, which is the trust company E
Proprietary Limited, the husband seeks restraints from, selling,
transferring,
assigning, et cetera, interests or shares that they have in seven entities: K
Pty Limited, M Pty Ltd, U1 Proprietary
Limited, U2 Pty Ltd, U3 Pty Ltd, U4 Pty
Ltd, or in dealing with their interests in the properties at Suburb O, Suburb P
13 That the wife, second and the fourth respondents, who are her parents, be
restrained from doing any act or thing which causes or
authorises a sale,
transfer, assignment or apportionment of the rights of K Pty Ltd (KPL) to the
master franchise agreement, a very
important document. The KPL group or company
as it is referred to, is part of the W Company franchise which sells those type
of products
in various locations in Sydney. That franchise, I am told by the
wife in her affidavit, is coming up for renewal in January 2022
and negotiations
are under way in respect of that renewal. That document is not before me.
14 Further that the wife, the third and fourth respondents be restrained from
dealing with properties at S Street, Sydney, and Suburb
15 That the third respondent be restrained from exercising an asserted power
or appointment to place the second respondent as the
trustee of the E Family
Trust, or voting in favour of this happening.
16 That the wife, and fourth respondent be similarly restrained.
17 That there be a restraint in the ordinary course of business of declaring
a dividend which exceeds $250,000 per financial year,
a restraint on loans to
directors et al., a restraint in any increase in salary and wages, any sale of
stock to franchisees other
than in accordance with the agreement, unless and
pursuant to orders 13 through to 15, the husband seeks to be appointed as a
director or to have some involvement in the day to-day running of these
various groups and entities aforementioned. An extraordinary
raft of orders
18 The main business stems from the operation of the W Company franchise
which is operated by KPL, and I will just use that form of
letters at the
19 This company is run and controlled by a trust, and this company and the
many various other companies involving the wife and the
wife’s parents and
third parties, is a very complicated structure. A web, you might call it.
20 The husband asserts urgency because he asserts the wife and second to
fourth respondents are depleting the asset pool of the parties,
including the
businesses of KPL, and thus the value of the E Trust, which appears at first
blush to be the trust at the centre of
these complex business and company
structures. He says on 2 July 2021 that he was advised by the
who is valuing this group of companies, which
valuation hopefully will be ready in two to three weeks, that KPL no longer
stores in Suburb V, Suburb BB and Suburb DD and that another franchisee
had taken over the operation of those stores or shops.
21 Secondly, that the W Company group had not yet accepted a renewal of the
existing franchise, which end date is in January 2022.
This is referred to as
the master franchise agreement. That for these reasons there was significant
urgency to minimise what he said
was a depletion of potentially the matrimonial
22 As I read his material and despite the plethora of orders and his
extensive affidavit, this is the only aspect of the matter as
pleaded by the
husband which contains any hint of some urgent requirement by a court to
intervene or in some way interpose in the
day-to-day business and operation of a
hitherto successful company – or group of companies. I also note the
husband has not
been involved for over four years in the running of these
businesses. I accept that some, or perhaps many, of the assets contained
this group, or the wealth-generating assets in the group, are well capable of
being regarded as matrimonial property. The
husband asserts a value of some 70
million. However, I cannot accept that mere assertion and a valuation of this
web and the value
of the companies and the wealth-creating assets in the
companies will be provided in two or three weeks by a registered valuer.
has been a tortuous process itself. It appears this process started in 2019,
and we are towards the end of 2021, thus one can
see the complexity here.
23 There is no other evidence that I can see in the husband’s material
of a recent nature pleaded by him that the wife is intending
to sell or deal
with in any way her extensive property portfolio. That the wife or second and
fourth respondents are not actively
applying and entering into negotiations to
renew the master franchise or have not continued to conduct the business
profitably.
In fact, one of the husband’s assertion is the wife earns
significant income. Rather, his assertion is a depletion or potential
of the matrimonial pool based upon the letter of 2 July 2021, to which I will
later refer. There may well be issues that
need addressing on an interim basis.
However, the wife has just had a baby, and the second and fourth respondents,
who are not parties
to the marriage, need time, as does the wife, to respond
fulsomely to the myriad of assertions and allegations made by the husband
24 The husband proffered an undertaking in support of his injunctions.
However, I am not satisfied on his material as filed he can
make good that
undertaking if by any injunction I make now I will interfere with or stop or
hinder in some way the wife and second
to fourth respondents from running,
managing, conducting their businesses, and perhaps most importantly, interfere
with the franchise
negotiations. There is some reference to that concern in the
fourth respondent’s material.
25 The injunctions sought by the husband cast a very wide net, and I have not
referred to all the orders. For example, he seeks from
paragraph, 7 to about
paragraph 14 of his minute of orders, that he in some way have some control or
overarching control over how
the business is conducted in regard to the
information he requires the wife and second to fourth respondent provide him on
basis. This is sought in circumstances where the husband has not had
any involvement with the day to day operation of this business
for at least four
years and there is a factual dispute about his involvement prior to that
26 The information regarding the U Company stores at Suburb DD, Suburb BB and
Suburb V no longer being operated by KPL was only received,
the husband tells
me, from a letter dated 2 July 2021. However, that horse has bolted because the
letter is clear these events have
happened and are in the past. These events
are not a prospective thing; it has happened. KPL no longer operates those
27 The husband may have become concerned, but without a fully pleaded
response by the wife and second to fourth respondents, I do
not see urgency now
as it is clear franchise negotiations are ongoing, something the husband seeks
to continue, and for a Court to
restrict third parties to a marriage to
negotiate ongoing businesses arrangements, run ongoing businesses, deal with the
operation of business should only be undertaken in the most extreme
of circumstances, and the husband has not, on the evidence, made
out a prima
facie case that I would act in this matter on an urgent basis.
28 It is imperative that the Court have available to it the best possible
evidence to enable a just, equitable and appropriate decision
to be made on an
interim basis and the husband does not really know about the day-to-day running
of this business, where negotiations
are at, and, for example, as Mr Campton SC
submitted, at minimum, I might need to see this master franchise agreement or
might need to see it so she can make her submissions on what is
happening. There needs to be evidence, as Mr Campton SC submitted,
chief financial controller of these various companies setting out what it would
mean for a Court to make the orders sought
by the husband, for example he being
provided with bank statements of various bank accounts each seven days
29 As stated in
In the Marriage of Sieling
[1979] FamCA 23
(1979) 4 Fam LR 713
the injunctive power must not be exercised lightly, and this is particularly so
where, as here, third parties’ interests and
rights are also involved. I
must be cautious. As provided in Mr McInerney SC’s case outline, in the
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v O’Neill
[2006] HCA 46
, a prima facie case need not show it is more probable than not something
will occur or be made out. It is sufficient to show a likelihood
of success to
justify the preservation of the status quo. That is the very fact in issue
30 The husband has not made out a prima facie case that he is justified in
preservation of a status quo because, quite frankly, I
don’t know what the
status quo is at this stage. That is something that the wife and second to
fourth respondents will, no
doubt, flesh out and provide to the Court in their
affidavits. The husband does not have any knowledge of or involvement in the
running of the business.
31 Further, I am concerned regarding the husband’s case and his
presentation of his case for the following.
32 He continues to assert he is not a beneficiary under the E Trust deed, yet
in their defence filed in these proceedings, the second
to fourth respondents
admit he is and admitted the same again in their case outline, and thus I must
act cautiously on his one side
of the story, which is effectively what I have
33 Importantly, the value of this web of businesses, if I can use that
description, will be known in two to three weeks when the valuation
is provided,
and this is also a crucial piece of information, not only for the parties, but
also for the Court in making a decision
a party asks the Court to make. In
those circumstances, the adjournment of this urgent application is granted.
I certify that the preceding thirty-three (33)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the ex tempore Reasons for Judgment of
the Honourable
Dated: 26 August 2021
SYC 4261 of
Respondents
Fourth Respondent:
RTF format (329 KB)
Signed PDF/A format