Gadsen & Madray [2021] FCCA 2181 (31 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Gadsen & Madray
[2021] FCCA
File number:
MLC 4211 of 2021
Judgment of:
JUDGE O'SHANNESSY
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– interim parenting and
property – live with and spend time arrangements with the child –
equal time – property
injunction sought and refused – orders made.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Evidence Act 1995
Cases cited:
Goode & Goode
(2006) FLC 93-286
Lindon v Commonwealth (No. 2)
[1996] HCA 14
(1996) 70 ALJR 541
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr J Mellas
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Leanne Cain & Associates
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Davison Family Lawyers
MLC 4211 of 2021
JUDGE O'SHANNESSY
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
BY CONSENT:
Parenting Orders
1. The parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the child X born
in 2015 ("the child").
BY THE COURT:
Living arrangements
2. The child live with each parent on a week-about basis.
3. During school terms, on Tuesday nights the child spend the night with the
parent with whom the child is not living with that week
and at such other times
as agreed by the parties in writing.
4. The parent with whom the child lives each week facilitate daily telephone
each night via Google
5. The changeovers take place as follows:
(a) Each Friday at the conclusion of school at school on school days or at
6.00pm if a non-school day at the home of the parent whose
time with the child
(b) Each Tuesday at the conclusion of school at school on school days or at
6.00pm on a non-school day at the home of the parent
with whom the child is
living with that week;
(c) Each Wednesday by taking the child to school on school days or at 9.00am on
a non-school day at the home of the parent with whom
the child is living with
BY CONSENT:
6. Where changeover occurs at the parents' respective residences, upon
delivery of the child at changeover, each parent is to ensure
that the child has
with him all personal belongings, sporting equipment, uniforms and homework
required by the child for the proceeding
time arrangements with the other
7. Where changeover occurs at the child's school, the delivering parent is to
ensure that the child's personal belongings, sporting
equipment, uniforms and
delivered to the other parent's residence
on the day of changeover.
8. The arrangement in paragraph 3 be suspended during 30 days commencing
7.00pm on 24 December each year until 3.00pm on 23 January
9. If either parent is unable to care for the child overnight the other
parent have first right of refusal to care for the child.
BY THE COURT:
Long summer school holidays
10. During the 2021/2022 long summer school holidays the child spend time
with each parent as follows:
(a) With the Respondent from 3.00pm on Boxing Day 2021 until 3.00pm on 9 January
(b) With the Applicant from 3.00pm on 9 January 2022 until 3.00pm on 23 January
Special occasions
11. The child spend time with each parent on special occasions as
(a) For Christmas 2021:
(i) with the Applicant from 7.00pm on Christmas Eve until 3.00pm on Christmas
(ii) with the Respondent from 3.00pm on Christmas Day until 3.00pm on Boxing
(b) For Easter 2022:
(i) with the Respondent from 5.00pm Easter Thursday until 5.00pm on Easter
Saturday; and
(ii) with the Applicant from 5.00pm on Easter Saturday until 5.00pm Easter
and otherwise in accordance with order 2 herein.
BY CONSENT:
(c) On the child's birthday, with the parent the child is not scheduled to live
with that week for 4 hours at a time as agreed by
the parents and failing
agreement from the conclusion of school if school day until 7.00pm on the same
day and if the birthday falls
on a non-school day from 3.00pm until 7.00pm the
(d) On the child's half-sister Y’s birthday, with the Respondent from the
conclusion of school if school day until 7.00pm on
the same day and if Y's
birthday falls on a non-school day from 9.00am until 7.00pm the same day;
(e) On each parent's birthday, if the birthday is on a day the child is not
scheduled to live with that parent from the conclusion
of school if school day
until 7.00pm the same day or if non-school day from 10.00am until 7.00pm the
(f) On Mother's Day, with the Respondent from 5.00pm on the Saturday preceding
Mother's Day until 5.00pm on Mother's Day if the child
is not scheduled to live
with the Respondent than week;
(g) On Father's Day, with the Applicant from 5.00pm on the Saturday preceding
Father's Day until 5.00pm on Father's Day if the child
is not scheduled to live
with the Applicant that week.
12. The child continue to be enrolled at school at B School, Town C or such
other school as the parents may agree in writing.
13. Each parent be permitted to travel outside the State of Victoria with the
child while the child is in that parent's care.
14. The parent intending to take the child outside the State of Victoria
during his/her time with the child:
(a) must provide the other parent with a minimum of 72 hours' written notice or
any lesser period agreed to between the parents;
(b) must, prior to leaving home, provide the other parent with details of where
the child will be staying and when he will be returning
Miscellaneous
15. The parents each notify the other and provide particulars of any changes
to their telephone numbers, email addresses or residential
addresses within 24
hours of said change.
BY CONSENT AND UNTIL FURTHER ORDER:
Financial Orders
16. That the Applicant:
(a) Make all such payments as may be required to D Finance with respect to the E
Motor vehicle registration number ... ('the E Motor
Vehicle') until such finance
has been paid out and discharged in full and thereafter do all such acts and
things and sign all such
documents as may be required to transfer to the
Respondent at the expense of the Respondent the said motor vehicle; and
(b) Until further order make all other payments in respect of the E Motor
Vehicle including registration, insurance and roadside
assistance.
17. That the Applicant pay to the Respondent the sum of $550 per week, in
lieu of any assessed child support, by way of payment directly
into a bank
account as nominated by the Respondent.
18. That pending settlement of the sale of F Street, Town C the Applicant
(a) $250 per week to mortgage loan account number ...70; and
(b) the GO Mastercard instalments.
19. That upon discharge of the mortgage referred to in paragraph 18(a) of
these Orders the Applicant forthwith pay to the Respondent
periodic spousal
maintenance in the sum of $250 per week by way of payment directly into a bank
account as nominated by the Respondent.
20. That the Applicant continue to pay:
(a) Private health insurance at the current level and family rate for the
Respondent, the child X ('X') and Y ('Y') and for that
purpose the Applicant
shall provide the Respondent with up to date statements for that health
insurance policy as may be requested
from time to time by the Respondent;
(b) X's tuition fees for the B School in Town C plus uniform expenses; and
(c) Y's tuition fees for the G School in City H.
BY THE COURT:
21. That notwithstanding paragraph 10 of the Orders of 29 July 2021 the
Respondent be permitted to borrow up to $60,000.00 secured
against the property
at J Street, Town C, for the purposes of funding her legal fees associated with
this litigation.
Trial Directions:
22. The proceedings be adjourned to
for Final Hearing (with an estimated hearing time of
days), subject to
the court, if able, listing the matter for an earlier final hearing in the
circumstances of the amalgamation of
the Federal Circuit Court and Family Court.
23. The matter may be listed for a compliance mention by telephone
approximately 1 week prior to the final hearing in the event that
the compliance
email check that the parties will be sent is not completed or if a party
requests such compliance mention.
24. The party responsible for the payment of any fee including a setting down
or hearing fee pay or cause to be paid such of the fees
as shall be payable by
that party in accordance with, and within the time specified in, the
(Fees) Regulation 2012
25. No later than 21 days prior to the trial date, the Applicant file and
(a) any Amended Initiating Application setting out with particularity the
precise final orders sought;
(b) an updated single consolidated trial affidavit;
(c) other witness affidavits upon which they intend to rely; and
(d) in property proceedings, an updated Financial Statement.
26. No later than 14 days prior to the trial date, the Respondent file and
(a) any Amended Response setting out with particularity the precise final orders
(b) an updated single consolidated trial affidavit;
(c) other witness affidavits upon which they intend to rely; and
(d) in property proceedings, an updated Financial Statement.
27. No later than 7 days prior to the trial date:
(a) the Applicant file and serve any affidavit(s) in reply addressing only the
evidence presented in the Respondent(s)' affidavits;
28. No later than 2 days prior to the trial date, all parties are to file and
serve a case outline document in the approved form which
shall not, without
leave, exceed 5 pages in respect of parenting issues and 5 pages in respect of
financial issues and shall include:
(a) a list of the material relied upon;
(b) a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the
issues to be determined by the Court;
(c) in a parenting case, a summary of contentions as to section 60CC factors
relied upon to satisfy the Court that it is the best
interests of the child(ren)
to make the orders sought;
(d) in a property case, a table listing all of the assets, liabilities and
financial resources claimed to be relevant to the dispute,
with the values
contended for by each party and the main contentions on disputes as to:
the assets and
liabilities available for division;
the value of
items where the value is in dispute;
contributions
claimed or contended for and the percentage-based adjustment on contributions
contended for;
relevant s 75(2)
/ 90SF(3) factors and the percentage-based adjustment contended for; and
any further
factors relevant to determining a 'just and equitable' division of property.
29. Lists of authorities which Counsel intend to cite to the Court during the
presentation of any argument, together with copies of
any unreported decisions
to which it is intended that reference shall be made, should be filed and served
not later than two days
prior to the hearing.
30. Each party will be permitted to rely on one consolidated trial affidavit
and one affidavit in reply (if applicable) only. Reliance
on earlier or
additional affidavits will not be permitted.
31. All documents required to be filed and all other documents sought to be
relied upon (including any court books) must be filed
or provided (as
applicable) in electronic format to the Court and to each other party.
AND THE COURT NOTES THAT:
agreed by the parties that the financial support in these orders include
periodic and non-periodic child support and that neither
party will seek a
formal child support assessment
Family Law Act 1975
the particulars of the
obligations these orders create and the particulars of the consequences that may
follow if a person contravenes
these orders are set out in Annexure A and these
particulars are included in these orders.
in any proceedings there are allegations of family violence and the provisions
section 102NA
Family Law Act 1975
apply (see attached Family Violence
Information Sheet), any unrepresented party will not be permitted to personally
cross-examine
the other party/parties.
unrepresented parties may apply to the Commonwealth Family Violence and
Cross-Examination of Parties Scheme ("the Scheme")
for representation but any
such application must be made at least 12 weeks prior to the final hearing.
information about the legislation and the Scheme can be found at
attached Family Violence Information Sheet.
applies and a party becomes unrepresented after trial directions have
been made, that party is required to promptly advise the
Section 121
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to
publish proceedings that identify persons, associated persons,
or witnesses
involved in family law proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment under the pseudonym
Gadsen & Madray
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
JUDGE O’SHANNESSY
1 These are the settled ex tempore reasons delivered
on 31 August 2021. In this matter, the parties wished me to decide the living
arrangements until further order (that is on an interim basis) for the child, X
(“the child”) who is aged five and will
turn six this year. The
father, Mr Gadsen, (“the Father”) is aged 54 and the mother, Ms
Madray, (“the Mother”)
is aged 47.
2 The date the parties commenced to live together is disputed and could be
and the precise date of
the commencement of their cohabitation does not matter for the purposes of these
reasons and the decision
I have made. I have indicated to the parties in
broad terms the general form of the orders that I will make, which is that the
arrangement of alternate weeks, with the Tuesday night being with the
other parent, will continue until further order. I can also
indicate that it is
agreed that the telephone time should be between 7.00pm and 7.30pm.
3 The Mother relied upon a number of affidavits and the settled reasons will
set out those documents from the Mother's list of documents
relied upon:
1. Affidavit of [the Mother] filed on 25 May 2021
(Parenting matters);
2. Affidavit of [the Mother] filed on 25 May 2021 (Financial matters);
3. Financial Statement of [the Mother] filed on 25 May 2021;
4. Affidavit of [the Mother] filed on 8 July 2021;
5. Affidavit of Mr K filed on 18 August 2021; and
6. Affidavit of [the Mother] filed on 30 August 2021.
4 The Father relied upon a number of documents and the settled reasons will
set out the Father's list of documents relied upon:
1. Initiating Application filed 16 April 2021;
2. Affidavit of [the Father] sworn and filed 16 April ;
3. Notice of Child Abuse, Family Violence or Risk filed 16 April 2021;
4. Orders made 17 June;
5. Amended Initiating Application filed 7 July 2021;
6. Financial Statement of [the Father] sworn and filed 7 July 2021;
7. Affidavit of [the Father] sworn and filed 8 July 2021;
8. Orders made 9 July 2021;
9. Orders made 29 July 2021;
10. Further Initiating Application filed 3 August 2021;
11. Affidavit of Mr K sworn 17 August 2021;
12. Affidavit of [the Father] sworn and filed 26 August 2021.
5 In addition, the Father relied upon, for purposes of the current
controversy, documents in what I will call a tender bundle from
pages 2 to 28,
which included an email from the Mother to the Father; an email from a mediator
to the parties and invoices from a
nanny retained by the Father for the period
from 5 February 2021 to 28 August 2021.
6 The Father sought the continuation of an arrangement that has been in place
since August last year (2020), with the parents having
alternate weeks but on a
Tuesday night the child returning to the care of the other parent. The parties
disagreed about Christmas
and school holidays arrangements; notwithstanding that
they broadly agreed that school holidays would be shared.
7 Each party sought, in this coming year, to have from Christmas Eve until
Christmas morning, and to have the period from Boxing Day
until round about 9
January; in other words, the first part of the school holidays.
8 I will just deal briefly with the Christmas arrangement. It is unfortunate
that a Judge needs to decide where the child is on Christmas
morning in a
dispute between two highly intelligent, highly educated and high achieving
parents, but that is my job to do that as
best I can on the information I
9 The child is very fortunate to have such highly educated and high achieving
parents as an example and role model to him in his life,
and he has the further
advantage that they live very close, or relatively close by, in the city of Town
C: a significant and thriving
city and some regard it as a cultural lynchpin to
central Victoria. It has been described as a small country town; but that, of
course, depends where you come from. If you grew up in Melbourne or Sydney, you
may to think that Town C is a small county town.
In fact, it is a city with all
the advantages of a regional city and the child is very lucky to have those
advantages.
10 The child has another advantage, he has an older sister, Y (“the
sister”), who is 10 years old, who lives with the
Mother and spends
alternate weekends with her Father. The child is able to attend school nearby
to where the parties live and his
sister attends a private school in a not too
distant different regional city, where she travels to and from school by school
11 The Mother's application sought a significant change from the arrangements
that have been in place for some time, and she sought
to change the week-about
minus the Tuesday arrangement to an arrangement of the child spending alternate
weekends, from the conclusion
of school on Friday until 5:00pm the following
Sunday, and each Tuesday from the conclusion of school to 6:00pm, save that if
Father could demonstrate that he was not required to work on the following
Wednesday morning, then that Tuesday could be until the
commencement of school
on Wednesday. In other words, depending on the Father's work, two nights per
fortnight or three nights per
fortnight. In addition, the Mother sought the
Christmas time be from 22 December until a day 15 days later and the child
her for the whole of that Christmas period.
12 The recent history of Christmas is that, for the Christmas of 2019, the
child was with the Father for the whole of the Christmas
when he travelled to
Adelaide by himself with the child. The following Christmas in 2020,
shortly before the parties separated,
the parties shared that Christmas Day and
the issue is how should Christmas Day continue.
13 Balancing all those things as best I can and acknowledging how important
Christmas Day is, particularly to the parents, (I note
I have yet to meet a
child that objects to two birthday parties on two different days or two
Christmas celebrations on different
days), but acknowledging how important that
is for the parents and that the parents live reasonably close together, it
me practical that they share Christmas Day on an alternating basis.
14 I now consider the extra special time during the school holidays, when
most people are on holidays in normal non-COVID-19 times.
From Christmas Eve
until early in the New Year, in the circumstances where the Father had that time
last when it was not shared,
the Mother should have that this time, albeit the
Father only had part of the Christmas time in 2019. Such is the manner by which
I have to determine Christmas Day.
15 I am endeavouring to follow the law in
Goode & Goode
Goode & Goode
”) and the settled reasons will
refer to paragraphs 73 and 81 and 82 of
Goode & Goode
those paragraphs:
[73] That is not to say that stability derived from a
well-settled arrangement may not ultimately be what the Court finds to be in
child’s best interests, particularly where there is no ability to test
controversial evidence, but that decision would
be arrived at after a
consideration of the matters contained in
, particularly
s 60CC(3)(d)
s 60CC(3)(m)
and, if appropriate,
s 60CC(4A).
[81] In making interim decisions the Court will still often be faced with
conflicting facts, little helpful evidence and disputes
between the parents as
to what constitutes the best interests of the child. However, the legislative
pathway must be followed.
[82] In an interim case that would involve the following:
(a) identifying the competing proposals of the parties;
(b) identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing;
(c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts;
(d) considering the matters in
that are relevant and, if possible, making
findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested
evidence to
enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take
(e) deciding whether the presumption in
that equal shared parental
responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply
because there are reasonable
grounds to believe there has been abuse of the
child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the Court does not consider
appropriate to apply the presumption;
(f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because
application of it would not be in the child’s best
(g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order
that the child spend equal time with the parents
unless it is contrary to the
child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the
, or impracticable;
(h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests,
considering making an order that the child spend substantial
and significant
time as defined in
with the parents, unless contrary to the
child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the
, or impracticable;
(i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to
be in the best interests of the child, then making
such orders in the discretion
of the Court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of
consideration of one or more
of the matters in
(j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as
is in the best interests of the child, as a result
of consideration of one or
more of the matters in
(k) even then the Court may need to consider equal time or substantial and
significant time, especially if one of the parties has
sought it or, even if
neither has sought it, if the Court considers after affording procedural
fairness to the parties it to be in
the best interests of the
16 In this case, I determine the living arrangements for the child based on
what I regard as his best interests as being the paramount
consideration. When
determining what is in the child’s best interests, the primary
considerations are the benefit to the child
of having a meaningful relationship
with both of the child's parents and the need to protect the child from physical
or psychological
harm or from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect,
or family violence. In applying those two considerations, I must give
weight to the protective concern of the second primary consideration. I must
also take into account the matters under
section 60CC
and I will come to those
in a moment.
17 I need to identify next, the agreed or uncontested relevant facts. I had
the advantage in this hearing of having been provided
with a detailed chronology
in a document described as an Outline of Case. Each of the parties' counsel
humoured me as they were
taken laboriously through that document to identify
which were disputed and which were controversial. In dealing with the
facts, it appears to me that the undisputed facts are that the child
has a good relationship with his Mother and his Father and his
18 At around September 2016 when the child was 10 months old, he started to
attend day care and was attending two to three days per
week at that time. By
February 2017, he was regularly attending child care three days per week. By
2018, the child was attending
child care five days per week and by March 2019,
the child moved from attending day care on five days per week to four days per
19 It is agreed that the parties agreed to separate on a final basis in April
2020 and that, in April 2020, they agreed that the child
would live equal time
with them. Notwithstanding that agreement, it is common ground that on 19 May
2020, the Mother emailed to
the Father an email that I will set out in a moment.
But the context to that email is that the Mother (consistent with her high
background and personality) was very busy in May 2020: she was
working on a development of real estate, attempting to study and
attempting to
establish a practice, in addition to caring for the sister and the child. She
stated in that email the following:
As you know, I'm keen to get back to work ASAP.
I’m unable to implement any plan for this unless you agree to take on a
even share of X's care. Even though you’ve said you’re willing
to take 50%, I’m still shouldering at least 80%
of the load. This
includes both non-kinder days and most drop-offs and pick-ups. Your share
cannot simply be done on weekends.
You need to take more responsibility during
weekdays as well...
20 The agreed circumstance is that the Father's work was the practice of a
legal professional and the Mother's intended work was the
practice of a legal
professional, as well as a builder and property developer, as well as intending
to complete health professional
21 It is common ground that, following that email, the parties put in place a
5/5/2/2 arrangement and that this arrangement was in
place until August 2020.
In August 2020, the parties agreed to change the 5/5/2/2 arrangement to a
week-about arrangement, with
the Tuesday being with the other parent 7/7 minus
Tuesdays. Notwithstanding that commenced in August 2020, it is common ground
by late October 2020, the Mother had raised with the Father the issue of
whether the 7/7 minus the Tuesdays was working for the child
22 A theme in the Father's material is that he regards these communications
as threats to reduce his time, and the Mother's theme
is that she regards these
as realistic expressions of unhappiness with how the current arrangement was
working. I am unable to determine
at an interim hearing which parental opinion
is correct. But it is a fact that from at least October 2020 the current
arrangement
was complained of by the Mother.
23 It is then common ground that the parties attended mediation on 17
December 2020 in a mediation with a solicitor, mediator and
experienced family
law practitioner. What the parties agreed that day is agreed, and it's set out
in an email from the mediator
to the parties and the settled reasons will recite
that email:
Dear [Mother] and [Father]
Thank you for participating in family dispute resolution today.
To follow is a summary of your agreement:
1. [the child] to live with [the Mother] in each alternate week and [the Father]
in each alternate week.
2. The forthcoming summer school holidays to be shared equally as agreed.
3. School holidays thereafter to be shared equally at dates and times to be
4. Special occasions be shared equally at dates and times to be agreed.
5. [the Mother] and [the Father] forthwith sign all documents necessary to enrol
[the child] in B Primary School in Town C, commencing
prep in 2021.
6. That commencing term 1, 2021 an agreed babysitter care for X from the
conclusion of school to approximately 5:30pm (and [the sister]
from 4:30 to
5:30pm in each alternate week when [the child] and [the sister] live with [the
Mother]), the cost to be met by solely
[the Father] (not to be credited against
any other child support and /or spousal maintenance currently paid to [the
Mother] by [the
Father]) to be reviewed at the end of term 4, 2022.
7. In the event of dispute and upon the written request of [the Mother] and/or
[the Father], [the Mother] and [the Father] attend
Family Dispute Resolution
8. The parenting arrangement to be confirmed by way of a Parenting Plan at [the
Father’s] expense.
9. The babysitter payment arrangement be confirmed by way of a Binding Child
Support Agreement at [the Father’s] expense.
24 What is in dispute around that email is the context that surrounded it.
The Mother's position is that the primary focus of that
mediation was resolving
the stalemate the parties had relating to which school the child would attend
and that the week-about arrangement
received less attention. Although she agreed
to the continuation of the existing arrangement, it was on the basis that that
be reviewed further or later. The Father sees that as a concluded
25 There was a second mediation with the same mediator in February 2021, and
the Father commenced proceedings in April 2021. The
parties attended Mr K, an
experienced psychologist and psychologist who has worked for some 30-odd years
in family law.
26 The other matter that needs to be added to the chronology of agreed facts
is, in the December 2020 agreement, it was agreed that
the Father would pay for
the nanny that he was using of an evening
and that nanny
available for the Mother to utilise at the Father’s expense. It is common
ground that that commenced in February 2021
and that the Mother continued to use
the services of that nanny until June or July of 2021. By reference to the
practice records
of the nanny which were tendered by the Father, it is clear
that the last time that that nanny worked for or at the direction of
was on 24 June 2021, and that on that occasion the nanny was involved in caring
for the child and his sister until 6.30
pm. There is a controversy between the
parties as to the Mother's motivation in not continuing that arrangement, and it
that the Mother advised the Father that she would not be continuing with
that arrangement after the interviews with Mr K.
27 For the purpose of the hearing with me, nothing turns on when it was the
Mother told the Father that that would not be continuing,
but the clear fact is
that the last occasion was on 24 June 2021. It is not the law that I
apply some sort of a measure of a status
quo. I am required to follow the
requirements of
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (‘the
Act’), sections of which I have referred to above. However, I do note
paragraph 73 of
Goode & Goode
28 I set out the broad arguments and positions of each of the parties. As I
checked with their respective counsel, each party was
content to, by and large,
live with the description of their positions as set out in the very detailed
family report prepared by
the psychologist. The Mother agrees that the position
set out at paragraphs 2, 3, 15, 17, part of 19 and 20, and paragraphs 43 and
(and I infer also part of 48(ii) referring to the child’s sister), set out
with reasonable accuracy a broad description
of her position, and the settled
reasons will include those paragraphs:
[2] From [the Mother’s] perspective, the current
arrangement does not make sense. She explained that at present, for 7 days
14 night cycle, [the child] is cared for by morning and afternoon nannies when
he could otherwise reside with her, and his sister;
the children are separated
on a weekly basis, notwithstanding that she and [the Father] live within very
close physical proximity,
that sees, from her perspective, the absurd situation
that [the Father] is at work and her son is in the care of a child support
[3] [The Mother] is seeking a change to the arrangement such that [the child]
spends time with his father each alternate weekend
and midweek, including
overnight on the condition that the following day, [the Father] is available to
care for him in Town C. In
the alternative, [the Mother] believes that it is in
[the child’s] best interest that he resides with her, that he not be
to the changing care arrangements, and that the parenting time
arrangement reflect the reality of [the Father’s] employment.
[15] [The Mother] noted that [the Father] has always worked long hours, and that
the commute to and from Melbourne means that he
is absent from home for long
periods when [the child] could otherwise be in her care. [The Mother] told me
that it obviously makes
more sense or him to be with her and his sister, and to
not perpetuate an arrangement that sees the children being separated. She
impressed upon me that it was not her intention to deprive [the child] a
relationship with his father, but that the current plan
means that [the child]
is cared for by third parties, as compared to by his direct family. [The Mother]
explained that when she initially
entertained an equal care arrangement that she
has no idea that [the Father] would rely so heavily on nannies and that he would
away from [the child] for such long periods. She told me that she had been
optimistic about the arrangement because [the Father]
had been more available
due to the lockdown restrictions, but now that things have returned to their
previous level, that he leaves
early in the morning and comes home late at
night; it makes no sense to her that [the child’s] care should be
compromised.
[The Mother’s] plan is to be fully available to the children
from 4:30pm; she told me that she has family close by to provide
support and
extra assistance if needed, that she can be there before and after school, and
that way, provide direct ongoing support
to the children.
[17] From [the Mother’s] perspective, the status quo arrangement that
needs to be maintained is the status quo that she has
been [the child’s]
primary carer, that [the child] has lived the majority of his life with his
mother and sister, and that
because of his employment in Melbourne, that [the
Father] has been, historically, a comparatively absent figure, although she
acknowledged
that [the Father] makes an effort, does prioritise [the child] when
he is available, and that he is devoted to his son, although
the reality is that
his time is restricted, that he is limited in what he can do, and that the
burden for the inconvenience caused
falls upon [the child]. [The Mother] told me
that is cannot possibly be good for [the child] to be regularly separated from
his sister,
and she questioned the benefit to them having a childhood so
fragmented is a consequence of [the Father’s] work constraints.
Mother] is concerned that [the Father] cannot place [the child’s] needs
ahead of his own, that he cannot see the obvious
benefits to [the child] of
being more settled, in one place, in the care of a parent, and in the company of
his sister. She told
me that she was concerned that [the Father] continues to
share with others in the community his concerns regarding her mental health,
seems not to recognise the harm that he causes to her by so doing. [The Mother]
told me she finds it both hurtful and upsetting
that she is constantly having to
deal with the social fallout of his ongoing campaign of denigration and
criticism of her and her
family, and that he shows a lack of empathy and
understanding for the impact of his actions upon both her and their co-parenting
relationship. She feels that [the Father] through his actions conveys to her a
lack of respect as a co-parent, does not recognise
the importance to [the child]
of them achieving a more constructive co-parenting relationship, or the extent
to which his continued
negative criticism and attack upon her is an impediment
to them achieving a better outcome.
[19] ... According to [the Mother], [the Father] worked long hours, he was away
every day, he would leave for work early, come back
late, and upon his return he
was negative and critical. She explained how, at any point she expressed
dissatisfaction with the relationship,
that he would immediately attribute this
to her having mental health problems, that her unhappiness and not his behaviour
problem, and so he could never accept responsibility or a contribution
to the relationship difficulties. She told me that they had
no ability to
discuss and negotiate, that [the Father] was unable to acknowledge her
unhappiness, and that at no point could [the
Father] consider her position. From
[the Mother's] perspective, [the Father] was only focused on his own needs,
could give no consideration
to the impact of those needs upon others, and that
the same is true now in relation to [the child] and the parenting time proposals
that he is seeking to have consolidated. It is [the Mother's] concern that [the
Father] is unable to acknowledge that the current
arrangement is burdensome for
[the child], or that it makes obvious sense for [the child] to be with her if
not in the care of his
father, and that his proposal is not sustainable in the
[20] [The Mother] told me that living with [the Father] became intolerable, that
she felt constantly put down and constantly criticised;
she described how for
her, being in the relationship felt terrible, awful and suffocating. She told me
she had been trying to separate
for the 12 months before and that her mental
health certainly did suffer in direct response to the stress of living with [the
but that as a consequence of the separation, and of her having become
independent and having re-established herself personally and
professionally,
that her mental health had improved significantly.
[43] [The Mother's] concerns also have considerable merit. She believes the
current arrangement is excessive, places the burden for
its continuation upon
[the child], that it makes no sense from a developmental perspective, for [the
child] to be cared for by someone
other than one of his parents when one of his
parents is available to care for him. [The Mother] places significantly and
substantial
importance not only upon her role as [the child’s] primary
carer, but on the importance of [the child] and his sister having
uninterrupted and regular stable relationship over the course of their
childhood. It causes to [the Mother] sadness and distress
to think about her
children being separated from each other, on a regular basis, over the course of
their development, and in this
regard, she believes it is essential that they
spend as much time together as possible, and especially so during this age and
of their development, and especially so prior to [the sister’s]
adolescence when her focus will become more outside of the
family. In this
regard she can see an obvious benefit to [the child] spending more time with
her, in the family unit, benefitting
not only from continuity of parental care
but his relationship with his sister and extended family, all of whom live close
an important role in [the child’s] life.
[47] It might well be argued that continuation of the current arrangement, that
is, continuation of the status quo, is the least
uncertain option and best
reflects the observable reality that [the child] is doing well, that he has a
good relationship with both
his parents and that there is a well-established
status quo. However, it is also inescapable that continuation of the status quo
relies on people other than [the child’s] parents to provide care, and
whilst it is true that a great many children utilise
the services of bother
before and after school care, and that there are realities of parental
employment, commitments and other
demands that impact on child care decisions,
what is significantly different in this dispute is that [the Mother] is
available to
care for [the child] before and after school, that she has
immediate family support and lives in dose physical proximity to his school
other activities. In support of her proposal, it could be argued that children
should be cared for as a priority by their parents,
when their parents are
available to do so, and that whilst good enough care and good enough
arrangements can be sustained, that there
should be no confusion between what is
good enough and what is optimal; and according to [the Mother], the optimal
arrangement has
[the child] cared for by his parents, with his time in the care
of both parents maximised when his parents are actually available
to care for
him and especially so if this means that [the child] also maximises the time
with his sister. According to [the Mother],
the sibling relationship is
important, as is reliance upon the trilogy of stability, consistency and
predictability of care.
second option is in favour of the proposal by [the Mother], that [the child]
should be in the care of his father when his father
is actually physically
available to care for him, and whilst handing over key responsibility to third
parties might be good enough
it is not optimal, it is not necessary, and from
her perspective, compromises the overall quality of care available to [the
It is not difficult to be sympathetic to [the Mother’s] concerns,
and it is not difficult to argue that [the child] should
preferentially be in
the care of his parents in favour of care by third parties, and especially when
his mother is available. Whilst
both parents place considerable value on the
importance of their role as [the child’s] primary carer and about the
involvement
they have fulfilled in the life of their son, my observation is that
[the child] treats his parents as interchangeable; there can
be no ignoring the
importance of his relationship with his sister, and that the current arrangement
will see them separated on a
regular basis.
29 The Father agrees that the description of the position at paragraphs 4, 5,
6 and 35 of the psychologist's affidavit describes his
[4] [The Father] maintains that he has been actively and
equally involved in [the child’s] life, and that since August 2020,
current equal care arrangement has worked and worked well. Whilst he
acknowledged that he leaves work early in the morning, he
places an extremely
high emphasis upon the quality of the time spent with [the child] and especially
upon his return from work, describing
[the child] as his unequivocal focus and
priority during these times, and that the strength of his relationship with [the
and the progress in [the child’s] overall health and welfare is
testimony to the benefits of the current arrangement. At present,
[the Father]
engages a morning nanny, Ms M from 6:30am until commencement of school, and then
an afternoon nanny, Ms N who collects
[the child] from school and cares for him
until his return from work at about 6:00pm. I note the afternoon Nanny is shared
Mother] during the time that [the child] is in his mother’s
[5] From [the Father’s] perspective, continuation of the current
arrangement not only best approximates the history of his
involvement in the
care of his son, but ensures that he continues to fulfil a significant and
substantial role in [the child’s]
life. He described a well-established
routine, in the midst of which [the child] has thrived. He told me that
notwithstanding that
he leaves for work at just after 7:00a.m., he and [the
child] have a fixed pattern, and that in particular, in the afternoons, [the
child] benefits from the individual attention provided to him by Ms N and a
range of organised and specific activities. [The Father]
emphasised that their
routine upon his return from work at about 6:00p.m is of linchpin importance to
[the child], including the
reading of books, the telling of stories, and the
laying together during quiet time until sleep time at about 8:15p.m.
[6] [The Father] simply wants to maintain a well-established routine that
respects the importance of the time and relationship he
has with [the child].
From his perspective, he had thought that he and [the Mother] had reached
agreement in mediation that would
seek to maintain a well-established status
quo, that recognised that [the child] was doing well, and that allowed for both
[the Mother] to be actively, significantly and meaningfully involved in
their son's life. Even though [the Father] understands that
according to [the
Mother], that [the child] appears unsettled upon his return to her care and that
she believes that the fragmented
nature of the parenting arrangement adversely
impacts upon his relationship with [the sister], his observation is that [the
is flourishing within the current arrangement, that he is in a good
routine, and that overall if the current arrangement is working
well, that there
can be no benefit in changing it.
[35] [The Father] is seeking maintenance of the status quo. Put simply, he feels
that if it is not broken, then there is no need
to fix it. His observation is
that [the child] is moving easily and comfortably between the two homes, that he
enjoys an established
status quo, that he is comfortable and confident, that he
has made the transition into primary school well, is enjoying the time
and [the Father] was confident that he could continue to organise himself and
his professional life in order to support
the equal care arrangement. [The
Father] told me that he has established a new home and a new home office, such
that his expectation
is to work from home each Friday, and more as necessary,
although it is his expectation that he will continue to commute to his city
office on a regular basis.
30 I also note that the psychologist described the world view from X'
position and his relationship with his parents at paragraphs
23, 24, 25 and 39,
[23] When seen individually and then in the company of
his parents, [the child] obviously related warmly, confidently and well. Even
though when seen with his father he was tired and irritable, and ultimately the
session was curtailed, there was no doubting that
his father was a source of
comfort, and that at this time of distress that [the child] actively sought his
father's physical and
emotional support and that this provided to him
considerable reassurance, In the company of his mother he related warmly,
was overtly spontaneously affectionate, and I have no doubt that X has
an excellent relationship with both his parents. When interviewed
individually,
[the child] spoke about the importance of his parents both being actively and
equally involved in his life. He described
living in two houses as part of what
was normal to him, that he was happy with the arrangement, that he enjoyed the
time spent with
both parents, and was accepting of the current parenting
arrangement and the support and assistance provided by the nannies in the
morning in the afternoon as being his part of his normal routine; X described
the nannies as kind and caring people, who look after
him well, and that they
were involved because his father had to work.
[24] Despite the extra care and support by the caregivers, [the child] clearly
has his dependency needs met by his parents; he described
his parents as
emotionally and physically interchangeable, that they provide to him equal
physical comfort, emotional support, an
equal sense of safety and security, and
in this regard, he identified both parents as his special people. Significantly,
he described
his parents as interchangeable, and that if he was stressed or
distressed, or if he needed help or support, that he would go to them
interchangeably, with the expectation that both would be immediately emotionally
available to him. He for example told me that his
parents best understand how he
feels, that both provide to him warmth and affection, that he felt safe and
confident in the care
of both, and that he would turn to either if he needed
comfort and reassurance. [The child] described both parents as kind, caring
loving, and it was his expectation that they would continue to be actively and
equally involved in his life. He described a good
relationship with his sister,
and that he missed her when he wasn't with her.
[25] It was very clearly my impression that [the child’s] expectation was
that something approximating the current arrangement
would continue. He has
adapted to the current arrangement, and it was his expectation that it would
continue; he told me that he
wanted to see both of his parents equally, and told
me that living in two houses was enjoyable. [The child] told me that his mother
was the parent who had looked after him for the majority and over the course of
his life, but it was his expectation that both his
parents would continue to be
actively, equally and significantly involved.
[39] It is in my view significant that amidst his parents' conflict, [the child]
is doing well. Even though both parents use the
language of primary care and
parental responsibility, the notion of primary carer is conflated in the sense
that for [the child],
his parents are interchangeable, both clearly present to
him an equal source of having his dependency needs met, and he has an excellent
relationship with them both. To [the child], neither parent is more or less
important, both are perceived by him to be an equal source
of trust, safety,
security, confidence and affection, and he transitions between the homes
comfortably and confidently. From [the
child’s] perspective, he has
accepted the new normal, he has accommodated to it, he feels confident with the
routine, feels
certainty with the care arrangements, described both the morning
and afternoon carers as people whom he likes and upon whom he could
though he would prefer for his parents to be together, he has accepted and
accommodated to the new family circumstances.
What does seem clear is that [the
child] is settled with the new arrangement, that it is predictable for him, that
he understands
the movement between the homes, and it is his expectation that
the shared parenting arrangement will in some capacity continue.
[40] From a child welfare perspective, the current arrangement is working well
enough. [The child] understands the arrangement, moves
comfortably between his
parents, has made the transition into primary school well, and appears to be
experiencing no difficulties.
He has a good relationship with both parents, and
he trusts and relies upon them both. It is apparent that he has an excellent
relationship
with his parents separately, and that notwithstanding what their
concerns might be about each other, that they parent well enough,
enough level; from [the child’s] perspective, the notion of primary carer,
or parental hierarchy is conflated by
his parents and from his perspective, his
parents are interchangeable, complimentary and of equal importance.
[42] Even though [the Father] has had concerns regarding [the Mother] and her
mental health, the objective reality is that she seems
to be doing well, that
she is doing better since the separation, that the psychiatric and psychological
data available suggests that
her overall functioning is not currently
compromised, and certainly not insofar as her parenting. My observations of her
child] were unequivocally positive, as was [the child’s]
portrayal of her; notwithstanding that there is no effective communication
between [the Father] and [the Mother], both are parenting well, at least as
perceived through the eyes of [the child], and the lack
of any substantial
concern about [the child] is testimony to this, and from [the Father’s]
perspective provides good reason
for why the current arrangement should
continue. It is [the Father’s] intention to work more regularly from home,
for himself a home office and that way be even more available to care
for [the child].
31 In regard to the controversial issue of the impact of the Mother's
previous psychological and psychiatric treatment, I recite what
summarised as the position of Dr O, the psychiatrist, and Mr P, that is,
paragraph 27 and 28 in regard to the psychiatrist:
[27] In relation to the ultimate question of diagnosis,
Dr O concluded that [the Mother] has a recurrent depressive illness, with
possible mood elevation suggestive of a Bipolar II diagnosis. She further
comments that the prognosis is uncertain because the diagnosis
is uncertain,
although she also stated that [the Mother] was presenting well, that her
short-term prognosis appeared positive, and
that there were no obvious or
immediate concerns in relation to her capacity to parent. Importantly, Dr O
described [the Mother]
as having made significant gains and so this obviously
reduces the question of risk.
[28] At her most recent review in May 2021, Dr O described [the Mother] as calm
and happy, that there was no suggestion of a psychiatric
illness, and that there
were no concern about her ability to function in her various social and personal
roles, including in her
capacity to care for the children.
32 The psychiatrist's prognosis (at page 40 of 43 attached to the Father's
affidavit) is as follows:
The prognosis is unclear because the diagnosis is uncertain.
seen below, she has recovered and seems well. The prognosis for the short term
is good but the long term
prognosis is guarded.
33 Mr P's (the psychologist's) observations as summarised by Mr K at
paragraphs 30 and 31 are relevant and as follows:
[30] Mr P identified a number of characterological
vulnerabilities, including an inclination towards more negative self-evaluation
and appraisal, but also highlighted the contribution of environmental stresses
as having been a significant contribution to [the
Mother’s] mood related
difficulties. He described the relationship with [the Father] as having been a
significant stressor
identified by [the Mother], and especially in the period
leading up to the brief hospitalisation in December 2019.
[31] Importantly, Mr P also described [the Mother] as having made significant
gains and identified a number of protective factors.
He did however, highlight
that she is a perfectionist, and that she is consequently vulnerable to outside
stressors, and especially
those that are similar to the bullying and harassment
that she experienced earlier in her life. I note the description by [the Mother]
as often feeling criticised and demeaned by [the Father]. Mr P a1so noted that
[the Mother] was particularly distressed by [the Father]
portraying her as
psychologically unstable and by having shared unfavourable information about her
and her family in their local
community, oblivious to the harm of having done so
to her. Mr P concluded that [the Mother’s] mood had stabilised over the
last 12 months, that she was managing the various stresses in life well, and
that he was optimistic in relation to prognosis and
had no concerns regarding
her ability to parent.
34 I will make some comment now in regard to the issue of the nannies. It is
central to the Mother's case that the arrangements for
the child whereby the
Father uses a nanny in the morning and in the evening when he works in Melbourne
do not best advance the child's
welfare. It was put by her counsel that this
was described by Mr K as being "not optimal". It is clear that at times when
the parties
were together and at times when it suited both of them there was
significant involvement of childcare and nannies in the child’s
observations of Mr K at paragraphs 45 and 46 are relevant and as follows:
[45] The two scenarios, that is, continuation of the
status quo as proposed by [the Father], and a change in the arrangement such
that [the child] spends more time in the care of this mother, have considerable
merit and both make sense. It may be that a decision
be made on the basis of what offers the most in the way of long term
sustainability. One of the more
obvious difficulties with the continuation of
the current arrangement is that it relies upon care being provided by people
than [the child’s] parents, and so comparatively, this arrangement
means there must be less certainty and less permanence,
compared to an
arrangement that relies upon his parents and immediate family to provide the
care for [the child]. The inescapable
reality is that the proposal by both
parents will rely on some extra care, although in the case of [the Mother], from
between the
completion of school and 4:30pm when [the sister] returns home. I
also draw attention to how for other nannies, before and after
school care
arrangements are a necessity, and that from a child welfare perspective, that
there is no adverse impact.
[46] In the Family Law vernacular, shared parenting is commonly used to reflect
a minimum of 35% of time with one parent, which equates
to 5 nights in a
14 night cycle. In this regard, equal care is just one type of shared care.
All the indications are that [the child]
is doing well in a shared care
arrangement and that his parents, separately, provide for him at a high level.
The polarities of his
parent’s proposals reflects the dichotomous nature
of what each considers to be important; both are
35 I acknowledge that on the Mother's proposal, the child will spend more
time with his sister than on the Father's proposal.
36 Turning to the relevant matters as to
section 60CC
, in the circumstances
of the child’s age, I do not place any weight upon his wishes and views of
the world. In regard to the
nature of his relationship with each of his
parents, I find that the child has a very significant and appropriate
relationship with
each of his parents and his sister, and I refer to the
observations about Mr K's opinion that from the child’s point of view,
care in each of his parents is interchangeable.
37 I find that each of the child’s parents have taken every opportunity
to participate in decisions concerning his welfare and
to spend time with the
child, and neither parent has failed to take any opportunity to participate in
his life or spend time with
him. I find that each of the parents have fulfilled
and fulfil to a high degree their obligations to maintain the child. The key
event is the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, which is
a matter that I must consider. The Mother's proposal
is a very significant
change from the current arrangement where in the opinion of the expert the child
is able to do well and doing
well to a high enough level. I note that there is
a significant dispute between the parents as to the extent to which either of
them were, prior to separation, what would be regarded as the primary carer;
i.e. who did most of the work. For my purposes on an
interim hearing, whilst
interesting, it's an arid dispute that I simply cannot determine. In the
circumstances of the very appropriate
relationship that the child has with each
of his parents it's not clear to me how determining that dispute would assist me
38 However, to my mind on this interim hearing there is a significant
uncertainty as to how that change would impact upon the child.
Mother's case that the impact would be much for the better and the Father's case
that this would be unsettling in the circumstances
of an established regime. I
am unable to find on this interim hearing that the Mother's position is correct
and notwithstanding
that from the expert's point of view there was substance in
her position.
39 In terms of the next requirement under
section 60CC
, there is little
practical difficulty or expense in the child spending time and communicating
with each parent in either scenario.
The Mother points to the circumstance that
the Father's need to have a nanny before he travels to work in Melbourne and of
is a very significant matter that means his proposal is simply
impractical in the full sense of that word when she is more available
for the child.
40 The Father told Mr K that when he travels to Melbourne he would usually
leave at about 6.30pm and he would usually get in at about
6:00pm. The records
of the nanny show the variation of that during the 2021 year. It must also be
noted that the father has announced
to Mr K and to the Court and to the Mother
his intention, now that he has a settled home office, to work from home more
work in Melbourne less than previously. The Mother remains sceptical
of that proposition in the circumstances of the demands upon
the Father's time
to maintain a busy and successful practice as a legal professional.
41 However, it's clear that in February on a number of occasions the nanny
was involved in the Mother's household until about 5.30pm.
It's clear that the
nanny was involved in the Father's household for longer than that and, on
occasions, it can be inferred by the
three hours time from the school pickup of
3.15pm to 6.15pm. On other occasions the nanny has been involved in the
Mother's household
until 6.15pm and in the Father's household until 6.30pm. The
nanny was frequently involved in the Mother's household until 5.30pm.
occasions, the nanny was involved in the Father's household until 7:00pm or
7.15pm but on other occasions as early as 5:00pm
and also as early as 5:00pm in
the Mother's household.
42 However, it's clear that the child will be cared for in the Father's
household by the nanny for a longer period than the time that
utilised the nanny. In addition to that, there is the time before school. I
take all that into account but I do not
determine that the arrangements are
impractical in the sense as contemplated by 60CC(3)(e). I find that both
parents have an appropriate
and excellent capacity to care for the child and to
provide for the emotional and intellectual needs of the child.
43 The other significant matter is the attitude to the child and the
responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by each of the child's
Both parents have demonstrated for the purposes of this interim hearing an
appropriate attitude to the responsibilities
of parenthood. I also note that
the close and appropriate relationship that the child has with both parents
reflects on their capacity
and attitude to parenthood to the extent that each
has, to this point in time, in practice (whatever the criticisms that each makes
of the other) promoted a significant and meaningful relationship with the other
parent. This is probably one of the most important
aspects of parenthood.
44 In this case, despite criticisms of each parent's personality and
behaviour at times, family violence is not a significant aspect
and there is no
family violence order. Both parties seek that I make an interim order. I am
then to determine any other fact or
circumstance that the Court thinks is
relevant. It's part of the Father's case that the Mother's psychiatric and
psychological condition
is such that the Court should be concerned that she
would not be able to cope if there was more than the week about regime. That
highly disputed by the Mother and for the purposes of this hearing I am unable
to find that that is a relevant risk.
45 In the long run there may remain in issue each parent's psychological
stability. I note that both parents have undertaken psychological
treatment in
the past, which demonstrates their maturity in seeking help and assistance
rather than an aspect of risk to the care
of the child.
46 I must now turn to the labyrinthine provisions of
and, following
the pathway, consider the consequences of equal shared parental responsibility.
In this case the parties agree that
there should be an order for equal shared
parental responsibility and I do not need to determine whether or not
the presumption
” should apply. In this case it may well be
that the presumption would have applied. In the circumstance of equal shared
responsibility I must consider, and consider positively as the
legislation commands me to,
section 65DAA.
I must consider whether the child
spending equal time with each of the child's parents would be in the best
interests of the child,
and I must consider whether that is reasonably
practicable. In considering whether it's practicable, I must consider the
section 65DAA(5)
, which are:
(a) how far apart the parents live, and in this case they live, sensibly, close
(b) the parents current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the
child spending equal time or substantial and significant
time with each of the
child's parents.
47 In this case the parties have demonstrated since May of 2020 that, despite
their criticisms of each other, they actually have the
capacity to implement an
arrangement of equal time. The issue in dispute between them is whether
that is in the child's best interests.
I must consider (c), which is the
parents current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve
difficulties that
might arise in implementing such an arrangement.
Notwithstanding the parents' criticism of each other, their shared high
backgrounds and level of education demands a level of common sense in
their communications with each other about the child's arrangements.
48 There has been significant difficulty in the past sorting these things
out, including which school the child will attend. However,
sensibly, by the
assistance of mediation, the parents have been able to sort those matters out.
I must also consider the impact
that such an arrangement would have on the
child, and in that regard, I refer to those passages referred to above of Mr K
the psychologist's
opinion about the impact of the existing arrangement on the
child. That is, he is doing well. I need to make it clear that I accept,
the purposes of this interim hearing, the observations and opinions of the
psychologist. In those circumstances of being required
section 65DAA
positively consider equal time, I find that it is in the child’s best
interest to spend equal time with his parents on this
interim hearing until
further order.
49 It is unnecessary for me to consider whether I would have made the same
order absent
section 65DAA(1).
THE PROPERTY INJUNCTION
50 The remaining issue is the issue of an injunction
that the Father seeks: that of the three parcels of real estate that the mother
has in Town C that I order her to sell one part. The Mother lives in a home
that she purchased with the proceeds of her former property
settlement and she
is the owner of two other parcels of land. One of those parcels of land has a
and settlement will occur fairly soon, and it's
expected to be in October. The Mother proposes to keep the third parcel of land
which was once part of the property that is now being sold.
51 She wishes to keep that block of land. The Father points to the
circumstance that, on the Mother's current income and his entitlement,
much entitlement but his likely outcome of a property settlement of some
dimension, that the Mother will be unable to retain
that property and that the
Court should grasp the nettle and order her to sell it at this point in time.
As I raised with counsel,
I am concerned that I am, by way of a summary hearing,
determining that the Mother cannot keep that property. At the moment it looks
to be quite difficult as to how she would be able to do that.
52 However, both parties would be familiar with the concepts of summary
judgment and the concept of
Lindon v Commonwealth (No. 2)
[1996] HCA 14
(1996) 70 ALJR
, that is how on a summary hearing, something that looks to be uncertain may
turn out to be better on a final hearing. Further, the
Mother's circumstances,
as she intends, may well improve. It is clear, or clear enough, that whether
the Father agrees with it or
not the Mother is working very hard to establish a
legal practice from which she expects to support herself. Depending whether
cup is half full or half empty, she has been quite successful or
unsuccessful. She has established a practice, established premises,
established a client base and made connections, including for referrals, and she
has done that during COVID-19 times, which has
simply had an enormous impact on
any aspect of establishing a practice, including a legal practice. I do not
require evidence as
to the likely impact of the COVID-19 lockdowns and
restrictions. I propose to regard that as a matter that I do not need evidence
of pursuant to
section 144
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), that
is, it is so common knowledge that it is not reasonably open to question. I do
not require expert evidence of that.
53 On that view, the Mother has been quite successful in her practice so far.
On the other hand, after more than a year in that practice,
in addition to
working developing real estate, she has not yet made any money. So on that
view, if that was the test, she has not
been successful so far. I dare say that
if most of the self-employed legal profession applied that rule to themselves,
they were not making money after 12 or 18 months in it and then must
seek alternate employment, that the number of self-employed
legal professionals
would be far less than what it is. Many people take some time to establish a
54 That is a significant matter that by the time this matter comes to final
hearing, the Mother's financial circumstances may well
be significantly
different, and she may be able to retain that property. For all of those
reasons, I do not propose to order her
to sell that now and close that option.
The Mother proposed that she be permitted to borrow against her property to fund
expenses and service that debt herself, and I propose to make that
order as I do not see any good reason to prevent that happening.
party's view, the Mother will end up with far more than that borrowing.
55 The Mother also proposed to borrow the same amount effectively for the
Father and have him service that himself, but he declined
that opportunity for
what are good reasons to him, and I will not challenge his assessment of that.
Hence, I will dismiss the application
to sell the property and I will permit the
Mother to borrow as she sees fit.
I certify that the preceding fifty-five (55)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
O'Shannessy
Dated: 22 October 2021
RTF format (531 KB)
Signed PDF/A format