URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/SSATACSA/2011/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Carroll v Webb [2011] SSATACSA 24 (3 October 2011)
REVIEW NOs: Decision A, Decision B, Decision C
Bill Carroll
SECOND PARTY: Joan Webb
RESPONDENT: Child Support Registrar
UNDER REVIEW
A decision made by a delegate
of the Child Support Registrar on 25 February 2011 that an objection by Mr
Carroll lodged on 12 January
2011 is invalid as the Child Support Agency cannot
clearly identify which decision Mr Carroll was objecting to.
A decision made by a delegate of the Child Support Registrar on 25
February 2011 that an objection by Mr Carroll lodged on 10 February
invalid as the Child Support Agency cannot clearly identify which decision Mr
Carroll was objecting to.
A decision made by a
delegate of the Child Support Registrar on 31 March 2011 that an objection
lodged by Mr Carroll on 27 March 2011
in relation to the adjusted taxable income
attributed to him at $39,236 in a notional assessment notice issued on 16 March
not be accepted because it was lodged too
The members of the Tribunal were:
XXXXXXXX, Presiding Member
The application was heard on 30 August
Applicant – Mr Carroll spoke to the Tribunal via conference
Second Party – Ms Webb attended the hearing and spoke
to the Tribunal.
Respondent – The Child Support Registrar was
represented at the hearing by Ms F Morris and Ms J
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
A member of the
Tribunal ceased to be a member on 30 September 2011. Therefore the review was
completed by the remaining member in
accordance with clause 12(1B) of Schedule 3
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
On 3 October
2011 the Tribunal decided:
In respect of Decision A the Tribunal set
aside the decision under review and remitted the objection in relation to the
notices issued on 13 December 2010 (not the provisional notional
assessment) for reconsideration by the Registrar under
subsection 87(1)
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
with a direction
that the Registrar reconsider paragraphs 2, 3, 8, 11 and 12 of the objection
letter dated 12 January 2011.
In respect of Decision B the Tribunal set
aside the decision under review and remitted the objection in relation to the
notice issued on 1 February 2011 for reconsideration by the Registrar
subsection 87(1)
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act
In respect of Decision C the Tribunal set aside the decision
under review and remitted the objection in relation to the provisional
taxable income attributed to Mr Carroll in the notional child support assessment
notice issued 11 March 2011 for reconsideration
by the Registrar under
subsection 87(1)
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act
DATE OF DESPATCH
REASONS FOR
Carroll and Ms Webb are the parents of Melanie, born 1995, and Alex, born 1995,
and Sarah, born 1997. Since 6 March 2007 the Child
Support Agency (the Agency)
has registered an administrative assessment in respect of the children and the
Agency has been responsible
for the collection of child
three review applications raise the fundamental issue of the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal to review decisions made by the Agency
in respect of objections lodged
by payers and payees in the child support scheme. The Agency has adopted over a
time a practice of
determining that some objections are “invalid”
for a range of reasons for not being “properly made” and contends
that a decision that an objection is “invalid” does not constitute
an “objection decision” under
subsection 87(1)
Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
and therefore the Tribunal
has no jurisdiction to review any decision by an Agency officer that an
objection is “invalid”.
Mr Carroll has initiated review applications
to this Tribunal as he does not accept that the objections he lodged were
and these decisions should be the subject of independent
review by the Tribunal. Ms Webb did not make any submissions as to the
of the Tribunal.
considering these review applications the first issue to be considered in
respect of Decision B, Decision A and Decision C is whether
the Tribunal has
Registrar provided written submissions
in accordance with an order of the
Tribunal. On 30 August 2011 the Tribunal held a jurisdiction hearing in order
for parties to provide
submissions in relation to the Tribunal’s
ordered the Registrar to provide additional submissions in respect of
Decision C and MC239310 and the Tribunal gave the Registrar
permission to lodge
additional written submissions in relation to Decision B and Decision A. The
parents were given an opportunity
to respond to the further
submissions.
considering the issue of whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction to review these
review applications the Tribunal took into account
the information lodged for
each review application:
numbered A(i) to A51 lodged by the Applicant in Decision A.
numbered A(i) to A19 lodged by the Applicant in Decision B .
numbered 1 to 56 provided by the Registrar in accordance with subsection 95(3)
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
in respect of
Decision C and documents A1 to A12 and documents T1 to T3 in respect of Decision
numbered 1 to 366 provided by the Registrar in accordance with subsection 95(3)
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
and documents
A1 to A73 provided by the Applicant in respect of Decision D.
In respect of
all applications the Tribunal took into account the submissions lodged by the
Agency numbered C1 to C10 lodged on 8
August 2011 and documents C11 to C17
lodged on 20 September 2011.
evidence of Mr Carroll, oral evidence of Ms Webb and oral submissions given by
Ms Harold and Ms Morris.
Further written
submissions lodged by Mr Carroll on 29 September
CONSIDERATION OF ISSUES
legislative framework
legislation relevant to the decisions under review is set out in the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
(the Registration Act) and
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
(the Assessment
Registration Act sets outs the law that enables payers and payees to seek
internal review by an objections officer of specified
decisions made by the
Agency and then to apply for external independent review by the
general terms, section 80 of the Registration Act states that a person may lodge
an objection in writing (
the Tribunal
notes that objections to care
percentage decisions do not need to be in writing see section
, in respect of decisions that are specifically listed
in section 80, if they are a person who may object. Section 81 provides that
objection, in most instances, must be lodged within 28 days after a notice of
the decision is served on a person, although a
person may apply for an extension
of time to object (
see Section 82
). Section 84 states that the objection
must state or give fully and in detail the grounds relied on. The Registration
Act then provides
that the objection is to be served on other affected parties
as required under section 85 (
but see s85A in respect of care percentage
) and to give the other party an opportunity to respond to the
objection in writing.
87(1) of the Registration Act then provides as follows:
Consideration of objections by Registrar
(1) If an objection is lodged under this Part, the Registrar must:
(a) consider the objection and:
(i) if paragraph 86A(1)(b) applies in relation to the objection--any
grounds relied on to oppose or support the objection; or
(ii) otherwise--any notice lodged with the Registrar under section 86 or
paragraph 86A(1)(a) in relation to the objection; and
(b) within 60 days after the objection is lodged,
(i) disallow the objection; or
(ii) allow it in whole or in part.
a decision is made by the Registrar to allow, partly allow or disallow the
objection then the Registrar must notify the parties
of the decision (ie
objection decision), and include reasons for the decision and a statement that
the person may apply to the SSAT
for review of the decision or to the Court (in
some instances) (
see ss87(2),(3)
person may then apply to the Tribunal for review of a decision specified in
subsection 89(1). The relevant paragraph for review
applications Decision A,
Decision B and Decision C is item 2:
Applications for review
(1) A person may apply to the SSAT for review of a decision of the
Registrar if:
(a) the decision is set out in an item of the following table;
(b) the person is set out in that item.
Decisions/applicants
Who may apply for review
a decision under subsection 83(1) on an application for an
extension of time
the person who applied for the extension of time
a decision under subsection 87(1) on an objection to a decision
(the original decision ) of the Registrar
(a) the person who objected to the original decision under section
80 or 80A; or
(b) a person who was entitled to be served a copy of the objection
and any accompanying documents under section 85
a decision to make a determination under subsection 87AA(2) or a
decision not to make such a determination
a person affected by the decision
a decision to make a determination under subsection 110Y(3) or
110Z(3) or a decision not to make such a determination
a person affected by the decision
should be noted there is no express provision in the Registration Act that gives
the Registrar the power to determine that an objection
is “invalid”
or not “properly made”.
this legislative framework the Tribunal considered review applications Decision
A, Decision B and Decision C. The key issue
for the purposes of these review
applications is whether a decision has been made by the Registrar that is
reviewable by the Tribunal.
Decision A – invalid
issue for the Tribunal to consider in this case is whether the Tribunal has
of the Agency on 25
February 2011 that the objection lodged by Mr Carroll on 12 January 2011 was
Factual Background to Decision
is no dispute between the parties about the central facts in this case. The
Tribunal finds based on the Agency records the sequence
of events occurred as
set out in paragraphs below.
23 June 2010 Ms Webb contacted the Agency seeking a change to the percentage of
care attributed to the parents in respect of Melanie.
After many months of the
Agency gathering information from the parties, a decision was made on 13
December 2010 to change the percentage
of care attributed to the parents in
respect of Melanie. A notice dated 13 December 2010 was sent to Mr Carroll and
Ms Webb advising
of the change in the percentage of care. In particular it
stated that the records now show that a 0% of care for Melanie from 12
had been attributed to Mr Carroll. That letter enclosed numerous assessment
notices for the period from 1 June 2009 to 30
November 2011.
13 December 2010, on the same day, as a result of the amendment to the Child
Support Register regarding the percentage of care
to be attributed to the
parents in respect of Melanie, the Agency issued a separate provisional notional
child support assessment
as at 13 December 2010. This provisional notional child
support assessment included an assessment setting out the details held on
Child Support Register as at 13 December 2010. This notice included 2 assessment
pages setting out the particulars of the assessment
as at 13 December 2010. The
covering letter went on to state that
“we have issued you with a
provisional notional assessment so you can check your details are correct. You
have until 5 January
2011 to advise us if your circumstances are different to
the details shown in this provisional assessment. After 5 January 2011 this
become your notional assessment”.
12 January 2011 Mr Carroll wrote to the Agency in a letter headed
wish to object to the CSA provisional child support assessment dated 13 December
2010 and received 20 December 2010”.
It is the contents of this letter
that is the subject of contentions in Decision A and this will be discussed
further below.
25 January 2011 an Agency objections officer in the Objections Team reviewed the
letter provided by Mr Carroll and made an assessment
in relation to that
objection. The officer noted that there were objection rights in relation to the
care percentages which had been
challenged by Mr Carroll, noting,
“Customer has objection rights but is unlikely to be successful”
and in relation to the provisional income for the father
has objection rights to this matter but matter can be resolved easily if Bill
can provide an ITD or lodge 09/10 tax
return without need for 60 day objection
. In relation to care of Melanie it was noted
week interim care period – no application was made and Bill did not
provide evidence to show that he was taking reasonable
action to have
court-ordered care reinstated. Customer has objection rights but it is unlikely
to be successful unless he can provide
evidence to show that he was taking
reasonable action to have court ordered care reinstated within 14 weeks of 12
May 2010 when care
event occurred”.
In relation to Ms Webb’s
income it was noted,
“Currently using provisional income customer has
objection rights to this matter. Bill can also apply for COA”.
the question, is the objection valid?
“Depends on what the customer is
objecting to.”
In relation to the question
“does it have
grounds? Yes”
. The document then goes on to state that there is a need
to confirm what part of the provisional notional assessment was Mr Carroll
actually objecting to and whether he wished to proceed with an objection after
an explanation had been provided. There was no indication
in the scrutiny that
the officer understood that Mr Carroll was also objecting to the assessment
notices issued on 13 December 2010
with the change in care
25 January and 31 January 2011 an objections officer attempted to contact Mr
Carroll by phone but was unsuccessful.
1 February 2011 Mr Carroll rang and spoke to another Agency officer and advised
he was in meetings all day and that he would call back when
opportunity presents”
1 February 2011 the objections officer had a meeting with another Agency officer
to discuss the issues raised in Mr Carroll’s
letter dated 12 January
3 February 2011 Mr Carroll contacted the Agency by telephone. The officer who
spoke with Mr Carroll made the following notations,
amongst other
advised he wanted to discuss objection.
advised he earns more than MTAWE and knows he earns more than the RP and will
have to pay.
advised he has no idea what his 2010 Income Tax Refund will be as it will be
with his Tax Assessment and he doesn’t
want to make an estimate and get it
25 February 2011 the objections officer spoke with a team leader and case
manager about the objections and determined after this
discussion that the
objections were invalid as they could not identify the decision in each letter
that Mr Carroll was objecting
25 February 2011 the Chief Operating Officer of the Agency wrote to Mr Carroll
in the following terms:
“I refer to your letter of objection received on 12 January
I confirm that under child support legislation your objection is invalid
due to the following reason:
A valid objection must
Be about a decision for which there is an objection right under the
Registration and Collection Act. This can be about a decision
that was made
under the Assessment Act or the Registration and Collection Act.
CSA cannot clearly identify which decision you are objecting to.
The matters you referred to in your letter have been referred to your
personalised services case manager for follow up.
8 March 2011 Mr Carroll lodged an application for a review with the Tr ibunal
seeking a review of the decision dated 25 February
Mr Carroll’s Evidence and
Contentions
summary, Mr Carroll gave the following evidence and made the following
submissions to the Tribunal.
He is seeking
review because he objected to a number of matters in the assessments on 13
December 2010 and he believes his objection
letter dated 12 January 2011 clearly
indicated what he was seeking review of. However, he received a response from
the Agency stating
that it was invalid because the Agency could not determine
what decision he was objecting to. He stated that he was not experienced
objecting at that time and he believes that may have been one of his first
objections. Further he believed that he should have
been given some latitude
when lodging his objection with the Agency and when it was considered by the
His letter dated
12 January 2011 was referring to the matters contained in both Agency notices
dated 13 December 2011. When he refers
to the page numbers in his letter of 12
January 2011 he was referring to the page numbers on the right hand side of the
Agency letters
that were sent to him. For example, in respect of paragraph 8 of
his letter dated 12 January 2011, he was referring to the income
particulars
ascribed to him of $39,236 which were referred to on the back of page 10 of the
notices, on the back of page 12 and on
the back of page 14. He stated that if
you look at the right hand side, every second page is numbered by the Agency.
When he was
preparing his letter he looked at the page number and at the back
page and then tried to identify the particular information that
he was objecting
to by reference to those page numbers. So when referring to page number 10 he
was referring to the back of page
number 10 where it was stated provisional
$39,236. He confirmed that he was objecting to all of the particulars in the
letters that
were sent to him and dated 13 December 2010. He confirmed that he
found the letters from the Agency difficult to understand and he
did his best to
understand them. However he believes he received nearly 30 pages of assessments
in letters dated 13 December 2010.
In relation to
the particular issues that he has raised in his letter dated 12 January 2011 (by
reference to paragraph numbers) he
In Paragraph 1
he is concerned that he is being described as a Family Assistance Office
Customer in the provisional notional assessment
when he is not a Family
Assistance Office Customer.
In Paragraph 2
he is concerned about how they have recorded the child support
Paragraph 3 is
in relation to the percentage of care that has been attributed to him in respect
of the children.
Paragraph 4 is
not resolved and relates to no value being assessed in the
Paragraph 5 as
far as he is concerned has been resolved, meaning he no longer wishes to pursue
this issue in regard to the cost percentage.
In relation to
paragraph 6 he advised that issue has now been resolved with the
In relation to
paragraph 7 he no longer cares in relation to that matter and doesn’t wish
to pursue it.
In relation to
paragraph 8 that is a matter that hasn’t been resolved and he does wish to
pursue his objection in relation to
the attribution of income to
In relation to
paragraph 9 he had been previously advised by the Agency in a letter dated (he
believes) 1 November 2010 that there
would be 2 assessments made for him in
relation to the care for Melanie. One letter would be for the period 1 pre July
2010 and another
letter would be issued for the period 1 post July 2010, because
the law changed regarding care. However he has not seen an assessment
Agency distinguishing between the 2 periods and the particulars applied under
the law before 1 July 2010 and the law after
1 July 2010.
In relation to
paragraphs 11 and 12 they relate to the care percentages for Melanie and he
wished to object to this.
Paragraph 13 was
his concern regarding the income attributed to Ms Webb, although he noted that
he is no longer concerned about this
In relation to
paragraph 14 this was his concern regarding the quality of Agency letters and
from his perspective that issue had been
He stated to the
Tribunal that he had raised a number of matters in relation to the assessments
in his letter dated 12 January 2011
and he wishes the Tribunal to look at these
He has reviewed
the written submissions prepared by the Agency that were provided to the
Tribunal prior to the hearing and he made
the following relevant
The objections
scrutiny prepared by an Agency officer on 25 January 2011 demonstrates that the
Agency was well aware of what decisions
he was objecting to and the aspects of
the decisions that he was objecting to. Similarly, the file note of the internal
between officers of the Agency confirms that they understood there
was an objection and they understood the aspects of the decision
to which he was
objecting to. The Agency has failed to make reference to this particular
objection scrutiny file note in its submission.
He confirmed
that he is a self-imposed write only customer and that he requested in June 2010
that the Agency write to him in relation
to all matters, not just complex
matters when dealing with the Agency. Yet in this instance they had tried to
call him repeatedly
in relation to his objection when he had already previously
asked to be a write only customer. He noted that the Agency records indicated
that they telephoned him and left messages. His evidence was that he did not
receive all of these messages. In relation to the submission,
where it states
that on 25 January 2011 an objections officer documented that they needed to
confirm various matters with him, he
stated that these matters had not been
raised and confirmed with him.
Registrar’s submissions she refers to a letter dated 11 April 2011 from
the Personalised Services case manager to him
regarding his letters of 12
January 2011 and 10 February 2011. In his view this letter of 11 April 2011 was
post the decision of
25 February 2011 and not relevant for the purposes of the
review and cannot be now taken to be relevant for review
He noted that
the Agency has indicated that where a person does not properly describe the
decision in their objection letter when
they seek review or when the Agency
decides that the objection does not include grounds, then the Agency will decide
that an objection
is invalid. In his view this leaves it open for the Agency in
any case to use as a precedent that any objection they do not wish
to deal with
they can rule invalid and the person therefore has no rights to seek review of
Agency decisions. He considered that
this would not be fair. If the submission
of the Agency is accepted then it would set a precedent that for every decision
Agency did not want reviewed by the SSAT, that they rule the objection
invalid and people would have no basis to seek a review by
an independent
He stated that
initially he was advised by the Agency that the objection was invalid because
they did not know what decision he was
objecting to, however now the submissions
of the Agency have put forward an alternative basis, in that he has failed to
the grounds on which his objections are made. In essence the Agency has
changed its basis for determining that his objection was
invalid. Yet he was
never given an opportunity to provide grounds, if that is what they were
seeking. This was a flaw and he should
have been given an opportunity to address
this particular aspect. He acted on the correspondence he received which
included no reference
to the lack of grounds in his objection
He stated that
the legislation does not include any criteria as to what the grounds should or
should not state and how clear the letter
must be in relation to what decision
is being objected to. Further there were no criteria sent to him by the Agency
setting out what
matters they took into account in deciding that he failed to
identify the decision clearly or that there were insufficient grounds
are now arguing.
In his view the
submissions provided by the Agency is not an objective response, but simply an
attempt to try and defend their position
to what they have done in this
summary, Mr Carroll submitted to the Tribunal that he had lodged an objection,
it was internally considered by the officers as
an objection and that is why
there was a scrutiny on 25 January 2011 and that is why there was discussion
between officers. Yet it
would seem that someone else in the Agency decided that
it was not to be treated as an objection because they couldn’t work
what the decision being objected to was, and now the Agency is saying they do
not know what the grounds were for the objection.
The Agency did not ask for
additional information and they did not seek further grounds from
Ms Webb’s Evidence and
Contentions
Webb stated that she had no comment to make in relation to the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal in Decision A.
Child Support Agency
Evidence and Contentions
Morris and Ms Harold, on behalf of the Registrar, made oral submissions at the
hearing, expanding on the written submissions previously
provided by the
Registrar. The Tribunal has detailed those submissions below as it considered
each of the issues relevant to the
(i) Power to determine the Tribunal’s
Registrar’s
submissions
Registrar’s representative submitted at the hearing that the Tribunal does
not have jurisdiction to review and consider
the decision made on 25 February
2011 that the objection was invalid. Further the representative submitted that
it was not open to
the Tribunal for the Tribunal to consider the basis and
reasons why the objection was considered “invalid”. The
representative
submitted in essence that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to
consider the decision of the Registrar that the objection was invalid
there was no objection decision under section 87. In the course of submissions,
the representative contended that the decision
to accept whether the letter that
was lodged was a valid objection or not, was not a matter that the Tribunal can
consider and therefore
the Tribunal cannot look at whether the objection was
“properly made” and therefore constituted an objection. For example,
the Tribunal cannot look at whether there were grounds or not in the letter that
Mr Carroll asserts is an objection. She further
submitted that the Tribunal has
Where the Agency
has not accepted lodgement of a letter as an objection as it
was not “properly made” then the Tribunal has no jurisdiction.
Morris noted that it was a merits review process in the context of legislation
which has clear specified matters which could be
reviewed by the Tribunal. She
noted that where there was not a valid objection then persons could seek
judicial review under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review)
Consideration
is a matter for the Tribunal to determine whether it has jurisdiction to review
a decision the subject of a review application
made under the Registration Act.
The Tribunal considers that a fundamental principle in the operation of the
merits review system
established under the Registration Act is that the Tribunal
can determine whether a review application falls within the jurisdiction
Tribunal. The Tribunal is not bound to determine that it does not have
Registrar that no
objection decision has been made under subsection 87(1) because the Registrar
has determined that an objection
is “invalid’. It is incumbent on
the Tribunal to consider a review application and determine for itself whether
application is a matter within its jurisdiction.
Ward v Nicholls and Others
(1988) 84 ALR 471
Wilcox J was considering
decisions of the Veterans’ Review Board and the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (AAT) respectively
that they did not have jurisdiction. In that case
the Veteran’s Review Board had determined that it did not have
to deal with an application lodged by the Applicant under its
enabling enactment and the AAT concluded that as no decision had been
the enabling enactment the AAT did not have jurisdiction. The Federal Court held
the AAT did have jurisdiction to review
the decision of the Veterans’
Review Board. His Honour said:
It would be a very odd situation if the position were as perceived by Mr
Bannon; that is to say, if the appointed first instance reviewer,
Veterans’ Review Board, erroneously found that it had no jurisdiction, and
the Administrative Appeals Tribunal —
which is set up by statute to review
on their merits decisions of that Board — was then precluded from
considering for itself
whether that Board in fact had jurisdiction and, if so,
what decision it should have made. There would be a lacuna in the system
administrative review disappointing to those who had laboured to set up the
comprehensive system which appears to be provided
by the statute. I cannot think
that this is right. I think that the true position is that the Veterans’
Review Board is always
in the position of having to decide whether to affirm, to
vary or to set aside the decision of the Commission, and that, whatever
it makes, that decision is subject to review by the Administrative Appeals
David John Roy Crompton v Repatriation Commission
[1993] FCA 468
Keely, O’Connor and Beazley JJ said:
If it is shown that the Board lacked the jurisdiction in the first instant
then it follows that the Tribunal must also lack jurisdiction
to review the
merits. In our view there is nothing in these cases that precludes the finding
that the Tribunal can, and indeed must,
re-decide the question of its
In administrative proceedings, having the power to determine and
re-determine questions of jurisdiction is essential to the process
determining question of law and fact. The board is a body of limited
on a question of
finding on the question of its
own jurisdiction must stand unassailed until
overturned by a court of competent jurisdiction cannot be accepted.
In the present case, there is a right appeal from the board on questions
of both law and fact, and it would be a “lacuna”
in administrative
proceedings if questions of jurisdiction had always to be determined by court
intervention. Where a board or tribunal
determines a question of law during its
own proceedings, that question must be open to redetermination by a superior
cases make clear that a Tribunal is bound to consider for itself whether it has
Tribunal also noted that the objections review process under child support law
is similar to the objections process established
under Australia’s
taxation system, although there are appeal rights to the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (AAT), rather than
this Tribunal. In
SRYYY and Child Support
[2001] AATA 687
, Senior Member Sassella commented on the
similarities. The AAT has on a number of occasions considered decisions made by
the Commissioner
of Taxation in relation to an objection and determined whether
it had jurisdiction to hear and determine the review application (
Commissioner of Taxation
[2008] AATA 716
, The Taxpayer and Commissioner of
[1997] AATA 501
). For example, in
Garrett and Commissioner of
[2008] AATA 749
the AAT considered whether there was an objection,
where the person had originally not put any objection in writing, and whether a
letter by the Commissioner constituted an objection decision and whether the
matters set out in the Commissioner’s letter could
be the subject of a
right of review to the AAT.
light of those cases, the Tribunal considers that it is open to determine
whether it has jurisdiction to review the decision made
on 25 February 2011 by
the Agency, even though the Agency determined that the objection was
“invalid”, and to look at
whether this constituted an objection
decision under subsection 87(1) or some other decision that is reviewable by
this Tribunal.
(ii) Were reviewable decisions made by
the Registrar ?
Submissions by Registrar’s
representative
representative submitted that the powers of the Tribunal are confined to only
review decisions made under subsection 87(1) of
the Registration Act. The
legislative scheme, in particular subsection 89(1) of the Registration Act, sets
out the prescribed jurisdiction
of the Tribunal and these are the only decisions
that can be reviewed by the Tribunal. Further, she submitted, section 87 clearly
states that after lodging an objection it must be “considered by the
Registrar” to either allow or disallow an objection.
In this case the
Registrar did not “consider” the objection and allow or disallow the
objection and did not make a decision
under section 87 of the Registration Act.
As the decision was not made under section 87 of the Registration Act there was
not a decision
that could be reviewed by the SSAT.
was submitted by the representative that section 87 was only operative once an
objection had been lodged, determined by the Registrar
to meet the objection
criteria (i.e. be properly made) and only then can it be
“considered” and determined under section
87. As the Registrar
formed the view that the letter dated 12 January 2011 was not a proper
objection, it was not considered and
there was no objection decision made under
section 87.
Tribunal asked what power the Registrar relied on to make a decision that the
objection was not a lawful objection and invalid.
The representative conceded
that the term “invalid” was probably not correct; however it was
open to the Registrar to
decide whether an objection had been properly lodged or
not. Ms Morris submitted that there are specific requirements for an objection
to be lodged. Firstly it must meet the requirements in section 80 that it is in
writing. Secondly, it must meet the requirements
in section 84 that it fully
state the grounds for objection. If the Registrar forms the view that it is not
a proper objection, because
it fails the requirements of section 80 and/or
section 84, then the Registrar does not make a decision under section
Tribunal asked in light of that submission, had the objection been considered
and treated as an objection as reflected in the
objection scrutiny of 25 January
2011. Ms Morris submitted that the objection scrutiny was simply evidence of the
Agency officer
looking at the letter to try and work out whether it constituted
a proper objection; it was not evidence of a consideration of the
itself. It was merely a step whereby the Agency was considering whether an
appropriate objection had been lodged and whether
it had meet the requirements
under section 80 and section 84. She noted that this case was more difficult
than others because Mr
Carroll could only be dealt with in writing and had
written in numerous requests to the Agency. She confirmed that the objection
not considered an objection because it did not identify the decision under
review and further it failed in that it did not set
out the grounds for
objection. The Tribunal took Ms Morris to the file note of 25 January 2011 and
noted that at the question, “are
there any grounds?” the Officer
undertaking the scrutiny had said “yes”. Ms Morris noted that the
decision to accept
whether the objection that was lodged was proper or not was
not a matter that the Tribunal can consider. Therefore the Tribunal cannot
at whether there were grounds or not in the letter that Mr Carroll asserts is an
objection. Further she submitted whether the
Agency was correct or not in
deciding whether the letter constituted an objection is not a matter that can be
considered before the
Morris noted that the Agency attempts to contact and assist applicants when
lodging objections to ensure that they meet all of
the relevant requirements.
She conceded that if the Agency determined that a letter did not constitute an
objection then there were
no review rights and there was a gap in the
legislation. However the legislation was very clear about what decisions could
be reviewed
by the Tribunal and that there were no review rights in relation to
these particular cases. The Tribunal queried what approach the
Agency took when
interpreting section 84 for the purposes of deciding whether a letter a
constituted an objection. Ms Morris noted
that the Agency takes a wide view of
considering whether grounds have been provided, because for the majority of
customers it is
difficult to ensure that they meet all of the requirements and
so they would assist the customers. When interpreting and applying
the Agency takes a facilitative approach to assist those who object. However
section 80 is very carefully worded and lists
what decisions can be objected
Tribunal asked Ms Morris why the Tribunal should not treat the decision by the
Agency to be a decision to disallow the objection.
The Tribunal suggested that
it was open to the Tribunal to form the view that in substance what the Agency
had done by its letters
of 25 February 2011 was to in substance disallow the
objections lodged by Mr Carroll. Ms Morris submitted that the legislation should
be followed and in this case the Agency had not “considered” the
objections as required by section 87 because they were
not satisfied that the
objections had lawfully been lodged. She noted in this case there had been
multiple correspondence received
from Mr Carroll and there was confusion as to
what decision he was seeking to have reviewed by the objections officer. She
it was difficult in these sorts of cases. In order for a
decision-maker to make a sound decision at the objections stage they needed
be clear about what decision was being sought to be reviewed and what the
grounds were and it was not clear in this case what
was being objected to. The
Tribunal put to Ms Morris that it was open to the Tribunal to form the view,
having reviewed the letters
of 12 January (and 10 February), that it was clear
what aspects of the particular decisions issued by the Agency that Mr Carroll
was seeking to review and that it was open to the Tribunal to form the view that
there was sufficient material that an objection
had been lodged. This was
indicated by the title in the letters and the particulars referred to in the
correspondence; therefore
why shouldn’t it be considered a decision under
section 87. She said that the legislative scheme expected that there would
review mechanism by the Agency to consider the substance of an objection before
it went to the Tribunal and that this had not
occurred and so therefore there
had not been a decision under section 87.
Consideration
– general principles
essence the Registrar submits there are two stages and two decisions made in the
objection process. Firstly, there is a “vetting”
process where a
decision is made as to whether the objection was “properly made” and
is “valid” – i.e.
does the objection meet the formal
requirements of the Registration Act. These formal requirements are as
the objection in writing in accordance with section 80?
the objection in relation to a decision that is specified in subsection
the objection been lodged within time in accordance with section 81, and if not
has an extension application been made?
the objection state or give fully and in detail the grounds relied on in
accordance with section 84?
the objection does not meet all of these criteria then in the Registrar’s
view, the Registrar can make a decision that the
objection was not
“properly made” and is “invalid” (the preliminary
decision) and therefore the Registrar
does not “consider” the
objection under section 87. Further as submitted by the Registrar in this case,
if the objection
is assessed at the preliminary phase to be
“invalid”, then the Registrar does not follow the requirements in
the Registration
Act to forward the objection to the other party for an
opportunity to respond.
to the Registrar, the second stage of the objection process, is that if all the
formal requirements for an objection are
met, then the objection will be
forwarded to the other party for a response and then the objection will be
considered by the Registrar
under section 87 and the objection either disallowed
or partly or fully allowed in accordance with section 87 (the objection
Tribunal looked carefully at the internal review process established under the
Registration Act. In the Tribunal’s view,
the Tribunal considers that a
decision that an objection is invalid, for lack of grounds or is outside the
list of decisions in section
80, is a decision that the Registrar has “no
administrative law principles established in
Ward’s case
Crompton’s case
Trajkovski v Telstra
Trajkovski’s
case, Tamberlin J considered the jurisdiction
of the AAT and referred to the principles established in
Collector of Custom
(NSW) v Brian Lawlor Automotive Pty Ltd
Hospital benefit Fund of WA
Inc v Minister for Health, Housing and Community Services
The approach adopted in these cases lends support to the proposition that
the AAT, in the present case, has the competence and authority
to determine
whether it has jurisdiction. It is not bound to decline jurisdiction simply
because the jurisdictional question cannot
be described as a "reviewable
decision" and it must consider antecedent matters going to its jurisdiction in
order to enable it to
perform its primary function. See also Aronson and Dyer
"Judicial Review of Administrative Action", 1996 at 263 ff; A N Hall, Judicial
Power, The Duality of Functions and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal,
(1994) 22 FL Rev 13
at 38 ff and J McMillan "Recent Themes in Judicial
Review of Federal Executive Action"
(1996) 24 FL Rev 347
Also, there is a line of English authority to the effect that, if a
certain state of facts has to exist before a tribunal has jurisdiction,
inquire into the facts in order to decide whether it has jurisdiction but it
cannot give itself jurisdiction by wrong decision
upon those facts. The Courts
may, by means of proceeding by way of prerogative writ such as certiorari, for
example, inquire into
the correctness of that decision. The AAT's decision as to
the existence of the state of facts is regarded as collateral because,
the exercise of jurisdiction depends on it, it is not the main question which
the tribunal must determine. See Rex v Fulham,
Hammersmith and Kensington Rent
Tribunal; ex parte Zerek
[1951] 2 KB 1
at 6; Regina v Kensington and
Chelsea (Royal) London Borough Rent Officer, ex parte Noel
[1978] QB 1
9; "Administrative Law" Wade, 6th edn, 1988, at 283-288; de Smith's "Judicial
Review of Administerial Action" 4th edn (1980) at
The Tribunal considers these principles are also applicable in this case. The
Tribunal does not accept that where the Registrar determines
that an objection
is in respect of a decision not listed in section 80 or that it does not contain
grounds that this cannot be the
subject of external merits review by the
Tribunal. The Tribunal’s role is that of independent merits review, to
give affected
parties an opportunity to have an external independent body review
afresh all the evidentiary material and determine whether the
preferable decision has been made by the Registrar. The Tribunal considered it
would be a “lacuna” in administrative
review of child support
decisions if such decisions fell outside the external review process. The
Tribunal does not accept there
is a gap in the legislation, as submitted by the
Registrar. It is the important role of the Tribunal to review such decisions and
if they are incorrect to rectify the error. Alternatively, if a decision is not
in the specified list or does not contain any grounds,
the Tribunal can confirm
there is no jurisdiction to review the decision sought to be reviewed. This role
of review has been accepted
in the social security review process (
example – Kerferd and Secretary, Department of Education, Employment and
Workplace relations
[2008] AATA 446
, Kerferd and Secretary, Department Families,
Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs
[2009] AATA 148
; Nisha and
Department of Families and Community Services
[2003] AATA 378
Centrelink and/ or the Tribunal determine there is no reviewable
case law in taxation, which has similar objection provisions, demonstrates that
the AAT has a role to review decisions where it
is contended that there is no
objection or no objection decision. In
Szajntop v The Commissioner of
[1993] FCA 231
, the Full Federal Court considered the jurisdiction
of the AAT in a case where the Commissioner contended the objection was invalid
because the objection contained no grounds. In that case, the primary issue was
whether an objection was valid. The Court accepted
the concession by the parties
that if the objection was invalid because it disclosed no grounds then the AAT
had no jurisdiction
to review any decision made by the Commissioner in respect
of the objection. The question of whether there is an objection decision
reviewable by the AAT or whether there has been a “valid” objection
has been regularly determined by the AAT when considering
whether it has
Cumins and Commissioner of Taxation
[2008] AATA 716
Taxpayer and Commissioner of Taxation
[1997] AATA 501
, Garrett and Commissioner
of Taxation[2008] AATA 749)
in respect of a particular review application in
the taxation scheme. This Tribunal has a similar role
in the child support
Tribunal notes the submission of the Registrar that
“care needs to
taken when applying general administrative law principles to child support
decisions. This is because it is not
the case...that the only rights that are
affected are those of the applicant and the Commonwealth. Administrative
decisions made
under the child support legislation which may benefit one party
to a child support case will almost always result in a decision that
adverse to the other party...The allowing of an objection outside of the
legislative arrangements could be seen to unfairly
affect the interests of a
Given the Tribunal’s experience since 1 January 2007,
the Tribunal completely concurs with the observation that the child support
review system is unlike any other administrative review scheme. There is an
administrative agency plus two distinct parties with
very different vested
interests in the decisions made by the Agency and the Tribunal, and almost
always one party will be adversely
affected by a decision under the Assessment
Act and/or Registration Act. In addition, the dispute usually centres on the
of monies payable by one private individual to another private
individual for the support of their dependent children, rather than
between a Commonwealth agency and one individual. In this context, the Tribunal
understands the reluctance to involve the
other party in an objection process if
an objection is in relation to a decision outside the specified decisions in
section 80 or
is completely without merit. This is particularly so given the
history between some parties, who in many instances only want limited
dealings with each other. The Tribunal notes that sub-section 85(2) enables the
Registrar to not serve the objection on the
other party in limited circumstances
involving departure applications. However, payers and payees should be able to
seek external
merits review of decisions that affect their rights of review and
any other potential affected party is entitled to be part of the
irrespective of the merits of the review application. It is always open to
Parliament to extend the operation of subsection
85(2) to other types of
reviewable decisions.
stated by Mr Carroll the approach advocated by the Agency leaves it open for the
Agency in any case to avoid dealing with an objection
by ruling the objection
invalid thereby denying the person a right to seek review of an Agency decision
by the Tribunal. The Tribunal
concurs with Mr Carroll’s submission that it
is unfair for the Agency to be able to decide that an objection does not
an objection with the consequence that the person objecting has no
remedy (other than judicial review) to seek an independent review
conclusion. The Tribunal notes it would be a lacuna in the administration of
merits review of Agency decisions if a person
was in essence prohibited from any
merits review processes because the Agency decided that an objection was not
valid and therefore
had not been considered by the Registrar. The Tribunal
considers that when the Registrar receives a letter purporting to be an
the Registrar is obliged to consider that objection letter to
determine whether that letter meets the requirements of sections 81
falls within one of the decisions listed in section 80 and if so, to assess the
merits of the objection.
the Tribunal is incorrect in its conclusions above, then in the alternative the
Tribunal considers that a decision that an objection
is invalid is a decision
under section 87 of the Registration Act and this is reviewable by the Tribunal.
Where the Registrar determines
that an objection does not meet the formal
requirements, then in reality, the Registrar has considered the objection and
that the objection does not meet the legal requirements of the
Registration Act and therefore there is no jurisdiction to determine
objection and this constitutes a decision under subsection 87(1). In reaching
this conclusion the Tribunal considered the following
The only power
conferred on the Registrar to make a decision in relation to an objection is
section 87. There is no other power conferred
on the Registrar to determine that
an objection is not to be accepted because it is not proper or is
Looking at the
child support legislative scheme more broadly, the Tribunal notes there are
other provisions in the child support scheme,
in particular, in the Assessment
Act which give the power to the Registrar to decide whether an act is
for example if an application for an administrative
assessment has been properly made or an application for acceptance of an
has been properly made. These provisions explicitly require the
Registrar to be satisfied that the applications were “properly
made”. There is no such equivalent legislative requirement for an
objection to be “properly made” to be accepted
The Tribunal
noted the comments in
Ward v Nicholls
where Wilcox J
“Consequently, I am of the view that s.154(1), properly construed,
had no relevance to the decision of the second Board, and
that the Board was
incorrect in regarding that section as an inhibition upon its considering Mr
Ward's second application on its
merits. I add that, even if there had been a
problem about s.154,
it was an incorrect
choice of language to say
that the Board had "no jurisdiction" in the matter. The Board
to review the decision of the Commission, and thereafter to make a
decision in writing
affirming the decision under review, varying the
decision under review or setting aside
the decision under review and
making a decision in substitution for the decision so set
the matter had come before the second Board within the six month period, as
properly computed, it is correct to say that
the Board would have been bound
affirmed the decision under review
for the reason that it was
not free to give effect to the claim for an increased disability pension. But,
in so doing, it would have
been exercising the jurisdiction given to it by
It would not have been in a position of
lacking jurisdiction.
35. The point just made may seem to be captious. I do not wish to be
unfair to a Board which is not necessarily constituted with a
legal member. The
reason for making the observation is that, with respect to the learned Deputy
President, I think
that the failure to correctly analyse the position
caused him to fall into error in considering the position of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal. The Administrative Appeals Tribunal has jurisdiction, under
Part X of the Veterans' Entitlement Act, to review
decisions by a Veterans'
Board. Section 175(1) of that Act provides:
"175. (1) Where a decision made by the Commission has been reviewed by the
Board upon a request made under section 135 and affirmed
or set aside, then,
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
application may be made to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for a review
(a) of the decision of the Commission that was so affirmed;
(b) of the decision made by the Board in substitution for the decision so set
aside, as the case may be."
36.. Mr Bannon took the view that the Tribunal was not being asked to
review a decision by the Board to affirm the decision by the
Commission. I can
understand his taking that view, but I think that it stems from the incorrect
analysis made by the second Board
of its own position. If, as I have suggested,
the effect of what the second Board did was to affirm the decision of the
Commission,
then it is plain that the Administrative Appeals Tribunal had
If these comments of Wilcox J were applied strictly to the child support
objection process then the only decision open to the Registrar
on an invalid
objection is to disallow the objection as there is no jurisdiction. The Tribunal
observes that the comments of Wilcox
J, whilst not binding in respect of the
child support review scheme, do support the proposition that a decision that an
is not valid” and therefore a decision of “no
only power to make such a decision is subsection 87(1).
the Tribunal
light of the discussion above, the Tribunal determined that the decision on 25
February 2011 that Mr Carroll’s objection
was “invalid”
constitutes a no jurisdiction decision by the Registrar which is reviewable by
the Tribunal.
Tribunal then considered whether the objection lodged by Mr Carroll on 12
January 2011 met the requirements of sections 80, 81
Objection within time
first issue the Tribunal considered was whether the letter dated 12 January 2011
from Mr Carroll (objection letter 1) was lodged
within 28 days after the notices
of 13 December 2010 were served on Mr Carroll, in accordance with section 81 of
the Registration
Act. The Tribunal asked for evidence regarding the delivery of
the letters dated 13 December 2010. Mr Carroll gave evidence that
he received
the letters of 13 December 2010 on 20 December 2010. Ms Harold, on behalf of the
Registrar, told the Tribunal that those
letters would go to the mailing house on
13 December 2010 and would usually be mailed within 48 hours out to the intended
recipients,
unless there is some sort of issue at the mailing house. She could
clarify on what date these letters were sent, if required. Ms
Harold confirmed
that there was a policy by the Agency that an additional 9 days was added to the
date on the letter to allow for
any possible delays in mailing when assessing
whether an objection had been lodged within time or not. They will also extend
9 days if there are any public holidays in that 9 day period. Ms Harold
agreed that the Agency did not dispute that the letter of
12 January 2011 (if it
was an objection) was lodged within time in response to the notices of 13
December 2010.
Tribunal is satisfied on the information available that Mr Carroll lodged
objection letter 1 within 28 days of service of the
notices issued on 13
December 2010 and therefore complied with section
Provisional notional child support assessment – no
Tribunal raised with Mr Carroll that, if his objection was only in relation to
the provisional notional child support assessment,
it was open to the Tribunal
to determine that it had no jurisdiction as there are no objection rights under
the Registration Act
regarding provisional notional child support assessments.
Mr Carroll responded that he understood that he did have objection rights
that was contained in the letter sent to him. The Tribunal drew Mr
Carroll’s attention to the provisional notional assessment
notice dated 13
December 2010 and noted that the provisional notional assessment notice did not
contain any statement to the effect
that there were objection rights. He stated
that most Agency letters included objection rights and he receives assessments
month and understands that he can object. He appreciates now having been
advised by the Agency that there are no objection rights
to provisional notional
notices of assessment, however that does not preclude him from objecting to the
particulars in the other
notice that he received that day.
looking at the letter dated 12 January 2011 from Mr Carroll (objection letter 1)
it is apparent to the Tribunal that Mr Carroll
has objected to two decisions.
The heading of objection letter 1 makes clear that Mr Carroll is referring to
the provisional notional
child support assessment issued on 13 December 2010.
Objection letter 1 then refers to various particulars – for example income
and care. To the extent that objection letter 1 objects to the provisional
notional assessment, the Tribunal determined it has no
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to consider the review application in
respect of the decision that there is
no jurisdiction to consider the objection
regarding the provisional notional assessment. The Tribunal determined that a
only object to the particulars in a notional assessment issued under
subsection 146E(4) of the Assessment Act. The notice dated 13
December 2010 was
a provisional notional child support assessment issued under subsection 146B(3),
and a decision to issue such a
notice and the particulars of such an assessment
does not fall within the list of specified decisions set out in subsection
that can be the subject of an objection review.
support assessments dated 13 December 2010 – identifiable decision and
Registrar contends that if the Tribunal took jurisdiction in review number
Decision A then the Tribunal should determine there
is no jurisdiction to
consider the objection as it did not contain any grounds for objection and
therefore failed to comply with
section 84.
(i) General principles – grounds – “give fully and
in detail the grounds relied on”
84 of the Registration Act states:
“The objection must state or give fully and in detail the grounds
relied on.”
Tribunal accepts that where an objection fails to include “fully and in
detail the grounds relied on”, it does not
meet the requirements of
section 84 and the objection is invalid (
Szajntop v The Commissioner of
[1993] FCA 231)
. The requirement to provide grounds is a
legislative requirement to assist in determining what aspects of the decision of
is being objected to and why. The issue before the Tribunal is
whether Mr Carroll’s objection letter 1 contained “fully
detail the grounds relied on”.
Szajntop’s case
, which considered the requirement under the tax
objection system of whether a particular letter contained grounds that were
“fully and in detail”
, Gray J commented:
Over the years, the courts have tended to substitute for the words
"fully and in detail" formulations which appear less stringent
than the words of
the statute. These attempts go back at least to R. v Deputy Commissioner of
Taxation for Western Australia; Ex
parte Copley
[1923] ArgusLawRp 76
(1923) 30 ALR 86
, at p87, where
Knox CJ said:-
"I think it is effective notice of objection under the Act if the written
communication is expressed in words that are reasonably
calculated to convey to
the understanding of the person to whom it is addressed (1) that the taxpayer
contends that the assessment
is not in accordance with law; and (2) the grounds
on which that contention is based."
In the same case, at p 88, Starke J pointed out that an objection need not
be in formal language, or in language that lawyers would
adopt. In A.L. Campbell
and Co. Pty. Ltd. v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1951] HCA 36
, at p 461, Dixon J (as he then was) said that grounds of objection
should not be interpreted technically, narrowly or with rigidity.
In H.R. Lancey
Shipping Co. Pty. Ltd. v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1951) 9 ATD 267
273, Williams J said:-
"The grounds of objection need not be stated in legal form, they can be
expressed in ordinary language, but they should be sufficiently
explicit to
direct the attention of the respondent to the particular respects in which the
taxpayer contends that the assessment
is erroneous and his reasons for this
contention. In each case the sufficiency of the grounds is a matter for the
Court. Vague grounds
such as that the assessment is excessive are not, in my
opinion, a compliance with the Act."
13. In Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Western Suburbs Cinemas Ltd.
[1952] HCA 28
(1952) 86 CLR 102
, at p 106, Kitto J applied the test of asking
whether the Commissioner, when considering whether an objection should be
could reasonably be expected to gather from the written objection that
he was being asked to apply his mind to a particular contention.
In Archer Bros.
Pty. Ltd. v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1953] HCA 23
(1953) 90 CLR 140
at p 149, the Full High Court referred to several of these authorities and
declined to allow a particular contention to be raised
in reliance on a ground
which was said to be expressed too vaguely. In Poole v Federal Commissioner of
[1970] HCA 25
(1970) 122 CLR 427
, at pp 441-442, Walsh J pointed out
that the sufficiency of what is stated must be determined according to the
circumstances of each
14. In Executor of Estate of Weinberg v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1983) 83 ATC 4747, at p 4750, Brooking J set out various
formulations derived
from the authorities as to how an objection might comply with the requirement
that its grounds be stated fully
and in detail:-
"So it is said that the objection must fairly cover the point; that it
must convey to the Commissioner that the objector would rely
upon the point;
that it must be sufficiently explicit to direct the Commissioner's attention to
the particular respects in which
the taxpayer contends that the assessment is
erroneous and his reasons for this contention; that the grounds must be intended
cover the point and that they must convey it to the Commissioner; and that
the objection should be such that the Commissioner could
reasonably be expected
to gather from it that he was being asked to apply his mind to the
contention."
majority judges, Black CJ and Burchett J stated:
The question in this case is not whether the taxpayer had a ground of
objection that might succeed but whether she had any valid ground
of objection
at all, that is, any intelligible ground of objection that was stated fully and
in detail. For the reasons we have given,
we consider that the letter sent by
the tax agent on behalf of the taxpayer did state a ground of objection. The
question then becomes
whether it can be said that the ground of objection was
stated fully and in detail as that requirement has been interpreted in the
to which the primary judge referred: H.R. Lancey Shipping Co. Pty Ltd. v.
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1951) 9 ATD 267
at 273 per Williams J; A.L.
Campbell and Co. Pty Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1951] HCA 36
(1951) 82 CLR 452
at 461 per Dixon J; Archer Bros. Pty Ltd. v. Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1953] HCA 23
(1953) 90 CLR 140
at 149; Poole v.
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1970] HCA 25
(1970) 122 CLR 427
Walsh J; Estate of Weinberg v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 83 ATC 4,747
at 4,749 per Brooking J, and the cases there cited.
26. The requirement that the grounds be stated fully and in detail has not
been taken to mean that the grounds have to be lengthy
or complicated. In
Lighthouse Philatelics Pty Ltd v. Commissioner of Taxation
(1991) 32 FCR 148
the Full Court of this Court, in outlining the history of the amendment to s.
190(a) of the Act to allow the Tribunal or court to
permit a taxpayer to rely
upon grounds not stated in his objection said (at 151-152):
"...objections which were supposed to be able to be written in layman's
language with a minimum of formality, provided they conveyed
to the Commissioner
the substance of what the taxpayer desired to argue, often became a
proliferation of technical pleadings, seemingly
commencing at s. 1 of the Act
and proceeding to at least s. 260, contained in hundreds of pages and signifying
nothing to the Commissioner
of the real issue in dispute."
27. Grotesque objections of this nature were unnecessary. In H.R. Lancey
Shipping Co. Pty Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation,
the grounds that were
considered sufficient by Williams J were as follows:
"(5) That the amount of compensation received by the company from the
Department of the Navy which has been included, is not assessable
income of the
(6) That such compensation is of a capital nature and is not made
assessable by any of the provisions of the Income Tax Assessment
28. In the circumstances of that case they were regarded as "sufficiently
explicit to direct the attention of the (Commissioner) to
the particular
respects in which the taxpayer contends the assessment is erroneous and his
reasons for that contention" (see at 268
and 273). See also, Poole v. Federal
Commissioner of Taxation at 441.
29. If the letter is read in the way we have discussed and it is accepted
that the tax returns to which it refers are to be read as
incorporated in the
objection by reference, the ground is in our view stated "fully and in detail"
as that expression has come to
be understood in accordance with the
authorities.
30. It tells the Commissioner the extent to which the taxpayer contends
the assessments are excessive, why she says they are excessive
and precisely
what the taxpayer says her true income from all sources was for the years in
question. By incorporating the tax returns,
the objection also tells the
Commissioner what the taxpayer says are the sources of what she contends was her
only income for the
years in question.
31. What the letter does not do is to give the Commissioner any useful
information at all, let alone any detail, about the betterment
statement that
provided the basis for the assessment, but in our view the failure to do so does
not mean that there is no valid ground
of objection. As we would interpret the
letter, the ground the taxpayer puts forward must be taken to ignore the
betterment statement
and to put her whole case on the simple basis that her
income in each year was of a particular amount and that the assessment is
excessive because it assesses tax on the erroneous basis that she derived income
of greater amounts in relevant years. That is a
case she is entitled to seek to
make out. The fact that it might be thought to be a hopeless case unless the
taxpayer positively
and directly challenges the betterment statement, or parts
of it, does not mean that the ground she has chosen is not a ground that
recognises or that it is not stated fully or in detail.”
Szajntop’s case
considered the requirement in relation to
objections under tax law, the Tribunal considers it is appropriate to apply
these principles
when determining whether there are grounds stated “fully
and in detail” under child support law.
ii) Assessment Notices issued on 13 December 2010 – identifiable
letter 1 raised a wide range of matters that Mr Carroll was objecting to. The
Tribunal accepts that from the heading of
objection letter 1 it is difficult to
ascertain that Mr Carroll was also objecting to the other assessments issued on
13 December
2010. However upon reading objection letter 1 closely it is quite
apparent that he objects to the change to the care percentage for
Melanie and
also by cross referencing the page numbers referred to in Mr Carroll’s
letter with the Agency assessments issued
on 13 December 2010 it is apparent he
is also objecting to the other particulars of the other assessments issued on 13
December 2010.
The Tribunal is satisfied that Mr Carroll is objecting to the
assessment notices for the period 1 June 2009 to 30 November 2011 issued
December 2010 that accompanied the notice headed –
“A change to
your percentage of care”.
(iii) Assessment Notices issued on 13 December 2010 - grounds –
“fully and in detail”
next issue for the Tribunal to consider is whether Mr Carroll’s objection
to the assessment notices issued on 13 December
2010 state fully and in detail
the grounds relied on.
the hearing Mr Carroll indicated to the Tribunal that he was no longer pursuing
all the matters that he listed in his letter dated
12 January 2011. The Tribunal
notes that a number of the matters listed by Mr Carroll are not particulars of
the assessments and
therefore could not be resolved in the objection process.
Similarly, upon reading objection letter 1 it is apparent in some instances
Carroll has requested an explanation for the contents of the notices rather than
to specifically set out why he disagrees with
the contents of the notices.
However there are a number of key particulars which Mr Carroll still wishes to
pursue that can be the
subject of an objection. The Tribunal was not assisted by
any detailed submissions from the Registrar as to why the contents of objection
letter 1 failed to meet section 84 – the Registrar making only the broad
submission that Mr Carroll’s objections did
not contain or properly
describe any grounds for objection.
light of the principles established in
Szajntop’s case
Tribunal has considered each of the paragraphs that Mr Carroll seeks to pursue
as an objection to the assessments in his letter
of 12 January 2011 and reached
the following conclusions as to whether a ground is stated fully and in
Paragraph 1
– The description of Mr Carroll as an FAO customer is contained in the
provisional notional assessment covering
letter and is not a particular of an
assessment that can be the subject of an objection. Therefore this objection is
outside the
Paragraph 2
– Mr Carroll has objected to the summary of the child support agreement as
reflected in the assessment notices.
The Tribunal notes that section 76 of the
Assessment Act sets out what matters must be contained in an administrative
notice, including details of the child support agreement where a lump
sum is payable. The Tribunal does not have a copy of the relevant
child support
agreement to determine if it included a lump sum. On the information available
the Tribunal considers that Mr Carroll
has set out why he objects to the
particular in the assessment notice regarding the child support agreement and is
therefore satisfied
he has set out his grounds in compliance with section 84.
The Tribunal notes that the objection may have no merit as the child support
agreement does not contain a lump sum component or does not have a term that
impacts on the administrative assessment, but it has
been included as part of
the assessment notices issued by the Agency, so on the material available, is a
matter that can be reviewed
through the objection process, as a particular of
the assessment.
Paragraph 3
– Mr Carroll has objected to care percentages attributed to him and Ms
Webb and asserted what the care percentages
should be. The Tribunal is satisfied
that this complies with section 84 and is a valid objection to the care
particulars in the assessments.
Paragraph 4
– Mr Carroll has raised his concerns regarding the inclusion of a
statement regarding an asterisk in the notices
stating the “value has been
determined according to your child support agreement” and requested that
the Agency “please
provide this information to permit validation of the
assessment.” The Tribunal does not consider this statement to be an
but a request for further information.
Paragraph 8 - Mr
Carroll has objected to the amendment to the provisional adjusted taxable income
to $39,236 attributed to him from
the previous amount and noted that the amended
sum is incorrect for the 2010/2011 year. The Tribunal considers that Mr Carroll
stated his ground with sufficient detail, such that it complies with section
Paragraph 9
– Mr Carroll has objected to not receiving notices that discretely deal
with the period’s pre 1 July 2010
and post 1 July 2010, as previously
advised to Mr Carroll. The letter goes on to state
“please provide the
assessment presented in such parts as advised by the Agency.
Tribunal does not consider this statement to be an objection but a request for
further information.
Paragraphs 11
and 12 – The Tribunal considers these paragraphs should be read in
conjunction with the Agency letter of 1 November
2010 (referred to in paragraphs
11 and 12) which together make clear that Mr Carroll objects to the percentage
of care attributed
to each parent in respect of Melanie as a result of the
notification by Ms Webb on 23 June 2010. It is clear to the Tribunal that
Carroll considers that if a care change was made from 12 May 2010, then an
interim care determination should have been made in
respect of Melanie as a
result of the alleged contravention of court orders. The Tribunal is satisfied
that Mr Carroll has sufficiently
stated his grounds to comply with section
Agency has submitted that if the Tribunal considers that an objection has been
lodged then the objection should be remitted for
consideration by the Registrar.
Mr Carroll has submitted that he may prefer other options than remitting the
matter back to the Registrar
as the Agency has demonstrated :
“a. its lack of competency and integrity to understand such review
b. a lack of internal procedures, rigor, and consistency in dealing with
objections.
c. That it willingly misrepresents the case correspondence to its own
d. It does not honour its commitments and accepts no responsibility for
its actions.
e. it is negligent in acting on or responding to customer
communications.” ...
reviewing the material the Tribunal considers, despite Mr Carroll’s
concerns, that the most appropriate course is to refer
this matter back to the
Agency for the Registrar to reconsider the objection and to make a fresh
decision under subsection 87(1).
In reconsidering the objection the Registrar is
directed to reconsider objections in paragraphs 2, 3, 8, 11 and 12 of objection
1. Further the Tribunal notes that Ms Webb has not had an opportunity to
date to respond to the objection and the Registrar will
need to send the
objection to Ms Webb for her response, prior to the Registrar making a decision
under section 87.
Consideration – Decision B -
decision made on 25 February 2011
Decision B -
issue for the Tribunal to consider in this case is whether the Tribunal has
of the Agency on 25
February 2011 that the objection lodged by Mr Carroll on 10 February 2011 was
Factual Background to Decision
is no dispute between the parties about the central facts in this case. The
Tribunal finds based on the Agency records the sequence
of events occurred as
set out in paragraphs below.
1 February 2011 the Agency issued a letter to Mr Carroll headed,
change to your child support payment amount”
. The letter explained
that the Agency had made changes to administrative assessments for the period
from 1 June 2010 to 31 August
2010 and enclosed assessment notices for the
period 1 June 2010 to 31 August 2010. The covering letter also noted that Mr
had an outstanding child support amount of $2,014.26 and as the Agency
did not have the taxable income for the financial year, the
Agency had to use a
provisional income to calculate the child support.
10 February 2011 Mr Carroll wrote to the Child Support Agency in a letter headed
“I wish to object the CSA provisional notional child support assessment
dated 1 February 2011 and received 7 February 2011”
(objection letter
The letter then went on to list numerous concerns that Mr Carroll had
in relation to the Agency letter dated 1 February 2011, including
letter contradicts previous Agency letters with no explanation for the change,
the amount owed of $2,014.26, and the percentage
of care attributed to the
parents for Melanie.
15 February 2010 a personalised services agency officer wrote to Mr Carroll in
response to his letter dated 10 February 2011. This
letter was not part of an
objections process but part of a personalised case management process that has
been implemented by the
Agency. The letter responded to various aspects of
objection letter 2 from a service delivery perspective of explaining the
of recent Agency decisions rather than from an objections perspective
of reviewing the recent decisions made by the Agency. The officer
explanations regarding a recent error in the assessments, a change to the
account due to the change in care attributed to
the parents in respect of
Melanie, the derived income attributed to Mr Carroll, late payment penalties and
the overdue account. In
one respect, the officer requested clarification –
“The decision to change the care for Melanie from 12 May 2010 was made
on 13 December 2010. Can you clarify if you wish to proceed
with an objection to
that decision or are you applying for a new interim care determination so that I
can provide further assistance?”
The Agency gave no timeframe to Mr
Carroll to respond to this request for clarification. In this context it should
be noted that Mr
Carroll is a self imposed write only customer – in other
words he only wants to communicate with the Agency in writing.
25 February 2011 the Chief Operating Officer of the Agency wrote to Mr Carroll
in the following terms:
“I refer to your letter of objection received on 10 February
I confirm that under child support legislation your objection is invalid
due to the following reason: A valid objection must
Be about a decision for which there is an objection right under the
Registration and Collection Act. This can be about a decision
that was made
under the Assessment Act or the Registration and Collection Act.
CSA cannot clearly identify which decision you are objecting to.
The matters you referred to in your letter have been referred to your
personalised services case manager for follow up.
27 February 2011 Mr Carroll responded to the letter of 15 February 2011, and in
part wrote that
“I have objected to the CSA assessments dated 13 Dec
2010 and 7 Feb 2011 for multiple reasons. No information has been provided
that address my concerns re these assessments and they have not been corrected
so I have no reason to withdraw my objections.”
Unfortunately by the
time this correspondence reached the Agency a decision had already been made on
25 February 2011 in respect of
objection letters 1 and 2.
8 March 2011 Mr Carroll lodged an application for a review with the Tribunal
seeking a review of the decision dated 25 February
Harold on behalf of the Registrar made the following comments in regards to the
matter. Due to the restrictions in the way that
the Agency could communicate
with Mr Carroll it made it challenging for the Agency to communicate with him to
decide whether there
were grounds to his objection and to respond to his
objection letters. Where a person has multiple queries there are some instances,
like this case, where a person is allocated a case manager who intensively
manages and provides customer service to get the best
outcomes for that
particular customer as can be evidenced from the letter that was sent to Mr
Carroll on 11 April 2011 and 15 February
2011. These were letters to try and
address the many concerns that had been raised by Mr Carroll in his letters. The
way the Agency
treated this case was that the objections were deemed to be
invalid but they tried to assist him by referring him through the personalised
customer management process. This was an attempt to provide as much support to
him, to give him the best decision the first time
and not to proceed to where we
are today. The attachments to the Agency’s submissions to the Tribunal
were an attempt to address
his concerns.
Tribunal put to the Agency representatives if the Tribunal was to accept the
Agency’s submission that the letter of 12 January
2011 had been determined
not to be an objection then why on 15 February 2011 did the Agency ask Mr
Carroll in its correspondence
whether he wished to proceed with his care
objection, what care objection were they referring to in that particular letter.
responded that it was still not clear at that stage whether Mr Carroll
had lodged an objection and they were still seeking clarification
Carroll about what he was objecting to. In Ms Morris’s submission if he
had lodged an objection then they would not
have needed to clarify in the letter
of 15 February 2011 what he was objecting to or that an objection had not been
lodged at that
Carroll stated that he experiences delays of up to 2 weeks from the date of the
CSA letters to the date that he receives the correspondence
from the Agency. His
letter dated 27 February 2011 saying that he had no reason to withdraw his
objection and was seeking to proceed
with his objection seemed to have crossed
paths with the letter that he dated the 25 February 2011 indicating that his
had been ruled invalid. He also noted that the letter of 15 February
2011 did not ask him for additional information for the purposes
of establishing
the grounds of his objection.
Review by the
Registrar and Mr Carroll adopted the submissions they previously made in
Decision A, as outlined above, for the purposes of Review
Decision B. Ms Webb
made no submissions.
light of the discussion above, the Tribunal determined that the decision on 25
February 2011 that Mr Carroll’s objection
received on 10 February 2011 was
invalid constitutes a no jurisdiction decision which is a decision reviewable by
the Tribunal.
Registrar contends that if the Tribunal took jurisdiction then the Tribunal
should determine there is no jurisdiction to consider
the objection as it did
not contain any grounds for objection and failed to comply with section 84. The
Tribunal did not ask Mr Carroll
to set out which parts of the letter dated 10
February 2011 he still wished to pursue. From reading objection letter 2 it is
in some instances Mr Carroll has requested an explanation for the
contents of the notices rather than sought to specifically set
disagrees with the contents of the notice of 1 February 2011. However, the
Tribunal has reviewed objection letter 2 and
is satisfied that Mr Carroll has
complied with section 84 in respect of the objections described in paragraphs
5,6, 12 and 13 for
the reasons set out above (see equivalent paragraphs in
objection letter 1 – re paragraphs 2,3, 11 and 12 respectively) but
not considered the other paragraphs in detail. The Tribunal is therefore
satisfied that the objection does include in some respects
grounds that comply
with section 84. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that the letter of 10
February 2011 complies with sections
80, 81 and 84.
Agency has submitted that the objection should be remitted for consideration if
the Tribunal considers there is an objection.
Mr Carroll has submitted that he
has concerns, as outlined above, about remitting the matter back to the
Registrar for reconsideration.
reviewing the material, the Tribunal considers that the most appropriate course
is to remit this matter back to the Agency and
for the objection to follow the
legislative process, by sending objection letter 2 to Ms Webb for her response
and to then reconsider
objection letter 2 and to make a fresh decision under
subsection 87(1). Given the passage of time since the letter was sent to the
Agency, the Tribunal recommends that the Agency clarify with Mr Carroll in
writing which issues he still wishes to have reviewed.
Again, the Tribunal notes
that some concerns may not be resolved by way of the objections process as they
do not relate to the particulars
of the assessment or within the list of
specified decision in subsection 80(1).
respect of Decision B the Tribunal decided to set aside the decision under
review and remit the objection in relation to the assessment
notice issued on 1
February 2011 for reconsideration by the Registrar under subsection 87(1) of the
Registration Act.
Consideration of Decision C –
objection out of time
Decision C -
issue for the Tribunal to consider in this case is whether the Tribunal has
of the Agency on 31 March
2011 that the Agency could not “accept” Mr Carroll’s letter
lodged on 27 March 2011 as
an objection in relation to his provisional income in
a notional assessment of child support issued on 11 March 2011 because it was
lodged too late.
Factual Background to Decision
factual matters in this matter are not in dispute. The Tribunal’s findings
are set out below.
11 March 2011 the Agency issued a notional child support assessment to Mr
Carroll setting out the particulars of the child support
assessment as at 11
March 2011.
27 March 2011 Mr Carroll wrote to the Agency a letter headed
object to the CSA notional child support assessment dated 11 March 2011 and
received 15 March 2011”.
In that letter he stated that as follows
“I object to the CSA decision to use adjustable taxable income for
myself of $39,236”.
He objected because he contends that on 3 February
2011 he advised the Agency of an income amount to use and that amount has not
used in the assessment.
31 March 2011 the Chief Operating Officer wrote to Mr Carroll and stated that
“unfortunately we cannot accept your letter of 27 March 2011 as an
objection because it was lodged too late
11 April 2011 Mr Carroll lodged an application for review with this Tribunal
seeking a review of the decision made on 31 March
Contentions of the parties
Carroll contends that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to review the decision of
the Agency on 31 March 2011 and submits that his
objection was not lodged out of
time. He told the Tribunal that he had notified the Agency on 3 February 2011 of
his income and this
amount should have been used in the notional assessment of
11 March 2011.
Webb made no submissions regarding the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Ms Webb
stated that she contacted the Agency also in relation
to the adjusted taxable
income of $39,236. She said that she queried with the Agency about the amount
that they had used because
it affected the amount he was liable to pay her. She
did not herself lodge an objection in relation to the income figure used for
Carroll. She told the Tribunal that she was advised that the Agency could not
change the figure and that Mr Carroll needed to
provide a tax return in order to
have the right 2010 taxable income used for assessment. She did not take any
further action because
it was her belief based on the advice of the Agency that
a tax return needed to be lodged in order that the true income is set out
tax return was reflected in the assessment. She did query and ring the Agency
several times but was always told the same thing.
the submissions lodged by the Registrar on 20 September 2011 the Registrar did
not specifically address the issue of whether the
Tribunal had jurisdiction to
review the decision made on 31 March 2011 by the Agency officer. Although, from
the submissions lodged
on 8 August 2011 it is apparent that in general terms the
Registrar contends that there is a staged objection process and if an objection
is lodged out of time and is not accompanied by an application for an extension
of time, the objection can be taken to have not been
properly made and therefore
is not valid. Further that a decision that an objection is not properly made, is
not a decision that
can be the subject of review by the Tribunal. However, the
Agency conceded that Mr Carroll did have objection rights to object to
provisional income attributed to him in the notional assessment issued on 11
March 2011 and that the objection was
lodged out of time.
Review by the Tribuna
light of the conclusions above, the Tribunal determined that a decision that an
objection was lodged out of time (where there was
no accompanying extension
application) and cannot be accepted as an objection, is an operative decision
that constitutes a no jurisdiction
decision by the Registrar which is reviewable
by the Tribunal.
the circumstances of this case, the Tribunal concluded that it had jurisdiction
to review the decision made on 31 March 2011 not
to accept the objection as it
was lodged too late. The Tribunal also concluded that the objection lodged on 27
March 2011 was lodged
within the 28 days as required by section 81. Therefore
the Tribunal decided to set aside the decision not to accept the objection.
However, it is apparent that Ms Webb has not been given an opportunity to
respond to the objection and the merit of Mr Carroll’s
objection has not
been assessed by the Registrar. The Tribunal considered in the circumstances
where there has been in effect no
substantive review of the objection lodged by
Mr Carroll in respect of the income attributed to him in the notional child
assessment that the Registrar should reconsider the
respect of Decision C the Tribunal decided to set aside the decision under
review and remit the objection in relation to the provisional
adjusted taxable
income attributed to Mr Carroll in the notional assessment notice issued on 11
March 2011 for reconsideration by
the Registrar under subsection 87(1) of the
Registration Act.
Tribunal therefore decided that:
In respect of Decision A the
Tribunal set aside the decision under review and remitted the objection in
relation to the assessment
notices issued on 13 December 2010 (not the
provisional notional assessment) for reconsideration by the Registrar under
subsection 87(1)
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
with a direction that the Registrar reconsider paragraphs 2, 3, 8, 11 and 12
of the objection letter dated 12 January 2011.
In respect of Decision B
the Tribunal set aside the decision under review and remitted the objection in
relation to the assessment
notice issued on 1 February 2011 for reconsideration
by the Registrar under
subsection 87(1)
Child Support (Registration
and Collection) Act 1988
In respect of Decision C the Tribunal set
aside the decision under review and remitted the objection in relation to the
provisional
adjusted taxable income attributed to Mr Carroll in the notional
child support assessment notice issued 11 March 2011 for reconsideration
Registrar under
subsection 87(1)
Child Support (Registration and
Collection) Act 1988
Presiding Member for
the Tribunal
The publication of Social Security Appeals Tribunal child support
decisions is authorised under
subsections 16(2AB)
(2AC) of the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act
Personal particulars of parties to an appeal and their children are
removed to protect their privacy. Names used in all published
decisions are
pseudonyms. Reasons for decisions are published in full (with any information
which may identify involved individuals
to a member of the public removed) to
ensure that the full context and basis for the decision can be understood. The
Social Security
Appeal's Tribunal's decisions in relation to child support
matters demonstrate the application of the Child Support legislation to
individual circumstances of the case being decided. Different fact situations
or subsequent changes to legislation may result
in different outcomes.
The CSA reviews all SSAT decisions to identify opportunities to improve
its services and ensure its processes and policies are robust
and accurate. The
CSA publishes further information about SSAT decisions on their website
www.csa.gov.au/publications/1313.aspx#ssat
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (5.81 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter