William Gerard Tully v Boonthamurra Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC and Another [2025] NNTTA 21 (31 July 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
William Gerard Tully v Boonthamurra Native Title Aboriginal Corporation
RNTBC and Another
[2025] NNTTA 21
(31 July 2025)
Application No:
QF2024/0001
IN THE MATTER of the
Native Title Act 1993
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into a future act determination
application
William Gerard Tully
(grantee party)
Boonthamurra Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (QCD2015/008)
(native title party)
State of Queensland
(Government party)
FUTURE ACT DETERMINATION THAT THE ACT MAY BE DONE SUBJECT TO
Ms Nerida Cooley
Catchwords:
Native title – future act – s 35 application for determination
– mining claim application – power to make
determination –
whether grantee party has negotiated in good faith – grantee party has
negotiated in good faith –
Tribunal has power to proceed with future act
determination inquiry – s 39 criteria considered – effect of act on
title rights and interests – effect of act on development of
social, cultural and economic structures of native title party
– effect of
act on way of life, culture and traditions – effect of act on freedom of
access – effect of act on
sites or areas of particular significance
– interests, proposals, opinions or wishes of native title party –
or other significance of act – public interest in doing of act
– determination that the act may be done subject to conditions
Legislation:
Cultural Heritage Act 2003
Resources Act 1989
(Qld) ss 10A, 64A, 85, sch 2
Title Act 1993
(Cth) ss 7, 24MD, 25, 28, 29, 30, 31, 36, 38, 39, 41,
60AB, 237, sub-div M, sub-div P
Discrimination Act 1975
Bissett and Others v Mineral Deposits (Operations) Pty Ltd and Another
[2001] NNTTA 104
(2001) 166 FLR 46
Bissett v Mineral
Carpentaria Gold Pty Ltd/Birri People/Queensland,
Carpentaria Gold
Cheedy and Others v Western Australia and Others
[2011] FCAFC 100
(2011) 194 FCR 562
Evans and Another v Western Australia and Others
[1997] FCA 741
(1997) 77 FCR 193
Evans v Western
FMG Pilbara Pty Ltd v Cox and Others
[2009] FCAFC 49
(2009) 175 FCR 141
FMG Pilbara Pty Ltd v Yindjibarndi Ngurra Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
and Another
Garry Verdon Higgins and Another v Boonthamurra Native Title Aboriginal
Corporation RNTBC
Gomeroi People v Santos NSW Pty Ltd and Santos NSW (Narrabri Gas) Pty
Kevin Alfred De Roma v Western Yalanji Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC and
Malu Lamar (Torres Strait Islander) Corporation RNTBC v Findlay (No 2)
(2018) 265 FCR 454
Seven Star Investments Group Pty Ltd v Western Australia and Others
[2011] NNTTA 53
(2011) 257 FLR 175
State of Queensland v Central Queensland Land Council Aboriginal
Corporation and Another
[2002] FCAFC 371
(2002) 125 FCR 89
Queensland v CQLC
Stephen Christopher Purse v Guwa-Koa Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC and
Wallace on behalf of the Boonthamurra People v State of Queensland
Boonthamurra Determination
Western Australia v Thomas and Others
[1996] NNTTA 30
(1996) 133 FLR 124
Western Australia v
Western Australia/West Australian Petroleum Pty Ltd and Shell
Development (Australia) Pty Ltd/Leslie Hayes, Glenys Hayes, Judy Hayes,
Ard, Douglas Fazeldean, Valerie Ashburton, Laura Hicks and Albert Hayes on
behalf of the Thalanyji People (WC99/45)
Shell v Thalanyji
Representatives of the native title party:
David Yarrow of Counsel; Anna Matthews, Queensland South Native Title
Representative of the grantee party:
Kevin Phillips, Queensland Opal Miners Association Inc
Representatives of the Government party:
Marc McKechnie of Counsel; Leilehua Fa’onevai, Crown Law; Leonie
Crane, Julie Hookey and Amelia Johnson, Department of Natural
Resources and
Mines, Manufacturing and Regional and Rural Development
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
[1] William
Gerard Tully has applied to the Tribunal for a determination that proposed
mining claim
MC 300436 may be granted.
Boonthamurra
Native Title
Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC holds non-exclusive native title rights in trust
for the Boonthamurra People in relation
to most of the area of the mining claim
Boonthamurra Determination
[2] Mr Tully and
Boonthamurra had been negotiating about the grant of the mining claim since late
May 2023, but negotiations ceased
on lodgement of this application. The
of Queensland was also a party to the negotiations but did not take
an active role.
[3] Boonthamurra
opposes a determination by the Tribunal that the mining claim may be granted,
and it also argues that Mr Tully did
not negotiate in good faith in accordance
with s 31(1)(b) of the
Native Title Act
Boonthamurra satisfies me that Mr Tully did not negotiate in good faith,
then I do not have the power to determine whether
the mining claim may be
Native Title Act
[4] For the
reasons outlined below, I am satisfied that I have the power to determine this
matter and I have determined that the mining
claim may be granted subject to
conditions regarding cultural heritage protection.
Where is the mining claim and what activities does Mr Tully
propose to undertake?
mining claim is about 8.5 hectares in area and situated approximately 35
kilometres northwest of Eromanga in the far south-west
of Queensland.
[6] The majority
of the area underlying the mining claim is a rolling
pastoral held by Mr Tully and his brother, Jack Joseph Tully. The remainder is a
road which was excluded from the
Boonthamurra Determination
, so there is
no determination of native title over that area.
[7] There is no
designated road access directly to the mining claim. The path of access is
described in the mining claim application
by reference to waypoints. However,
Mr Tully says that the access route has since been amended and is now via
dedicated access to
the term lease from Eromanga-Windorah Road, as shown on
additional mapping provided by both Mr Tully and the State.
[8] The mining
claim falls within
Restricted Area
261 gazetted under the
Mineral Resources Act
(Qld) which the State refers to as Opal Mining Reserve Restricted Area 261.
While nothing especially turns on the existence of the
Restricted Area, it is
not in dispute that part of the mining claim area has been the subject of
previous mining activity. Mr Tully
has provided an aerial map showing areas
of previous disturbance, and Mr Richard Wallace (known as Mr Mark Wallace),
a Boonthamurra
man and a director of the corporation, states in his affidavit
that part of the area was mined for opals in the 1960s.
[9] The proposed
term of the mining claim is 10 years. The work program submitted with Mr
Tully’s application provides some
basic information about his proposed
activities including reconstructing and grading existing tracks, excavation of
trenches, the
creation of mining pits and rehabilitation. In his contentions, Mr
Tully provides the following description of his proposed activities
says will be conducted in accordance with the State’s Small Scale Mining
(b) Mining will be an open cut operation utilising a 30 tonne excavator and a
20 tonne Loader, chasing the opal levels within the
boundaries of the tenure
area which are already in part revealed within the significant ground
disturbance throughout the tenure
(c) Mining will take part only part time when either his normal work as a
contract musterer subsides due to seasonal fluctuations
and when times allows
and will be conducted over the cooler months of the year when the weather is
kinder on both man and machinery.
(d) Rehabilitation will be undertaken in accordance with the Mining Claim Permit
and the small mining code if granted. The areas
which are already
“significantly disturbed”
by historic activities, the
rehabilitation will be undertaken in accordance with the Mining Claim Permit if
(As per original)
The preliminary question – has Mr Tully negotiated in
good faith?
scope of the obligation to negotiate in good faith under s 31(1)(b) was recently
considered by the Full Court of the Federal
Court of Australia in
. The good faith requirement is directed towards the quality of a
party’s conduct. It is to be assessed by reference to what
a party has
done or failed to do in the course of negotiations and is concerned with a
party’s state of mind as manifested
by its conduct:
[11] Mortimer
CJ observed in
at [96] that the “Tribunal is after all
doing no more at the good faith constraint stage than assessing the course of a
negotiation,
and measuring it objectively against a standard of honesty, open
mindedness and willingness to listen”. The Tribunal’s
role is not to
form its own assessment of whether a particular offer was
“reasonable” or not, although making a patently
unreasonable offer
might be one indicia of a lack of fair dealing or honesty, or it may not: see
discussion in
at [95]–[97].
discussed in
at [406], the obligation to negotiate in good faith
involves both objective and subjective standards, but the reference to objective
standards is the objective standard of honesty against which a party’s
conduct is to be assessed. The good faith obligation
is principally concerned
with a negotiating party’s intention, namely whether the party has
negotiated with the aim of reaching
What happened during the negotiations?
the purposes of
Native Title Act
, the notification day for
the mining claim was 26 May 2023. Negotiations between the parties appear to
have commenced shortly thereafter
when Boonthamurra’s representative,
Queensland South Native Title Services (
) wrote to Mr Tully
enclosing a draft
Ancillary Agreement
. Negotiations continued up until Mr
Tully’s lodgement of this application. Apart from his initial
correspondence with QSNTS,
Mr Tully was represented throughout by Mr Kevin
Phillips of the Queensland Opal Miners Association Inc (
[14] Boonthamurra
relies on the course of conduct set out in the affidavit of Ms Anna Matthews, a
lawyer with QSNTS, which attached
relevant correspondence. Mr Tully referred to
much of the same information but also identified additional correspondence in
his materials.
[15] An overview
of the engagement between the parties is outlined below.
Preliminary engagement from 26 May 2023 to December 2023
Boonthamurra provided Mr Tully with the Ancillary Agreement shortly after the
notification day, little progress was made
during the remainder of 2023.
followed up on a response to the Ancillary Agreement in July 2023. Mr Tully
responded to explain his review had been delayed
by a medical issue but, having
since had the opportunity to review, he found the Ancillary Agreement
overwhelming. He also referred
to the significant previous disturbance in the
area and said he had been made aware that he could rely on the Cultural Heritage
Duty of Care Guidelines
, being guidelines made under the
Cultural Heritage Act 2003
). Mr Tully said he was in
the process of surveying the area with a view to providing disturbance mapping
and would respond with an
alternative process and agreement. Mr Tully also
advised that he had authorised Mr Phillips to be his representative.
[18] Further
exchanges occurred in September and October 2023, with Mr Phillips explaining
the health and other reasons for the delay
in response. The material indicates
that on 30 October 2023, Mr Phillips advised he was waiting on a final version
of disturbance
mapping to provide to Boonthamurra and confirmed Mr Tully
sought to progress negotiations by way of a meeting with Boonthamurra in
Quilpie. On 13 November 2023, QSNTS responded to say that it looked forward
to receiving the alleged disturbance mapping and, once
received, negotiations
could progress with the Boonthamurra board.
January to June 2024 – discussions about cultural
heritage management, agreement options, requests for a meeting and an attempt
9 January 2024, Mr Phillips provided QSNTS with two maps showing disturbance in
the mining claim area and confirmed Mr Tully
wanted to progress this matter
by using the Duty of Care
Guidelines given the extent of the prior
disturbance.
[20] Between
March and June 2024, there were several exchanges between Ms Matthews, the new
QSNTS representative for Boonthamurra,
and Mr Phillips which illustrate the
divide between the parties and Mr Tully’s efforts at finding a solution.
Some of the key
messages conveyed in those exchanges are summarised as
(a) in response to Ms Matthew’s request for an update on the progress of
Mr Tully’s review of the Ancillary Agreement,
Mr Phillips repeated Mr
Tully’s view that the Ancillary Agreement was not suitable and his desire
to rely on the Duty of Care
Guidelines;
(b) Ms Matthews sought to explain why Mr Tully’s approach was not
acceptable in the context of the right to negotiate, repeating
requests for a
response to the Ancillary Agreement, as well as later noting that the previous
disturbance did not cover the whole
of the mining claim area;
(c) Mr Phillips advised Mr Tully’s view was that the Ancillary Agreement
was “too onerous” and again proposed a
face to face meeting between
the parties;
(d) on a number of occasions, Mr Phillips raised the prospect of using previous
agreements negotiated by QOMA with Boonthamurra as
a model in this matter,
subject to Boonthamurra’s agreement (noting confidentiality constraints),
but this was rejected by
Ms Matthews in part due to the confidentiality issue;
(e) Ms Matthews indicated she would seek instructions in relation to a meeting
between Boonthamurra and Mr Tully but noted Mr Tully
would need to pay the costs
of a meeting.
[21] On 19 June
2024, Mr Phillips requested mediation assistance from the Tribunal on behalf of
Mr Tully, which he had foreshadowed
with QSNTS. Boonthamurra was not amenable to
mediation at that time, with Ms Matthews advising both the Tribunal and Mr
that Boonthamurra preferred to endeavour to progress negotiations
through a meeting between the parties first. I note that in his
contentions, Mr
Tully says he felt given the impasse between the parties, a meeting was more
likely to come to fruition with mediation.
Boonthamurra contends there was no
impasse, it just preferred the parties to meet first, although Ms
Matthews’ various emails
with Mr Phillips and communication with the
Tribunal show that Boonthamurra’s clear preference was for the parties to
the negotiations themselves and only consider mediation if those
endeavours failed. Because of Boonthamurra’s position, the
terminated the mediation before any substantive step was taken. The material
indicates that Mr Phillips, for Mr Tully, was
unhappy with that event and
felt that the reason for termination had not been adequately explained at the
July to October 2024 – efforts to meet and costs
[22] Despite
these apparent setbacks, the parties continued to discuss a proposed meeting.
Between 23 July 2024 and 8 August 2024,
parties exchanged correspondence
relating to the costs of a meeting between Boonthamurra and Mr Tully.
Boonthamurra put forward two
alternate budgets; one for a meeting in Eromanga
(estimated at approximately $22,000 plus GST) and the other in Brisbane
at approximately $14,500 plus GST). Boonthamurra said it was also
liaising with another proponent about the possibility of cost sharing.
Mr Phillips confirmed Mr Tully was unable to afford the budgets put forward
by Boonthamurra and proposed, as an alternative, an hour
teleconference with one person from Boonthamurra and Ms Matthews as
Boonthamurra’s representative.
August 2024, Ms Matthews confirmed Boonthamurra was interested in meeting with
Mr Tully provided the meeting occurred on
country with three directors from
Boonthamurra and one legal representative from QSNTS.
September 2024, Mr Phillips confirmed that the new proposal would still be
unaffordable for Mr Tully. Mr Phillips noted
Mr Tully “still stands by his
cultural heritage inspection” but suggested, in an effort to resolve this
matter, Mr Tully
could “utilise his [two] Boonthamurra [e]mployees to
undertake a [c]ultural [h]eritage [i]nspection at a rate agreed between
and those persons”. Mr Phillips agreed to prepare a draft agreement for
Boonthamurra’s consideration if it was
willing to consider this
September 2024, Ms Matthews confirmed Boonthamurra maintained its position that
there should be a meeting between the parties
to negotiate this matter.
Ms Matthews acknowledged Mr Tully was unable to fund the meeting proposed
by Boonthamurra which, she said,
“was a significant compromise” and
requested Mr Tully to advise on what terms he would be willing to fund a
noting more than one Boonthamurra representative would be required to
attend. Ms Matthews noted Mr Tully’s proposal regarding
the cultural
heritage inspection could be discussed at the meeting but that it would be
difficult for Boonthamurra to agree to.
September 2024, Mr Phillips advised that Mr Tully had provided a proposal for a
meeting which had been rejected by Boonthamurra.
Mr Phillips said that, because
there had been no progress, he had been instructed to apply to the Tribunal for
a future act determination.
October 2024, Ms Matthews provided Mr Phillips with a brief history of
negotiations, noting Mr Tully had not engaged in
good faith negotiations and
stating his position on funding a meeting was unreasonable. Ms Matthews referred
to Boonthamurra’s
alternative meeting proposal and noted Boonthamurra was
willing to compromise on a budget so requested Mr Phillips seek instructions
an alternative meeting proposal and to reconsider applying for a future act
determination at this stage.
October 2024, Mr Phillips advised Ms Matthews that he had been instructed to
lodge this application.
What does Boonthamurra assert?
[29] Boonthamurra’s
initial contentions on the issue of good faith were relatively brief and
characterised Mr Tully’s
negotiating conduct as “halting,
hesita[nt], unresponsive and procrastinating”. It focussed on what it said
was Mr Tully’s
lack of a substantive response to the Ancillary Agreement,
his refusal to fund a meeting, rejection of alternative meeting proposals
failure to engage with Boonthamurra as with any owner of land.
[30] However, in
reply and during the hearing, Boonthamurra expanded in some detail on its
arguments, particularly as they concerned
Mr Tully’s approach to cultural
heritage and compliance with the
Mineral Resources Act
. For convenience,
I have grouped the arguments below.
Ancillary Agreement, meeting proposals and
confidentiality
number of Boonthamurra’s complaints concerning the manner in which the
negotiation proceeded and Mr Tully’s efforts
at negotiation are
interrelated and it is convenient to deal with them together.
[32] Specifically,
Boonthamurra says that Mr Tully’s failure to provide any feedback on the
Ancillary Agreement unduly delayed
the negotiations.
[33] Boonthamurra
submits that it is Mr Tully’s obligation to progress the negotiations
and/or engage external assistance to
facilitate negotiations. I note that all
parties share the obligation to negotiate in good faith. Also, it is not clear
what Boonthamurra
means by external assistance. Mr Tully did enlist the
assistance of Mr Phillips and it was Mr Tully who requested mediation by
Tribunal in June 2024. It was Boonthamurra which said it was not ready to
participate in mediation.
[34] Boonthamurra
also complains that it was not until April 2024 that Mr Tully gave any
substantive response to the Ancillary Agreement,
when he said it was too
onerous. Additionally, Boonthamurra argues that Mr Tully chose not to provide
specific feedback has been provided in Mr
Tully’s contentions. This is not entirely accurate in my view. Mr Tully
expressed his view about the Ancillary Agreement being unsuitable
from the outset, referring to it as “a bit overwhelming”
2023, although it was only in April 2024 that the word “onerous” was
used. During that time, Mr Tully did suggest
the parties could look to other
examples, although these were not agreeable to Boonthamurra. Further, the
argument Mr Tully makes
in his contentions is that to mark up the agreement
would have been virtually meaningless because of the extent to which it would
have been amended to accommodate his reliance on the Duty of Care Guidelines.
whatever reason, the parties seemed unable to progress any detailed discussion
of the issues for an agreement and there is
no evidence that either party sought
to interrogate the other’s position in any meaningful way. Just as Mr
Tully was repeating
his views, so too was Boonthamurra mostly repeating its
request for a marked-up response. On the evidence before me, neither party
appears to have picked up the telephone to explore the issues and a way forward
which seems unfortunate, as does the missed opportunity
of mediation.
[36] However, I
do not read Mr Tully’s approach as being intentionally obtuse or
unresponsive because he did proffer alternatives
and explain the reasons for his
preference to rely on the Duty of Care Guidelines.
[37] Boonthamurra
also argues that Mr Tully failed to make any reasonable proposals or
counteroffers regarding a meeting between the
parties. Mr Tully had requested a
meeting with Boonthamurra representatives as early as 30 October 2023 and this
request was repeated
on multiple occasions. After Ms Matthews became the
relevant representative for Boonthamurra, Mr Tully again made a request for a
meeting on 11 April 2024.
[38] Subsequent
discussions regarding a meeting collapsed over costs. Mr Tully says that he was
seeking an informal meeting and the
scale of meeting costs proposed by
Boonthamurra was exorbitant. Boonthamurra says that it was responding to Mr
Tully’s suggestions
for a meeting in Quilpie or Eromanga (with
Boonthamurra proposing Brisbane as a cheaper alternative) and that it also made
a reasonable
counteroffer when Mr Tully indicated he could not fund a meeting of
the scale proposed. It also proposed cost sharing measures with
other proponents
which is not uncommon. Mr Tully did offer to fund a teleconference with one
Boonthamurra representative and Ms Matthews
but once that approach was not
accepted, the negotiations came to an end.
[39] In its
reply to the State’s contentions, Boonthamurra acknowledges that there is
no obligation on any one party to fund
a meeting but says that Mr Tully’s
conduct should be considered as a whole and the position regarding funding
should also be
considered in light of more recent authorities such as
which came after the introduction of
Native Title Act
Overall, I do not disagree with those submissions, save that it is the entirety
of the negotiations that I must view as a whole.
[40] Boonthamurra
also took issue with Mr Phillips raising the possibility of taking a similar
approach to other Boonthamurra agreements
he had worked on and says that
Mr Phillips inappropriately disclosed the names of other proponents.
Boonthamurra contends that the
reliance on and disclosure of confidential
information is indicative of a failure to negotiate in good faith, although at
the hearing
it acknowledged that this issue on its own would not be critical but
is one piece of evidence which could be taken with other matters.
[41] I am not
persuaded by these arguments in the context of this matter. Mr Phillips says he
did not discuss the terms of these agreements
with Mr Tully, a point which
Boonthamurra questions in light of the agency relationship between the two.
However, Boonthamurra makes
only generalised assertions on this point and there
is no evidence regarding any breach of confidentiality. It is not clear at all
that Mr Tully identifying specific grantee parties was a breach of anything,
when presumably those individuals would have been named
notices and in
the State’s tenement register. More to the point, Mr Phillips is a peak
body representative for opal miners
with experience in negotiating for various
grantee parties. He was trying to find a path to agreement and it was in fact Mr
who first raised the issue of confidentiality, so he was alive to the
issue. It might have been possible for Mr Phillips to suggest
suitable terms
based on his experience without reference to any prior agreement or a breach of
any confidential information but he
was, in my view, simply looking for a short
cut to common ground and a suitable way forward. However, the suggested approach
not proceed past the question of confidentiality.
Mr Tully’s approach to cultural heritage
Tully’s approach to cultural heritage management in this matter emerged as
one of the key good faith issues for Boonthamurra
and it is evident from the
correspondence that cultural heritage was a pressure point in the negotiations.
[43] The draft
Ancillary Agreement provided by Boonthamurra included a detailed cultural
heritage process, whereas Mr Tully primarily
sought to rely on the Duty of Care
Guidelines and his own expertise, although he was willing to consider other
agreement examples.
Eventually, Mr Tully said that he would be agreeable to
arranging for two of his employees who are Boonthamurra People to conduct
survey at a cost to be agreed with those individuals.
[44] As to his
expertise, Mr Tully has gone to some length in his contentions to outline his
credentials in relation to cultural heritage
assessment. The points raised by Mr
Tully include:
(a) his upbringing in the Eromanga area and his knowledge of and connection to
(b) his education in the identification of cultural heritage by various
Aboriginal people, including Boonthamurra People throughout
his life; and
(c) his role in identifying an Aboriginal fish trap and ensuring its protection
and access to the site by the Mardigan People.
[45] Mr Tully
contends that the protection of cultural heritage can be a shared responsibility
and asserts that what he calls the
“paternal and
commercial”
approach” taken by Boonthamurra’s legal
representative is not the only approach to resolution.
respect to the application of the Duty of Care Guidelines, Mr Tully contends
that much of the area of the mining claim has
been subject to significant ground
disturbance which he says would place it in Category 4 of the Duty of Care
Guidelines. Mr Tully
goes on to describe undertaking three cultural heritage
inspections of the mining claim area, one as landowner in assessing how to
rehabilitate the area and twice related to pegging the mining claim.
[47] Boonthamurra
disputes Mr Tully’s assessment under the Duty of Care Guidelines and
points out that the whole of the mining
claim area has not been subject to
significant ground disturbance. Boonthamurra also says that Mr Tully is not
qualified to make
an expert determination of the category in question.
[48] I do not
accept Boonthamurra’s submission about Mr Tully not having the requisite
expertise to form a view about how the
Duty of Care Guidelines might apply. The
Duty of Care Guidelines are largely a self-assessment tool and are one way a
person undertaking
an activity may meet their duty of care under the ACHA. By
their own terms they “identify reasonable and practicable measures
ensuring that activities are managed to avoid or minimise harm to Aboriginal
cultural heritage in a way that meets the duty of
care requirements”. No
expert determination is required. Of course, a person relying on the Duty of
Care Guidelines may be
wrong in their assessment, which carries significant risk
for compliance with the ACHA, including penalties.
[49] The fact
that the whole of the mining claim area has not been subject to prior
disturbance seems evident from Mr Tully’s
disturbance mapping and
acknowledged by Mr Phillips in his correspondence, although he described it
variously as “pretty extensive”
and “intensive”.
[50] Even so,
there is a significant difference between a proponent undertaking a
self-assessment of how the Duty of Care Guidelines
might apply in an area
subject to previous disturbance and the good faith negotiations between the
parties which are directed to
obtaining a native title party’s agreement
to the doing of a future act. This was a distinction made by QSNTS in
negotiations
when it pointed out that the area of disturbance did not cover the
entire area of the mining claim. Mr Tully may have formed a view
that he could
meet his duty of care through the application of the Duty of Care Guidelines but
Boonthamurra, whose agreement he was
seeking to the grant, did not share that
view and wanted cultural heritage matters addressed as part of any agreement.
These issues
could have been further explored by the parties in the negotiation.
Perhaps the previous disturbance might have been relevant to
the scale of the
cultural heritage protection processes ultimately agreed. Again, mediation might
have assisted in exploring the
[51] There is
also a material distinction between Mr Tully making an assessment about how the
Duty of Care Guidelines might apply
to enable him to meet his cultural heritage
duty of care and him undertaking an inspection to determine the existence of
heritage in the area. The latter is not Mr Tully’s assessment to
[52] I am not
questioning Mr Tully’s belief that he has knowledge and experience which
may make him more informed than the average
person and alive to the risk of harm
to cultural heritage. However, Mr Tully is not the Aboriginal party. The Duty of
Care Guidelines
repeatedly state that the views of the Aboriginal party for an
area are key in assessing Aboriginal cultural heritage and managing
any activity
likely to excavate, relocate, remove or harm Aboriginal cultural heritage. If Mr
Tully truly acknowledges the role of
Boonthamurra as the Aboriginal party as he
submits, that should be evident from his actions.
[53] Nonetheless,
while I consider Mr Tully’s views on this aspect were misguided, he was
clearly open to alternatives, be it
inspection by his Boonthamurra workers or
the alternative agreement approach raised by Mr Phillips. Again, I am not
suggesting either
was an appropriate solution, but the rigid views argued by
Boonthamurra are not evident on the material.
[54] Therefore,
while aspects of the approach undertaken by Mr Tully with respect to cultural
heritage management were ill-advised,
I do not think they were so unreasonable
or rigid as to amount to a lack of good faith. Mr Tully was endeavouring to
reach agreement
within the facts as he apprehended them. He was also prepared to
consider alternatives which departed from his preferred position
and was open to
Assertion that Mr Tully failed to comply with State regulatory
requirements which apply to owners of land
[55] Boonthamurra
asserts that Mr Tully has failed to engage with it as he should with any owner
of land, which it says is further
indication of the absence of good faith in the
negotiations. Boonthamurra identifies what it says are two relevant failures on
Tully’s part, being:
(a) a failure to serve Boonthamurra with a copy of the documents listed in
s 64A(1) of the
Mineral Resources Act
(b) a failure to engage with Boonthamurra about the matter of compensation under
s 85 of the
Mineral Resources Act
prior to the grant of the mining
[56] Section 64A
requires an applicant to provide certain information about a proposed mining
claim to an “affected person”
which is defined as an owner of land
subject to the proposed mining claim or land necessary for access or the
relevant local government.
[57] Section 85
Mineral Resources Act
requires compensation with an owner to be
agreed or determined by the Land Court before a mining claim may be
definition of affected person and s 85 both refer to an “owner” of
land. The definition of owner in the Dictionary
at sch 2 to the
Resources Act
is exhaustive. It lists specific interest holders, such as the
holders of fee simple or leasehold interests and, for present
does not include a
registered native title body corporate (
) or registered native title
[59] Neither of
these requirements appears to have arisen as an issue during the negotiations.
Rather, as explained by Ms Matthews,
the genesis of the argument appears to be a
September 2024 version of the then Department of Resources’ Mining claim
application
guideline which included a footnote stating that, by operation of s
Racial Discrimination Act
“affected person” would include a native title party. Ms Matthews
also states her understanding that the same
position would apply to
[60] The State
says Mr Tully’s compliance with s 64A is not a good faith issue as the
relevant version of the guideline was
not in place until September 2024, which
was after Mr Tully says he had complied with s 64A and, I note, very late
in the negotiations.
It contends that requiring retrospective application of the
guideline is unreasonable and creates an impossibility which cannot serve
basis for a lack of good faith negotiations. In response to that issue,
Boonthamurra points out that if s 10 of the
Racial Discrimination Act
applies, it is not dependent on the State saying so in a guideline. I do not
disagree with that proposition, but I think the point
the State is making is
that Mr Tully’s conduct must be judged in context. The evidence
suggests that this was not an issue
either Boonthamurra or Mr Tully were alive
to before September 2024. As I said, it did not feature in the parties’
discussions.
similar vein, Mr Tully says it is disingenuous for this issue to be raised now
when it was not raised in the negotiations.
He says that if Boonthamurra thought
this was an issue, it should have raised it at the time. There is merit in that
view, and I
agree with the State’s contention that the issue raised by
Boonthamurra does not go to Mr Tully’s good faith on the facts
[62] If Mr Tully
had been aware of an obligation to provide additional material to Boonthamurra
and had wilfully ignored that obligation
or a similar request by Boonthamurra,
then that may well be a relevant consideration to the question of his good
faith. However,
it is evident that is not the case here. These issues have only
been raised after the event.
[63] For the
same reason, I do not consider that s 31(2), which provides that a party’s
refusal or failure to negotiate about
matters unrelated to the effect of the
grant on native title rights and interests does not mean that party has not
negotiated in
good faith (relied upon by the State) is particularly relevant. In
Shell v Thalanyji
the Tribunal observed that s 31(2) should not
be read too literally, but there is no evidence that Mr Tully refused or failed
to negotiate
[64] The State
contends that compensation for the effect of the mining claim on native title is
dealt with by the
Native Title Act
and not the
Mineral Resources
. It says, in any event that, any requirement to comply with s 85 is a
matter for the Land Court under the
Mineral Resources Act
and a failure
to comply would result in the grant being statute barred regardless of the
outcome of this application. The State also
asserts that Boonthamurra would not
have the equivalent rights of an owner in this context as it holds non-exclusive
rather than
exclusive native title rights. Incidentally, both the State and
Boonthamurra noted that questions regarding how State compensation
apply in relation to compensation for effect on native title is an issue
presently before the Federal Court of Australia
in a matter in Western
question before me is Mr Tully’s good faith and, in my view, there is
nothing in what has occurred in Mr Tully’s
efforts at compliance with the
Mineral Resources Act
which impugns his honesty and fair dealing.
Further, as the State says and as seems to be acknowledged by Boonthamurra in
its characterisation
of s 85 as a precondition to grant, the question of
compliance with s 85 will be a matter for the relevant decision maker to
before grant of the mining claim. Additionally, there was nothing to
stop the parties discussing the issue of payments or compensation
negotiations as Boonthamurra argued they should. However, the negotiations did
not proceed that far and there is no requirement
that they do so (see
at [23]). Again, this was not an issue raised by Boonthamurra until this
proceeding.
Some comments about the parties’ arguments on the
operation of the
Native Title Act
and the Racial Discrimination Act
[66] Although
I am not satisfied that the
Mineral Resources Act
issues raised by
Boonthamurra impugn Mr Tully’s good faith in the manner contended, both
the State and Boonthamurra spent considerable
time on this aspect of the case
and the arguments covered a lot of ground and occupied much of the hearing. For
the purposes of the
hearing, I had also asked the parties to specifically
(6A) of the
Native Title Act
the decision in
Queensland v CQLC
. Mr Tully elected to defer to the
other parties in relation to the legal argument.
[67] Boonthamurra
correctly contends, and the State agrees, that
Native Title
generally provides an RNTBC and RNTC with the same procedural rights as
an owner of freehold, except, amongst other things, when
the future act is one
to which Subdivision P applies (as is the case here).
[68] However,
Boonthamurra says the application of that provision is not relevant in this case
because ss 64A and 85 of the
Mineral Resources Act
characterised as procedural rights, with s 64A being an obligation on a
mining claim applicant and s 85 a condition on
the Minister’s power to
grant a mining claim. Further, while the State broadly agrees with
Boonthamurra’s analysis of
ss 24MD(6), (6A) and Subdivision P, it refers
to aspects of the arguments as novel. In particular, it says that the
Discrimination Act
is not enlivened in the manner outlined because
Boonthamurra holds non-exclusive rather than exclusive native title and that it
to amend its guideline to reflect that view.
[69] While it is
not necessary for me to form a concluded view in relation to either of those
matters given my conclusions on good
faith, I will briefly mention key aspects
of the parties’ submissions regarding the interaction of the
Resources Act
Racial Discrimination Act
Native Title Act
and make some general comments.
[70] Boonthamurra
argues that
is not directed to and does not affect the procedural
rights afforded to native title holders under other State or Commonwealth
legislation
(relying on
). It says there is no indication
Native Title Act
of a statutory intention to displace rights
under other statutes and so
and (6A) do not interfere with State
procedures or procedural rights. Further, it says that if
operated to exclude procedural rights outside of the
Native Title Act
reduce procedural rights to the right to negotiate only, the conclusion in
could not have been made.
[71] I have some
difficulties with this aspect of Boonthamurra’s argument. As it contends,
Native Title Act
, largely has primacy over the
Discrimination Act
. For acts to which s 24MD(6A) applies, the
is arguably doing the work which might otherwise, on
Boonthamurra’s argument, be done by the
Racial Discrimination Act
In general terms, s 24MD(6A) provides that native title parties have the same
procedural rights as they would if they instead held
ordinary title. However,
Native Title Act
also says that is not the case for an act to which
Subdivision P applies because, in such a case, a native title party has the
to negotiate in Subdivision P, failure to comply with which results in
invalidity: see
Native Title Act
. The implication is
therefore that, in such a case, the rights of an ordinary title holder do not
[72] This is the
interpretation adopted by the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia in
Queensland v CQLC
which carefully considered the interaction of all three
statutes (see especially [149]–[150]) and reflects the Explanatory
Memorandum to the
Native Title Amendment Bill 1997
[No 2] which states at
[15.13] that the procedural rights (being the rights afforded to ordinary title
holders) “do not apply
in these cases because other procedures [meaning
Subdivision P] are applicable under the [
Native Title Act
[73] Of course,
there may be rights, other than procedural rights as defined, in relation to
which s 10 of the
Racial Discrimination Act
is engaged or, in fact, other
rights specifically afforded to native title parties under other State or
Commonwealth laws. However,
it seems tolerably clear that, where there is a
vacuum in the rights afforded under, relevantly, State law in relation to an act
to which Subdivision M applies, it is nonetheless s 24MD which dictates the
applicable procedural rights, not s 10 of the
Racial Discrimination
[74] There does
not appear to be anything in that analysis at odds with
concerned a decision infected with jurisdictional error which the Federal Court
of Australia found could not validly affect
native title. In that case, the
Court did not consider the application of either s 24MD or the
Discrimination Act
Conclusion in relation to good faith
[75] Having
regard to the requirements for good faith as outlined above at
, I am not satisfied that Mr
Tully’s efforts at agreement were not in good faith. Aspects of his
approach were somewhat misguided,
but not so unreasonable as to constitute a
lack of good faith. The most problematic aspect of Mr Tully’s conduct was
his views on conducting cultural heritage assessments himself. His
views on the extent of previous disturbance in the mining claim
area and why
that impacted the approach to cultural heritage protection would be relevant to
the negotiations so it was not unreasonable
for Mr Tully to raise that as a
[76] However,
notwithstanding his views, when presented with reasons why his approach was not
appropriate or not entirely appropriate,
he tried to explore other agreement
models, and he tried to pursue mediation, neither of which were amenable to
Boonthamurra or,
in the case of mediation, amenable at that time. While my
assessment of the parties’ negotiation strategies is not relevant,
pursuing mediation does appear to have been a lost opportunity given the way the
negotiations ended.
[77] As is so
often the case, the negotiations in this case appear to have faltered at the
difficult intersection between the cost
and resource burden on a native title
party required to participate in s 31(1)(b) negotiations, heritage
protection requirements
and the capacity of small-scale mining proponents. While
unfortunate, I am not satisfied this position arises from a lack of good
on the part of Mr Tully.
[78] Accordingly,
I have the power to decide this matter and will now proceed to consider the
determination required by
Native Title Act
Should the mining claim be granted?
What issues must I consider?
Native Title Act
, I am required to make one of the following
determinations:
(a) that the grant of the mining claim must not be done;
(b) that the grant of the mining claim may be done; or
(c) that the grant of the mining claim may be done, subject to conditions to be
complied with by any of the parties.
[80] In making a
determination, I must take into account the five matters (or groups of matters)
ss 39(1)(a)
-(c), (e) and (f) of the
Native Title Act
observed by O’Bryan J in
at [382], the Tribunal’s
task involves balancing all the mandatory considerations. The weight to be
afforded to each matter
will depend on the evidence (see
Western Australia v
at page 166).
[81] With the
parties’ consent, I must take into account any relevant issues on which
they agree and need not take into account
the matters mentioned in
the extent they relate to the agreed issues:
Native Title Act
this case, there are no agreed issues, so I have considered each of the
criteria in turn.
[82] I note at
the outset that Mr Tully does not make any specific contentions in relation to
the matters listed in
ss 39(1)(a)
or (b). He states simply that he has no
intention to obstruct or deny Boonthamurra from exercising its native title
rights and interests,
subject only to health and safety requirements.
Effect on the enjoyment of registered native title rights
and interests:
s 39(1)(a)(i)
[83] Boonthamurra
holds non-exclusive native title rights and interests in relation to just over
95% of the area of the mining claim.
The registered native title rights and
interests relevant for
are those described in the entry for the
Boonthamurra Determination
on the National Native Title Register:
Native Title Act
[84] In its
contentions, Boonthamurra outlines its registered native title rights and
interests and submits that they “stand
to be affected” by the grant.
However, it is the effect of the grant on the
enjoyment of native
title rights and interests which is relevant here, not the possible effect (see
at [38] and
[85] There is no
evidence regarding the enjoyment of the registered native title rights and
interests in the mining claim area. Boonthamurra
relies on the evidence of Mr
Wallace who speaks about his family and his connection to the Eromanga area. He
speaks of going back
to the Eromanga area to teach the kids how to make
spearheads, fish and find bush medicine and bush tucker. He says he has found
stone artefacts and refers to fireplaces in the Eromanga area, as well as native
wells on Boonthamurra Country.
[86] However,
none of the evidence relates specifically to the area of the mining claim.
Accordingly, there is nothing I can usefully
glean from the evidence regarding
the effect of the grant on the enjoyment of Boonthamurra’s registered
native title rights
and interests.
Effect on way of life, culture and traditions:
39(1)(a)(ii)
[87] Boonthamurra
says the perceived impacts it outlines on its registered native title rights and
interests will impact the Boonthamurra
People’s way of life, culture and
traditions because its practice and enjoyment of those rights and interests are
those matters.
[88] Again, the
difficulty is that there is no evidence of the practice and enjoyment of those
rights and interests in the mining
claim area, so I do not give any significant
weight to this matter.
Effect on development of social, cultural and economic
structures:
s 39(1)(a)(iii)
this criterion, Boonthamurra relies on Mr Wallace’s evidence about the
importance of cultural heritage processes involving
Boonthamurra People during
mining activity, including the importance of monitoring and fair payment for
work. Boonthamurra contends
that the authorisation of mining activity without
the effective protection and control of cultural heritage impacts by
Boonthamurra
People is inimical to their rights and responsibilities for
[90] The State
does not address these contentions except to generally point to the various
regulatory constraints on the mining claim,
the history of mining in the area of
the mining claim and the proposed scale of Mr Tully’s operations. However,
in my view,
having regard to Mr Wallace’s evidence and his discussion of
Boonthamurra’s wishes as outlined below, there is merit
Boonthamurra’s contention.
Western Australia v Thomas
(at page 170), the Tribunal noted that the
social, cultural and economic structures of Aboriginal societies are not static
and a mining
proposal could have either a negative or a positive effect on the
development of these structures. It also noted that, where an act
may be done,
conditions could be imposed to minimise any adverse effect on, or to promote the
development of, such structures and
I have taken this into account in my
discussion below of proposed conditions.
Effect on freedom of access to the land or waters and
freedom to carry out rites, ceremonies or other activities of cultural
significance
in accordance with traditions:
s 39(1)(a)(iv)
[92] Boonthamurra
says little about this criterion other than asserting that the grant of the
mining claim will impact its freedom
of access to do the matters listed. It does
not say how but simply relies on its earlier contentions in relation to
, which, as I have said, focus on the existence of rights rather than
their enjoyment in the mining claim area.
[93] While it is
possible that the conduct of opal mining on the mining claim may impede
Boonthamurra’s freedom of access to
carry out rites, ceremonies or other
activities of cultural significance, there is no evidence of such activities
being undertaken
in the mining claim area so I give this matter limited
Effect on any area or site of particular significance to
Boonthamurra on the land or waters concerned:
s 39(1)(a)(v)
[94] Boonthamurra
asserts that the mining claim area is of particular significance to the
Boonthamurra People in accordance with their
traditions. It relies on Mr
Wallace’s evidence regarding fireplaces and native wells in the vicinity
of the mining claim. He
says that his Old People told him there are old camp
sites, artefacts, scar trees and fireplaces all along Monkey Coolah Creek. Based
on mapping provided by the State, the creek is some distance from the area of
the mining claim. Mr Tully submits the distance is
4.5 kilometres. He also says
that the amended access for the mining claim will not cross the creek, which
seems evident from the
[95] However,
, this criterion is not concerned with the significance of a
native title party’s country generally. It is concerned with areas
sites located in the mining claim area which are of more than ordinary
significance in accordance with traditions (see
Bissett v Mineral Deposits
at [83]–[84]). While I appreciate Mr Wallace’s concerns
regarding the
existence of any area or site of particular significance in the mining claim
area or in the access route. More evidence
would be needed in relation to the
identity, location and particular significance of any specific area or
Interests, proposals, opinions or wishes of Boonthamurra in
relation to the management, use or control of land or waters affected
mining claim:
Wallace gives evidence regarding the Boonthamurra People’s wishes for
country, including the importance of rehabilitation.
He also speaks of the
importance of monitoring by Boonthamurra People before ground disturbance and
says that the mining claim area
should be cleared on foot due to the
sentiment is echoed by Boonthamurra in its contentions. It argues that, as the
Aboriginal party under the ACHA, it should
be involved in the assessment and
management of cultural heritage in the area of the mining claim. It also argues
that the mining
claim should not be granted as activities conducted under it are
likely to cause harm to cultural heritage. There is no evidence
of any such
harm, but I understand clearly that Boonthamurra is concerned about the risk of
damage to cultural heritage, particularly
given Mr Tully’s approach to
heritage assessment as I have discussed above. Further, while Mr Wallace
acknowledges previous
opal mining in the area, his concerns are heightened by,
what he says, was a lack of cultural heritage clearances undertaken previously,
coupled with his understanding that mining methods are now more
“destructive”.
[98] The State
acknowledges Mr Wallace’s concerns and Boonthamurra’s wishes for
county but relies upon Mr Tully’s
acknowledgment of Boonthamurra’s
role as the Aboriginal party under the ACHA, his knowledge of cultural heritage
issues (which
is discussed above) and the need for compliance with the Small
Scale Mining Code. It says that the mining claim is not likely to
interfere with
any areas or sites of particular significance because of the various regulatory
controls on the mining claim and Mr
Tully’s categorisation of the
mining claim area under the Duty of Care Guidelines. Those matters are more
relevant for s 39(1)(a).
[99] Additionally,
Mr Tully has not shown himself to be especially concerned with
Boonthamurra’s role as the Aboriginal party,
being content to rely on his
own assessment of heritage risk. He asserts that the mining claim has been
subject to significant disturbance
yet, as pointed out by Boonthamurra, and as
shown on Mr Tully’s own mapping, only parts of the area appear to
have been the
subject of previous mining activity. Unless Mr Tully’s
activities are confined to those previously disturbed areas, the Duty
Guidelines would seem to require an agreement for the balance. That issue does
not appear to have been considered by Mr Tully.
criterion is about Boonthamurra’s wishes and interests for the area and I
accept its clear interest in cultural heritage
protection and management, as
well as rehabilitation of the country, as expressed by Mr Wallace.
Economic or other significance of the mining claim: s
[101] Boonthamurra
says the mining claim does not have economic significance to Australia or
Queensland as it is not likely to lead
to the creation of jobs or an influx of
people to a rural area.
[102] Mr Tully
says the mining claim will create investment opportunities and contribute to the
regional economy, which is in decline,
and provides him with another income
stream. In addition, Mr Tully highlights local business opportunities, including
for local fuel
and food businesses, as well as persons in the gem trade. The
State echoes Mr Tully’s submissions on the economic stimulus
the industry provides, especially in times of drought.
[103] There is
no evidence regarding any of these matters or the potential economic benefit
which may arise from the grant of the
mining claim. Given the small scale of the
proposed mining claim and Mr Tully’s contentions regarding its aim in
supplementing
his income from pastoral endeavours, I do not give much weight to
this criterion. Overall, any economic benefit arising from the
grant of the
mining claim appears to be limited.
Public interest in the grant of the mining claim: s
[104] Section
39(1)(e) requires the Tribunal to consider whether there is any public interest
in the grant of the mining claim.
phrase confers a wide discretionary judgement. Mortimer CJ observed in
at [221] that the scheme of the
Native Title Act
the Tribunal, “informed by the objects of the [
Native Title Act
and the values set out in the Preamble”, to “form its own views on
where the public interest lies both as a separate
consideration and as part of a
holistic exercise, reflecting on all the factors in
[106] O’Bryan
J, with whom the Chief Justice agreed, framed the analysis as requiring a
consideration of both the public benefits
and public detriments of the proposed
act in order to assess whether there is any overall (or net) public interest:
[107] The State
says the grant is in the public interest and points to previous Tribunal
decisions which acknowledged exploration
as central to a healthy and feasible
mining industry:
Carpentaria Gold
at [30]-[32];
[108] Mr Tully
contends, amongst other things, that the grant of the mining claim will help
reinvigorate a once vibrant regional mining
community. He refers to the
tradition of opal mining in the Restricted Area and his connection to these
activities.
[109] Mr Tully
also says that the grant is in the public interest because it is small in size,
will not affect the Boonthamurra People’s
enjoyment of their native title
rights and interests and there is no significant or tangible cultural heritage
in the mining claim
area. To the extent Mr Tully is here referring to the
matters covered by
, they are no doubt factors I have to weigh up but
they do not necessarily mean there is a public benefit in the grant.
[110] It is true
that the Tribunal has previously recognised that there is a public interest in
maintaining a viable mining industry
Western Australia v Thomas
at [138], the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia accepted that general proposition, while noting that it may be
for the Tribunal to consider the public interest in the particular
project rather than by reference to the mining industry in general.
I can accept
that general proposition.
[111] Conversely,
Boonthamurra says there is public interest in not granting the mining claim in
order to protect cultural heritage
and Boonthamurra’s native title rights,
and that this should be given more weight than the grant of the mining claim
will have limited, if any, significance to Australia or Queensland. It is
difficult to accept this contention in the absence of any
evidence regarding
potential harm to cultural heritage or any effect on the enjoyment of native
title rights and interests in the
area, as discussed above. As I have said, I
accept that Boonthamurra is concerned about the risk of harm to cultural
heritage, but
there is insufficient information before me to go so far as to say
it is not in the public interest to grant the mining claim because
perceived risk. That is particularly so in circumstances where the area has been
mined in the past.
[112] There is
no evidence of any public detriment in the grant and, overall, I accept there is
some limited public interest as part
of the opal mining industry. However, I do
not give this criterion any significant weight.
Should the mining claim be granted and, if so, should
conditions be applied?
[113] Based
on the evidence and information provided by the parties, there is relatively
little to go on to assist me in weighing
the matters in
[114] I can
accept there is some degree of public interest in the grant and limited economic
benefit, but the issue is whether that
outweighs the impacts on the matters
affecting Boonthamurra. There is no evidence of any effect on the enjoyment of
native title
rights and interests in the area of the mining claim or the access
route and no evidence of any areas or sites of particular significance
areas either. However, Boonthamurra, through Mr Wallace’s evidence,
has clearly explained its wishes and concerns
for the area, particularly
regarding heritage protection measures, including as part of its social,
cultural and economic structures.
understand also that these matters are of heightened concern to Boonthamurra in
circumstances where Mr Tully has taken it
upon himself to conduct cultural
heritage inspections. I have already explained my views on that approach.
[116] In the
absence of specific evidence regarding the effect of the grant on the matters in
, I do not go so far as to say that the mining claim may not be
granted, but Boonthamurra’s concerns and wishes, as articulated
Mr Wallace, carry significant weight in my analysis, particularly in light
of the unorthodox approach to cultural heritage assessments
taken by Mr
therefore of the view that the grant may be done but should be subject to
conditions regarding cultural heritage protection
in order to provide the
required level of finality to the conclusion of this matter:
Evans v Western
at page 214. I acknowledge that Mr Wallace also expressed a
concern regarding rehabilitation but no party has addressed that issue
meaningful way and the Small Scale Mining Code includes a range of regulatory
requirements for rehabilitation, so I do not
propose to impose any conditions in
that respect.
accordance with
Native Title Act
, conditions imposed by
the Tribunal take effect as if the conditions were the terms of a contract among
the parties. For the conduct
of a cultural heritage survey, there are clear
advantages to such terms being negotiated by the parties rather than formulated
the Tribunal, but here we are.
Tribunal provided proposed draft conditions to the parties and afforded them an
opportunity to comment. None of the parties
opposed the proposed conditions, but
each proposed relatively minor amendments. The parties also conferred on the
terms of the conditions
and settled several issues by agreement. The Tribunal
then circulated a further version substantially in the form in Annexure A which
reflected the matters agreed between the parties, addressed any issues in
dispute and proposed a number of minor additional amendments
for clarity. None
of the parties had any further comments and I am satisfied that the conditions
set out in Annexure A are appropriate.
For completeness, I note that Annexure A
includes two additional minor typographical or grammatical corrections to the
circulated to parties.
Determination
determine that mining claim MC 300436 may be granted subject to the conditions
set out in Annexure A.
Ms Nerida Cooley
Aboriginal cultural heritage survey
grantee party
must not undertake
mining activities
over any part
of the area of the
mining claim
without first causing a
be conducted over that part or the whole of the
mining claim
accordance with clauses 2 to 13.
grantee party
must give the
native title party
at least sixty (60)
days’ written notice of his intention to conduct a
notice must include:
(a) a topographical map showing the area or areas proposed to be surveyed
notified area
(b) the proposed date/s and period during which the
conducted; and
(c) a description of the proposed
mining activities
thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice under clause 2, the
native title
must, by notice in writing to the
grantee party
, nominate not
more than three (3) Boonthamurra people (each a
) to participate
on behalf of the
native title party
and provide
native title party
fails to nominate any
period specified in clause 3, then the
grantee party
may proceed to
mining activities
notified area
conducted, and upon receipt of a tax invoice, the
must pay the
native title party
for the participation of each
for the period of a
at the rates specified for
inspectors under clause 5.6(a) of the
native title protection conditions
as adjusted from time to time.
grantee party
must also obtain and provide the
following at the
grantee party’s
(a) transportation within the
Determination Area
for the period reasonably necessary for the
(b) meals and suitable accommodation for each
survey period
as reasonably necessary for the
(c) all necessary permits, authorities and notices required for the
native title party
does not conduct a
notified area
survey period
in circumstances not due to
a failure on the part of the
grantee party
grantee party
proceed to undertake
mining activities
native title party
must provide a written
Survey Report
grantee party
within twenty (20) business days of the conclusion of the
, identifying any
Aboriginal cultural heritage sites
including recommendations for any necessary measures to ensure the protection of
grantee party
does not receive the
native title party
within the time specified in this
clause 8, not due to a failure on the part of the
grantee party
grantee party
may undertake the
mining activities
within the area
identified in the
notified area
to clauses 8 and 11, the
grantee party
must undertake
in accordance with the recommendations in the
grantee party
native title party
must cooperate and use
their best endeavours to facilitate arrangements for the
implementation of the recommendations in the
Survey Report
grantee party
considers that any recommendation in the
is unreasonable, the
grantee party
must advise the
title party
within seven (7) days and clause 15 then applies.
grantee party
must not disclose to any person any information given to it
native title party
Aboriginal cultural heritage
except (and only then on a confidential basis):
(a) with the written consent of the
native title party
(b) to a bona fide prospective assignee of the
mining claim
(c) to an actual assignee of the
mining claim
(d) to employees, agents, contractors and consultants for the sole purpose of
ensuring that no
are interfered with and as far as the information
relates only to the location of those
(e) as required by law.
mining activities
may to be undertaken by the
grantee party
identified in a
Survey Report
except in accordance with the
recommendations in the
Survey Report
or otherwise with the written
consent of the
native title party
Dispute Resolution
party may give any other party notice of a dispute arising under these
conditions.
the event of a dispute, the disputing parties must meet (whether in person or by
electronic means) within seven (7) days and use
their best endeavours to resolve
any issue in dispute.
the disputing parties are unable to resolve the dispute within ten (10) days of
a notice given under clause 11 or clause 14, then
before commencing any
proceedings, the parties must participate in mediation undertaken by the
National Native Title Tribunal (if
permitted) or another mediator agreed by the
parties or, failing agreement, nominated by the President of the Queensland Law
For such mediation, the parties must equally share the costs of the
grantee party
must not assign the
mining claim
unless and until
the proposed assignee executes and delivers to the
native title party
deed expressed to be for the benefit of the
native title party
the assignee undertakes to be bound by these conditions as if it were the
grantee party
the purposes of clause 17, ‘
grantee party
’ includes any
Government party
must ensure that the
mining claim
condition in terms of clauses 17 and 18.
grantee party
must take all reasonable steps to ensure compliance with
these conditions by its employees, agents and contractors.
grantee party
must give the
native title party
written notice of
the grant of the
mining claim
, including any conditions, within
twenty-one (21) days of the date of grant.
or other communications under these conditions may be sent to the address below,
or such other address as advised by a party
from time to time, by email or
Grantee party
William Gerard Tully
C/- Qld Opal Miners Association Inc
PO Box 210, Quilpie QLD 4480
gemtrends@bigpond.com
0427 662 003
Native title party
Boonthamurra Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
C/- Queensland South Native Title Services
PO Box 10832, Adelaide Street, Brisbane QLD 4001
reception@qsnts.com.au
Government party
Native Title Services | Land & Surveying Services
25 Yeppoon Road, Parkhurst QLD 4702
nativetitleservices@resources.qld.gov.au
Definitions
these conditions:
Aboriginal cultural heritage
Aboriginal cultural heritage site
means Aboriginal cultural heritage within the meaning of the
Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Act 2003
Determination
means the area described in Schedule 1 to
the Orders in
Wallace on behalf of the Boonthamurra People v State of
[2015] FCA 600
Government party
means the Minister administering the
Resources Act
grantee party
means William Gerard Tully;
Mineral Resources Act
Mineral Resources Act 1989
mining activities
means any activities undertaken under the
mining claim
means mining claim MC 300436;
native title party
means Boonthamurra Native Title
Corporation RNTBC;
native title protection conditions
means the native title protection
conditions version 10 dated July 2023 made under the
Mineral Resources
or any replacement from time to time;
has the meaning given in clause 3;
notified area
has the meaning given in clause 2;
means a visual inspection to identify any
cultural heritage site
survey period
means the period specified in a notice given under
clause 2 or such other period agreed by the
native title party
grantee party
Resources Act
RTF format (502 KB)
Signed PDF/A format