D20-21\101 [2020] SCTA 208 (4 December 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\101
FILE NUMBER : 17-1581
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 1 October 2020 before:
Duffield, Member
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision under review is the Trustee’s refusal to compromise the
Complainant’s claim in the amount of $24,670.22.
Trustee notified the Tribunal of its decision by email dated 1 October 2020.
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal does not affirm the decision of the Trustee.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal determines to set aside the Trustee’s decision and substitute
another decision that the Complainant’s
claim is to be compromised in the
amount of $24,670.22.
the methodology employed by the Complainant in calculating the quantum of loss
(Quantum), including the fact the final dollar
amount was inserted as at 30
September 2020, it is not appropriate to award interest.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
Submissions
were received from the Complainant and the Trustee.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. The Complainant
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
electronic files provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant made a complaint that the decision of the Trustee was
or unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this determination.
late 2012, the Complainant established both a [Name] superannuation account
[XXX] with the Fund and a [Name] transition
to retirement (TTR) pension account
[YYY] with the Fund; in addition, the Complainant held other external
superannuation assets.
2017 the Complainant made enquiries with the Trustee’s representatives
(Representatives) in relation to how he could increase
the amount he held in his
YYY account as there were some significant changes being introduced from 1 July
2017, by the Federal Government,
including a $1.6 million transfer balance cap
and taxation on earnings was being introduced for the first time on TTR
2 May 2017 the Complainant contacted the Representatives to initiate the product
transfer from YYY back to XXX (in order to add
additional monies to his pension
assets) however, during the telephone call the Complainant was advised the
timeframe for processing
his request would be 10 to 15 business days. This was
incorrect and such product switches are normally completed within 3 business
the Complainant required the transaction to be completed as quickly as possible
he contacted the Other Fund (just after requesting
the XXX/YYY product switch)
to request the full rollover of his XXX/YYY accounts from the Fund to the Other
this meant that there were several transactions in process at the same time; a
product switch from YYY to XXX and two rollover
requests to transfer the same
YYY/XXX accounts to the Other Fund.
Ultimately,
the rollover of the YYY account to the Other Fund was delayed and there were a
number of incorrectly produced documents
issued to the Complainant by the
Representatives.
complaint therefore revolves around how much monetary loss the Complainant
suffered as a result of that delay. The Trustee estimates
the loss to be $8,600
while the Complainant calculates it to be $24,670.22.
Quantum of loss
to the Complainant, the Quantum of loss was $24,670.22 at 30 September 2020.
Events not in dispute:
− The Complainant’s date of birth.
− The Fund issued the Complainant a Welcome
Letter to the YYY Fund account.
− The Fund issued the Complainant a Welcome
Letter to the XXX Fund account.
− The Complainant’s XXX Fund account is
established and a rollover is received from another fund for $1,023,634.80.
− The product switch to the YYY fund account is
processed with an effective date of 10 December 2012 for the amount of
$1,026,013.27.
− The Representatives raised an administration task
to transfer the whole balance of the YYY Fund account to the XXX Fund account.
Tribunal considers s14.4(d) of the trust deed, the compromise power, to be
relevant to this complaint.
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
Tribunal notes by the time this complaint had reached the Review Meeting on 1
October 2020, the sole issue requiring determination
was the Quantum.
Accordingly, the Tribunal has limited the Parties respective positions to that
The Complainant
The Complainant
relevantly submitted in respect of the Trustee’s Fund’s
actuary’s calculations (Actuary) 4 detailed
excel spreadsheets which he
summarised as below:
Corrected to FYE2019 Actual vs Expected - Actual Pension Phase -
which includes annotations on the corrections made to Actuary's calculations
annotations showing the resultant Variance of the corrected calculation against
the Statements for the Actual case.
Corrected to FYE2019 Actual vs Expected - Expected Pension Phase - which
shows the corrected extension of the Expected case through
to 30 June 2019
showing a rollover shortfall of $23,603.91. Note as mentioned in my 28 September
2020 response, the Expected case
cashflow is determined mainly by the investment
switches and has $805 impact on pension income payments in FY2018 and $850 on
impacts in FY2019 payments.
Corrected Shortfall Extended to current - Expected Pension Phase - which
shows the extension of the loss in Expected Rollover of $24,670.22
September 2020.
The Trustee
relevantly initially advised:
A compensation offer was made to Mr [Complainant] in
[Representative’s] email of 13 September 2017 for $4,982.91 however, Mr
[Complainant] declined this. The offer was a goodwill gesture for inconvenience
and distress calculated using an interest rate of
5% on an amount of
$1,306,708.74 for 18 days in addition to a previously agreed compensation sum of
$1,760.89. The [Trustee] calculations
to determine any loss on the [YYY] side of
the rollover transaction showed that Mr [Complainant] had been advantaged due to
movements by an amount of $599.10.
Subsequently,
the Trustee relevantly advised:
...it was agreed that the Trustee would undertake some calculations
with the assistance of the [Fund] Actuary to determine any detriment
in relation
to the purchase of the super and pension in [the Other Fund].
It was agreed that the calculations would be based on the final rollover
amount of the [YYY account] being $1,307,242.61 and that
it should have been
received into the [Other Fund] superannuation account on 19 May 2017 rather than
23 May 2017 (the date it was
actually credited to the [Other Fund] account as
per the annual Statement for 2017). We are accepting this for the purposes of
the dispute. The final [YYY] pension account balance that was rolled
over was actually $1,304,947.85.
To this effect we have agreed that the rollover was -$2,294.76 less than it
should have been and it was credited to the [Other Fund]
superannuation account
three business days later than it should have been, as per the [Other Fund] 2017
superannuation Annual Statement.
The revised calculations take into effect the earnings of the super and the
earnings in the pension up until 30 June 2019. The calculations
show a loss in
earnings of -$8,117.54. As Mr [Complainant] does not yet have his 2020 Annual
Statement for the pension and has been
unable to provide a transaction listing
for the period we have calculated interest for the period (14 months from 1 July
August 2020) at a rate of 5% to bring the compensation figure up to
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must initially determine whether the
decision of the Trustee refusing to compensate
the Complainant’s claim in
the amount of $24,670.22, was fair and reasonable in its operation in relation
to the Complainant
in the circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decision was fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the material it has
relied on has been provided to both Parties
the outset, the Tribunal notes there is a substantial body of Australian case
law establishing how a deliberative body, such as
the Tribunal, should examine
the circumstances underpinning a trustee’s refusal to exercise a
discretion, in this instance
the discretion, as to whether or not the Trustee
should compromise the Complainant’s claim in the amount of $24,670.22.
convenience’s sake, the Tribunal will limit itself to the appropriate
observations of Rein J in
Manglicmot v Commonwealth Bank Officers
Superannuation Corporation
[2010] NSWSC 363 (Manglicmot
’s Case). In
considering a trustee’s exercise of a discretion, Rein J relevantly noted
...I proceed on the basis that where reasons are given, the Court
can have regard to those reasons in forming a view as to whether
the trustee
(1) acted for an indirect motive;
(2) acted without honesty of intention;
(3) acted without a fair or real and genuine consideration of whether and how
the discretion should be exercised; and
(4) acted for a purpose beyond that for which the power and discretion were
bestowed on it.
Rein then relevantly concluded at [36]:
...I am of the view that where the reasons given by a trustee are
of a kind which no trustee acting reasonably could arrive at or
could rely on to
justify the exercise of a discretion in the manner adopted, this would permit
the inference to be drawn by the Court
that the trustee had acted in one or more
of the ways identified in (1) – (4) in [34] above, but once again no test
of reasonableness
per se is imported into the Court’s task.
that backdrop, the Tribunal’s obvious starting point is the
Trustee’s admissions of errors; as relevantly admitted
On 2 May 2017 Mr [Complainant] contacted [the Representatives] to
initiate the product transfer from [YYY] pension back to [XXX] (in
order to add
additional monies to his pension assets) however, during the telephone call Mr
[Complainant] was advised that the timeframe
for processing his request would be
10 to 15 business days.
This was incorrect
and such product switches are
normally completed within 3 business days. [Tribunal emphasis]
Ultimately, the rollover of the [YYY] to [Other Fund]
was delayed
were a number of incorrectly produced documents issued to Mr
[Complainant].
[Tribunal emphasis]
doubt it was in recognition of these errors that prompted the Trustee to
consider some monetary compensation to the Complainant.
However, the Trustee
initially made a fairly rudimentary calculation and arrived at a figure of
$4,982.91; however, this was rejected
by the Complainant.
Subsequently,
the Trustee employed some more sophisticated calculations courtesy of the
Actuary and arrived at a revised figure of
$8,600; this was forwarded to the
Complainant on 2 September 2020.
30 September 2020 the Complainant responded to the Trustee with 4 detailed excel
spreadsheets, demonstrating errors in the calculations
and arriving at a figure
of $24,670.22.
Trustee relevantly advised the Tribunal on 1 October 2020:
Thank you for providing me with the additional information from Mr
[Complainant]. I can confirm that this has been reviewed and added
We have nothing further to add at this stage...
its part, the Tribunal having carefully considered the calculations offered by
the Trustee and the Complainant, considers the
Complainant’s to be more
persuasive. The Tribunal’s determination in this regard is buttressed by
the Trustee’s
response of 1 October 2020.
Tribunal therefore determines the Trustee’s reasons attract Rein J’s
descriptor from Manglicmot’s Case, in that
they ‘...are of a kind
which no trustee acting reasonably... could rely on to justify the exercise of a
discretion in the manner
adopted...’. In so determining, the Tribunal
considers the Trustee has acted contrary to the third way identified by Rein J,
namely: ‘(3) acted without a fair or real and genuine consideration of
whether and how the discretion should be exercised.’
Accordingly,
the Tribunal determines it was unfair and unreasonable of the Trustee to refuse
to compromise the Complainant’s
claim, by way of exercising its discretion
to compromise per the trust deed’s subclause 14.4(d).
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decision under review
if it is satisfied that the decision, in its
operation in relation to the
Complainant, was fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons
stated above the Tribunal
is not so satisfied.
Tribunal therefore does not affirm the decision of the Trustee.
the Tribunal is not satisfied that the decision of the Trustee was fair and
reasonable s37(3) of the Complaints Act empowers the
Tribunal to make a
determination to remit the matter to which the decision relates to the Trustee
for reconsideration in accordance
with the directions of the Tribunal, vary the
decision, or set aside the decision and substitute another decision.
s37(1)(a) of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal has all the powers, obligations
and discretions of the Trustee.
making its decision, s37(5) of the Complaints Act requires that the Tribunal
must not do anything that would be contrary to law
or to the Fund’s trust
s37(4) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal may only exercise its determination
making power for the purpose of placing a complainant
as nearly as practicable,
in the position that they would have been in but for the unfairness,
unreasonableness, or both, that the
Tribunal has determined to exist in relation
to the Trustee’s decision.
accordance with these provisions, the Tribunal determines to set aside the
Trustee’s decision and substitute another decision
Complainant’s claim is to be compromised in the amount of $24,670.22.
the methodology employed by the Complainant in calculating the Quantum,
including the fact the final dollar amount was inserted
as at 30 September 2020,
it is not appropriate to award interest.
Stephen Duffield, Member
Tribunal signature: 4 December 2020
RTF format (256 KB)
Signed PDF/A format